The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Supplication for the Beggars, by Simon Fish

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

Title: A Supplication for the Beggars

Author: Simon Fish

Editor: Edward Arber

Release Date: May 21, 2010 [EBook #32464]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A SUPPLICATION FOR THE BEGGARS ***

Produced by Meredith Bach and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries.)

Larger Image

To
my Godfathers in English Literature
,

HENRY MORLEY,
Esq.
,

Professor of English Literature
,

University College, London
.

AND

HENRY PYNE,
Esq.
,

Late
Assistant Tithe Commissioner
,

St. James’s Square, London
.

this

Old Series

is,

with blended admiration and gratitude,

filially

Inscribed.

No. 4.

A Supplication for the Beggars.

[Spring of 1529.]

[SIMON FISH,

of Gray’s Inn, Gentleman.]

A Supplication for the Beggars.

[Spring of 1529.]

Edited by EDWARD ARBER, F.S.A., etc.,

LECTURER IN ENGLISH LITERATURE ETC.,

UNIVERSITY COLLEGE, LONDON.

SOUTHGATE, LONDON, N.

15 August 1878.

No. 4.

(
All rights reserved.
)

CONTENTS.

PAGE

Bibliography
vi

Introduction
vii-xviii

A Supplicacyon for the Beggers
1

1.
The yearly exactions from the people taken by this greedy sort of
sturdy idle holy thieves
3

They have a Tenth part of all produce, wages and profits
4

What money pull they in by probates of testaments, privy tithes, men’s
offerings to their pilgrimages and at their first masses; by masses and

diriges
, by mortuaries, hearing of confessions (yet keeping thereof no
secrecy), hallowing of churches, by cursing of men and absolving them for
money; by extortion &c.; and by the quarterage from every household to
each of the Five Orders of begging Friars, which equals £43,333 6s. 8d. [
=
over £500,000 in present value
] a year
4

400 years ago, of all this they had not a penny
4

These locusts own also one Third of the land
5

Or in all more than half of the substance of the realm
5

Yet they are not in number, one to every hundred men, or one in every four
hundred men women and children
5

Neither could the Danes or Saxons haue conquered this land, if they had
left such a sort [
company
] of idle gluttons behind them; nor noble King

Arthur
have resisted the Emperor
Lucius
, if such yearly exactions had been
taken of his people; nor the Greeks so long continued the siege of Troy,
if they had had to find for such an idle sort of cormorants at home; nor
the Romans conquered the world, if their people had been thus yearly
oppressed; nor the Turk haue now so gained on Christendom, if he had in
his empire such locusts to devour his substance
5

2.
What do they with these exactions?
6

Nothing but to translate all rule, power &c. from your Grace to
themselves, and to incite to disobedience and rebellion
6

3.
Yea, and what do they more?
7

Truly nothing but to have to do with every man’s wife, every man’s
daughter &c.
7

4.
Yea, who is able to number the great and broad bottomless ocean sea
full of evils, that this mischievous and sinful generation is able to
bring upon us? unpunished!
7

5.
What remedy? Make laws against them?
I am in doubt whether ye are
able. Are they not stronger in your own parliament house than yourself
8

So captive are your laws unto them, that no man that they list to
excommunicate may be admitted to sue any action in any of your Courts
9

Neither have they any coulour [
pretence
] to gather these yearly
exactions but they say they pray to GOD to deliver our souls from
purgatory. If that were true we should give a hundred times as much. But
many men of great literature say there is no purgatory: and that if there
were and that the Pope may deliver one soul for money, he may deliver him
as well without money; if one, a thousand; if a thousand, all; and so
destroy purgatory.
10

6.
But what remedy? To make many hospitals for the relief of the poor
people?
Nay, truly! The more the worse. For ever the fat of the whole
foundation hangeth on the priests’ beards
12

7.
Set these sturdy loobies abroad in the world to get themselves wives,
to get their living with their labour in the sweat of their faces,
according to the commandment of GOD
13

[Pg vi]

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF SIMON FISH’S WORKS.

ISSUES IN HIS LIFETIME.

A.
As a separate publication.

1.
[1529. Printed abroad.] 8vo. See title at
p.
1. Wholly printed in a clear italic type.

2.
1529. [Printed abroad.] 4to. Klagbrieff oder supplication der armen
dürfftigen in Engenlandt | an den Kōnig daselb gestellet | widder die
reychen geystlichen bettler. [A Letter of Complaint or Supplication of the
necessitous poor in England shewn to the King thereof against the rich
spiritual beggars] M.D.XXIX. [with a preface by
Sebastian Franck
.] Black letter.

3.
1530. [Printed abroad.] 8vo. Supplicatorius Libellus pauperum, et
egentium nomine, Henricho VIII. Serenissimo Angliæ regi etc. oblatus,
contra quotidianas religiosorum ibidem iniurias et impiam auariciam. Ex
Anglico in latinum versus. M.D.XXX.

In the same type and style as No. 1. and with an engraved framework on the
title page that may eventually lead to a knowledge of the foreign printer
of both the editions.

B.
With other Works.

None known.

ISSUES SINCE HIS DEATH.

A.
As a separate publication.

4.
1546. [London] Fol. A supplication of the poore Commons. Prov. 21 Chap.
¶ Whereunto is added the Supplication of Beggers, [In the same style and
type as No. 3. below, and therefore printed by
William Hyll
.] In the
heading the “Supplicacyon of Beggers” is assigned to 1524, which is wrong by five years.

5.
1845. London. 8vo. A Supplicacyon for the Beggers. [100 copies only printed.]

6.
1860. Fol. See Woods
Ath. Oxon.
i. 59. Ed. 1813.

7.
15. Aug. 1878 Southgate, London, N. 8vo. The present impression.

B.
With other Works.

8a.
1563. London. Fol. This tract is reprinted, with notes by
John Fox
in
his
Actes and Monumentes etc.

8b.
8c.
8d.
1570. London. Fol.
1576. London. Fol.
1583. London. Fol.
}
And so in all later editions of the
Book of Martyrs.

9.
1871. London. 8vo.
Early English Text Society. Extra Series. No. 13
,
1871. “Four Supplications. 1529-1553
A.D.
” The first of these is “A
Supplicacyon for the Beggers written about the year 1529, by
Simon Fish
.
Now re-edited by
Frederick J. Furnivall
.”

ISSUES IN HIS LIFETIME.

A.
As a separate publication.

1.
[Winter of 1529-1530. Printed abroad.] 8vo. The only copy at present
known is in the British Museum. C. 37. 2/2. The title page is torn off, apparently for the safety of the first possessors.

B.
With other Works.

None known.

ISSUES SINCE HIS DEATH.

A.
As a separate publication.

2.
1547. London,
W. Herbert
,
Typ. Amt.
i. 616,
Ed.
1785, quotes an
edition by
John Day
.

3.
11. Dec. 1548. [London.] 8vo. The summe of the holy Scripture, and
ordinarye of the Chrystian teachyng, the true christian fayth, by the
whiche we be all iustified. And of the vertu of Baptisme, after the
teachynge of the Gospell and of the Apostles, With an information howe all
estattes should lyue according to the Gospell very necessary for all
Christian people to knowe. ¶ Anno. M.d.xlviii.

[
Colophon
]: Imprynted at London, at the signe of the Hyll, at the west
dore of Paules. By Wyllyam Hill. And there to be sold. Anno 1548. The 11
of Decembre.
Cum Gratia et Privilegio ad Imprimendum solum.
The press
mark of the British Museum copy is 4401. b. 2.

B.
With Other Works.

None known.

[Pg vii]

INTRODUCTION.

ir Thomas More
,
who at that time was but Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster, was made Lord Chancellor in the room of Cardinal
Wolsey
on
Sunday, the 24th of October 1529.

The following undated work—the second of his controversial ones—was
therefore written, printed and published prior to that day, and while as
yet he held the lower dignity of the ducal Chancellorship.

The supplycacyon of soulys Made by syr Thomas More knyght councellour to
our souerayn lorde the Kynge and chauncellour of hys Duchy of Lancaster.

Agaynst the supplycacyon of beggars.

At fol. xx. of this work occurs the following important passage, which,
while crediting the Reformers with a greater science in attack, and a more
far-reaching design in their writings than they actually possessed: fixes
with precision the year of the first distribution in England of
Simon
Fish
’s
Supplicacyon for the Beggers
, and with that its sequence in our
early Protestant printed literature—

For the techyng and prechyng of all whych thyngys / thys beggers proctour or
rather the dyuels proctour with other beggers that la[c]k grace and nether
beg nor lo[o]ke for none: bere all thys theyr malyce and wrathe to the
churche of C[h]ryste. And seynge there ys no way for attaynyng theyr
entent but one of the twayn / yat ys to wyt eyther playnly to wryte agaynst
the fayth and the sacramentys (wheryn yf they gat them credence and
obtaynyd / they then se[e] well the
[Pg viii]
church must nedys fall therwyth) or els
to labour agaynst the church alone / and get the clergye dystroyd /
whereuppon they parceyue well that the fayth and sacramentes wo[u]ld not
fayle to decay: they parceyuyng thys / haue therfore furste assayd the
furst way all redy / sendyng forth Tyndals translacyon of the
new
testament
in such wyse handled as yt shuld haue bene the fountayn and
well spryng of all theyr hole heresyes. For he had corrupted and purposely
changed in many placys the text / wyth such wordys as he myght make yt
seme to the vnlerned people / that the scripture affirmed theyr heresyes
it selfe. Then cam sone after out in prynt
the dyaloge
of freere Roy and
frere Hyerome /
betwene ye father and ye sonne
[
Preface dated
Argentine
(Strasburg),
31 August, 1527
] agaynst ye sacrament of ye
aulter: and the blasphemouse boke entytled
the beryeng of the masse

[i.e.
Rede me and be not wroth
/ printed at Strasburg early in 1528].
Then cam forth after Tyndals wykkyd boke of
Mammona
[
Dated Marburg, 8
May 1528
] / and after that his more wykkyd boke of obydyence [
Dated
Marburg, 2 October 1528
]. In whych bokys afore specyfyed they go forth
playnly agaynst the fayth and holy sacramentis of Crystys church / and
most especyally agaynst the blyssed sacrament of ye aulter / wyth as
vylanous wordes as the wre[t]ches cou[l]d deuyse. But when they haue
perceuyd by experyence yat good people abhorred theyr abomynable bokes:
then they beyng therby lerned yat the furst way was not ye best for ye
furtherance of theyr purpose / haue now determined them selfe to assay the
secunde way / that ys to witte yat forberynge to wryte so openly and
dyrectly agaynste all the fayth and the sacramentys as good crysten men
coulde not abyde the redyng / they wolde / wyth lyttell towchyng of theyre
other heresyes / make one boke specially agaynst ye church and loke how
that wold proue.

The previous controversial work produced by Sir
Thomas More
had but
recently appeared under the title of

[Pg ix]
A dialoge
of syr Thomas More knighte: one of the counsayll of oure
souerayne lorde the kyng and chauncellor of hys duchy of Lancaster. Wherin
be treatyd diuers matters / as of the veneration and worshyp of ymagys and
relyques / prayng to sayntys / and goyng on pylgrymage. Wyth many othere
thyngys touchyng the pestelent sect of Luther and Tyndale / by th[e] one
begone in Saxony / and by th[e] other laboryd to be brought in to Englond.

[
Colophon
]. Emprynted at London at the sygne of the meremayd at Powlys
gate next to chepe syde in the moneth of June the yere of our lord.
M.C.C.XXIX.
Cum priuilegio Regali.

Of this extraordinarily scarce first edition, there is a copy in the
Corporation Library, London.

As Sir
Thomas More
felt it necessary to write this second work, of the

Supplicacyon of Soulys, after
he had composed his
Dialogue
the
printing of which was finished in June 1529; and as his
Supplicacyon

certainly was written and published prior to his advancement on the 24th
October following: it is conclusive that S. Fish’s tract had not appeared

before
he was writing the
Dialogue
, and therefore that the date of its
distribution must by this internal evidence, be fixed as in the spring or
summer of 1529; however that date may conflict with early testimony, such
as incorrect lists of prohibited books, assigning it to 1524, 1526, etc.

Yet
John Fox
in his
Actes and Monumentes
, [Third Edition]
fol.
987,

Ed.
1576, states that was

“Throwen and scattered at the procession in Westminster vpon
Candlemas day [?
2nd February 1529
] before kyng Henry the viij, for
him to read and peruse.”

We have been unable to verify this procession at Westminster on this
particular date, and think that if it had been so, Sir
Thomas More
would
have surely noticed to the
Supplicacyon
while writing the
Dialogue
,
the printing of which was in progress during the next four months. He may,
however, have thought it necessary to write a special book against
S.
Fish
’s tract, with its distinct line of attack as he has accurately stated
it.

It will be seen from the Bibliography that this date of the Spring of 1529
quite harmonizes with those of the contemporary German and Latin
translations; which, naturally, would be prompt. It is also not
inconsistent with the following allusion at p. 30 to Cardinal
Wolsey
’s
still holding the Lord Chancellorship.

[Pg x]
And this
is by the reason that the chief instrument of youre lawe ye[a]
the chief of your counsell and he whiche hath your swerde in his hond to
whome also all the other instrumentes are obedient is alweys a spirituell
man.

So much, then, as to the certain approximate date of the publication.
Fox

is quite wrong in assuming as he does in the following paragraph that this
work was the occasion of Bishop
Tonstal
’s
Prohibition
of the 24th
October 1526,
i.e.
more than two years previously.

After that the Clergye of England, and especially the Cardinall,
vnderstoode these bookes of the
Beggars supplication
aforesayd, to be
strawne abroade in the streetes of London, and also before the kyng. The
sayd Cardinall caused not onely his seruauntes diligently to attend to
gather them vp, that they should not come into the kynges handes, but also
when he vnderstode, that the king had receaued one or two of them, he came
vnto the kynges Maiesty saying: “If it shall please your grace, here are
diuers seditious persons which haue scattered abroad books conteyning
manifest errours and heresies” desiryng his grace to beware of them.
Whereupon the kyng putting his hand in his bosome, tooke out one of the
bookes and deliuered it vnto the Cardinall. Then the Cardinall, together
with the Byshops, consulted
&c.

Eccles. Hist. &c., p. 900. Ed. 1576.

II.

e now
come to the only authoritative account of our Author, as it is
recorded in the same Third Edition of the
Actes and Monumentes &c., p. 896. Ed. 1576
.

The story of M
[
aster
].
Simon Fishe.

efore the
tyme of M[aster]. Bilney, and the fall of the Cardinall, I
should haue placed the story of Symon Fish with the booke called the

Supplication of Beggars
, declaryng how and by what meanes it came to the
kynges
[Pg xi]
hand, and what effect therof followed after, in the reformation of
many thynges, especially of the Clergy. But the missyng of a few yeares in
this matter, breaketh no great square in our story, though it be now
entred here which should haue come in sixe yeares before.

Fox
is writing of 1531, and therefore intends us to understand that the
present narrative begins in 1525.

The maner and circumstaunce of the matter is this:

After that the light of the Gospel workyng mightely in Germanie, began to
spread his beames here also in England, great styrre and alteration
followed in the harts of many: so that colored hypocrisie and false
doctrine, and painted holynes began to be espyed more and more by the
readyng of Gods word. The authoritie of the Bishop of Rome, and the glory
of his Cardinals was not so high, but such as had fresh wittes sparcled
with Gods grace, began to espy Christ from Antichrist, that is, true
sinceritie, from counterfait religion. In the number of whom, was the sayd
M[aster]. Symon Fish, a Gentleman of Grayes Inne.

Ex certa relatione, vivoque testimonio propriæ ipsius coniugis.

It happened the first yeare that this Gentleman came to London to dwell,
which was about the yeare of our Lord 1525 [
i.e. between 25 Mar. 1525 and
24 Mar. 1526
] that there was a certaine play or interlude made by one
Master Roo of the same Inne Gentleman, in which play partly was matter
agaynst the Cardinal Wolsey. And where none durst take vpon them to play
that part, whiche touched the sayd Cardinall, this foresayd M. Fish tooke
upon him to do it, whereupon great displeasure ensued agaynst him, vpon
the Cardinals part: In so much as he beyng pursued by the sayd Cardinall,
the same night that this Tragedie was playd, was compelled of force to
voyde his owne house, and so fled ouer the Sea vnto Tyndall.

We will here interrupt the Martyrologist’s account, with
Edward Halle
’s
description of this “goodly disguisyng.” It occurs at
fol.
155 of the
history of the eighteenth year of the reign of Henry VIII. [22 April 1526
[Pg xii]

to 21 April 1527] in his
Vnion of the two noble and illustrate families
of Lancastre and York &c.
1548.

This Christmas [1526] was a goodly disguisyng plaied at Greis inne, whiche
was compiled for the moste part, by Master Jhon Roo, seriant at the law.
[some] xx. yere past, and long before the Cardinall had any aucthoritie,
the effecte of the plaie was, that lord Gouernaunce was ruled by
Dissipacion and Negligence, by whose misgouernance and euil order, lady
Publike Wele was put from gouernance: which caused
Rumor Populi
, Inward
Grudge and Disdain of Wanton Souereignetie, to rise with a greate
multitude, to expell Negligence and Dissipacion, and to restore Publike
Welth again to her estate, which was so doen.

This plaie was so set furth with riche and costly apparel, with straunge
diuises of Maskes and morrishes [
morris dancers
] that it was highly
praised of all menne, sauing of the Cardinall, whiche imagined that the
plaie had been diuised of hym, and in a great furie sent for the said
master Roo, and toke from hym his Coyfe, and sent hym to the Flete, and
after he sent for the yong gentlemen, that plaied in the plaie, and them
highley rebuked and thretened, and sent one of them called Thomas Moyle of
Kent to the Flete. But by the meanes of frendes Master Roo and he were
deliuered at last.

This plaie sore displeased the Cardinall, and yet it was neuer meante to
hym, as you haue harde, wherfore many wisemen grudged to see hym take it
so hartely, and euer the Cardinall saied that the kyng was highly
displeased with it, and spake nothyng of hymself.

There is no question as to the date of this “disguisyng.” Archbishop

Warham
on the 6th February 1527, wrote to his chaplain,
Henry Golde
, from
Knolle that he “Has received his letters, dated London, 6 Feb., stating
that Mr. Roo is committed to the Tower for making a certain play. Is sorry
such a matter should be taken in earnest.”
Letters &c.
Henry VIII
.
Ed.
by
J. S. Brewer
,
p.
1277.
Ed.
1872.

It would seem however that
Fish
either did not go or did not stay long
abroad at this time.
Strype
(
Eccles. Mem. I. Part II, pp. 63-5. Ed.
1822
)
[Pg xiii]
has printed, from
the Registers of the Bishops of
London
, the
Confession in 1528 of
Robert Necton
(a person of position, whose brother
became Sheriff of Norwich in 1530), by which it appears that during the
previous eighteen months, that is from about the beginning of 1527, our
Author was “dwellyng by the Wight Friars in London;” and was actively
engaged in the importation and circulation of
Tyndale
’s
New Testaments
,
a perfectly hazardous work at that time.

Possibly this Confession was the occasion of a first or a renewed flight
by
Fish
to the Continent, and therefore the ultimate cause of the present
little work in the following year.

We now resume
Fox
’s account, which was evidently derived from
Fish
’s wife,
when she was in old age.

Vpon occasion wherof the next yeare folowyng this booke was made (being
about the yeare 1527) and so not long after in the yeare (as I suppose)
1528 [
which by the old reckoning ended on the 24 Mar. 1529
]. was sent
ouer to the Lady Anne Bulleyne, who then lay at a place not farre from the
Court. Which booke her brother seyng in her hand, tooke it and read it,
and gaue it [to] her agayne, willyng her earnestly to giue it to the kyng,
which thyng she so dyd.

This was (as I gather) about the yeare of our Lord 1528 [-1529].

The kyng after he had receaued the booke, demaunded of her “who made it.”
Whereunto she aunswered and sayd, “a certaine subiect of his, one Fish,
who was fled out of the Realme for feare of the Cardinall.”

After the kyng had kept the booke in his bosome iij. or iiij. dayes, as is
credibly reported, such knowledge was giuen by the kynges seruauntes to
the wife of ye sayd Symon Fishe, yat she might boldly send for her
husband, without all perill or daunger. Whereupon she thereby beyng
incouraged, came first and made sute to the kyng for the safe returne of
her husband. Who vnderstandyng whose wife she was, shewed a maruelous
gentle and chearefull countenaunce towardes her, askyng “where her husband
was.” She aunswered, “if it like your grace, not farre of[f].” Then sayth
he, “fetch him, and he shal come and go safe without perill,
[Pg xiv]
and no man
shal do him harme,” saying moreouer, “that hee had [had] much wrong that
hee was from her so long:” who had bene absent now the space of two yeares
and a halfe,

Which from Christmas 1526 would bring us to June 1529, which
corroborates the internal evidence above quoted.
Fox
evidently now
confuses together two different interviews with the King. The first
at the Court in June 1529; the other on horseback with the King,
followed afterwards by his Message to Sir
T. MORE
in the winter of
1529-30, within six months after which
S. FISH
dies. His wife never
would have been admitted to the Court, if she had had a daughter ill
of the plague at home.

In the whiche meane tyme, the Cardinall was deposed, as is aforeshewed,
and M[aster]. More set in his place of the Chauncellourshyp.

Thus Fishes wife beyng emboldened by the kynges wordes, went immediatly to
her husband beyng lately come ouer, and lying priuely within a myle of the
Court, and brought him to the kyng: which appeareth to be about the yeare
of our Lord. 1530.

When the kyng saw hym, and vnderstood he was the authour of the booke, he
came and embraced him with louing countenance: who after long talke: for
the space of iij. or iiij. houres, as they were ridyng together on
huntyng, at length dimitted him, and bad him “take home his wife, for she
had taken great paynes for him.” Who answered the kyng agayne and sayd, he
“durst not so do, for fear of Syr Thomas More then Chauncellor, and
Stoksley then Bishop of London. This seemeth to be about the yeare of our
Lord. 1530.

This bringing in of
Stokesley
as Bishop is only making confusion worse
confounded.
Stokesley
was consecrated to the see of London on the 27th
Nov. 1530. By that time,
S. Fish
had died of the plague which occurred in
London and its suburbs in the summer of 1530; and which was so severe,
that on 22nd June of that year, the King prorogued the Parliament to the
following 1st October.
Letters &c.
Henry VIII
.
Ed. by
J. S. Brewer,
M.A., IV
, Part 3, No. 6469.
Ed.
1876.

The Martyrologist, throughout, seems to be right as to his facts, but
wrong as to his dates.

[Pg xv]
The kyng takyng his signet of[f] his finger, willed hym to haue hym
reommended to the Lord Chauncellour, chargyng him not to bee so hardy to
worke him any harme.

Master Fishe receiuyng the kynges signet, went and declared hys message to
the Lord Chauncellour, who tooke it as sufficient for his owne discharge,
but asked him “if he had any thynge for the discharge of his wife:” for
she a litle before had by chaunce displeased the Friers, for not sufferyng
them to say their Gospels in Latine in her house, as they did in others,
vnlesse they would say it in English. Whereupon the Lord Chauncellour,
though he had discharged the man, yet leauyng not his grudge towardes the
wife, the next morning sent his man for her to appeare before hym: who,
had it not bene for her young daughter, which then lay sicke of the
plague, had bene lyke to come to much trouble.

Of the which plague her husband, the said Master Fish deceasing with in
half a yeare, she afterward maryed to one Master James Baynham, Syr
Alexander Baynhams sonne, a worshypful Knight of Glo[uce]stershyre. The
which foresayd Master James Baynham, not long after, [1 May 1532] was
burned, as incontinently after in the processe of this story, shall
appeare.

And thus much concernyng Symon Fishe the author of the
booke of beggars
,
who also translated a booke called
the Summe of the Scripture
out of the
Dutch [
i.e. German
].

Now commeth an other note of one Edmund Moddys the kynges footeman,
touchyng the same matter.

This M[aster]. Moddys beyng with the kyng in talke of religion, and of the
new bookes that were come from beyond the seas, sayde “if it might please
hys grace, he should see such a booke, as was maruell to heare of.” The
kyng demaunded “what they were.” He sayd, “two of your Merchauntes, George
Elyot, and George Robinson.” The kyng [ap]poynted a tyme to speake with
them. When they
[Pg xvi]
came before his presence in a priuye [
private
] closet,
he demaunded “what they had to saye, or to shew him” One of them said “yat
there was a boke come to their hands, which they were there to shew his
grace.” When he saw it, hee demaunded “if any of them could read it.”
“Yea” sayd George Elyot, “if it please your grace to heare it,” “I thought
so” sayd the kyng, “for if neede were thou canst say it without booke.”

The whole booke beyng read out, the kyng made a long pause, and then sayd,
“if a man should pull downe an old stone wall and begyn at the lower part,
the vpper part thereof might chaunce to fall vpon his head:” and then he
tooke the booke and put it into his deske, and commaunded them vpon their
allegiance, that they should not tell to any man, that he had sene the
booke.

III.

o this
account we may add two notices. Sir
T. More
replying in his

Apology
to the “Pacifier” [
Christopher Saint Germain
] in the spring of
1533, gives at
fol.
124, the following account of our Author’s death—

And these men in the iudgement of thys pytuouse pacyfyer be not dyscrete /
but yet they haue he sayth a good zele though. And thys good zele hadde,
ye wote well, Simon Fysshe when he made the supplycacyon of beggers. But
god gaue hym such grace afterwarde, that he was sory for that good zele,
and repented hym selfe and came into the chyrche agayne, and forsoke and
forsware all the whole hyll of those heresyes, out of whiche the fountayne
of that same good zele sprange. [Also at
p.
881,
Workes. Ed. 1557
.]

This is contrary to the tenour of everything else that we know of the man:
but Sir
T. More
, possessing such excellent means of obtaining information,
may nevertheless be true.

[Pg xvii]
Lastly.
Anthony à Wood
in
his
Ath. Oxon.
i. 59,
Ed.
1813, while giving
us the wrong year of his death, tells us of his place of burial.

At length being overtaken by the pestilence, died of it in fifteen hundred
thirty and one, and was buried in the church of St. Dunstan (in the West).

Tyndale
had often preached in this church.

IV.

hat a
picture of the cruel, unclean and hypocritical monkery that was
eating at the heart’s core of English society is given to us in this terse
and brave little book? Abate from its calculations whatever in fairness
Sir
T. More
would have wished us to deduct; we cannot but shudder as we
try to realize the then social condition of our country; and all the more,
when we remember that the fountain of all this unmercifulness, impurity
and ignorance was found in the very persons who professed to be, and who
should have been the Divine Teachers of our nation. It argues, too, much
for the virility of the English race, that it could have sustained, in
gradually increasing intensity, such a widespread mass of festering and
corroding blotches of vice, and could by and bye throw it off altogether;
so that in subsequent ages no other nation has surpassed us in manhood.

It is marvellous to us how the ecclesiastical fungus could have ever so
blotted out of sight both the royal prerogative and the people’s
liberties. Was not
Henry VIII
the man for this hour? A bold lusty and
masterful one, imperious and impatient of check, full of the animal
enjoyment of life; yet a remarkable Theologian, a crafty Statesman, a true
Englishman. Often referred to in the literature of this time as “our Lord
and Master.” Had England ever had such a Master! ever such a Lord of life
and limb since? A character to the personal humouring and gratification of
whom, such an one as
Wolsey
devoted his whole soul and directed all the
powers of the State.

How necessary was so strong a ruler for our national disruption with Rome!
It is not easy for us to realize what an amazingly difficult thing that
wrench was.
Moddys’
story witnesses to us of the King’s great perplexity.
By what difficult disillusions, what slow and painful thoughtfulness did

Henry
’s mind travel from the
Assertio
of 1522 and the consequent

Defensor fidei
, to the destruction of the monasteries in 1536. Truly, if
in this “passion” he vacillated or made mistakes; we may consider the
inherent difficulty of disbelief in what—despite its increasing
corruptions—had been the unbroken faith of this country for a thousand
years.

[Pg xviii]
We call the disillusionists,
the Reformers; but
Fish
describes them as

men of greate litterature and iudgement that for the love they haue
vnto the trouth and vnto the comen welth haue not feared to put theim
silf ynto the greatest infamie that may be, in abiection of all the
world, ye[a] in perill of deth to declare theyre oppinion....
p.

10.

Undoubtedly
Henry
personally was the secular Apostle of the first phase of
our Reformation. The section of doctrinal Protestants was politically
insignificant: and it may be fairly doubted whether the King could have
carried the nation with him, but that in the experience of every
intelligent Englishman, the cup of the iniquity of the priesthood was full
to overflowing. He was aided by the strong general reaction of our simple
humanity against the horrid sensuality, the scientific villany offered to
it by the supposed special agents of Almighty GOD in the name of, and
cloaked under the authority believed to have been given to them from the
ever blessed Trinity.

Morality is the lowest expression of religion, the forerunner of faith. No
religion can be of GOD which does not instinctively preassume in its
votaries the constant striving after the highest and purest moral
excellence. It is an intolerable matter, beyond all possible sufferance,
when religion is made to pander to sensuality and extortion. How bitter a
thing this was to this barrister of Gray’s Inn, may be seen in the strange
terms of terror and ravin with which he characterizes these “strong,
puissant, counterfeit holy, and idle beggars.” To the untravelled
Englishman of Henry VIII’s reign, “cormorants” must have meant some like
devouring griffins, and “locusts” as a ruthless irremediable and fearful
plague without end. By such mental conceptions of utter desolation,
impoverishment and misery does our Author express the bitterness of the
then proved experience by Englishmen, of the combined hierarchy and
monkery of Rome.

All which is for our consideration in estimating the necessity and policy
of the subsequent suppression of the monasteries.

These representations are also some mitigation of what is sometimes
thought to be the Protestant frenzy of our great Martyrologist, whose
words of burning reprobation of the Papal system of his time seem often to
us to be extravagant; because, by the good providence of GOD, we are
hardly capable of realizing the widespread and scientific villany of the
delusions and enormities against which he protested.

[Pg 1]

A Supplicacyon for the Beggers.

[Pg 2]

[Pg 3]

TO THE KING OVRE

souereygne lorde.

ost lamentably
compleyneth theyre wofull mysery vnto youre highnes youre
poore daily bedemen the wretched hidous monstres (on whome scarcely for
horror any yie dare loke) the foule vnhappy sorte of lepres, and other
sore people, nedy, impotent, blinde, lame, and sike, that live onely by
almesse, howe that theyre nombre is daily so sore encreased that all the
almesse of all the weldisposed people of this youre realme is not halfe
ynough for to susteine theim, but that for verey constreint they die for
hunger. And this most pestilent mischief is comen vppon youre saide poore
beedmen by the reason that there is yn the tymes of youre noble
predecessours passed craftily crept ynto this your realme an other sort
(not of impotent but) of strong puissaunt and counterfeit holy, and ydell
beggers and vacabundes whiche syns the tyme of theyre first entre by all
the craft and wilinesse of Satan are nowe encreased vnder your sight not
onely into a great nombre, but also ynto a kingdome. These are (not the
herdes, but the rauinous wolues going in herdes clothing deuouring the
flocke) the Bisshoppes, Abbottes, Priours, Deacons, Archedeacons,
Suffraganes, Prestes, Monkes Chanons, Freres, Pardoners and Somners. And
who is abill to nombre this idell rauinous sort whiche (setting all
laboure a side) haue begged so importunatly that they haue gotten ynto
theyre hondes more then the therd part of all youre Realme. The goodliest
lordshippes, maners, londes, and territories, are theyrs. Besides this
they haue the tenth part of all the corne, medowe, pasture, grasse, wolle,
coltes, calues, lambes,
[Pg 4]
pigges, gese, and chikens. Ouer and bisides the
tenth part of euery seruauntes wages the tenth part of the wolle, milke,
hony, waxe, chese, and butter. Ye[a] and they loke so narowly vppon theyre
proufittes that the poore wyues must be countable to theym of euery tenth
eg or elles she gettith not her ryghtes at ester shalbe taken as an
heretike. hereto haue they theire foure offering daies. whate money pull
they yn by probates of testamentes, priuy tithes, and by mennes offeringes
to theyre pilgremages, and at theyre first masses? Euery man and childe
that is buried must pay sumwhat for masses and diriges to be song for him
or elles they will accuse the de[a]des frendes and executours of heresie.
whate money get they by mortuaries, by hearing of confessions (and yet
they wil kepe therof no counceyle) by halowing of churches altares
superaltares chapelles and belles, by cursing of men and absoluing theim
agein for money? what a multitude of money gather the pardoners in a yere?
Howe moche money get the Somners by extorcion yn a yere, by assityng the
people to the commissaries court and afterward releasing th[e] apparaunce
for money? Finally, the infinite nombre of begging freres whate get they
yn a yere? Here if it please your grace to marke ye shall se a thing farre
out of ioynt. There are withyn youre realme of Englond. lij. thousand
parisshe churches. And this stonding that there be but tenne houshouldes
yn euery parisshe yet are there fiue hundreth thousand and twenty thousand
houshouldes. And of euery of these houshouldes hath euery of the fiue
ordres of freres a peny a quarter for euery ordre, that is for all the
fiue ordres fiue pens a quarter for every house. That is for all the fiue
ordres. xx.d. a yere of euery house. Summa fiue hundreth thousand and
twenty thousand quarters of angels.

That is. cclx. thousand half angels. Summa. cxxx. thousand angels. Summa
totalis. xliij. thousand poundes and. cccxxxiij. li. vi.s. viij.d.
sterling. wherof not foure hundreth yeres passed they had not one peny. Oh
greuous and peynfull exactions thus yerely to be paied. from the whiche
the people of your nobill predecessours the kinges of the auncient Britons
euer stode fre And this wil they haue or els they wil procure him that
will not giue it theim to be taken as an heretike. whate tiraunt euer
oppressed the people like this cruell and vengeable generacion? whate
subiectes shall be
[Pg 5]
abill to helpe theire prince that be after this facion
yerely polled? whate good christen people can be abill to socoure vs pore
lepres blinde sore, and lame, that be thus yerely oppressed? Is it any
merueille that youre people so compleine of pouertie? Is it any merueile
that the taxes fiftenes and subsidies that your grace most tenderly of
great compassion hath taken emong your people to defend theim from the
thretened ruine of theire comon welth haue bin so sloughtfully, ye[a]
painfully leuied? Seing that almost the vtmost peny that mought haue bin
leuied hath ben gathered bifore yerely by this rauinous cruell and
insatiabill generacion The danes nether the saxons yn the time of the
auncient Britons shulde neuer haue ben abill to haue brought theire armies
from so farre hither ynto your lond to haue conquered it if they had had
at that time suche a sort of idell glotons to finde at home. The nobill
king Arthur had neuer ben abill to haue caried his armie to the fote of
the mountaines to resist the coming downe of lucius the Emperoure if suche
yerely exaction had ben taken of his people. The grekes had neuer ben
abill to haue so long continued at the siege of Troie if they had had at
home suche an idell sort of cormorauntes to finde. The auncient Romains
had neuer ben abil to haue put all the hole worlde vnder theyre obeisaunce
if theyre people had byn thus yerely oppressed. The Turke nowe yn youre
tyme shulde neuer be abill to get so moche grounde of cristendome if he
had yn his empire suche a sort of locustes to deuoure his substance. Ley
then these sommes to the forseid therd part of the possessions of the
realme that ye may se whether it drawe nighe vnto the half of the hole
substaunce of the realme or not, So shall ye finde that it draweth ferre
aboue. Nowe let vs then compare the nombre of this vnkind idell sort vnto
the nombre of the laye people and we shall se whether it be indifferently
shifted or not that they shuld haue half.

Compare theim to the nombre of men, so are they not the. C. person.
Compare theim to men wimen and children, then are they not the. CCCC.
parson yn nombre. One part therfore yn foure hundreth partes deuided were
to moche for theim except they did laboure. whate an vnequal burthen is it
that they haue half with the multitude and are not the. CCCC. parson of
theire nombre? whate tongue is abill to tell that euer there was eny comon
welth so sore oppressed sins the worlde first began?

[Pg 6]
And whate
do al these gredy sort of sturdy idell holy theues with these
yerely exactions that they take of the people? Truely nothing but exempt
theim silues from th[e] obedience of your grace. Nothing but translate all
rule power lordishippe auctorite obedience and dignite from your grace
vnto theim. Nothing but that all your subiectes shulde fall ynto
disobedience and rebellion ageinst your grace and be vnder theim. As they
did vnto your nobill predecessour king Iohn: whiche forbicause that he
wolde haue punisshed certeyn traytours that had conspired with the frenche
king to haue deposed him from his crowne and dignite (emong the whiche a
clerke called Stephen whome afterward ageinst the kinges will the Pope
made Bisshoppe of Caunterbury was one) enterdited his Lond. For the whiche
mater your most nobill realme wrongfully (alas for shame) hath stond
tributary (not vnto any kind temporall prince, but vnto a cruell
deuelisshe bloudsupper dronken in the bloude of the sayntes and marters of
christ) euersins. Here were an holy sort of prelates that thus cruelly
coude punisshe suche a rightuous kinge, all his realme, and succession for
doing right.

Here were a charitable sort of holy men that coude thus enterdite an
hole realme, and plucke awey th[e] obedience of the people from theyre
naturall liege lorde and kinge, for none other cause but for his
rightuousnesse. Here were a blissed sort not of meke herdes but of
bloudsuppers that coude set the frenche king vppon suche a rightuous
prince to cause hym to lose his crowne and dignite to make effusion of the
bloude of his people, oneles this good and blissed king of greate
compassion, more fearing and lamenting the sheding of the bloude of his
people then the losse of his crowne and dignite agaynst all right and
conscience had submitted him silf vnto theym. O case most horrible that
euer so nobill a king Realme, and succession shulde thus be made to stoupe
to suche a sort of bloodsuppers. where was his swerde, power, crowne, and
dignitie become wherby he mought haue done iustice yn this maner? where
was their obedience become that shuld haue byn subiect vnder his highe
power yn this mater? Ye[a] where was the obedience of all his subiectes
become that for mainteinaunce of the comon welth shulde haue holpen him
manfully to haue resisted
[Pg 7]
these bloudsuppers to the shedinge of theyre
bloude? was not all to gither by theyre polycy translated from this good
king vnto theim. Ye[a] and what do they more? Truely nothing but applie
theym silues by all the sleyghtes they may haue to do with euery mannes
wife, euery mannes doughter and euery mannes mayde that cukkoldrie and
baudrie shulde reigne ouer all emong your subiectes, that no man shulde
knowe his owne childe that theyre bastardes might enherite the possessions
of euery man to put the right begotten children clere beside theire
inheritaunce yn subuersion of all estates and godly ordre. These be they
that by theire absteyning from mariage do let the generation of the people
wher by all the realme at length if it shulde be continued shall be made
desert and inhabitable.

These be they that haue made an hundreth thousand ydell hores yn your
realme whiche wolde haue gotten theyre lyuing honestly, yn the swete of
theyre faces had not theyre superfluous rychesse illected theym to vnclene
lust and ydelnesse. These be they that corrupt the hole generation of
mankind yn your realme, that catche the pokkes of one woman. and bere
theym to an other, that be brent wyth one woman, and bere it to an other,
that catche the lepry of one woman, and bere it to an other, ye[a] some
one of theym shall bo[a]st emong his felawes that he hath medled with an
hundreth wymen. These be they that when they haue ones drawen mennes wiues
to such incontinency spende awey theire husbondes goodes make the wimen to
runne awey from theire husbondes, ye[a], rynne awey them silues both with
wif and goods, bring both man wife and children to ydelnesse theft and
beggeri.

Ye[a] who is abill to nombre the greate and brode botomles occean see
full of euilles that this mischeuous and sinful generacion may laufully
bring vppon vs vnponisshed. where is youre swerde, power, crowne, and
dignitie, become that shuld punisshe (by punisshement of deth euen as
other men are punisshed) the felonies, rapes, murdres, and treasons
committed by this sinfull generacion? where is theire obedience become
that shulde be vnder your hyghe power yn this mater? ys not all to gither
translated and exempt from your grace vnto theim? yes truely. whate an
infinite nombre of people might haue ben encreased to haue
[Pg 8]
peopled the
realme if these sort of folke had ben maried like other men. what breche
of matrimonie is there brought yn by theim? suche truely as was neuer sins
the worlde began emong the hole multitude of the hethen.

who is she that wil set her hondes to worke to get. iij.d. a day and may
haue at lest. xx.d. a day to slepe an houre with a frere, a monke, or a
prest? what is he that wolde laboure for a grote a day and may haue at
lest. xij.d. a day to be baude to a prest, a monke, or a frere? whate a
sort are there of theime that mari prestes souereigne ladies but to cloke
the prestes yncontinency and that they may haue a liuing of the prest
theime silues for theire laboure? Howe many thousandes doth suche
lubricite bring to beggery theft and idelnesse whiche shuld haue kept
theire good name and haue set theim silues to worke had not ben this
excesse treasure of the spiritualtie?? whate honest man dare take any man
or woman yn his seruice that hath ben at suche a scole with a spiritual
man? Oh the greuous shipwrak of the comon welth, whiche yn auncient time
bifore the coming yn of these rauinous wolues was so prosperous: that then
there were but fewe theues: ye[a] theft was at that tyme so rare that
Cesar was not compellid to make penalte of deth vppon felony as your grace
may well perceyue yn his institutes. There was also at that tyme but fewe
pore people and yet they did not begge but there was giuen theim ynough
vnaxed, for there was at that time none of these rauinous wolues to axe it
from theim as it apperith yn the actes of th[e] appostles. Is it any
merueill though there be nowe so many beggers, theues, and ydell people?
Nay truely.

; whate remedy: make lawes ageynst theim. I am yn doubt whether ye be
able: Are they not stronger in your owne parliament house then your silfe?
whate a nombre of Bisshopes, abbotes, and priours are lordes of your
parliament? are not all the lerned men in your realme in fee with theim to
speake yn your parliament house for theim ageinst your crowne, dignitie,
and comon welth of your realme a fewe of youre owne lerned counsell onely
excepted? whate lawe can be made ageinst theim that may be aduaylable? who
is he (though he be greued never so sore) for the murdre of his auncestre
rauisshement of his wyfe, of his doughter, robbery, trespas, maiheme,
dette, or eny other offence dare ley it
[Pg 9]
theyre charge by any wey of
accion, and if he do then is he by and by by theyre wilynesse accused of
heresie. ye[a] they will so handle him or he passe that except he will
bere a fagot for theyre pleasure he shal be excommunicate and then be all
his accions dasshed. So captyue are your lawes vnto theym that no man that
they lyst to excommunicat may be admitted to sue any accion in any of your
courtes. If eny man yn your sessions dare be so hardy to endyte a prest of
eny suche cryme he hath or the yere [
ere he
] go out suche a yoke of
heresye leyd in his necke that it maketh him wisshe that he had not done
it. Your grace may se whate a worke there is in London, howe the bisshoppe
rageth for endyting of certayn curates of extorcion and incontinency the
last yere in the warmoll quest. Had not Richard hunne commenced accyon of
premunire ageinst a prest he had bin yet a lyue and none heretik at all
but an honest man.

Dyd not dyuers of your noble progenitours seynge theyre crowne and
dignite runne ynto ruyne and to be thus craftely translated ynto the
hondes of this myscheuous generacyon make dyuers statutes for the
reformacyon therof, emong whiche the statute of mortmayne was one? to the
intent that after that tyme they shulde haue no more gyuen vnto theim. But
whate avayled it? haue they not gotten ynto theyre hondes more londes sins
then eny duke in ynglond hath, the statute notwithstonding? Ye[a] haue
they not for all that translated ynto theyre hondes from your grace half
your kyngdome thoroughly? The hole name as reason is for the auncientie of
your kingdome whiche was bifore theyrs and out of the whiche theyrs is
growen onely abiding with your grace? and of one kyngdome made tweyne: the
spirituall kyngdome (as they call it) for they wyll be named first, And
your temporall kingdome, And whiche of these, ij. kingdomes suppose ye is
like to ouergrowe the other, ye[a] to put the other clere out of memory?
Truely the kingdome of the bloudsuppers for to theym is giuen daily out of
your kingdome. And that that is ones gyuen theim comith neuer from theim
agein. Suche lawes haue they that none of theim may nether gyue nor sell
nothing.

whate lawe can be made so stronge ageinst theim that they other with
money or elles with other policy will not breake and set at nought? whate
kingdome can endure that
[Pg 10]
euer gyuith thus from him and receyueth nothing
agein? O howe all the substaunce of your Realme forthwith your swerde,
power, crowne, dignite, and obedience of your people, rynneth hedlong ynto
the insaciabill whyrlepole of these gredi goulafres to be swalowed and
devoured.

Nether haue they eny other coloure to gather these yerely exaccions ynto
theyre hondes but that they sey they pray for vs to God to delyuer our
soules out of the paynes of purgatori without whose prayer they sey or at
lest without the popes pardon we coude neuer be deliuered thens whiche if
it be true then is it good reason that we gyue theim all these thinges all
were it C times as moche, But there be many men of greate litterature and
iudgement that for the love they haue vnto the trouth and vnto the comen
welth haue not feared to put theim silf ynto the greatest infamie that may
be, in abiection of all the world, ye[a] in perill of deth to declare
theyre oppinion in this mather whiche is that there is no purgatory but
that it is a thing inuented by the couitousnesse of the spiritualtie onely
to translate all kingdomes from other princes vnto theim and that there is
not one word spoken of hit is al holy scripture. They sey also that if
there were a purgatory And also if that the pope with his pardons for
money may deliuer one soule thens: he may deliuer him aswel without money,
if he may deliuer one, he may deliuer a thousand: yf he may deliuer a
thousand he may deliuer theim all, and so destroy purgatory. And then is
he a cruell tyraunt without all charite if he kepe theim there in pryson
and in paine till men will giue him money.

Lyke wyse saie they of all the hole sort of the spiritueltie that if
they will not pray for no man but for theim that gyue theim money they are
tyrauntes and lakke charite, and suffer those soules to be punisshed and
payned vncheritably for lacke of theyre prayers. These sort of folkes they
call heretikes, these they burne, these they rage ageinst, put to open
shame and make theim bere fagottes. But whether they be heretikes or no,
well I wote that this purgatory and the Popes pardons is all the cause of
translacion of your kingdome so fast into their hondes wherfore it is
manifest it can not be of christ, for he gaue more to the temporall
kingdome, he hym silfe paid tribute to Cesar he toke nothing from hym but
[Pg 11]

taught that the highe powers shulde be alweys obei[e]d ye[a] he him silf
(although he were most fre lorde of all and innocent) was obedient vnto
the highe powers vnto deth. This is the great scabbe why they will not let
the newe testament go a brode yn your moder tong lest men shulde espie
that they by theyre cloked ypochrisi do translate thus fast your kingdome
into theyre hondes, that they are not obedient vnto your highe power, that
they are cruell, vnclene, vnmerciful, and ypochrites, that thei seke not
the honour of Christ but their owne, that remission of sinnes are not
giuen by the popes pardon, but by Christ, for the sure feith and trust
that we haue in him. Here may your grace well perceyue that except ye
suffer theyre ypocrisie to be disclosed all is like to runne ynto theire
hondes and as long as it is couered so long shall it seme to euery man to
be a greate ympiete not to gyue theim. For this I am sure your grace
thinketh (as the truth is) I am as good as my father, whye may I not
aswell gyue theim as moche as my father did. And of this mynd I am sure
are all the loordes knightes squir[e]s gentilmen and ye[o]men in englond
ye[a] and vntill it be disclosed all your peoole [
people
] will thinke
that your statute of mortmayne was neuer made with no good conscience
seing that it taketh awey the liberte of your people in that they may not
as laufully b[u]y theire soules out of purgatory by gyuing to the
spiritualte as their predecessours did in tymes passed.

wherfore if ye will eschewe the ruyne of your crowne and dignitie let
their ypocrisye be vttered and that shalbe more spedfull in this mater
then all the lawes that may be made be they never so stronge. For to make
a lawe for to punisshe eny offender except it were more fit to giue other
men an ensample to beware to committe suche like offence, whate shuld yt
auayle. Did not doctour Alyn most presumptuously nowe yn your tyme ageynst
all this allegiaunce all that ever he coude to pull from you the knowledge
of suche plees as [be]long vnto your hyghe courtes vnto an other court in
derogacion of your crowne and dignite? Did not also doctor Horsey and his
complices most heynously as all the world knoweth murdre in pryson that
honest marchaunt Richard hunne? For that he sued your writ of premunire
against a prest that wrongfully held him in ple[a] in a spirituall court
for a mater wherof the knowlege belonged vnto your hyghe courtes. And
[Pg 12]

whate punisshement was there done that eny man may take example of to be
ware of lyke offence? truely none but that the one payd fiue hundreth
poundes (as it is said to the b[u]ildinge of your sterre chamber) and when
that payment was ones passed the capteyns of his kingdome (because he
faught so manfully ageynst your crowne and dignitie) haue heped to him
benefice vpon benefice so that he is rewarded tenne tymes as moche. The
other as it is seid payde sixe hundreth poundes for him and his complices
whiche forbicause that he had lyke wyse faught so manfully ageynst your
crowne and dignite was ymmediatly (as he had opteyned your most gracyous
pardon) promoted by the capiteynes of his kingdome with benefice vpon
benefice to the value of. iiij. tymes as moche. who can take example of
this punisshement to be ware of suche like offence? who is he of theyre
kingdome that will not rather take courage to committe lyke offence seying
the promocions that fill [
fell
] to this [
these
] men for theyre so
offending. So weke and blunt is your swerde to strike at one of the
offenders of this cro[o]ked and peruers generacyon.

And this is by the reason that the chief instrument of youre lawe ye[a]
the chief of your counsell and he whiche hath youre swerde in his hond to
whome also all the other instrumentes are obedient is alweys a spirituell
man whiche hath euer suche an inordinate loue vnto his owne kingdome that
he will mainteyn that, though all the temporall kingdoms and comonwelth[s]
of the worlde shulde therfore vtterly be vndone, Here leue we out the
gretest mater of all lest that we declaring suche an horrible carayn of
euyll ageinst the ministres of iniquite shulde seme to declare the one
onely faute or rather the ignoraunce of oure best beloued ministre of
rightousnesse whiche is to be hid till he may be lerned by these small
enormitees that we haue spoken of to knowe it pleynly him silf. But whate
remedy to releue vs your poore sike lame and sore bedemen? To make many
hospitals for the relief of the poore people? Nay truely. The moo the
worse, for euer the fatte of the hole foundacion hangeth on the prestes
berdes. Dyuers of your noble predecessours kinges of this realme haue
gyuen londes to monasteries to giue a certein somme of money yerely to the
poore people wherof for the aunciente of the tyme they giue neuer one
[Pg 13]

peny, They haue lyke wyse giuen to them to haue a certeyn masses said
daily for theim wherof they sey neuer one. If the Abbot of westminster
shulde sing euery day as many masses for his founders as he is bounde to
do by his foundacion. M, monkes were to[o] fewe. wherfore if your grace
will bilde a sure hospitall that neuer shall faile to releue vs all your
poore bedemen, so take from theim all these thynges. Set these sturdy
lobies a brode in the world to get theim wiues of theire owne, to get
theire liuing with their laboure in the swete of theire faces according to
the commaundement of god. Gene. iij. to gyue other idell people by theire
example occasion to go to laboure. Tye these holy idell theues to the
cartes to be whipped naked about euery market towne til they will fall to
laboure that they by theyre importunate begging take not awey the almesse
that the good christen people wolde giue vnto vs sore impotent miserable
people your bedemen. Then shall aswell the nombre of oure forsaid
monstruous sort as of the baudes, hores, theues, and idell people
decreace. Then shall these great yerely exaccions cease. Then shall not
youre swerde, power, crowne, dignite, and obedience of your people, be
translated from you. Then shall you haue full obedience of your people.
Then shall the idell people be set to worke. Then shall matrimony be moche
better kept. Then shal the generation of your people be encreased, Then
shall your comons encrease in richnesse. Then shall the gospell be
preached. Then shall none begge oure almesse from vs. Then shal we haue
ynough and more then shall suffice vs, whiche shall be the best hospitall
that euer was founded for vs, Then shall we daily pray to god for your
most noble estate long to endure.

Domine saluum fac regem.

[Pg 14]

UNWIN BROTHERS, THE GRESHAM PRESS, CHILWORTH AND LONDON.

The OLD SERIES

ill represent
the following classes of books:—

a
Early printed translations from the Classics, as those by
J. Heywood
,
T.
Phaer
,
R. Stanyhurst
,
A. Golding
,
T. May
, and others: or from the
Continental literatures of their times.

b
Romances, “histories,” satires, epigrams, “love pamphlets,” poems, and
other pieces by
R. Braithwaite
;
N. Breton
;
T. Campion
, M.D.;
H. Chettle
;
T.
Churchyard
;
S. Daniel
;
F. Davison
;
M. Drayton
;
T. Decker
;
G. Gascoigne
;
S.
Hawes
;
T. Lodge
, M.D.;
A. Munday
;
W. Painter
;
G. Pettie
;
B. Rich
;
S.
Rowlands
;
J. Taylor
, the “Water Poet;”
W. Warner
; and others. Some of
these productions are the ground works of
Shakespeare
’s plays.

c
Some quaint sermons or other characteristic books by Puritans: together
with some 20 or 25 tracts of the
Martin Marprelate Controversy
:
1588-1590
A.D.
A complete set of the original editions of these “laughing
libels” now about to be reproduced would fetch from
£200
to
£250
; as many
of them were secretly printed at
John Penry
’s wandering press, and are now
of extraordinary scarcity.

d
A brief Selection from the earlier and later Drama down to the time of

Dryden
: not forgetting the annual pageants of the Lord Mayor on the 29th
of October, the Court Revels, and the Masks at the Inns of Court. Also
some books attacking or defending the Stage.

e
Remarkable books like Sir
T. Elyot
’s
Governor
; Sir
T. Wilson
’s

Rhetoric and Logic: The Mirror for Magistrates
;
J. Howell
’s
Epistolæ Ho

Elianæ
; Colonel
S. Allen
’s
Killing no Murder
; W.
Bradford
’s
Of New
Plimouth
;
W. Thomas’

Historie of Italie
;
J. Lambard
’s
Perambulation of
Kent
; Bp.
J. Jewell
’s
Apologie
; Sir
T. Smith
’s
Commonwealth of
England
; and also books remarkable as being the first produced in any
country.

f
The Controversy with Rome in the first phase of the English Reformation;
as represented by the works of
W. Tyndale
; Sir
T. More
;
C. Saint German
;

R. Barnes
;
J. Rastell
;
G. Joye
; and others. To be printed from the

contemporary
editions.

g
“Characters,” “Essays,” and other pieces photographing the “humours” of
their time.

h
The Quarrels of Authors; and notably that between Dr.
Gabriel Harvey
and

Tom Nash
.

i
Strange travels; like
Lithgow
’s
Peregrination
and
Coryat
’s

Crudities
.

j
A few philosophical books: like Sir
J. Eliot
’s
Monarchie of Man
;
J.
Hale
’s
Golden Remains
;
T. Hobbe
’s
Leviathan
; and Bishop
J. Wilkin
’s

Real Character
.

k
Some “Emblem” books; if their text and illustrations can by

photogravure
or any like process be reproduced with a satisfactory
definition and clearness.

II. Though not its main intention—this
OLD SERIES
will comprise the
largest number of forbidden or “obnoxious” English books ever brought
together. Of which it will represent books burnt by the Romish hierarchy
under Henry VIII; Brownist, Puritan, and
Martin Marprelate
tracts
confiscated by
Elizabeth
’s bishops; free-speech books obnoxious to the
ministers of the Stuarts; “Divine right” sermons and other works burnt by
the common hangman by order of Parliament; and lastly, works rewarded by
the High Commission in the Star Chamber with slit nose, branded face, or
cropped ears.

⁂
For further particulars, including issues to date, see
current List.

Mr.
EDWARD ARBER’s

Publications & Announcements
.

CONDITIONS OF ISSUE.

1. Prepayment is obligatory.

2.
ONE
Price
ALONE
is charged to every one.

3. That Price includes
FREE DELIVERY

anywhere
through the post.

4. These publications can
ONLY
be obtained by
postal
application to Mr.

Arber
. Booksellers and Shipping Agents should therefore
not
be troubled in
respect to them. They cannot get them any cheaper; and must, in all
fairness, charge Carriage, Commission etc., in addition to the One Price
in which Mr.
Arber

includes
free delivery by post. Distribution by post is
also quicker (if not more certain) than any other process of delivery that
booksellers etc. can command. Applications should therefore
invariably

be made
direct
to the Publisher.

5. To avoid the recurrence of small payments; any sum can be sent in
advance on Deposit, and will be accounted for.

6. The accurate postal address (
as if addressing a letter to one’s self
)
is required.

7. All packets sent outside the United Kingdom are registered.

8. Inland remittances can be made in ½d., 1d., or 1½d.
Postage

Stamps, when under 5s. 0d.: or by Postal Orders, Notes, or crossed Cheques
when above that amount.

Colonial, American, and Continental remittances can be made by Colonial or
International Money Orders, Notes, etc., or by Bank drafts at sight “to
order.” All Postal Money Orders are to be made on
Southgate
Post Office,

London, N.

9. Purchasers etc. are informed from time to time of the fresh issues.

10. The wide distribution of the current Catalogues will be very helpful.

Copies will be forwarded, as demanded, for that purpose.

⁂ Under these arrangements is it alone possible continuously to
produce and distribute these most important Works: for the production of
which, at the cheap rates here studied, or indeed at any price at all,
there is, for the most part, no inducement to the ordinary Publisher.

End of Project Gutenberg's A Supplication for the Beggars, by Simon Fish

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A SUPPLICATION FOR THE BEGGARS ***

***** This file should be named 32464-h.htm or 32464-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
https://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/4/6/32464/

Produced by Meredith Bach and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries.)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.

*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).

Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License.  You must require such a user to return or
destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.

Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.

Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate

Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.