Project Gutenberg's The Story of Books, by Gertrude Burford Rawlings

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

Title: The Story of Books

Author: Gertrude Burford Rawlings

Release Date: August 13, 2010 [EBook #33413]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF BOOKS ***

Produced by Adrian Mastronardi, Jana Srna and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)

Transcriber's Note:

Every effort has been made to replicate this text as faithfully as
possible, including inconsistencies in spelling and hyphenation;
changes (corrections of spelling and punctuation) made to the
original text are marked
like this
.
The original text appears when hovering the cursor over the marked text.

The illustrations have been moved to be closer to the text that
references them.

THE STORY OF BOOKS

The Useful Knowledge Library

PLANT LIFE. By
Grant Allen
.

ARCHITECTURE. By
P. L. Waterhouse
.

THE STARS. By
G. F. Chambers
, F.R.A.S.

THE SOLAR SYSTEM. By
George F.
Chambers
, F.R.A.S.

FOREST AND STREAM. By
James Rodway
.

THE MIND. By Prof.
J. M. Baldwin
.

THE RELIGIONS OF THE WORLD. By
the Rev.
E. D. Price
, F.G.S.

EXTINCT CIVILIZATIONS OF THE EAST.
By
Robert E. Anderson
, M.A., F.A.S.

THE CHEMICAL ELEMENTS. By
M. M.
Pattison Muir
, M.A.

A PIECE OF COAL. By
E. A. Martin
.

THE EARTH IN PAST AGES. By
H. G.
Seeley
, F.R.S.

BIRD-LIFE. By
W. P. Pycraft
.

GEOGRAPHICAL DISCOVERY. By
Joseph
Jacobs
.

PRIMITIVE MAN. By
Edward Clodd
.

THOUGHT AND FEELING. By
Frederick
Ryland
, M.A.

THE BRITISH RACE. By
John Munro
.

GERM LIFE. By
H. W. Conn
.

ANIMAL LIFE. By
B. Lindsay
.

COTTON PLANT. By
F. Wilkinson
, F.G.S.

ECLIPSES. By
G. F. Chambers
, F.R.A.S.

ELECTRICITY. By
J. Munro
.

WEATHER. By
G. F. Chambers
, F.R.A.S.

WILD FLOWERS. By Rev. Prof.
Henslow
.

LONDON: HODDER AND STOUGHTON

EARLY PRINTERS AT WORK.

THE

STORY OF BOOKS

BY

GERTRUDE BURFORD RAWLINGS

Author of “The Story of the British Coinage”

HODDER AND STOUGHTON

PUBLISHERS, LONDON

CONTENTS

CHAP.

PAGE

I.

Introductory

9

II.

The Preservation of Literature

13

III.

Books and Libraries in Classical Times

26

IV.

Books in Mediæval Times

36

V.

Libraries in Mediæval Times

56

VI.

The Beginning of Printing

70

VII.

Who Invented Moveable Types?

81

VIII.

Gutenberg and the Mentz Press

89

IX.

Early Printing

103

X.

Early Printing in Italy and some other Countries

110

XI.

Early Printing in England

118

XII.

Early Printing in Scotland

131

XIII.

Early Printing in Ireland

138

XIV.

Book Bindings

144

XV.

How a Modern Book is Produced

159

Postscript

164

Index

166

ILLUSTRATIONS

Early Printers at Work

Frontispiece

PAGE

Page from the Book of Kells

38

Part of Page from the Book of Kells

39

Page from the Lindisfarne Gospels

44

Page from the Biblia Pauperum

76

Type
of the
Mentz Indulgence

95

Page from the Mazarin Bible

98

Type of the Mazarin Bible

99

Type of the Subiaco Lactantius

111

Type of the Aldine Virgil, 1501

114

Type of Caxton's Dictes or Sayengis of the Philosophres,
Westminster, 1477

123

Boys Learning Grammar

125

Caxton's Device

127

Type of Wynkyn de Worde's Higden's Polychronicon, London, 1495

129

Myllar's Device

132

Title Page of O'Kearney's Irish Alphabet and Catechism

140

Upper Cover of Melissenda's Psalter

149

THE STORY OF BOOKS

CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTORY

The
book family is a very old and a very noble
one, and has rendered great service to mankind,
although, as with other great houses, all its members
are not of equal worth and distinction. But
since books are so common nowadays as to be
taken quite as matters of course, probably few
people give any thought to the long chain of
events which, reaching from the dim past up to
our own day, has been necessary for their evolution.
Yet if we look round on our bookshelves,
whether we measure their contents by hundreds
or by thousands, and consider how mighty is the
power of these inanimate combinations of “rag-paper
with black ink on them,” and how all but
limitless their field of action, it is but a step
further to wonder what the first books were like.
Given the living, working brain to fashion thoughts
and create fancies, to whom did it first occur to
write a book, what language and characters and
material did he use, when did he write, and what
did he write about? And although these questions
can never be answered, an attempt to follow

them up will lead the inquirer into many fascinating
bye-ways of knowledge. It is not, however,
the purpose of these pages to deal at length with
the ancient history of the
manuscript
book, but,
after briefly noticing the chief links which connect
the volumes of to-day with primeval records, to
present to the reader a few of the many points
of interest offered by the modern history of the

printed
book.

The Beginning of Writing.
—Books began with
writing, and writing began at the time when man
first bethought himself to make records, so that
the progenitor of the beautiful handwriting and no
less beautiful print of the civilised world is to be
looked for in the rude drawing which primeval
man scratched with a pointed flint on a smooth
bone, or on a rock, representing the beast he
hunted, or perhaps himself, or one of his fellows.
The exact degree of importance he attached to
these drawings we cannot hope to discover.
They may have been cherished from purely
æsthetic motives, or they may have served, at
times, a merely utilitarian end and acted, perhaps,
as memoranda. However this may be, these
early drawings are the germs from which sprang
writing, the parent of books, and liberator of
literature, that great force of which a book is but
the vehicle. How these drawings were gradually
changed into letters, in other words, the story
of the alphabet, has been already told in this
series by Mr Edward Clodd, and therefore we
need not deal further with the subject here.

Writing once learned, and alphabets once

formulated, the machinery for making books, with
the human mind as its mainspring, was fairly in
motion. “Certainly the Art of Writing,” says
Carlyle, “is the most miraculous of all things
man has devised.… With the art of Writing,
of which Printing is a simple, an inevitable and
comparatively insignificant corollary, the true
reign of miracles for mankind commenced.”
That these words only express the feeling of our
far away ancestors, a cursory glance into the
mythology of various peoples will prove. For
wherever there is a tradition respecting writing,
that tradition almost invariably, if not always,
connects the great invention with the gods or
with some sacred person. The Egyptians attributed
it to Thoth, the Babylonians and Assyrians
to Nebo, the Buddhists to Buddha, the Greeks
to Hermes. The Scandinavians honoured Odin
as the first cutter of the mysterious runes, and
the Irish derived their ogham from the sacred
Ogma of the Tuatha de Danaan. And it is
noteworthy how, from time immemorial, writing,
and the making of books, have been considered
high and honourable accomplishments, and how
closely they have ever been connected with the
holy functions of priesthood.

Materials for Writing and Books.
—The early
forms of books were various, and, to modern eyes,
more or less clumsy. Wood or bark was one
of the oldest substances used to receive writing.
Stone was no doubt older still, but stone inscriptions
are outside our subject. The early Greeks
and Romans employed tablets of soft metal, and

wooden leaves coated with wax, when they had
anything to write, impressing the characters with
a stilus. Thus Pausanius relates that he saw
the original copy of Hesiod's
Works and Days

written on leaden tablets. The wooden leaves,
when bound together at one side, foreshadowed
the form of book which is now almost universal,
and were called by the Romans
caudex
, or
codex

(originally meaning a tree-stump), in distinction
to the
volumen
, which was always a parchment or
papyrus roll. The oldest manuscript in existence,
however, is on papyrus, which, as is well known,
was the chief writing-material of the ancient
world. Although the discovery that skins of
animals, when properly prepared, formed a convenient
and durable writing-material, was made
at a very early date, the papyrus held its own as
the writing-material of literary Egypt, Greece,
and Rome, until about the fourth or fifth century
of our era.

The books of Babylonia and Assyria took the
form of thick clay tablets of various sizes. The
wedge-shaped characters they bore were made by
impressing the wet, soft clay with a triangular-pointed
instrument of wood, bone, or metal. The
tablet was then baked, and as recent discoveries
prove, rendered exceedingly durable. It is a
matter of conjecture as to whether the form of
the original documents of the Old Testament was
that of the Babylonian tablets, or of the Egyptian
papyrus rolls, or of rolls of parchment. Perhaps
all three were employed by the various biblical
writers at different times.

It is stretching a point, perhaps, to include

among writing materials the tablets of bamboo
bark which bore the earliest Chinese characters,
since the inscriptions were carved. The Chinese,
however, soon discarded such primitive uses, and
the paper which is so indispensable to-day was
invented by them at a very early date, though it
remained unknown to Europe until the Arabs
introduced it about the tenth century,
A.D.
One
of the earliest extant writings on paper is an
Arabic “Treatise on the Nourishment of the
Human Body,” written in 960
A.D.
, but it seems
to have been printing which really brought paper
into fashion, for paper manuscripts are rare compared
with those of parchment and vellum.

CHAPTER II

THE PRESERVATION OF LITERATURE

It
is easier to find the beginning of writing than
the beginning of literature. Although we know
for certain that the ancient nations of the world
had books and libraries, that they preserved
traditions, stored records and knowledge, and
assisted memory by means of their tablets,
their monuments, and their papyri, we shall probably
never know when the art of writing was
first applied to strictly literary purposes, and still
less likely is it that we shall ever discover when
works of the imagination were first recorded for
the edification of mankind. It is not very rash,
however, to assume that as soon as the art had

developed the ancients put it to much the same
uses as we do, except, perhaps, that they did not
vulgarise it, and no one wrote who had not something
to write about. But we are not without
specimens of antique literatures. Egypt has preserved
for us many different specimens of her
literary produce of thousands of years ago—historical
records, works of religion and philosophy,
fiction, magic, and funeral ritual. Assyria has
bequeathed to us hundreds of the clay books
which formed the great royal library at Nineveh,
books of records, mythology, morals, grammar,
astronomy, astrology, magic; books of reference,
such as geographical tables, lists of temples,
plants, birds, and other things. In the Old Testament
we have all that now remains of Israelitish
writings, and the early literatures of China and
India are also partly known to us. After these the
writings of Greece and Rome are of comparatively
recent origin, and moreover, they are nearer to us
in other respects besides the merely chronological.
The literature of Greece, dating from the far
Homeric age, grew up a strong and beautiful
factor in Greek life, and Rome, drawing first her
alphabet and then her literature from the land
before which she stooped, even while she conquered
it, passed them on as an everlasting possession
to the peoples of the western world. The
fact of the literary pre-eminence of Greece partly
helps to explain why Greek manuscripts form the
bulk of the early writings now extant.

In considering how early literature has been
preserved, therefore, we are hardly concerned
with Egyptian papyri or cuneiform tablets,

but with the writings of Greece and Rome, or
writings produced under Greek or Roman influence.
And it is curious that while the libraries
and books of older nations have survived in comparatively
large numbers, there should be no
Greek literary manuscripts older than about 160

B.C.
, and even these are very fragmentary and
scarce. The earliest Latin document known
is dated 55
A.D.
, and is an unimportant wax
tablet from Pompeii. For this lack of early documents
many causes are responsible, and those
who remember that it is not human beings only
who suffer from the vicissitudes inseparable from
existence will wonder, not that we have so few
ancient writings in our present possession, but
that we have any. The evidence of many curious
and interesting discoveries of manuscripts made
from time to time goes to show that accident,
rather than design, has worked out their preservation,
and that the civilised world owes its present
store of ancient literature more to good luck
than good management, to use a handy colloquialism.
It is true, of course, that in early days
there were many who guarded books as very
precious things, but in times of wars and tumults
people would naturally give little thought to
such superfluities. Fire and war have been the
agencies most destructive of books, in the opinion
of the author of
Philobiblon
, but carelessness
and ignorance, wanton destruction and natural
decay, are also accountable for some part of the
great losses which have wasted so large a share
of the literary heritage, and although we are
deeply indebted to monastic work for the transmission

of classic lore as well as of Christian
compositions, we can hardly conclude that the
monkish scribes wrote solely for the benefit of
posterity. Their immediate purpose, no doubt,
and naturally so, was much narrower, and identified
the service of God with the enrichment of
their houses. Besides, they did not hesitate to
erase older writings in order that they might use
the parchment again for their own, whenever it
suited them to do so.

Before noting some of the ways by which
ancient literature has come down to the present
day, let us for a moment transport ourselves into
the past, and see how a wealthy Roman lover of
letters would set about gathering a collection of
books. Having no lack of means, all that is best
in the literary world will be at his service. He
will first take care that the works of every Greek
writer which can possibly be obtained, as well as
those of Roman authors, are represented in his
library by well-written papyrus rolls containing
good, correct texts. If he can obtain old manuscripts
or original autographs of famous writers,
so much the better; but whereas ordinary volumes
will cost him comparatively little, on these he
must expend large sums. If a book on which he
has set his heart is not to be purchased, he may
be able to obtain the loan of it, so that it may be
transcribed for him by his
librarius
or writing-slave.
If he can neither borrow nor purchase
what he desires, he may commission the bookseller
to send for it to Alexandria, where there is
an unrivalled store of books and many skilled
scribes ready to make copies of them.

But it is not easy to estimate with any degree
of certainty the quantity of literary material available,
say, at the time of the establishment of the
first public library in Rome, which was probably
about 39
B.C.
Books were common and booksellers
flourished. Greek and Roman writings
were preserved on papyrus, not neglected or lost,
and the various parts of what we now call the
Old Testament probably existed in the Hebrew
synagogues. We may, perhaps, assume that the
Roman book collector, did he choose to take the
necessary trouble, might add to his collection
some of the writings of ancient Egypt. But no
doubt Greek and Latin authors only are of value
in his eyes. At this point it is dangerous to
speculate further, and we must leave the
imaginary Roman, and, advancing to our own
time, where we are on surer ground, ask what
remnants of old records and literature have come
down to us, and how have they been preserved?

It will be disappointing news, perhaps, to those
to whom the facts are fresh, that no original manuscript
of any classical author, and no original
manuscript of any part of the Bible, Old Testament
or New, has yet come to light. Nothing is known
of any of these documents except through the
medium of copies, and in some cases very many
copies indeed intervene between us and the
original. For instance, the oldest Homeric
manuscript known, with the exception of one or
two fragments, is not older than the first century

B.C.
, and the most ancient Biblical manuscript
known, a fragment of a Psalter, is assigned to the
late third or early fourth century
A.D.
The

earliest New Testament manuscript extant, the
first leaf of a book of St Matthew's Gospel, is
also no older than the third century. It is
curious, too, that no ancient Greek manuscripts
have been found either in Greece or Italy
excepting some rolls discovered in the ruins of
Herculaneum. One reason for this is no doubt
the fact that when Roman armies assailed Athens
and other Greek cities they despoiled them not
only of their statues and works of art, but of
their books as well. These went to furnish the
libraries of Rome, though it is probable that certain
of them found their way back to Greece in
company with some of Rome's own literary
produce when Constantine set up his capital and
founded a library at Byzantium. Another means
by which Greek manuscripts left the country was
afforded by the eagerness of Ptolemy II. to
extend the great library of Alexandria, to which
end he bought books in all parts of Greece, and
particularly in Athens and Rhodes.

The Roman libraries did not survive the
onslaughts of the barbarians, who seem to have
carried out a very thorough work of destruction
in the Eternal City. But it is not unlikely that
in some cases books, among other portable
treasures, were carried away when their owners
sought refuge in less troubled localities, such as
Constantinople or Alexandria. Still, the fact
remains that the contents of the Roman libraries
have disappeared, and that for the ancient manuscripts
now in our possession we are indebted to
the tombs, the temples, the monasteries, and the
sands of Egypt. Sometimes—to show the strange

adventures of some of these manuscripts—the
cartonnage cases in which mummies of the later
period were enclosed, were made of papyrus
documents, which apparently had been treated as
waste paper and put to all sorts of undignified
uses. The two oldest classical papyri known,
consisting of fragments of Plato's
Phœdo
and
of the
Antiope
of Euripides, were recovered from
mummy-cases, and are supposed to date from
the third century
B.C.
Other important Greek
texts which have been preserved by Egypt are
Aristotle's
Constitution of Athens
, the
Mimes
of
Herodas, the
Odes
of Bacchylides, the
Gospel
and

Apocalypse
of Peter, the Book of Enoch, &c.

But here we have to take into consideration a
new and important factor in literary as in other
matters—the spread of Christianity. With such
obvious exceptions as the cuneiform records,
or the Egyptian writings, and similar remains, the
bulk of the manuscripts (as manuscripts, not as
compositions) is the work of (Christian) religious
houses, and it is easy to see that we owe much to
the labours of the monks and ecclesiastics who
have transmitted to us not only the earliest and
most valuable works of the Church's own writers,
but also the chief part of the literature of Greece
and Rome. As Mr Falconer Madan says in
his
Books in Manuscript
, “the number and
importance of the MSS. of Virgil and the four
Gospels is greater than of any other ancient
authors whatever,” and it is safe to assume that
all these Gospel MSS., and perhaps all the
Virgil MSS. also, were the handiwork of churchmen.

As an example of the manuscript treasures
yielded by Egypt may be instanced the find at
Behnesa, a village standing on the site of the
Roman city of Oxyrhynchus, one of the chief
centres of early Christianity in Egypt. Here, in
1896, Mr B. P. Grenfell and Mr A. S. Hunt,
searching for papyri on behalf of the Egypt
Exploration Fund, lighted upon one of the
richest hunting-grounds yet discovered. The
result of their excavations was that about 270
boxes of manuscripts were brought to England,
while 150 of the best rolls were left at the
Cairo Museum. I am unable to give the size of
the boxes, but Professor Flinders Petrie's statement
that “the publication of this great collection
of literature and documents will probably occupy
a decade or two, and will place our knowledge of
the Roman and early Christian age on a new
footing,” will testify to the extent and importance
of the find.

In this collection the document which
excited most interest was a papyrus leaf bearing
some scraps of Greek, to which the name of

ΛΟΓΙΑ ΙΗΣΟΥ
, or Sayings of our Lord, has been
given. This leaf is at present assigned to a date
between 150 and 300
A.D.
The Logia are eight
in number, and while three of them are closely
similar to certain passages in the Gospels, the rest
are new. Another valuable document was the
fragment of St Matthew's Gospel alluded to
above, which, written in the third century, is a
hundred years older than any New Testament
manuscript hitherto known. Classical documents
also were found in great numbers, and included

a new
Ode
of Sappho, which, however, is
unfortunately imperfect. It was transcribed
probably about the third century
A.D.

Many Coptic, Syriac, and Arabic manuscripts
have been recovered from the numerous monasteries
of Palestine, Asia Minor, and Egypt. Several
travellers who have managed to overcome the
suspicion of the monks and their unwillingness to
open their literary hoards to strangers, or to part
with any of the volumes, have found immense
numbers of books hidden under dust and rubbish
in vaults and cellars or stowed away in chests,
where they were probably thrust at some time
when danger threatened them. Books written in
these monasteries themselves in earlier days, or
brought thither from other monasteries further
east, have thus lain forgotten or neglected for
centuries, or, if they were noticed at all, it was
only that they might be put to some ignoble use.
Thus some were found acting as covers to two
large jars which had formerly held preserves.
“I was allowed to purchase these vellum manuscripts,”
says the author of
Monasteries of the
Levant
, “as they were considered to be useless
by the monks, principally, I believe, because there
were no more preserves in the jars.” In another
case some large volumes were found in use as
footstools to protect the bare feet of the monks
from the cold stone floor of their chapel.

As we have already seen, Christian scribes not
only preserved the writings of the Fathers of the
Church, as well as the Holy Scriptures, but also
directed much of their attention to the classic
works of poetry and philosophy.  In every

monastery from Ireland to Asia Minor, from
Seville to Jerusalem, the work of transcribing and
transmitting sacred and secular literature was
carried on, and had we at the present day one half
of the fruits of this labour we should be rich indeed.
But we have also seen that many causes
have contributed to the destruction of old writings,
of which carelessness and ignorance are by
no means the least. The well-known story of
Tischendorf's discovery of the oldest copy of the
New Testament in existence,
[1]
in a basket of
fuel at a monastery near Mount Sinai is but a
single example, and that a modern one, of the
dangers to which these ancient books were
liable, and to which they too often fell victims.
The danger was long ago recognised, however, and
a canon of the third Council of Constantinople,
held in
719

A.D.
, enacted “That nobody whatever
be allowed to injure the book of the Old and
New Testament, or those of our holy preachers
and doctors, nor to cut them up, nor to give them
to dealers in books, or perfumers, or any other
person to be erased, except they have been
rendered useless by moths or water or in some
other way. He who shall do any such thing
shall be excommunicated for one year.” The
same Council also ordered the burning of heretical
books.

With the revival of learning in the fourteenth
century there came an awakened interest in ancient
writings. They were eagerly sought for in the
monasteries of Europe, and the learned of Italy
were especially instrumental in recovering the

neglected classical works. It has been said that
almost all the classical authors were discovered
or rediscovered either in Italy or through the researches
of Italians. Petrarch, with whose name
the Renaissance is inseparably associated, and a
contemporary of our Richard de Bury, took great
pains to form a collection of the works of Cicero,
whose
Epistles
he was fortunate enough to rescue
from destroying oblivion. He tells us that when
he met strangers, and they asked him what he
desired from their country, he would reply,
“Nothing, but the works of Cicero.” He also
sent money to France, Germany, Spain, Greece,
and England that these books might be bought
for him, and if while travelling he came across
any ancient monastery he would turn aside and
explore its book treasures.

Poggio Bracciolini, a learned Italian of the
fifteenth century, has also made himself famous
by his ardent pursuit of the remains of classical
literature, and by aiding the interest in them
which the Renaissance had awakened. He
searched Europe for manuscripts to such good
purpose that he unearthed a valuable text of
Quintilian's
Institutes
, “almost perishing at the
bottom of a dark neglected tower,” in the
monastery of St Gall, and recovered many other
classical writings by his industry, including some
of the
Orations
of Cicero; Lucretius; Manilius,
and others. He also rescued the writings of
Tertullian.

We may perhaps believe that even by this time
the surviving treasures of the old storehouses of
literature have not yet been all brought to light.

Renan discovered in the large collection of
manuscripts still preserved in the monastery of
Monte Casino in Italy, some unpublished pages of
Abelard's
Theologia Christiana
, and other valuable
finds besides, and it is quite possible that many
more surprises are awaiting an enterprising and
diligent searcher.

But although the monasteries had so large a
share in the work of the preservation of literature,
the monks themselves wrought harm as well as
good, for in their zeal to record sacred compositions
they frequently destroyed older and
often more valuable documents by scraping off
the original writing and substituting other. This
was done for economy's sake, when writing
material was costly, and parchments thus treated
are known as palimpsests. Owing to this reprehensible
practice, many literary treasures have
been irretrievably lost. Our Anglo-Saxon literature,
for instance, is not represented by any contemporary
copies. The Anglo-Norman writers had
a contempt for the old English manuscripts, and
turned them into palimpsests without the slightest
idea that there could be any value in them, and
attached far more importance to the writing they
themselves were about to make. Thus it happens
that we are in the same position with regard to
Anglo-Saxon literature as with regard to classical
authors. No original documents exist, and it is
known to us solely through copies, single copies,
in most cases. Beowulf, for instance, is represented
only by a manuscript of the first half of
the eleventh century, and Caedmon by a manuscript
of the tenth century.

With the invention and spread of the knowledge
of printing, however, the risk of loss was greatly
reduced. Such ancient writings as came into
the printer's hands were given a fresh lease of
life which in many cases was of indefinite length,
or rather, of practically eternal duration. But
the fact of being printed was not invariably a
safeguard. Some of the works of the early
printers have disappeared completely, and many
are represented only by single copies. The
strange history of the British Museum copy of
the famous
Book of St Albans
, will serve to show
the vicissitudes with which the relics of the past
have to contend in their journey down the ages.

At the end of the last century the library of an
old Lincolnshire house was overhauled by someone
who disdainfully turned out of it all unbound
books, and had them destroyed. A few of the
condemned books, however, were begged by the
gardener. Among them was the Book of St
Albans. At the gardener's death his son threw
away some of the rescued volumes, but kept the
“Book.” At the son's death, his widow sold
such books as he had left, to a pedlar, for the
sum of ninepence. The pedlar re-sold them to
a chemist in Gainsborough for shop-paper, but
observing the strange wood-cuts in the “Book,”
the chemist offered it to a stationer for a guinea.
The stationer would not purchase, but said he
would display it in his window as a curiosity.
Here it attracted attention, and five pounds was
offered for it by a gentleman in the neighbourhood.
The stationer, finding the volume an
object of desire, gave the chemist two pounds

for it and eventually sold it to a bookseller for
seven guineas. Of this bookseller the Right
Hon. Thomas Grenville bought it for seventy
pounds, and bequeathed it to the British Museum
with the rest of his magnificent library. This
story I give on the authority of Mr Blades, who
also, to instance the way in which books travel
about and turn up in odd places, relates that a
brother of Bishop Heber's, who had been for
years seeking for a book printed by Colard
Mansion, but without success, one day received
a fine copy from the bishop, who had bought it
from a native on the banks of the Ganges.

CHAPTER III

BOOKS AND LIBRARIES IN CLASSICAL TIMES

In
literary Greece and Rome, so far as we can
tell from the somewhat meagre information handed
down to us, literature was pursued for her own
sake, and filthy lucre did not enter into the calculations
of authors, who appear to have been satisfied
if their works met with the approval of those
who were competent to judge of them. Literature
walked alone, and had not as yet entered
into partnership with commerce. The writing of
books for pecuniary profit is a wholly modern
development, and even now it is more often an
aspiration than a realisation.

In those days, when an author desired to
make known a work, he would read it aloud to

an invited party of friends. This reading of
original compositions became in time a common
item of the programme provided by a host for
the entertainment of his guests, and it is not
difficult to imagine that such a custom was often
subjected to grave abuse, from the guests' point
of view. Later, the private reading developed
into the public lecture. Lectures of this kind
became very frequent in Rome, and we are told
that it was looked upon as a sort of festival when
a fashionable author announced a reading. But
we are also told that some of the audience often
treated a lecturer of mediocre merit with scant
courtesy, entering late and leaving early, and
frequently they who applauded most were those
who had listened least. The public reading is
recorded of a poem composed by Nero. It was
read to the people on the Capitol, and the manuscript,
which was written in letters of gold, was
afterwards deposited in the temple of Jupiter
Capitolinus.

If a work happened to attract attention by
reason of its author's reputation or its own merit,
it was copied by students or others who had
heard and admired it. This was the only way
in which literary productions could be dispersed
and made known to the public at large, or a
collection of books be gathered together. As
the literary taste developed, those who were sufficiently
wealthy kept slaves whose sole business
it was to copy books, which books might be
either the original works of their master, who by
this means disseminated his compositions, or the
works of others, for the benefit of their master's

library. These slaves, being of necessity well
educated and skilful scribes, were purchased at
high prices and held in great esteem by their
owners. But obviously it was only the rich who
could command such service, and ordinary folk
had to resort to the bookseller.

The booksellers of Athens and Rome were
those who made copies of books, or employed
slaves to make them, and sold or let them on hire
to those who had need of them. The author had
no voice in these matters. There was nothing to
prevent anyone who borrowed or otherwise got
possession of his work from making copies of the
manuscript if he chose, and making money from
the copies if he could. “Copyright” was a
word unknown in those days, and for centuries
after. The booksellers advertised their wares by
notices affixed to the door-posts of their shops,
giving the names of new or desirable works, and
sometimes read these works aloud to their friends
and patrons. Their shops were favourite places
of resort for persons of leisure and literary tastes.

Copyists of books retained a high place in the
order of things literary until the introduction of
printing, and without their labours we should
know nothing of ancient literature, seeing that no
original manuscript of any classical author has
survived. And apart from its purely literary
value, which is variable, the work of the early
mediæval scribes in many instances reaches a
high artistic standard, and exhibits marvellous
skill in an accomplishment now numbered among
the lost arts.

On the subject of libraries, as on all literary

matters in ancient times, hardly any solid information
is available. But we know that Egypt
was to the fore in this respect as in so many
others. Yet of all the collections of books which,
since they are frequently alluded to in the inscriptions,
she undoubtedly possessed, stored in her
kings' palaces and her temple archives, there is
only one which is mentioned in history, and that
by a single historian. According to Diodorus
Siculus, this library was made by Osymandyas,
who was king of Egypt at a date which has not
been precisely determined. He tells us that its
entrance exhibited the inscription: “Place of
Healing for the Soul,” or, as it has been variously
rendered, “Balsam for the Soul,” or, “Dispensary
of the Mind.” Although doubt has been thrown
on the perfect accuracy of the historian in introducing
the name of Osymandyas in this connection,
modern Egyptologists have identified the
plan of the library with a hall of the great
“palace temple” of Rameses II., the “Ramesium”
or “Memnonium” at Thebes. The door-jambs
of this hall utter their own testimony to its
ancient use, for they bear the figures of Thoth,
the god of writing, and Saf, a goddess who is accompanied
by the titles “Lady of Letters” and
“Presider over the Hall of Books.” Astle, in

The Origin and Progress of Writing
, says that the
books and colleges of Egypt were destroyed by
the Persians, but Matter, on the other hand, in

L'École d'Alexandrie
, declares that the temple
archives were in existence in the Greek and
Roman periods. Probably Astle's statement is
not intended to be as sweeping as it appears.

Babylonia and Assyria also had their libraries.
According to Professor Sayce (
The Higher
Criticism and the Monuments
) they were “filled
with libraries, and the libraries with thousands of
books.” The royal library already referred to as
furnishing so rich a treasure of cuneiform tablets,
was begun by Sennacherib, who reigned 705–681

B.C.
, and completed by Assur-bani-pal, who reigned
about 668–626
B.C.

There were libraries, too, in Palestine, in early
days, but we know nothing of them. They may
have been archives or places where records were
kept, rather than libraries as we understand the
term. The name of Kirjath-sepher, a city near
Hebron, means “city of books,” and survives from
pre-Israelitish times. By the Jews, records and
“the book of the law” were preserved in the
temple.

Almost as scanty are the accounts of the
libraries of ancient Greece. The tyrant Pisistratus,
537–527
B.C.
, has been credited, traditionally,
with the establishment in Athens of the first
public library, but although he encouraged letters
and the preservation of literature there is no good
reason for accepting the tradition as authentic.

But of all libraries those of Alexandria were
the largest and most celebrated, and yet, notwithstanding
their eminence, the accounts relating to
them are confused and contradictory. Alexandria,
which, although situated in Egypt, was a Greek
and not an Egyptian city, was founded by Alexander
the Great in 332
B.C.
, and rapidly rose to a
high position. Its buildings, its learning, its
luxury, and its books, became world-famous.

The first library was established by Ptolemy
Soter, a ruler of literary tastes, about 300
B.C.
,
and was situated in that part of the city known as
the Bruchium. Copyists were employed to
transcribe manuscripts for the benefit of the
institution, and it is said that under Ptolemy
Euergetes all books brought into Egypt were
seized and sent to the library to be transcribed.
The copies were returned to the owners, whose
wishes were evidently not consulted, in place of
the originals, which went to enrich the store in
the great library.

Ptolemy Philadelphus is said to have supplemented
Soter's library by another, which was
lodged in the Temple of Serapis, but it has been
conjectured, with more probability, that the
Serapeum collection began with the temple
archives, to which the Ptolemies made additions
from time to time; these additions, as some have
affirmed, including part of Aristotle's library.
But here, also, contradictions are encountered,
and it seems impossible to say exactly whether
this statement refers to Aristotle's autograph
writings, or to copies of them, or to manuscripts
of other authors' works formerly in his possession.

It was Ptolemy Philadelphus, we are told by
Galen, who gave the Athenians fifteen talents, a
great convoy of provisions, and exemption from
tribute, in exchange for the autographs and
originals of the tragedies of Æschylus, Sophocles,
and Euripides.

Two other libraries also helped to make up the
glory of Alexandria; one in the Sebasteum, or
Temple of Augustus, and one in connection with

the Museum. The latter, however, was a much
later foundation. The museum or university itself,
had been instituted by Ptolemy Soter, and though
it was quite distinct from the library which is associated
with his name, there was doubtless some
relationship between the two. Her museum and
libraries, and the encouragement she offered to
learning, combined to set Alexandria at the head
of the literary world, and to make her “the first
great seat of literary Hellenism” (Jebb). She
was also the centre of the book industry, that is,
of the reproduction of books, as distinguished
from their first production. This was owing in a
large measure to the number of professional
copyists attracted by the facilities afforded to
them, and to the fact that the papyrus trade had
its headquarters here.

Another famous library of this period was that
of the Kings of Pergamus, founded by Attalus I.,
who reigned from 241 to 197
B.C.
Between Pergamus
and Alexandria there was vigorous competition.
In the end, however, Alexandria had
the satisfaction of seeing her rival completely
humbled, for Antony presented the books of
Pergamus, stated to have been about two hundred
thousand in number, to Cleopatra, who added
them to Alexandria's treasures. At least, so says
Plutarch, but Plutarch's authority for the statement
was Calvisius, whose veracity was not above
suspicion.

How the enormous accumulation of manuscripts
gathered by Alexandria came to perish so
utterly is not clear. The Romans accidentally
fired the Bruchium when they reduced the city,

but according to several accounts there were still
a goodly number of books remaining at the time
of the Saracen invasion in 638
A.D.
The story
of the Caliph Omar's reply to a plea for the
preservation of the books is well known. “If they
contain anything contrary to the word of God,”
he is reported to have said, “they are evil; if not,
they are superfluous,” and forthwith he had them
distributed among the four thousand baths of
the city, which they provided with fuel for six
months. But several authorities doubt this story,
and assert that long before Omar's time the
Alexandrian libraries had ceased to exist.

Though very far from being as full as could be
wished, the accounts of libraries in Rome are
more numerous than any relating to libraries in
other parts of the ancient world. Besides the
collections of books made by private persons,
which in one or two instances were generously
opened to the public by the owner, there were
the imperial libraries, and the more strictly public
libraries. Among the emperors whose names are
especially associated with the gathering and preservation
of books are Augustus, Tiberius and
Trajan. Julius Cæsar had formed a scheme for
the establishment of a public library, but it is
not clear whether it was ever carried out or no.
Domitian, to replace the library in the Capitol,
which had been destroyed, sent scholars abroad
to collect manuscripts and to copy some of those
at Alexandria. Under Constantine the Roman
public libraries numbered twenty-nine, and were
very frequently lodged in the temples.

Last in point of date come the libraries of

Byzantium, the city which the Emperor Constantine
in 330
A.D.
made the capital of the
eastern portion of the empire, and named after
himself. He at once began to gather books
there, and his successors followed his example.
Thus various libraries were established, and those
which survived the fires which occurred from
time to time in the city, existed until its capture
by the Turks in 1452. On this occasion, and
also after the assault by the Crusaders in 1203,
the libraries probably suffered. It is said, too,
by some that Leo III. wantonly destroyed a
large number of books, but the assertion cannot
be proved. Among the lost treasures of Constantinople
was “the only authentic copy” of the
proceedings of the Council of Nice, held in 325

A.D.
to deal with the Arian heresy.

The ultimate fate of the imperial library at
Constantinople yet remains a problem. Some
are of opinion that it was destroyed by Amurath IV.,
and that none but comparatively unimportant
Arabic and other Oriental manuscripts make up
the Sultan's library. Some believe that, in spite
of repeated assertions to the contrary on the part
of Turkish officials and others, there somewhere
lies a secret hoard, neglected and uncared for,
perhaps, but nevertheless existent, of ancient and
valuable Greek manuscripts. The Seraglio has
usually been considered to be the repository of
this hoard, and access to the Seraglio is very
difficult and almost impossible to obtain. In the
year 1800 Professor Carlyle, during his travels in
the East, took enormous pains and used every
means in his power to reach the bottom of the

mystery surrounding the Seraglio treasures. He
was assured by every Turkish officer whom he
consulted on the subject that no Greek manuscripts
existed there; and when by dint of influence
in high quarters and much patience and perseverance
he at length gained permission to examine
the Seraglio library, he found that it consisted
chiefly of Arabic manuscripts, and contained not
a single Greek, Latin, or Hebrew writing. The
library, or such part of it as the Professor was
shown, was approached through a mosque, and
consisted of a small cruciform chamber, measuring
only twelve yards at its greatest width. One
arm of the cross served as an ante-chamber, and
the other three contained the book-cases. The
books were laid on their sides, one on the other,
the ends outward. Their titles were written on
the edges of the leaves.

The result of the
Professor's
researches went
to confirm the belief held by so many that no
Greek manuscripts had survived. On the other
hand, the jealousy and suspicion of the Turks
would render it at least possible that despite
the apparent straightforwardness with which Mr
Carlyle was treated, there were stores of manuscripts
which were kept back from him.

A final touch of mystery was given to this
fascinating subject by a tradition concerning a
certain building in Constantinople which had
been closed up ever since the time of the Turkish
conquest in the fifteenth century. Of the existence
of this building Professor Carlyle was certain.
The tradition asserted that it contained many of
the former possessions of the Greek emperors, and

among these possessions Professor Carlyle expected
that the remains of the imperial library
would be found, if such remains existed.

Of other libraries of olden times, such as those
of Antioch and Ephesus, or those in private
possession in the country houses of Italy and
Gaul, and which perished at the hands of the
barbarians, it is not necessary to speak more
fully. It is sufficient to point out that they
existed, and that though we possess few details as
to their furniture or arrangement, we are justified
in concluding that the latter, at any rate, were
luxuriously appointed. It must not be inferred,
however, that all the books which disappeared
from these various centres were of necessity
destroyed. Many, and particularly some of the
Byzantine manuscripts, were dispersed over
Europe, and survive to enrich our libraries and
museums of to-day.

CHAPTER IV

BOOKS IN MEDIÆVAL TIMES

The
books of the Middle Ages are a special subject
in themselves, since they include all the
illuminated manuscripts of Ireland, England and
the Continent. We can therefore do little more
than indicate their historical place in the story
of books.

We have only to look at a mediæval illuminated
manuscript to understand how books were regarded

in those days, and with what lavish expenditure
of time and skill the quaint characters were
traced and the ornaments designed and executed.
And having looked, we gather that books, being
rare, were appreciated; and being sacred, were
reverenced; and that it was deemed a worthy
thing to make a good book and to make
it beautiful. Sometimes the monkish artist's
handiwork had a result not foreseen by him, for
we read that when St Boniface, the Saxon
missionary who gave his life to the conversion of
Germany, wrote to ask the Abbess Eadburga for
a missal, he desired that the colours might be gay
and bright, “even as a glittering lamp and an
illumination for the hearts of the Gentiles.” It is
easy to imagine how the brilliant pages would
attract the colour-loving barbarians, and prepare
the way for friendly advances.

It is probable that the custom of ornamenting
books with drawings was derived from the
Egyptians by the Greeks, and from the Greeks by
the Romans, among whom decorated books were
common, although they are known to us chiefly
by means of copies preserved in Byzantine and
Italian manuscripts of a more recent period.
These, and a few examples dating from the time
of Constantine, exhibit a style evidently derived
from classical models.

A survey of mediæval books properly begins
with the early Irish manuscripts, which stand at
the head of a long and glorious line stretching,
chronologically, from the seventh century of our
era to the fifteenth. Although it is not known
where the art was born to which these wonderful

productions of Celtic pen-craft owe their origin,
it is Ireland, nevertheless, which has provided us
with the earliest and finest examples of this work,
the marvels of skill and beauty which, summed

up, as it were, in the Book of Kells, the Book of
Durrow, and others, set the Irish manuscripts
beyond imitation or rivalry.

PAGE FROM THE BOOK OF KELLS
(
reduced.
)

PART OF PAGE FROM THE BOOK OF KELLS
(
exact size.
)

Most of these books are Psalters, or Gospels,
in Latin, while the remainder consist of missals and
other religious compilations, and of them all the
Book of Kells is the most famous. It was written
in the seventh century, and probably indicates
the highest point of skill reached by the Irish
artist-scribes, or as regards its own particular style
of ornamentation, by any artist-scribes whatever.
It is a book of the Gospels written (in Latin) on
vellum, and the size of the volume, of the writing,
and of the initial letters is unusually large. The
leaves measure 13½ x 9½ inches. The illustrations
represent various incidents in the life of Christ,
and portraits of the Evangelists, accompanied by
formal designs. Ornamentation is largely introduced
into the text, and the first few words of each
Gospel are so lavishly decorated and have initial

letters of such size that in each case they occupy
the whole of a page.

The book just described was preserved at
Kells until the early part of the seventeenth
century. It then passed into Archbishop Ussher's
possession, and finally into the library of Trinity
College, Dublin, where it is now treasured.

Of course it is impossible to give here a reproduction
of a page of this marvellous book in its
proper size and colours. Our illustrations, however,
may convey a little idea of the accuracy and
minuteness of the work, which, it is hardly
necessary to say, was done entirely by hand, and
will serve as a text for a brief summary of the chief
features of Irish book art. The design here shown
is composed of a diagonal cross set in a rectangular
frame, having in each angle a symbol of one of
the four Evangelists. The colours in this design,
as reproduced by Professor Westwood in his

Miniatures and Ornaments of Anglo-Saxon and
Irish Manuscripts
, principally consist of red, dark
and light mauve, green, yellow, and blue-grey.
The animals depicted are quaint, but not ridiculous,
and the figure of St Matthew, in the upper
angle of the cross, though stiff and ungraceful, is
less peculiar than other figures in the book. The
Irish artist was always more successful in designing
and executing geometrical systems of ornamentation
than in representing living figures.

The interlacing, which forms a large part of
the design under consideration, is a characteristic
of Celtic work. The regularity with which the
bands pass under and over, even in the most
complicated patterns, is very remarkable, and

errors are rarely to be detected. The spirals
which occupy the four panels at the ends and
sides of the frame are also typical of this school
of art. The firmness and accuracy of their drawing
testify to the excellent eyesight as well as
to the steady hand and technical skill of the
artist.

The prevailing feature of Celtic ornament as
shown in illuminated manuscripts is the geometrical
nature of the designs. The human figure
when introduced into the native Irish books is
absurdly grotesque, for its delineation seems to
have been beyond the artist's skill, or, more
correctly, to have lain in another category, and
to have belonged to a style distinct from that in
which he excelled. At a later period, figure drawing
became a marked characteristic of English
decorated manuscripts, and English artists
attained to a high degree of skill in this branch
of their art.

Bright colours were employed in the Irish
manuscripts, but gold and silver are conspicuous
by their absence, and did not appear in the manuscripts
of these islands until Celtic art had been
touched by continental influence.

The tradition that the Book of Kells was
written by the great St Columba himself, reminds
us that at this period nearly all books were the
handiwork of monks and ecclesiastics, and in all
monasteries the transcribing of the Scriptures and
devotional works was part of the established order
of things. Columba, we know, was a famous
scribe, and took great pleasure in copying
books. He is said to have transcribed no less

than three hundred volumes, and all books written
by him were believed to be miraculously preserved
from danger by water. As an instance of
this, Adamnan relates the following story:—

“A book of hymns for the office of every day
in the week, and in the handwriting of St
Columba, having slipt, with the leathern satchel
which contained it, from the shoulder of a boy
who fell from a bridge, was immersed in a certain
river in the province of the Lagenians (Leinster).
This very book lay in the water from the Feast of
the Nativity of our Lord till the end of the
Paschal season, and was afterwards found on the
bank of the river” uninjured, and as clean and
dry as if it had never been in the water at all.
“And we have ascertained as undoubted truth,”
continues Adamnan, “from those who were well
informed in the matter, that the like things
happened in several places with regard to books
written by the hand of St Columba;” and he adds
that the account just given he received from
“certain truthful, excellent, and honourable men
who saw the book itself, perfectly white and
beautiful, after a submersion of so many days, as
we have stated.”

By Irish missionaries the art of book writing
was taught to Britain, chiefly through the school
of Lindisfarne, where was produced the famous
Lindisfarne Gospels, or Book of St Cuthbert.
This magnificent work, which is one of the
choicest treasures of the British Museum, was
as highly esteemed by its contemporaries as by
ourselves, though perhaps not for quite the same
reasons. Tradition has it that when Lindisfarne

was threatened by the Northmen and the monks
had to fly, they took with them the body of St
Cuthbert, in obedience to his dying behest, and
this book. They attempted to seek refuge in
Ireland, but their boat had scarcely reached the
open sea when it met a storm so violent that
through the pitching of the little vessel the book
fell overboard. Sorrowfully they put back, but
during the night St Cuthbert appeared to one of
the monks and ordered him to seek for the book
in the sea. On beginning their search, they
found that the tide had ebbed much further than
it was wont to do, and going out about three
miles they came upon the holy book, not a whit
the worse for its misadventure. “By this,” says
the old historian, “were their hearts refreshed
with much joy.” And the book was afterwards
named in the priory rolls as “the Book of St
Cuthbert, which fell into the sea.”

PAGE FROM THE LINDISFARNE GOSPELS
(
reduced.
)

This notable volume is an excellent example of
Celtic book art in the beginning of its transition
stage, a stage which marks the approach to the
two schools which were the result of the
combination of Celtic and continental influences
in the hands of intelligent and skilful Anglo-Saxon
scribes—the Hiberno-Saxon and the
English schools. It contains the four Gospels
written in Latin, and arranged in double columns,
each Gospel being preceded by a full-page formal
design of Celtic work and a full-page portrait of
the Evangelist. The conjunction of these two
distinct styles of ornament forms one of the chief
points of interest in the book. The formal
designs of interlaced, spiral, and key patterns, so

characteristic of Celtic work, show its near kinship
to the Irish books, while the portraits prove an
almost equally close connection with Roman and
Byzantine models. There is reason to believe
that the classical element is due to the influence

of an Italian or Byzantine book or books brought
to Lindisfarne by Theodore, Archbishop of
Canterbury, and his friend Adrian, an Italian
abbot, when the archbishop visited the island for
the purpose of consecrating Aidan's church.

The Lindisfarne Gospels accompanied St
Cuthbert's body to Durham in 995, but rather
more than a century later was restored to Lindisfarne,
and remained there until the monastery
which had replaced St Aidan's foundation was
dissolved at the Reformation. It is then lost
sight of until it reappears in the famous Cotton
Library, with which it is now possessed by the
nation.

The English school of illumination had its
chief seat at Winchester. Its work is characterised
by its figure drawing, and while the foliage ornament
introduced, together with the gold which
was largely used in the Winchester manuscripts,
indicate continental influence, the interlaced and
other patterns are derived from the Irish school.
Of this class of manuscript the Benedictional of
Æthelwold, in the Duke of Devonshire's library,
may serve as a typical example. It was written
for Æthelwold, Bishop of Winchester, by his
chaplain Godemann, towards the end of the tenth
century. Were it practicable to offer the reader
a reproduction of one of its pages, it would be
seen that it exactly illustrates what has just
been said. Its figure drawing and foliated
ornamentation are among its most striking
features.

The Norman Conquest opened up the English
school of art more widely to continental influence,

with the result that towards the end of the
thirteenth and beginning of the fourteenth
centuries the English manuscripts were unsurpassed
by any in Europe. As a typical specimen
of the illuminations of this period, we may with
propriety select one which has been described by
Sir Edward Maunde Thompson as “the very
finest of its kind,” and “probably unique in its
combination of excellence of drawing, brilliance of
illumination, and variety and extent of subjects.”
It is a Psalter dating from the fourteenth century,
and known as Queen Mary's Psalter, because a
customs officer of the port of London, who intercepted
it as it was about to be taken out of the
country, presented it to the Queen in 1553.
This magnificent book is now in the British
Museum.

During the twelfth and thirteenth centuries a
large number of Bibles and Psalters were written,
and made up the greater part of the book-output
of the larger monasteries, to which we are indebted
for all our fine pieces of manuscript
work. Indeed, most of the decorated manuscripts
of this period are occupied with the
Scriptures, services, liturgies, and other matters
of the kind, and on such the best work was
lavished. Later, however, the growing taste for
romances and stories induced a corresponding
tendency to decorate these secular manuscripts
too, and some very fine work of this class was
produced, especially in France. The books of
the chronicles of England and of France, written in
the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, were also
largely adorned with painted miniatures.

Nearly all the writing of Europe was done in
the religious houses. In most of the larger
monasteries there was a scriptorium, or writing-room,
where Bibles, Psalters, and service books,
and patristic and classical writings were
transcribed
,
chronicles and histories compiled, and
beautiful specimens of the illuminator's art carefully,
skilfully, and lovingly executed.

Books, however, were not only written in the
monasteries, but read as well. The rule of St
Benedict insisted that the steady reading of books
by the brethren should form part of the daily
round. Archbishop Lanfranc, also, in his orders
for the English Benedictines, directed that once
a year books were to be distributed and borrowed
volumes to be restored. For this purpose, the
librarian was to have a carpet laid down in the
Chapter House, the monks were to assemble,
and the names of those to whom books had been
lent were to be read out. Each in turn had to
answer to his name, and restore his book, and he
who had neglected to avail himself of his privilege,
and had left his book unread, was to fall
on his face and implore forgiveness. Then the
books were re-distributed for study during the
ensuing year. This custom was generally followed
by all the monasteries of Lanfranc's time.

Richard Aungervyle, Bishop of Durham, born
in 1281 at Bury St Edmund's, and therefore
usually known as Richard de Bury, gives a
vivacious picture of the attitude of a book-lover
of the Middle Ages in his
Philobiblon
, or
Lover of
Books
. He there sings the praises of books, and
voices their lament over their ill-treatment by

degenerate clerks and by the unlearned. He
also tells how he gathered his library, which was
then the largest and best in England.
Philobiblon

is written in vigorous and even violent language,
and is worth quoting.

Books, according to this extravagant eulogy,
are “wells of living water,” “golden urns in which
manna is laid up, or rather, indeed, honeycombs,”
“the four-streamed river of Paradise, where the
human mind is fed, and the arid intellect moistened
and watered.” “You, O Books, are the golden
vessels of the temple, the arms of the clerical
militia, with which the missiles of the most wicked
are destroyed, fruitful olives, vines of Engedi, fig-trees
knowing no sterility, burning lamps to be
ever held in the hand.”

Then the books are made to utter their plaint
because of the indignity to which they are subjected
by the degenerate clergy. “We are expelled
from the domiciles of the clergy, apportioned
to us by hereditary right, in some interior
chamber of which we had our peaceful cells;
but, to their shame, in these nefarious times we
are altogether banished to suffer opprobrium out
of doors; our places, moreover, are occupied by
hounds and hawks, and sometimes by a biped
beast: woman, to wit …; wherefore this beast,
ever jealous of our studies, and at all times implacable,
spying us at last in a corner, protected
only by the web of some long-deceased spider,
drawing her forehead into wrinkles, laughs us to
scorn, abuses us in virulent speeches, points us
out as the only superfluous furniture in the house,
complains that we are useless for any purpose

of domestic economy whatever, and recommends
our being bartered away forthwith for costly
head dresses, cambric, silk, twice-dipped purple
garments, woollen, linen, and furs.”

After this terrible picture of feminine ignorance
and malevolence, it is refreshing to turn to the
achievements of the pious Diemudis, by way of
contrast. Diemudis was a nun of Wessobrunn
in Bavaria, who lived in the eleventh century.
Nuns are not often referred to as writers, but of
this lady it is recorded that she wrote “in a
most beautiful and legible character” no less than
thirty-one books, some of which were in two,
three, and even six volumes. These she transcribed
“to the praise of God, and of the holy
apostles Peter and Paul, the patrons of this
monastery.”

Although the greater part of the book-writing
of this time was done in the monasteries and by
monks and ecclesiastics, there were also secular
professional writers, a class who had followed
this occupation from very early days. They
consisted of antiquarii, librarii, and illuminators,
though sometimes the functions of all three were
performed by one person. They were employed
chiefly by the religious houses, to assist in the
transcription and restoration of their books, and
by the lawyers, for whom they transcribed legal
documents. The antiquarii were the highest in
rank, for their work did not consist merely of
writing or copying, but included the restoration
of faulty pages, the revision of texts, the repair
of bindings, and other delicate tasks connected
with the older and more valuable books which

could not be entrusted to the librarii or common
scribes. On the whole, the production of books
was more of an industry in those days than we
should believe possible, unless we admit that the
Dark Ages were not quite as dark as they have
been painted. “There was always about us in
our halls,” says Richard de Bury, who no doubt
was a munificent patron of all scribes and book-workers,
“no small assemblage of antiquaries,
scribes, bookbinders, correctors, illuminators, and
generally of all such persons as were qualified to
labour in the service of books.”

Books of a great size were frequently monuments
of patience and industry, and sometimes
half a lifetime was devoted to a single volume.
Books therefore fetched high prices, though they
were not always paid for in money. In 1174
the Prior of St Swithun's, Winchester, gave the
Canons of Dorchester in Oxfordshire, for Bede's
Homilies and St Augustine's Psalter, twelve
measures of barley, and a pall on which was
embroidered in silver the history of St Birinus'
conversion of the Saxon King Cynegils. A
hundred years later a Bible “fairly written,” that
is, finely written, was sold in this country for fifty
marks, or about £33. At this period a sheep
cost one shilling. In the time of Richard de
Bury a common scribe earned a halfpenny a day.
About 1380 some of the expenses attending the
production of an
Evangeliarium
, or book of the
liturgical Gospels, included thirteen and fourpence
for the writing, four and threepence for
the illuminating, three and fourpence for the
binding, and tenpence a day for eighteen weeks,

in all fifteen shillings, for the writer's “commons,”
or food.

The book-writers or copyists became, later, the
booksellers, very much as they did in old Rome.
Sometimes they both wrote and sold the books,
and sometimes the sellers employed the writers to
write for them, or the writers employed the sellers
to sell for them. Publishers as yet did not exist.
Practically the only method of publication known
consisted of the reading of a work on three days
in succession before the heads of the University,
or other public judges, and the sanctioning of its
transcription and reproduction. The booksellers
were called “stationers,” either because they
transacted their business at open stalls or stations,
or perhaps from the fact that
statio
is low Latin
for
shop
; and since they were also the vendors
of parchment and other writing-materials, the
word “stationer” is still used to designate those
who carry on a similar trade to-day. As early
as 1403 there was already formed in London a
society or brotherhood “of the Craft of Writers
of Text-letter,” and “those commonly called
‘Limners,’” or Illuminators, for in that year they
petitioned the Lord Mayor for permission to elect
Wardens empowered to see that the trades were
honourably pursued and to punish those of the
craft who dealt disloyally or who rebelled against
the Wardens' authority. This petition was granted.
By 1501 the Company of Stationers was established,
and it is highly probable that this was
only the Brotherhood of Text-writers and Limners
under the more general designation.

The well-known names of Paternoster Row,

Amen Corner, Ave Maria Lane, and Creed
Lane still remain to show us where the London
stationers who sold the common religious leaflets
and devotional books of the day had their stalls,
close to St Paul's Cathedral, and in some cases
even against the walls of the Cathedral itself, and
where, too, the makers of beads and paternosters
plied their trade. And Londoners at least will
not need to be reminded that at this very moment
Paternoster Row is almost entirely inhabited by
sellers of books, religious and otherwise. There
is also a queer open-air stall on the south side
which serves to carry on the ancient tradition of
the place.

Societies similar to that of the Text-Writers
and Limners of London also existed on the
Continent, and especially at Bruges, in which
city literature and book-production flourished
under the patronage of Philippe le Bon, Duke of
Burgundy, who himself gave constant employment
to numerous writers, copyists, translators,
and illuminators in the work of building up
his famous library. The members of the
Guild of St John the Evangelist in Bruges
represented no less than fifteen different trades
or professions connected with books and writing.
They included:

Booksellers,

Printsellers,

Painters of vignettes,

Painters,

Scriveners and copiers of books,

Schoolmasters and schoolmistresses,

Illuminators,

Printers,

Bookbinders,

Curriers,

Cloth shearers,

Parchment and vellum makers,

Boss carvers,

Letter engravers,

Figure engravers.

Of course, the printers here mentioned would
at first be block-printers only, as will be shown
presently. And it is worth noticing that in all
this long list, which cannot be called at all
exclusive, there is no mention of authors.

The mediæval booksellers were not all
permitted to ply their trade in their own way.
Since the supply of books for the students
depended on them, the Universities of Paris,
Oxford, and elsewhere deemed it their duty to
keep them under control, having in view the
maintenance of pure texts and the interests of
the students, at whose expense the booksellers
were not to be permitted to fatten. By the rules
of the University of Paris the bookseller was
required to be a man of wide learning and high
character, and to bind himself to observe the laws
regarding books laid down by the University.
He was forbidden to offer any transcript for sale
until it had been examined and found correct;
and were any inaccuracy detected in it by the
examiner, he was liable to a fine or the burning
of the book, according to the magnitude of his
error. The price of books was also fixed by the
University, and the vendor forbidden to make
more than a certain rate of profit on each volume.

Again, the bookseller could not purchase any
books without the sanction of the University, for
fear that he might be the means of disseminating
heretical or immoral literature. Later, it was
made obligatory on him to lend out books on
hire to those who could not afford to buy them,
and to expose in his shop a list of these books
and the charges at which they were to be had.
The poor booksellers, thus hedged about with
restrictions, often joined some other occupation
to that of selling manuscripts in order to make
both ends meet, but when this practice came to
the notice of the University they were censured
for degrading their noble profession by mixing
with it “vile trades.” But presumably no such
rules as the above hampered the booksellers of
non-university towns, such as London.

The control assumed by the Universities over
the book trade presently extended to interference
with original writings and a censorship
of literature. With the introduction of printing
and the consequent increase of books and of the
facilities for reproducing them this censorship was
taken up by the Church.

Ecclesiastical censorship, however, was not
the outcome of the Universities' assumption of
control over the book trade. It sprang from the
jealousy of the clergy, who opposed the spread of
knowledge among the people—some, perhaps,
because they knew that knowledge in ignorant
hands is dangerous, and others because they
feared their own prestige might suffer. This
feeling existed before printing, though printing
brought it to a head. For instance, in 1415 the

penalty in this country for reading the Scriptures
in the vernacular was forfeiture of land, cattle,
body, life, and goods by the offenders and their
heirs for ever, and that they should be condemned
for heretics to God, enemies to the Crown, and
most errant traitors to the land. They were
refused right of sanctuary, and if they persisted
in the offence or relapsed after a pardon were
first to be hanged for treason against the King
and then burned for heresy against God. Thus
the clergy upheld and encouraged a censorship
of the press. As early as 1479 Conrad de
Homborch, a Cologne printer, had issued a
Bible accompanied by canons, etc., which was
“allowed and approved by the University of
Cologne,” and in 1486 the Archbishop of Mentz
issued a mandate forbidding the translation into
the vulgar tongue of Greek, Latin, and other
books, without the previous approbation of the
University. Finally, in 1515, a bull of Leo X.
required Bishops and Inquisitors to examine all
books before they came to be printed, and to
suppress any heretical matter.

The Vicar of Croydon, preaching at St Paul's
Cross about the time of the spread of the art of
printing, is said to have declared that “we must
root out printing or printing will root out us.”
But an ecclesiastical censorship over the English
press was not established until 1559, when an
Injunction issued by Queen Elizabeth provides
that, because of the publication of unfruitful,
vain, and infamous books and papers, “no
manner of person shall print any manner of
boke or paper
…
except the same be first

licenced by her maiestie … or by .vi. of her
privy counsel, or be perused and licensed by the
archbysshops of Cantorbury and Yorke, the
bishop of London,” etc. The Injunction extended
also to “pampheletes, playes, and
balletes,” so that “nothinge therein should be
either heretical, sedicious, or vnsemely for
Christian eares.” Classical authors, however, and
works hitherto commonly received in universities
and schools were not touched by the Injunction.

CHAPTER V

LIBRARIES IN MEDIÆVAL TIMES

During
the rule of the Arabs in Northern Africa
and in Spain, thousands of manuscripts were
gathered together in their chief cities, such as
Cairo and Cordova, and many Arabic-Spanish
and Moorish writings have been preserved in the
Escurial Library, though a large part of this
library was burnt in 1671. With these exceptions,
the collections of books belonging to the
various religious houses were practically the only
libraries of early mediæval times. These collections,
to begin with, were very small; so small,
indeed, that there was no need to set apart a
special room for them. Library buildings were
not erected till the fourteenth or fifteenth centuries,
when the accumulation of books rendered
them necessary, and those which are found in
connection with old foundations will always prove

to have been added later. It is said, however,
that Gozbert, abbot of St Gall in the ninth
century, who founded the library there by collecting
what was then the large number of four
hundred books, allotted them a special room
over the scriptorium. But as a rule the books
were kept in the church, and then, as the number
increased, in the cloisters. The cloister was the
common living-room of the monks, where they
read and studied, and carried out most of their
daily duties. The books were either stored in
presses, though no such press remains to show
us upon what pattern they were built, or in recesses
in the wall, probably closed by doors.
Two of these recesses may be seen in the
cloisters at Worcester. In Cistercian houses,
says Mr J. W. Clark, to whose Rede Lecture
(1894) I am indebted for these details, this
recess developed “into a small square room without
a window, and but little larger than an ordinary
cupboard. In the plans of Clairvaux and
Kirkstall this room is placed between the chapter-house
and the transept of the church; and similar
rooms, in similar situations, have been found at
Fountains, Beaulieu, Tintern, Netley, etc.” The
books were placed on shelves round the walls.
When the cloister windows came to be glazed, so
as to afford better protection from the weather
for the persons and things within the cloister,
they were occasionally decorated with allusions
to the authors of the books in the adjacent
presses.

Sometimes
carrells
were set up in the cloister,
a carrell being a sort of pew, in which study

could be conducted with more privacy than in
the open cloister. The carrell was placed so that
it was closed at one end by one of the cloister
windows and remained open at the other.
Examples still survive at Gloucester.

The arrangement of the libraries which were
subsequently added to most of the larger monasteries
in the fifteenth century is unknown, as
none of the furniture or fittings seem to have
come down to the present day either in this
country or in France or Italy. But Mr Clark
thinks that the collegiate libraries will give us
the key to the plan of the monastic libraries,
since the rules relating to the libraries of Oxford
and Cambridge were framed on those which
obtained in the “book-houses” of the religious
foundations. From these collegiate libraries we
gather that it was customary to chain the books,
so that they might be accessible to all and yet
secure from those who might wish to appropriate
them temporarily or otherwise. The shelf to
which the volumes were fastened took the form
or an “elongated lectern or desk,” at which the
reader might sit. Pembroke College and
Queens'

College, Cambridge, had desks of this type, which
was also in use on the Continent. In some
places the desks were modified by the addition of
shelves above or below.

Mr Falconer Madan, in his
Books in Manuscript
,
quotes the following account, which he
translates from the Latin register of Titchfield
Abbey, written at the end of the fourteenth century,
and which shows the care and method with
which the books were kept: “The arrangement

of the library of the monastery of Tychefeld is
this:—There are in the library of
Tychefeld
four
cases (
columnæ
) in which to place books, of
which two, the first and second, are in the eastern
face; on the southern face is the third, and on
the northern face the fourth. And each of them
has eight shelves (
gradus
), marked with a letter
and number affixed on the front of each shelf.…
So all and singular the volumes of the said
library are fully marked on the first leaf and elsewhere
on the shelf belonging to the book, with
certain numbered letters. And in order that
what is in the library may be more quickly found,
the marking of the shelves of the said library, the
inscriptions in the books, and the reference in
the register, in all points agree with each other.
Anno domini, MCCCC.” Then is shown the order
in which the books lie on the shelves. Briefly,
the sequence of subjects and books is as follows:—Bibles,
Bibles with commentary, theology, lives
of saints, sermons, canon law, commentaries on
canon law, civil law, medicine, arts, grammar,
miscellaneous volumes, logic and philosophy,
English law, eighteen French volumes, and a
hundred and two liturgical volumes. Titchfield
Abbey owned altogether over a thousand
volumes.

The monastic librarian, as we should call him,
was known as the
armarius
, since he had charge
of the
armaria
or book-presses. He frequently
united this office to that of precentor or leader of
the choir, for at first the service-books were his chief
care. It was his business to make the catalogue,
to examine the volumes from time to time to see

that mould or book-worms or other dangers were
not threatening them, to give out books for transcription,
and to distribute the various writing-materials
used in the scriptorium or writing-room.
He had also to collate such works as were bound
to follow one text, such as Bibles, missals, monastic
rules, etc. To these duties he often added
that of secretary to the abbot and to the monastery
generally.

Many catalogues of monastic libraries are
extant, and several belonging to continental
foundations were compiled at a very early
period. Of the library of St Gall, founded by
the Abbé Gozbert in 816, a contemporary catalogue
still exists. The St Gall library contained
four hundred volumes, a large number for those
days, and, moreover, was provided with a special
room, a chamber over the scriptorium. It is not
easy to see why in this and other cases of the co-existence
of a library and a scriptorium one
room was not made to do duty for both. But
to return to the catalogues. Another early
example is that of the Abbey of Clugni, in
France, made in 831, and forming part of an
inventory of the Abbey property. The Benedictine
Abbey of Reichenau, on the Rhine, had
four catalogues compiled in the ninth century—two
of the books in the library, one of certain
transcriptions made and added thereto, and one
of additions to the library from other sources.
Among English monastic book-lists, there is one
of Whitby Abbey, which appears to have been
made in 1180, and the library of Glastonbury
Abbey, which excited the wonder and admiration

of Leland, and which was started by St
Dunstan round a nucleus of a few books formerly
brought to the Abbey by Irish missionaries, was
catalogued in 1247 or 1248. Catalogues of the
books at Canterbury (Christ Church and St
Augustine's monastery), Peterborough, Durham,
Leicester, Ramsey, and other foundations are
also known, and these, with the notices of
Leland, form our only sources of information as
to these various literary storehouses.

As regards their contents, the Scriptures,
missals, service-books, and similar manuscripts
formed the larger part of the monastic libraries,
but besides these they included copies of patristic
and classical works, devotional and moral writings,
lives of saints, chronicles, books on medicine,
grammar, philosophy, logic, and, later, romances
and fiction were admitted into this somewhat
austere company. The catalogue of the “boc-house”
of the monastery of St Augustine at
Canterbury, written towards the close of the
fifteenth century, names many romantic works,
including the
Four Sons of Aymon
,
Guy of
Warwick
,
The Book of Lancelot
,
The Story
of the Graal
,
Sir Perceval de Galois
,
The
Seven Sages
, and others, and of some of these
there is more than one copy.

Books were frequently lent to other monasteries,
or to poor clerks and students. It was
considered a sacred duty thus to share the
benefits of the books with others; but sometimes
the custodians of the precious volumes, aware of
the failures of memory to which book-borrowers
have ever been peculiarly liable, were so averse

from running the risk of lending that the libraries
were placed under anathema, and could not be
lent under pain of excommunication. But the
selfishness and injustice of such a practice being
recognised, it was formally condemned by the
Council of Paris in 1212, and the anathemas
annulled. Anathemas were also pronounced
against any who should steal or otherwise alienate
a book from its lawful owners.

But as even in mediæval days there were
those who loved books better than honesty, the
loan of a volume was accompanied by legal
forms and ceremonies, and the borrower, whatever
his station or character, had to sign a bond
for the due return of the work, and often to
deposit security as well. Thus, when about
1225 the Dean of York presented several Bibles
for the use of the students of Oxford, he did so
on condition that those who used them should
deposit a cautionary pledge. Again, in 1299,
John de Pontissara, Bishop of Winchester, borrowed
from the convent of St Swithun the

Bibliam bene glossatum
, i.e. the Bible with annotations,
and gave a bond for its return. And in
1471, when books had become much more
common, no less a person than the King of
France, desiring to borrow some Arabian medical
works from the Faculty of Medicine at Paris,
had not only to deposit some costly plate as
security, but to find a nobleman to act as surety
with him for the return of the books, under pain
of a heavy forfeit.

Many of the great monastic libraries owed
their origin to the liberality of one donor, usually

an ecclesiastic. Among other libraries destroyed
by the Danes was the fine collection of books at
Wearmouth monastery, made by Benedict Biscop,
the first English book collector, who was so
eager in the cause of books that he is said to
have made no less than five journeys to Rome in
order to search for them. Part of his library
was given to the Abbey at Jarrow, and shared
the same fate as the books at Wearmouth.

One of the earliest English libraries was that of
Christ Church,
i.e.
the Cathedral, at Canterbury.
On the authority of the Canterbury Book, a
fifteenth century manuscript preserved at Cambridge,
this library began with the nine books
said to have been brought from Rome by St
Augustine. These nine books were a Bible in
two volumes, a Psalter, a Book of Gospels, the
Lives of the Apostles, the Lives of the Martyrs,
and an Exposition of the Gospels and Epistles.
This collection was enriched by the magnificent
scriptural and classical volumes brought from
the continent by Archbishop Theodore in the
seventh century. Under Archbishop Chicheley,
in the fifteenth century, this library was provided
with a dwelling of its own, built over the Prior's
Chapel, and containing sixteen bookcases of
four shelves each. At this time a catalogue was
already in existence, made by Prior Eastry at the
end of the thirteenth or beginning of the fourteenth
century, and records about three thousand
volumes.

The monastery of St Mary's at York owned
a library which was founded by Archbishop
Egbert. Egbert's pupil Alcuin, whom Charlemagne

charged with the care of the educational
interests of his empire, soon after taking up
his residence at St Martin's at Tours, desired
the emperor to send to Britain for “those books
which we so much need; thus transplanting into
France the flowers of Britain, that the garden of
Paradise may not be confined to York, but may
send some of its scions to Tours.”

Richard de Bury, the famous old book collector
or bibliomaniac to whom reference has already
been made, bequeathed his books, which outnumbered
all other collections in this country,
to the University of Oxford, where they were
housed in Durham College, which he had endowed.
He has left an interesting account of
how he gathered his treasures, which may fitly be
quoted here. Aided by royal favour, he tells us,
“we acquired a most ample facility of visiting at
pleasure and of hunting as it were some of the
most delightful coverts, the public and private
libraries both of the regulars and the seculars.…
Then the cabinets of the most notable
monasteries were opened, cases were unlocked,
caskets were unclasped, and astonished volumes
which had slumbered for long ages in their
sepulchres were roused up, and those that lay
hid in dark places were overwhelmed with a new
light.… Thus the sacred vessels of science
came into the power of our disposal, some being
given, some sold, and not a few lent for a time.”
The embassies with which he was charged by
Edward III. gave him opportunity for hunting
continental coverts also. “What a rush of the
flood of pleasure rejoiced our hearts as often as

we visited Paris, the paradise of the world!…
There, in very deed, with an open treasury and
untied purse-strings, we scattered money with a
light heart, and redeemed inestimable books with
dirt and dust.” Richard de Bury also furthered
his collection by making friends of the mendicant
friars, and “allured them with the most familiar
affability into a devotion to his person, and having
allured, cherished them for the love of God
with munificent liberality.” The affability and
liberality of the good bishop attained their object,
and the devoted friars went about everywhere,
searching and finding, and whenever he visited
them, placed the treasures of their houses at his
disposal. Although the mendicant orders were
originally forbidden property of any kind, this
rule was afterwards greatly relaxed, especially as
regards books, and in Richard de Bury's time the
friars had amassed large libraries and were well-known
as keen collectors.

In France it was not an uncommon practice
for a monastery to levy a tax on its members
or its dependent houses for the increase of its
library, and in several houses it was customary
for a novice to present writing materials at his
entry and a book at the conclusion of his novitiate.
As early as the close of the eleventh century
Marchwart, Abbot of Corvey in North Germany,
made it a rule that every novice on making his
profession should add a book to the library.

The monastic libraries met their doom at the
time of the Reformation and of the suppression
of the religious houses. Nearly all the books at
Oxford, including the gifts of Richard de Bury,

were burnt by the mob, and under Elizabeth the
royal commissioners ordered the destruction of all
“capes, vestments, albes, missals, books, crosses,
and such other idolatrous and superstitious monuments
whatsoever.” Since those who ought to
have been more enlightened classed missals and
books among idolatrous and superstitious monuments,
it is not to be wondered at that the
ignorant and undiscriminating mob should glory
in their wanton destruction. Books that escaped
the fire or the fury of the mob were put to various
uses as waste paper. They were employed for
“scouring candlesticks and cleaning boots,” for
the wrapping up of the wares of “grocers and
soap-sellers,” and were exported by shiploads for
the use of continental bookbinders. On the
continent, too, fire, wars, plunder, and suppression
dispersed or destroyed many of the monastic
collections.

A comparatively recent instance of book destruction
caused by the fury of the rabble is
afforded by the great losses undergone by Bristol
Cathedral library in the riots which took place
in connection with the passing of the Reform
Bill. The palace was set on fire, and the library,
which was lodged in the Chapter-house, was
brought out and most of the volumes hurled into
the flames. Others were thrown into the river,
into ditches, and about the streets, and although
about eleven hundred were subsequently recovered
from second-hand clothes dealers and
marine stores, only two copies and one set remained
intact.

As a natural consequence of the revival of

learning in the fourteenth century, private libraries
began to increase in size and in number, and the
collection of books was no longer left to monks
and priests. King John of France gathered a
little library, some say of only twenty volumes,
which laid the foundation of the great Royal
Library, now the Bibliothèque Nationale. These
he bequeathed to his son, Charles V., who increased
the number to nine hundred, for his
known fondness for books and reading obtained
for him presentation volumes from many of his
subjects. His books included works of devotion,
astrology, medicine, law, history, and romance,
with a few classical authors. Most of them were
finely written on vellum, and sumptuously bound
in jewelled and gold-bedecked covers. They
were lodged in three rooms in the Louvre, in a
tower called “La Tour de la libraire.” These
rooms had wainscots of Irish [bog?] oak, and
ceilings of cypress “curiously carved.” According
to Henault, the library of the Louvre was
sent to England by the Duke of Bedford while
Regent of France, and only a few volumes afterwards
found their way back to Paris.

One of the finest libraries of this period was
possessed by Philippe le Bon, Duke of Burgundy.
It contained nearly two thousand volumes, mostly
magnificent folios clothed in silk and satin, and
ornamented with gold and precious stones.
Books were now the fashion, the fashionable
possessions, the fashionable gifts, among those
who were wealthy enough to afford them. Louis
de Bruges, Seigneur de la Gruthyse, was another
famous collector, whose books were no less

splendid in their size, beauty and costliness,
than those of the Duke of Burgundy. His collection
was afterwards added to the Royal
Library, and some of its treasures still exist in
the Bibliothèque Nationale.

The rich and cultured of Italy were also busily
collecting books and forming libraries. A library
was made by Cardinal Bessarion at a cost of
thirty thousand sequins, and afterwards became
the property of the church of St Mark at Venice.
Venice already possessed a small collection of
books given to it by Petrarch, but the gift was so
little thought of that it lay neglected in the
Palazzo Molina until some of the volumes had
crumbled to powder, and others had petrified, as
it were, through the damp.

Of English collectors of this period Richard de
Bury was the most famous. As has already been
stated, he possessed the largest number of books
in the country, and these he bequeathed to the
University of Oxford. The Aungervyle Library,
as it was called, was destroyed at the Reformation.
Guy de Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick,
also had a very fine collection. He preferred
romances, however, to theology or law, and his
library contained many such works. At his death
he bequeathed it to the Abbey of Bordesley, in
Worcestershire.

The English kings had not as yet paid much
attention to books. Eleven are mentioned in the
wardrobe accounts as belonging to Edward I.,
and not until the time of Henry VII. was any
serious consideration given to the formation of
the Royal Library.

Among the more famous continental book collectors
of a later period were Matthias Corvinus,
King of Hungary, and Frederick, Duke of
Urbino. The library of the King of Hungary
perhaps excelled all others in its size and
splendour. It is said to have contained nearly
fifty thousand volumes, but only a comparatively
small number survived the barbarous attack of
the Turks, who stole the jewels from the bindings
and destroyed the books themselves. The Duke
of Urbino's library was scarcely less magnificent,
and was distinguished by its completeness. All
obtainable works were represented, and no imperfect
copies admitted. The duke had thirty-four
transcribers in his service.

After the monastic libraries had been destroyed,
and when old ideas were beginning to
give place to new, the restrictions formerly
placed on the reading of the Scriptures by the
people at large were withdrawn. In an Injunction,
dated 1559, Elizabeth ordered that the
people were to be exhorted to read the Bible,
not discouraged, and she directed the clergy to
provide at the parish expense a book of the
whole Bible in English within three months,
and within twelve months a copy of Erasmus'
Paraphrases upon the Gospels, also in English.
These books were to be set up in the church for
the use and reading of the parishioners. The
chain is not mentioned in the Injunction, but was
probably adopted as a matter of course. Chained
books in churches thus became common, and
besides the Bible, very generally included copies
of Fox's
Book of Martyrs
and Jewel's
Apology

for the Church of England
. The chained books
at St Luke's, Chelsea, consist of a Vinegar Bible,
a Prayer Book, the Homilies, and two copies
of the
Book of Martyrs
.

The custom of chaining books, as we have
seen, was followed in the college libraries, and
obtained also in church libraries in England and
on the continent. Among the still existing
libraries whose books are thus secured are those
of Hereford Cathedral and Wimborne Minster
in England, and the church of St Wallberg at
Zutphen, in Holland. The last, however, was
not always chained, and thereby hangs a tale.
Once upon a time the Devil, having a spite
against the good books of which it was composed,
despoiled it of some of its best volumes.
The mark of his cloven hoof upon the flagged
floor gave the clue to the identity of the thief,
whereupon the custodians of the books had them
secured by chains sprinkled with holy water, by
which means the malice of the Evil One was
made of none effect.

CHAPTER VI

THE BEGINNING OF PRINTING

The
germs of the invention which, in spite of
Carlyle's somewhat slighting reference, has
proved itself hardly less momentous in the
world's history than the conception of the idea
of writing, are to be found in the stamps with
which the ancients impressed patterns or names

upon vases or other objects, or in the device and
name-bearing seals which were in common use
among the nations of antiquity. But these
stamps and seals could be used only to impress
some plastic material, not to make ink or other
marks upon paper; and for the first example of
printing, as we understand the word, we must
look to China, where, it is said, as early as the
sixth century,
A.D.
, engraved wooden plates were
used for the production of books. The Chinese,
however, kept their invention to themselves, or
at any rate it spread no further than Japan, until
many years later; and although in the tenth century
the knowledge of printing was carried as far
as Egypt, Europeans seem to have made the discovery
for themselves, quite independently of
help from the East, both as regards block-printing
and the use of moveable type.

In Europe, as in China, the first printing was
done by means of a block, that is, a slab of wood
on which the design was carved in relief, and
from which, when inked, an impression could be
transferred to paper or other material. This
process is known as block-printing, and in
Europe was principally used for the production
of illustrations, the text, which came to be added
later, being accessory and subordinate to the
picture.

The first European block-prints are pictures
of saints, roughly printed on a leaf of paper and
usually rudely coloured. Heinecken, whose

Idée general d'une Collection complette d'Estampes

(1771) is still a standard work, is of opinion that
pictures of this class were first executed by the

old makers of playing-cards, and that the playing-cards
themselves were printed from wood and
not drawn separately by hand. In this case the
cards should rank as the earliest examples of
block-printing, or wood-engraving. Heinecken
has not been alone in entertaining this opinion,
but, on the other hand, there are some who
consider that the portraits represent the first
woodcuts, and that the early playing-cards were
drawn and painted by hand.

The single-leaf portraits of saints were produced
chiefly, or perhaps solely, in Germany, and
examples are now rare. It is curious that
most of those which have survived to the present
day have been found in German religious houses,
pasted inside the covers of old books, and thus
shielded from the destruction to which their
fragile nature rendered them liable. One
specimen, which has the reputation of being the
earliest extant with which a date can be connected,
is the well-known St Christopher, which
represents the saint carrying the child Christ
over a stream, after an old legend. This specimen
bears the date 1423, and was discovered pasted
in the cover of a mediæval manuscript in the
monastery at Buxheim, in Swabia, and is now in
the John Rylands Library at Manchester. The
date, however, may be only that of the engraving
of the block, and not the year of printing. A
theory was put forward by Mr H. F. Holt, at
the meeting of the British Archaeological Association
in 1868, that this St Christopher, so far from
being the earliest known specimen of printing of
any sort, belonged to a period subsequent to the

invention of typography, and that the date 1423
refers only to the jubilee year of the saint, and
not to the execution of the print. He also held
that the block-books, to which we refer below,
were not the predecessors of type-printed books,
as they are usually considered to be, but merely
cheap substitutes for the costly works of the
early printers. But these theories, though not
disproved, do not receive the support of bibliographers
in general.

Another early woodcut is the Brussels Print,
which is in the Royal Library at Brussels. It is
ostensibly dated 1418, but although this date is
accepted by some, it has most probably been
tampered with, and therefore the position of the
print is at least doubtful. It is of Flemish origin,
and represents the Virgin and Child, accompanied
by SS. Barbara, Catharine, Veronica and
Margaret. Other prints exist which are not
dated, and it is quite possible that some of these
may be older than the St Christopher, though
no definite statements as to their date can be
made. It is certain, however, that the art of
block-printing was known in the closing years of
the fourteenth century, and that it was practised
thenceforward until about 1510, that is, some
years after the invention of typography. In
many manuscripts of the period, printed illustrations
were inserted by means of blocks, either to
save time, or because the scribe's skill did not
extend to drawings.

These early woodcuts were the forerunners of
the better known block-books, which also, according
to Heinecken, were at first the work of the

card-makers. Block-books consisted of prints
accompanied by a descriptive or explanatory text,
both text and illustration being printed from the
same block. Since they were intended for the
moral instruction of those whose education did
not fit them for the study of more elaborate
works, they generally deal with Scriptural and
religious subjects. The earliest of all the block-books
was the
Biblia Pauperum
, or “Bible of
the Poor,” so called because it was designed for
the edification of persons of unlearned minds and
light purses, who could neither have afforded the
high prices demanded for ordinary manuscript
copies, nor have read such copies had they
owned them. The
Biblia Pauperum
, however,
exactly met their want. It is not so much a
book to read, as a book to look at. It has a
text, it is true, but the text is subordinate to the
pictures.

The
Biblia Pauperum
is on paper, as paper was
cheaper than vellum and considered quite good
enough for the purpose. One side only of each
leaf was printed, two pages being printed from
one block, and the sheets folded once and
arranged in sequence, not “quired” or “nested.”
The resulting order was that of two printed pages
face to face, followed by two blank pages face to
face. The illustrations are of scenes from sacred
history, and portraits of Biblical personages,
accompanied by explanatory Latin or German
texts in Gothic characters. The original designer
and compiler of this favourite block-book is unknown,
but he certainly worked on lines laid
down by some much older author and artist, for

manuscript works of similar nature existed at
least as early as the beginning of the fourteenth
century. The earliest known instance of a composition
of the kind, however, is a series of
enamels on an antependium or altar-frontal in
the St Leopold Chapel at
Klosterneuburg
, near
Vienna, which originally contained forty-five
pictures dealing with Biblical subjects, arranged
in the same order as in the
Biblia Pauperum
, and
which were executed by Nicolas de Verdun, in
1181. Some attribute the inception of the
Biblia
Pauperum
to Ansgarius, first Bishop of Hamburg,
in the ninth century, others to Wernher, a German
monk of the twelfth century, but it seems unlikely
that the point will ever be decided. The

Biblia Pauperum
is usually supposed to have
been first printed xylographically in Holland,
and type-printed editions were issued later from
Bamberg, Paris and Vienna.

To modern eyes the illustrations of this book
are strange and wonderful indeed. “The designer
certainly had no thought of irreverence,”
says De Vinne, “but many of the designs are
really ludicrous. Some of the anachronisms are:
Gideon arrayed in plate-armour, with mediæval
helmet and visor and Turkish scimitar; David
and Solomon in rakish, wide-brimmed hats bearing
high, conical crowns; the translation of
Elijah in a four-wheeled vehicle resembling the
modern farmer's hay-wagon. Slouched hats,
puffed doublets, light legged breeches and pointed
shoes are seen in the apparel of the Israelites
who are not represented as priests or soldiers.
Some houses have Italian towers and some have

Moorish minarets, but in none of the pictures is
there an exhibition of pointed Gothic architecture.”

PAGE FROM THE BIBLIA PAUPERUM (SECOND EDITION).

Our illustration gives a reduced representation
of a page from the second edition of the
Biblia
Pauperum
, dating from about 1450. The middle

panel shows Christ rising from the tomb, and the
wonder and fear of the Roman guards; the left-hand
panel shows Samson carrying off the gates
of the city of Gaza, and the right-hand panel the
disgorging of Jonah by the whale. The upper
part of the text shows how that Samson and
Jonah were types of Christ, and the four little
figures represent David, Jacob, Hosea, and
Siphonias (Zephaniah), the texts on the scrolls
being quotations from their words.

The accompanying rhymes are as follows:—

Obsessus turbis: Sāpson valvas tulit urbis.

Quem saxum texit: ingens tumulum Jesus exit.

De tumulo Christe: surgens te denotat iste.

(In the midst of crowds, Samson removes the
gates of the city. The anointed Jesus, whom the
stone covered, rises from the tomb. This man
[Jonah] rising from the tomb, denotes Thee, O
Christ!)

Another very popular block-book, of German
origin, was the curious compilation known as

Ars Moriendi
—the Art of Dying—or, as it is
sometimes called,
Temptationes Demonis
, or
Temptation of Demons. It describes how dying
persons are beset by all manner of temptations,
the final triumph of the good, and the
sad end of the wicked, with suitable emotions
on the part of the attendant angels, and the
hideous demons by which the temptations are
personified. This work was greatly in vogue in
the fifteenth century, and after the invention of
type-printing was reproduced in various parts of
France, Italy, Germany and Holland.

The only block-book without illustrations was
the
Donatus de octibus partibus orationis
, or Donatus
on the Eight Parts of Speech, shortly known
as Donatus. It was
the
Latin grammar of the
period, and was the work of Donatus, a famous
Roman grammarian of the fourth century. Large
numbers were printed both from blocks and from
type, but xylographic fragments are scarce, and
none are known of any date before the second
half of the
fifteenth
century. Yet it is believed
that probably more copies of this work were
printed than of any other block-book whatever.
Besides its lack of illustrations, the xylographic
Donatus is unique among block-books from the
fact that it was printed on vellum and not on
paper, and (another unusual feature) on both
sides of the leaf. Vellum was dear, and had to
be made the most of, and no doubt was used
only because a paper book would have fared
badly at the hands of the schoolboys.

Only one block-book is known to have been
printed in France, and that is
Les Neuf Preux
,
or the Nine Champions. The nine champions
are divided into three groups: first, classical
heroes—Hector, Alexander and Julius Cæsar;
next, Biblical heroes—Joshua, David and Judas
Maccabæus; and lastly, heroes of romance—Arthur,
Charlemagne and Godefroi of Boulogne.
The portraits of these celebrities are accompanied
by verses. This block-book dates from about
1455.

Other block-books were the
Speculum Humanæ
Salvationis
,
the Apocalypse of St John
,
the Book
of Canticles
,
Defensorium Inviolatæ Virginitatis

Beatæ Mariæ Virginis
,
Mirabilia Romæ
; various
German almanacks, and a
Planetenbuch
, this last
representing the heavenly bodies and their influence
on human life. The last of the block-books,
so far as is known, was the
Opera nova
contemplativa
, which was executed at Venice about
1510.

From one point of view the
Speculum Humanæ
Salvationis
, or Mirror of Salvation, is the most
curious of its kind. It is looked upon as the
connecting link between block-books proper and
type-printed books. Its purpose seems to have
been to afford instruction in the facts and lessons
of the Christian religion, beginning with the fall
of Satan. It is founded on an old and once
popular manuscript work sometimes ascribed to
Brother John, a Benedictine monk of the thirteenth
or fourteenth century. Four so-called “editions”
of the
Speculum
are known, two of which are in
Latin rhyme, and two in Dutch prose, all four
having many points in common and standing
apart from the later and dated editions afterwards
produced in Germany, Holland, and
France.

In these early copies the body of the work
consists of a text printed from moveable types,
with a block-printed illustration at the head of
each page. But one of the Latin editions is
remarkable for having twenty pages of the text
printed from wood blocks. How and why these
xylographic pages appear in a book whose remaining
forty-two pages are printed from types
is a mystery. They are inserted at intervals
among the other leaves, and for this and other

reasons it is considered improbable that they
were printed from blocks originally intended for
a block-book, to help to eke out a not very
plentiful stock of type. Moreover, no entirely
xylographic
Speculum
exists to lend colour to
such a theory.

The time and place of origin of the
Speculum

are unknown, and bibliographers are not
agreed as to the order in which the several
“editions” appeared. But such evidence as
exists points to Holland as the home of the
printed
Speculum
, and those who believe that
Coster of Haarlem invented typography, credit
him with having produced it.

Block-books are nearly all of German, Dutch,
or Flemish workmanship. As a rule the illustrations
are roughly coloured by hand. The
method by which they were printed is generally
supposed to have been that of laying a dampened
sheet of paper on the inked block, and rubbing
it with a dabber or frotton until the impression
was worked up. But De Vinne, in his
History
of Printing
, says that there are practical reasons
against the correctness of this view, and considers
it more probable that a rude hand-press was
used.

Those who wish to see some modern examples
of block-printing may be referred to the books
printed by the late William Morris at the celebrated
Kelmscott Press at Hammersmith. The
title-pages and initial words of these volumes
were executed by means of wood blocks, and are
as beautiful examples of block-printing as the
texts of the works they adorn are of typography.

All the Kelmscott printing, whose history, though
most interesting, is nevertheless outside the present
subject, was done by hand presses.

CHAPTER VII

WHO INVENTED MOVEABLE TYPES?

The
wood-block, however, was merely a stepping-stone
to the greatest of all events in the history
of printing, the invention of moveable types; that
is, of letters formed separately, which, after being
grouped into words, and sentences, and paragraphs,
could be redistributed and used again for
all sorts of books. Here once more our Chinese
friends were ahead of the rest of the world, for,
more than four centuries before German printers
existed, Picheng, a Chinese smith, had shown
his countrymen how to print from moveable types
made of burnt clay. But the process which was to
prove of such untold value to those who employed
the simple Roman alphabet was almost useless
to the Chinese, since the immense number of
their characters rendered the older method the
less tedious and cumbersome of the two. In
China and Japan, therefore, the use of moveable
types was of short duration. In Europe, however,
when the art of printing from moveable types
once became known, the case was very different.

Once upon a time, as a magnate of the city
of Haarlem was walking in a wood near the city,
he idly cut some letters on the bark of a beech

tree. It then suddenly occurred to him that
these letters might be impressed upon paper;
whereupon he made some impressions of them
for the amusement of his grandchildren. This,
we have learned from our youth up, is how the
art of printing came to be discovered. But unfortunately,
this legend is not to be relied upon.
As a matter of fact, the first inventor of printing
is unknown, and even as regards moveable types
it is impossible to say with absolute certainty
when or by whom the idea was first conceived.
Daunon, in his
Analyse des Opinions diverses sur
l'origine de l'Imprimerie
, tells us that no less than
fifteen towns claim to be the birthplace of printing,
and that a still larger number of persons
have been put forward as its inventors, from
Saturn, Job, and Charlemagne downwards. The
arguments for or against the pretensions of Saturn,
Job, and Charlemagne, and, indeed, of the
majority of the personages whose names have
been mentioned in this connection, do not call
for notice. For although the first printer is not
known, many believe that they can point him
out with tolerable certainty, and in the fierce
battle which has raged round the question of the
identity of the inventor of moveable types, two
names alone have been used as the respective
war-cries of the opposing armies. One is Johann
Gutenberg of Mentz, and the other, Laurenz
Coster of Haarlem.

Although the balance of opinion is now, and
always has been, in favour of Gutenberg, the
battle has been long and furious. The diligence
of the disputants in collecting data in support

of their theories has been equalled only by the
vigour and ferocity with which some of their
number have maintained their opinions. Each
side has charged the other with forging evidence,
and ink and abuse have been freely poured out
in the cause of typographical truth. Yet though
sought for during several centuries, no conclusive
proof has been discovered by either side; typographical
truth remains in her well, and the
identity of the inventor of moveable types seems
almost as hard to determine as that of the man
in the iron mask or the writer of the letters of
Junius. The partisans of Coster have been as
eminent and as able as those of Gutenberg, and
thus the unlearned enquirer finds it difficult to
declare for one rather than the other, without
investigating for himself all the ins and outs of
this involved subject. Even then, without some
previous bias in one or the other direction, he
would probably find himself halting between two
opinions. Such an investigation is obviously out
of the question here, and even were it practicable
it could hardly be lipped that where so many
doctors disagree our modest effort would produce
any valuable result. We shall therefore do no
more than briefly set forth some of the chief
arguments on either side as fairly as may be, but
without attempting an exhaustive examination of
the evidence, first, however, declaring ourselves
as followers of the majority and partisans of
Gutenberg, by way of sheet anchor.

Those who advocate the claims of Holland
against Germany largely base their belief on the
existence of various printed books and fragments

of Dutch origin, undated, and affording no clue
to the time and place at which they were printed,
or to their printer, whether Coster or another.
It is much more likely, they say, that these were
the first rude attempts at typography, and that
they gave the idea to the Mentz printers, who
forthwith improved upon it, than that the Mentz
printers should have given the idea to the Dutch,
who, so far from improving upon it, produced these
clumsy imitations of fine German work. And
Mr Hessels, who made a complete examination
of the evidence in favour of Gutenberg, was
unable to say either that Gutenberg invented
type-printing, or that he did not invent it. On
the other hand, “it is certainly possible,” say the
writers of the
Guide to the British Museum
, “that
actual printing may have been previously executed
in Holland; although, to our minds, the improbability
of the printers who are asserted to
have produced
Donatus
and the
Speculum
from
moveable types ten years before Gutenberg having
produced nothing but the like kind of work for
nearly twenty years after him outweighs all the
arguments which have been advanced in support
of their claim. It is at all events certain that,
without some very direct and positive evidence
on the other side, mankind will continue to
regard Gutenberg as the parent of the art, and
Mainz as its birthplace.”

Within recent years a claim for the honour of
the invention has been put forward on behalf of
quite another part of the world. Some early
fifteenth century documents discovered at
Avignon make unmistakable references to

printing, and not to xylography, and from them
we learn that Procopius Waldfoghel, a silver-smith
of Prague, was engaged in printing at
Avignon in 1444, and had undertaken to cut a
set of Hebrew types for a Jew whom he had previously
instructed in the art of printing. No
specimens of his work are known, and it is therefore
impossible to say exactly to what process
these records refer, but it has been conjectured
that it may have been some method of stamping
letters from cut type, and not from cast type by
means of a press.

Since Coster is the hero of the well-known
story quoted above, and since as regards our
present purpose there is less to be said of him
than of Gutenberg, we will briefly recapitulate
what is known about him, and the foundations
on which his fame as a typographer rests, before
dealing more at length with Gutenberg and the
Mentz press.

It does not seem easy to account for the
existence of what the partisans of Gutenberg
contemptuously term the Coster legend. It has
been conjectured, somewhat plausibly, that
Haarlem's jealousy of the superiority and fame
of Mentz and its printers began very early, and
arose from the narrow vanity of those Haarlemers
who imagined that the first printing press in
Haarlem must necessarily be the first printing
press in the world. However this may be, the
legend arose, and waxed strong, and many
believed in it.

Laurenz Janssoen, or Coster, was born in
Haarlem about 1370. He is said to have held

various high offices, such as sheriff, treasurer,
officer of the city guard, and especially that of
Coster to the great church of Haarlem. Coster
means sacristan or sexton, but the position was
one of far greater honour than is now associated
with it. But another account, which is supported
by all the available records, represents
him as a tallow-chandler, and subsequently as an
innkeeper, and if he had anything at all to do
with the great church, it was only that he supplied
it with candles. But whether chandler or
coster, nothing is heard of him as a printer
until 1568, more than a hundred years after his
alleged success in printing from types—in itself
a strange fact, since if Coster were the inventor,
why were the Mentz printers allowed to appropriate
all the credit to themselves, unchallenged
by Coster's kinsfolk or countrymen, and
supported by the opinions of sixty-two writers,
including Caxton, the chronicler Fabian,
Trithemius, and the compilers of the Cologne
and Nuremberg chronicles? It is true that
“few sometimes may know when thousands
err,” but silence is no proof of truth, and if
Coster's representatives possessed the truth, how
came they to withhold it from a deluded
world?

Although Coster is not named till 1568, the
claims of Haarlem to be the birthplace of
printing had been put forward (for the first
time) some years earlier by Jan Van Zuyren
in a work on the Invention of Typography, of
which only a fragment remains. The claims of
Haarlem, he says, “are at this day fresh in the

remembrance of our fathers, to whom, so to
express myself, they have been transmitted from
hand to hand from their ancestors.” Thus,
though probably writing in all good faith, Van
Zuyren bases his statements on nothing better
than tradition. “The city of Mentz,” he goes
on to say, “without doubt merits great praise
for having been the first to publish to the world,
in a becoming garb, an invention which she
received from us, for having perfected and embellished
an art as yet rude and imperfect.…
It is certain that the foundations of this
splendid art were laid in our city of Haarlem,
rudely, indeed, but still the first.”

Coornhert, an engraver, and a partner of Van
Zuyren, repeats the same statements, and on the
same basis, in the preface to a translation of
Cicero which he published in 1561, but is acute
enough to see that the case for Haarlem is nearly
hopeless. “I am aware,” he says, “that in consequence
of the blameable neglect of our ancestors,
the common opinion that this art was
invented at Mentz is now firmly established, that
it is in vain to hope to change it, even by the
best evidence and the most irrefragable proof.”
He proceeds to declare his conviction of the
justice of Haarlem's claim, because of “the faithful
testimonies of men alike respectable from their
age and authority, who not only have often told
me of the family of the inventor, and of his name
and surname, but have even described to me the
rude manner of printing first used, and pointed
out to me with their fingers the abode of the
first printer. And therefore, not because I am

jealous of the glory of others, but because I love
truth, and desire to pay all tribute to the honour
of our city which is justly her due, I have thought
it incumbent upon me to mention these things.”
Yet it is strange that he did not think it incumbent
upon him to mention the name and surname
of the inventor, since he had been told them so
often.

Hadrian Junius, said to have been the most
learned man in Holland after Erasmus, is the
first to give to the world the fully-developed
legend of Coster. This he does in his
Batavia
,
which was finished in 1568 and published
posthumously twenty years later. It is he who
first mentions Coster by name, and gives the
story of the walk in the woods. He relates how
Coster devised block-printing, and calling in the
help of his son-in-law, Thomas Peter, produced
the block-book
Speculum Humanæ Salvationis
,
and then advanced to types of wood, then to
types of lead, and finally to types of lead and tin
combined. Prospering in his new art, he engaged
numerous workmen, one of whom, probably
named Johann Faust, as soon as he had mastered
the process of printing and of casting type, stole his
master's types and other apparatus one Christmas
Eve, and fled to Amsterdam, thence to Cologne,
and finally to Mentz. For all this Junius also
adduces no better authority than hearsay, but
nevertheless it is his statements which have
brought Coster to the front and given him such
reputation as he now enjoys.

No books bearing Coster's name are known,
though this in itself is no argument against him,

for the name of Gutenberg himself is not found
in any of his own productions. It is not only
highly improbable that Coster was the first
printer, but also doubtful whether he printed
anything at all. But those who think otherwise
consider that the idea of printing occurred to
him about 1428 or 1430, and that he executed,
among other books, the
Biblia Pauperum
, the

Speculum
, the
Ars Moriendi
, and
Donatus
.

The people of Holland still retain their faith
in Coster. Statues have been erected, medals
struck, tablets put up, and holidays observed in
his honour.

CHAPTER VIII

GUTENBERG AND THE MENTZ PRESS

Johann
or Hans Gutenberg was born at Mentz
in or about the year 1400. His father's name
was Gensfleisch, but he is always known by his
mother's maiden name of Gutenberg or Gutemberg.
It was customary in Germany at that
time for a son to assume his mother's name if
it happened that she had no other kinsman to
carry it on. Of Gutenberg's early life, of his
education or profession, we know nothing. But
we know that his family, with many of their
fellow-citizens, left Mentz when Gutenberg was
about twenty years of age, on account of the
disturbed state of the city. They probably went
to Strasburg, but this is uncertain. In 1430
Gutenberg's name appears among others in an

amnesty, granted to such of the Mentz citizens
as had left the city, by the Elector Conrad III.,
but apparently he continued to live in Strasburg.
Two years later he visited Mentz, probably
about a pension granted by the magistrates to
his widowed mother. This is practically all that
is known of the earlier part of Gutenberg's life.

It is curious that nearly all the recorded information
concerning Gutenberg is in connection
either with lawsuits or with the raising of money.
From the contracts for borrowing or repaying
money into which he entered, we gather that he
was always hard pressed, and that his invention
ran away with a good deal of gold and paid
back none. Gutenberg cast his bread on the
waters, and it is we who have found it.

The first known event of his life which directly
concerns our subject is a lawsuit brought against
him by Georg Dritzehn. Mr Hessels implies,
though he does not actually state, that he suspects
the authenticity of the records of this trial.
But no proof of their falsity can be adduced, and
the integrity of the documents otherwise remains
unquestioned. They cannot now, however, be
subjected to further examination, for they were
burnt in 1870 at the time of the siege of Strasburg.

The action in question was brought against
Gutenberg in 1439 by Georg Dritzehn, the
brother of one Andres Dritzehn, deceased, for
the restitution of certain rights which he considered
due to himself as his brother's heir.
From the testimony of the witnesses as set
down in the records of the trial, we gather that

Gutenberg had entered into partnership with
Hans Riffe, Andres Dritzehn, and Andres Heilmann;
and one of the witnesses deposed that
Dritzehn, on his death-bed, asserted that Gutenberg
had concealed “several arts from them,
which he was not obliged to show them.” This
did not please them, so they made a fresh
arrangement with Gutenberg and further payments
into the exchequer, to the end that
Gutenberg “should conceal from them none
of the arts he knew.”

Again, Lorentz Beildeck testified that after
Andres Dritzehn's death, Gutenberg sent him
to Claus, Andres' brother, to tell him “that he
should not show to anyone the press which he had
under his care,” but that “he should take great
care and go to the press and open this by means
of two little buttons whereby the pieces would
fall asunder. He should, thereupon, put those
pieces in or on the press, after which nobody
could see or comprehend anything.”

Besides this, Hans Niger von Bischoviszheim
said that Andres Dritzehn applied to him for
a loan, and when witness asked him his occupation,
answered that he was a maker of looking-glasses.
Later on, a pilgrimage “to Aix-la-Chapelle
about the looking-glasses” is mentioned.

By these records, from Mr Hessels' translation
of which the above quotations are taken, two
things at least are made clear. First, that
Gutenberg was in possession of the knowledge
of an art unknown to his companions, which he
was desirous of keeping to himself, and which
those not in the secret wished to learn; and

secondly, that a press containing some important
and mysterious “pieces,” which was not to be
exhibited to outsiders until the pieces had been
separated, played a prominent part in this secret
work. The “looking-glasses,” apparently, were
imaginary, and intended for the misleading of too
curious enquirers. But it has been ingeniously
suggested that the word
spiegel
, or looking-glass,
was a cryptic reference to the
Spiegel onser
Behoudenisse
, or
Mirror of Salvation
, and that
Gutenberg and his assistants were engaged in
preparing the printed
Speculum
for sale at the
forthcoming fair held on the occasion of the
pilgrimages to Aix-la-Chapelle in 1439. This
part of his plan, however, was frustrated by the
postponement of the fair for a year.

It is hardly to be doubted that the researches
privately conducted in the deserted convent of
St Arbogastus, where Gutenberg dwelt, concerned
the great invention usually linked with
his name. Were this probability an absolute
certainty, then Strasburg might successfully dispute
with Mentz the title of birthplace of the art
of printing. But to what stage Gutenberg carried
his labours in the old convent, or how far he proceeded
towards the goal of his ambition, is not
known, though it has been conjectured that
possibly he and those in his confidence got as
far as the making of matrices for types, and that
perhaps even the types used for the earliest
extant specimens of type-printing were cast there,
although not used until Gutenberg had returned
to Mentz. On the other hand, there are many
who think that matrices and punches are due to

the ingenuity of Peter Schoeffer, to whom reference
is made below.

When Gutenberg left Strasburg for Mentz is
not known, but he was in the latter city in 1448,
as is testified by a deed relating to a loan which
he had raised. His constant pecuniary difficulties
resulted in his entering into partnership, in 1450,
with the goldsmith Johann Fust, or Faust, a rich
burgher of Mentz, who contributed large loans
towards the working expenses, and was evidently
to share in the profits of the press. Fust or
Faust, the printer of Mentz, has sometimes been
identified with the Faust of German legend.
The dealings in the black art related of the one
have also been ascribed to the other by various
story-tellers, some of whom say that in Paris
Faust the printer narrowly escaped being burnt
as a wizard for selling books which looked like
manuscripts, and yet were not manuscripts. The
first printed letters, it should be observed, were
exactly copied from the manuscript letters then
in vogue.

The first really definite recorded event in the
history of Gutenberg's printing was a lawsuit
brought against him by Fust, in 1455, when
Gutenberg had to give an account of the receipts
and expenditure relating to his work, and
to hand over to Fust all his apparatus in discharge
of his debt. The partnership was of
course dissolved, Gutenberg left Mentz, and Fust
continued the printing assisted by Peter Schoeffer.
Schoeffer was a servant of Fust's, who had further
associated himself with the establishment by
marrying Fust's daughter, and to him some attribute

the improvement of the methods then
employed by devising matrices and punches for
casting metal types. It has even been suggested
that this device of his, communicated to Fust,
induced the latter to rid himself of Gutenberg by
demanding repayment of his advances when
Gutenberg was unable to meet the call, and that
having gained possession of his partner's apparatus,
he was able, with the help of Schoeffer
and his inventions, to carry on the work to his
own profit and glory. But it is difficult to know
whether to look upon Fust as a grasping and
treacherous money-lender, or as a prudent and
enterprising man of business. However this
may be, at the time of the lawsuit the work of
years was already perfected, printing with moveable
types was now an accomplished thing, and
the great Mazarin Bible, if not finished, was at
any rate on the point of completion.

The earliest extant specimens of printing from
types, however, are assigned to the year 1454.
These are some Letters of Indulgence issued by
Pope Nicholas V. to the supporters of the King
of Cyprus in his war with the Turks. They consist
of single sheets of vellum, printed on one
side only, and measuring
c.
11 x 7 inches. They
fall into two classes, of each of which there were
various issues; that is to say, (1) those containing
thirty lines, and (2) those containing thirty-one
lines. The thirty-line Indulgence is printed
partly in the type used for the Mazarin Bible.
The thirty-one-line Indulgence is partly printed
in type which is the same as that used for books
printed by Albrecht Pfister at Bamberg, and for

a Bible which disputes with the Mazarin Bible
the position of the first printed book. Who
printed these Indulgences is not certainly known.
Both emanated from the Mentz press, and it is
not unreasonable to believe that both were executed
by Gutenberg, since the Mazarin Bible is
most probably his work, and since the types used
by Pfister were perhaps at one time possessed by
Gutenberg. Still, the point is not clear, and the
more general view is that they were the work of
two different printers. Some attribute the thirty-line

Indulgence to Schoeffer, on the ground that
some of its initial letters are reproduced in an
Indulgence of 1489 known to be of Schoeffer's
workmanship. Yet there seems no reason why
Schoeffer in 1489 should not have made use of
Gutenberg's types—indeed, it is very probable
that he had every chance of doing so, as may be
seen from the above account of the dissolution of
partnership between Gutenberg and Fust.

TYPE OF THE MENTZ INDULGENCE
(30-line,
exact size
).

Those who assign the thirty-line specimen to
Schoeffer consider the thirty-one-line specimen to
be Gutenberg's work. “And though we have no
proof of this,” says Mr E. Gordon Duff, who
holds this view, “or indeed of Gutenberg's having
printed any book at all, there is a strong
weight of circumstantial evidence in his favour.”
It may be taken for granted, then, although proof
is wanting, that Gutenberg printed at least one of
these Indulgences, and perhaps both. In any
case, these are the first productions of the printing-press
to which a definite date can be assigned.
Some of them have a printed date, and in other
copies the date has been inserted in manuscript.
The earliest specimens of each class belong to
the year 1454.

The next production of the Mentz press, as is
generally believed, is the beautiful volume known
as the Gutenberg Bible, or the Mazarin Bible,
because it was a copy in the library of Cardinal
Mazarin which first attracted attention and led
bibliographers to enquire into its history. It
illustrates a most remarkable fact—that is, the
extraordinary degree of perfection to which the
art of printing attained all but simultaneously

with its birth. Even though we cannot tell how
long Gutenberg experimented before producing
this book, it is none the less amazing that as a
specimen of typographic art the Mazarin Bible
has never been excelled even by the cleverest
printers and the most modern and elaborate
apparatus. It was probably not begun before
1450, the year when Gutenberg and Fust joined
forces, and was completed certainly not later
than 1456. This latter date is fixed by a
colophon written in the second volume of the
copy in the Bibliothèque Nationale at Paris,
which informs us that “this book was illuminated,
bound, and perfected by Heinrich Cremer, vicar
of the collegiate church of St Stephen in Mentz,
on the Feast of the Assumption of the Blessed
Virgin, in the year of our Lord 1456. Thanks
be to God. Hallelujah.” A similar note is
affixed to the first volume.

It is believed by competent authorities that
this and all very early printed books were printed
one page at a time, owing to an inadequate
supply of type, a process exceedingly slow and
productive of numerous small variations in the
text. The work of printing the Mazarin Bible
was in all probability interrupted to allow of the
execution of the more immediately needed
Letters of Indulgence, in certain parts of which,
as we have said, some of the types used in the
Mazarin Bible are employed.

We must not omit to mention here another
Bible issued from Mentz about this time. It has
thirty-six lines to a column, and is therefore
known as the thirty-six line Bible, in distinction

to the forty-two line or Mazarin Bible. It exhibits
a larger type, and is regarded by some
as the first book printed at the Mentz press,
and, for all that can be proved to the contrary,

it is so. Although the point is still undecided,
this volume may at any rate be safely regarded
as contemporary with the Mazarin Bible.

PAGE FROM THE MAZARIN BIBLE
(
reduced
).

The Mazarin Bible is in Latin, and printed in
the characters known as Gothic, or black letter.
These were closely modelled on the form of
the handwriting used at that time for Bibles and
kindred works. It is in two volumes, and each
page, excepting a few at the beginning, has two
columns of forty-two lines, and each is provided
with rubrics, inserted by hand, while the small
initials of the sentences have a touch of red, also

put in by hand. Some copies are of vellum,
others of paper. But henceforward the use of
vellum declines.

TYPE OF THE MAZARIN BIBLE
(
exact size
).

The Mazarin Bible is usually considered to be
the joint work of Gutenberg and Fust. Mr
Winter Jones has conjectured that the metal
types used in early printing were cut by the
goldsmiths, and that Fust's skill, as well as his
money, were pressed into Gutenberg's service.
But if, as some have thought, Fust provided
money only, while Gutenberg was the working
partner, then Fust would hardly have been concerned
in its actual production until 1455,
when he and Gutenberg separated. Even then—supposing
the book to have been still unfinished—it
is quite possible that Schoeffer did
the work. But no one is able to decide the
exact parts played by those three associated
and most noted printers of Mentz; conjecture
alone can allot them.

Gutenberg returned to Mentz in 1456, and
made a fresh start, aided financially by Dr
Conrad Homery. Here again we are confronted
with a want of direct evidence, and
can point to no books as certainly being the
work of Gutenberg. But there are good reasons
for believing that under this new arrangement he
printed the
Catholicon
, or Latin grammar and
dictionary, of John of Genoa; the
Tractatus
racionis et conscientiæ
of Matthæus de Cracovia;

Summa de articulis fidei
of Aquinas; and an
Indulgence of 1461. There is a colophon to
the
Catholicon
which may possibly have been
written by Gutenberg, which runs as follows:—

“By the assistance of the Most High, at Whose
will the tongues of children become eloquent, and
Who often reveals to babes what He hides from
the wise, this renowned book, the
Catholicon
, was
printed and perfected in the year of the Incarnation
1460, in the beloved city of Mentz (which
belongs to the illustrious German nation, whom
God has consented to prefer and to raise with
such an exalted light of the mind and free
grace, above the other nations of the earth), not
by means of reed, stile, or pen, but by the admirable
proportion, harmony, and connection of the
punches and types.” A metrical doxology follows.

A few other and smaller works have also been
believed to have been executed by Gutenberg at
this time, but with no certainty.

In 1465 Gutenberg was made one of the
gentlemen of the court to Adolph II., Count of
Nassau and Archbishop of Mentz, and presumably
abandoned his printing on acceding to this
dignity. In 1467 or 1468 Gutenberg died, and
thus ends the meagre list of facts which we
have concerning the life and career of the first
printer.

To nearly every question which we might wish
to ask about Gutenberg and his work, one of two
answers has to be given—“It is not known,” or
“Perhaps.” He does not speak for himself, and
none of his personal acquaintance, or his family,
if he had any, speak for him. We have no reason
to believe that his work brought him any particular
honour, and certainly it brought him no
wealth. It has been suggested, however, that
the post offered to him by the Archbishop was

in recognition of his invention, since there is
no other reason apparent why the dignity was
conferred. But we may well conclude this
account of Gutenberg with De Vinne's words,
that “there is no other instance in modern
history, excepting, possibly, Shakespeare, of a man
who did so much and said so little about it.”

Fust, the former partner of Gutenberg, died
in 1466, leaving a son to succeed him in the
partnership with Schoeffer, and Schoeffer died
about 1502. Of his three sons (all printers),
the eldest, Johann, continued to work at Mentz
until about 1533.

The most notable books issued by Fust and
Schoeffer were the Psalter of 1457, and the Latin
Bible of 1462. The Bible of 1462 is the first
Bible with a date. The Psalter of 1457 is famous
as being the first printed Psalter, the first printed
book with a date, the first example of printing
in colours, the first book with a printed colophon,
and the first printed work containing musical
notes, though these last are not printed but
inserted by hand.
[2]
The colour printing is
shown by the red and blue initials, but by
what process they were executed has been the
subject of much discussion. They are generally
supposed to have been added after the rest of
the page had been printed, by means of a stamp.
The colophon is written in the curious Latin
affected by the early printers, and Mr Pollard
offers the following as a rough rendering:—

“The present book of Psalms, adorned with
beauty of capitals, and sufficiently marked out
with rubrics, has been thus fashioned by an
ingenious invention of printing and stamping,
and to the worship of God diligently brought
to completion by Johann Fust, a citizen of
Mentz, and Peter Schoffer of Gernsheim, in the
year of our Lord, 1457, on the Vigil of the Feast
of the Assumption.”

These two printers also produced, in 1465,
an edition of the
De Officiis
of Cicero, which
shares with the
Lactantius
, printed in the same
year at Subiaco, near Rome, by Sweynheim and
Pannartz, the honour of exhibiting to the world
the first Greek types, and with the same printers'
Cicero
De Oratore
, that of being the first printed
Latin classic, unless an undated
De Officiis
,
printed at Cologne by Ulrich Zel about this
time, is the real “first.”

CHAPTER IX

EARLY PRINTING

Wherever
typography originated, it was from
Mentz that it was taught to the world. The
disturbances in that city in 1462 drove many of
its citizens from their homes, and the German
printers were thus dispersed over Europe. Within
a little more than twenty years from the time of
the first issue from the Mentz printing-press, other
presses were established at Strasburg, Bamberg,

Cologne,
Augsburg
, Nuremberg, Spires, Ulm,
Lubeck, and Breslau; Basle, Rome, Venice,
Florence, Naples, and many other Italian cities;
Paris and Lyons; Bruges; and, in 1477, at
Westminster.

Before the end of the fifteenth century eighteen
European countries were printing books. Italy
heads the list with seventy-one cities in which
presses were at work, Germany follows with
fifty, France with thirty-six, Spain with twenty-six,
Holland with fourteen; and after these
England's four printing-places—Westminster,
London, Oxford, and St Albans—make a somewhat
small show. Some other countries, however,
had but one printing-town. With the
possible exception of Holland, England and
Scotland are the only countries which are indebted
to a native and not (as in every case
save that of Ireland) to a German for the introduction
of printing.

The early printers were more than mere workmen.
They were usually editors and publishers
as well. Some of them were associated with
scholars who did the editorial work: Sweynheim
and Pannartz, for instance, the first to set up a
press in Italy, had the benefit of the services of
the Bishop of Aleria, and their rival, Ulric Hahn,
enjoyed for a while the assistance of the celebrated
Campanus. Aldus Manutius, too, the
founder of the Aldine press at Venice, though
himself a literary man and a learned editor,
availed himself of the help of several Greek
scholars in the revising and correcting of classical
texts. The exact relations of these editors to the

printers, however, is not known. The English
printer, Caxton, who also was a scholar, usually,
though not invariably, edited his publications
himself.

The first printers were also booksellers, and
sold other people's books as well as their own.
Several of their catalogues or advertisements still
exist. The earliest known book advertisements
are some issued by Peter Schoeffer, one, dating
from about 1469, giving a list of twenty-one
books for sale by himself or his agents in the
several towns where he had established branches
of his business, and another advertising an edition
of St Jerome's
Epistles
published by Schoeffer at
Mentz in 1470. An advertisement by Caxton is
also extant, and being short, as well as interesting,
may be quoted here. It is as follows:—

If it plese ony man spirituel or temporel to
bye ony pyes,
[3]
of two and thre comemoracios
of salisburi vse enpryntid after the forme of
this preset lettre whiche ben wel and truly
correct, late hym come to westmonester in to
the almonesrye at the reed pale and he shal haue
them good chepe.

Supplico stet cedula.

The date of this notice is about 1477 or 1478.
Other extant examples of early advertisements
are those of John Mentelin, a Strasburg printer,

issued about 1470, and of Antony Koburger,
of Nuremberg, issued about ten years later.
In 1495 Koburger advertised the Nuremberg
Chronicle.

Early printed books exhibit a very limited
range of subject, and were hardly ever used to
introduce a new contemporary writer. Theology
and jurisprudence in Germany, and the classics
in Italy, inaugurated the new invention, and
lighter fare was not served to the patrons of
printed literature until a later date. Italy made
the first departure, and took up history, romance,
and poetry. France began with the classics, and
then neglected them for romances and more
popular works, but at the same time became
noted for the beautifully illuminated service-books
produced at Paris and Rouen, and which
supplied the clergy of both France and England.
England, who received printing twelve years after
Italy and seven years after France, made more
variety in her books than any. Caxton's productions
consist of works dealing with subjects
of wider interest, even if less learned and improving—romances,
chess, good manners,
Æsop's
Fables
, the
Canterbury Tales
, and the
Adventures
of Reynard the Fox
.

From what sort of type the Bible usually considered
to be the first printed book was produced
is not known. Some competent authorities think
that wooden types were used. Others are in favour
of metal, and like the late Mr Winter Jones, scout
the notion of wooden types and consider them
“impossible things.” But Skeen, in his
Early
Typography
, declares that hard wood would print

better than soft lead, such as Blades hints that
Caxton's types were made of, and to illustrate
the possibility of wooden types prints a word in
Gothic characters from letters cut in boxwood.
The objections made to types of this nature are
that they would be too weak to bear the press,
could never stand washing and cleaning, and
would swell when wet and shrink when dried.
Some have thought that the early types were
made by stamping half-molten metal with wooden
punches, and so forming matrices from which the
types were subsequently cast.

As we have already noticed in connection with
the Mazarin Bible, the forms of the types were
copied from the Gothic or black letter characters
in which Bibles, psalters, and missals were then
written. When Roman type was first cut is
uncertain. The “R” printer of Strasburg, whose
name is unknown, and whose works are dated only
by conjecture, may have been the first to use it. It
was employed by Sweynheim and Pannartz in
1467, and by the first printers in Paris and
Venice. It was brought to the greatest perfection
by Nicolas Jenson, a Frenchman working in
Venice. Caxton never employed it, and it was
not introduced into England until 1509. In that
year Richard Pynson, a London printer and a
naturalised Englishman, though Norman by birth,
used some Roman type in portions of the
Sermo
Fratris Hieronymi de Ferrara
, and in 1518 he
produced
Oratio Ricardi Pacaei
, which was entirely
printed in these characters.

Had the idea of the title-page, in the modern
sense of the term, a very obvious idea, as it seems

to us, occurred to the first printers, we should not
have to sharpen our wits on the hundred and one
doubtful points with which the subject of early
bibliography bristles. To-day, the title-page not
only introduces the book itself, but declares the
name of the writer and the publisher, and the
time and place of publication. But during the
first sixty years of printing title-pages were rare,
and the old methods followed by the scribes in
writing their manuscript books still obtained.
The subject matter began with “Incipit” or
“Here beginneth,” etc., according to the language
in which the work was written, and such
information as the printer considered it desirable
to impart was contained in the colophon, or note
affixed to the end of the book.

More often than not these colophons are
irritatingly reticent, and withhold the very thing
we want to know. At other times they are informing,
and in some cases amusing. Dr Garnett
has suggested that as a literary pastime some one
might do worse than collect fifteenth-century
colophons into a volume, for the sake of their
biographical and personal interest, but I am not
aware that his idea has been carried out. Two
colophons have already been quoted here, the
first printed colophon (see
p. 103
) and one which
is possibly from the pen of Gutenberg (see
p. 101
).
A quaint specimen found in a volume of Cicero's

Orationes Philippicæ
, printed at Rome by Ulrich
Hahn, about 1470, descends to puns. It is in
Latin verse, and supposed by some to have been
written by Cardinal Campanus, who edited several
of Hahn's publications. It informs the descendants

of the Geese who saved the Capitol, that
they need have no more fear for their feathers,
for the art of Ulrich the
Cock
(German
Hahn

= Latin
Gallus
= English
Cock
) will provide a
potent substitute for quills. A colophon to
Cicero's
Epistolæ Familiares
, printed at Venice in
1469 by Joannes de Spira, declares with pardonable
pride that he had printed two editions of
three hundred copies in four months.

The first book with any attempt at a title-page
is the
Sermo ad Populum Predicabilis
, printed at
Cologne in 1470 by Arnold Therhoernen, but a
full title-page was not generally adopted till fifty
years later. The first English title-page is very
brief, and reads as follows:—

A passing gode lityll boke necessarye &
behouefull agenst the Pestilence.

This gode lityll boke, written by Canutus, Bishop
of Aarhaus, was printed in London about 1482
by Machlinia. A later development of the title-page
was a full-page woodcut, headed by the
name of the work, as in the
Kynge Richarde
cuer du lyon
, printed in 1528 by Wynkyn de
Worde. The same woodcut does duty in another
of the same printer's books for Robert the Devil.

Early title-pages in Latin sometimes render
the names of familiar places of publication in a
very unfamiliar form. London may appear as
Augusta Trinobantum, Edinburgh as Aneda,
Dublin as Eblana. Some towns are easily
recognised by their Latin names, such as Roma
or Venetiæ; others are less obvious, such as
Moguntia, or Mentz; Lutetia, or Paris; Argentina,

or Strasburg. Several places had more than
one Latin form of name. London, for example, was
also Londinum, and Edinburgh, Edemburgem.

Pagination, or numbering of the pages, was
first introduced by Arnold Therhoernen, in the
same book in which he gives us the first title-page,
and to which reference has already been
made. He did not place the figures at the top
corner, however, but in the centre of the right
hand margin.

The practice of printing the first word of a leaf
at the foot of the leaf preceding, as a guide for
the arrangement of the sheets, was first employed
by Vindelinus de Spira, of Venice, in the
Tacitus

which he printed about 1469.

CHAPTER X

EARLY PRINTING IN ITALY AND SOME OTHER
COUNTRIES

The
new invention found more favour in Italy
than in any other country, for more presses were
established there than anywhere else. The
printers, however, were all Germans, and before
1480 about 110 German typographers were at
work in twenty-seven Italian cities. They kept
the secrets of their trade well to themselves,
and not till 1471 was any printing executed
by an Italian. In May of that year the
De
Medicinis Universalibus
of Mesua was executed
at Venice by Clement of Padua, who accomplished

the truly wonderful feat of teaching himself
how to print. Another Italian, Joannes
Phillipus de Lignamine, printed at Rome some
time before July 26, 1471, and it is therefore
uncertain whether he or Clement of Padua was
the first native printer of Italy.

The first press established in Italy was that set
up in the Benedictine monastery of St Scholastica
at Subiaco, a few miles from Rome, by two
German typographers, Conrad Sweynheim and
Arnold Pannartz. There they issued Cicero's

De Oratore
in 1465, the first book printed in
Italy. In their petition to the Pope, referred to

below, they say that they had printed a
Donatus
,
presumably before the Cicero, but no such
work is known, and some have thought it was
only a block-book. In the same year they issued
the works of Lactantius, “the Christian Cicero,”
the first dated book executed in Italy. It is also
one of the earliest books to adopt a more
elaborate punctuation than the simple oblique
line and full stop in general use. The
Lactantius

has a colon, full stop, and notes of admiration
and interrogation. Both these books are printed
in a pleasing type which is neither Gothic nor
Roman, but midway between the two.

TYPE OF THE SUBIACO LACTANTIUS
(
exact size.
)

Two years later Sweynheim and Pannartz
removed to Rome, where their countryman,
Ulric Hahn, was already at work, and prosecuted
their business with so much energy, and
apparently so little prudence or regard to the
works of other printers, that at the end of five
years they had printed no less than 12,475
sheets which they could not sell, and were in
such financial straits that they petitioned the
Pope for assistance for themselves and their
families. Whether they obtained it is unknown,
but the partnership was soon after dissolved, and
the name of Pannartz alone appears in books of
1475 and 1476. When these two printers died
is uncertain.

Venice was the next city of Italy to take up
the new art. There, in 1469, Joannes de Spira,
or John of Spires, executed Cicero's
Epistolæ
ad Familiares
. He obtained a privilege from
the Venetian Senate with regard to his productions,
and, more than that, a monopoly of book-printing

in Venice for five years. He died,
however, less than a year later, and his monopoly
with him. His brother Vindelinus carried on
his work, and was succeeded by Nicolas Jenson,
a Frenchman, who, from a technical point of
view, was perhaps the most skilful and artistic
of early typographers.

The most famous printer of Venice, however,
and the most famous printer of Italy, and
perhaps of the world, is Aldus Manutius, born in
1450, but his fame rests less on his actual
printing, which, though good, is not unequalled,
than upon the efforts he made for popularising
literature, and bringing cheap, yet well-produced
books within the reach of the many. He saw
that the works printed in such numbers by the
Venetian printers, who paid attention to quantity
and cheapness and altogether ignored the
quality of their productions, were faulty and
corrupt, and that textually as well as typographically
there was room for improvement. He
applied himself to the study of the classics, above
all to the Greek, hitherto neglected or published
through Latin translations, and secured the
assistance of many eminent scholars, and then,
having obtained good texts, turned his thoughts
to type and format. The types he cast for his
first book, Lascaris'
Greek Grammar
, were
superior to the Greek types then in use. Next
he designed a new Roman type, modelled, so it
is said, upon the handwriting of Petrarch. It
called forth admiration, and won fame under the
name of the “Aldino” type. Its use has continued
to the present day, and it is known to almost

everyone as
Italic
. It was cut by Francesco
de Bologna, who was probably identical with
Francesco Raibolini, that painter-goldsmith who
signed himself on his pictures as
Aurifex
, and on
his gold-work as
Pictor
.

The advantage of the Aldino type, at the
time of its invention, when type was large and
required a comparatively great deal of space,
was that its size and form permitted the printed
matter to be much compressed, while losing
nothing in clearness. The book for which it was
used could be made smaller, and printed more
cheaply. In 1501 Aldus inaugurated his new
type by issuing a
Virgil
printed throughout in
“Aldino.” It occupied two hundred and twenty-eight
leaves, and was of a neat and novel shape,

measuring just six by three and a half inches.
This book, which was sold for about two shillings
of our money, marks Aldus as the pioneer of
cheap literature—literature not for the wealthy
alone, but for all who loved books. A proof of the
popularity of the new departure is afforded by the
fact that the
Virgil
was immediately forged, that
is to say, reproduced in a number of exceedingly
inferior copies, by an unknown printer of Lyons.

TYPE OF THE ALDINE VIRGIL
, 1501 (
exact size.
)

The Aldine mark, which appears on Aldus'
edition of Dante's
Terze Rime
in 1502, and on
nearly all the numerous works subsequently issued
from this famous press, is a dolphin twined about
an anchor, and the name
Aldvs
divided by the
upper part of the anchor. This device continued
to be used after the death of Aldus Manutius
in 1515 by his descendants, who carried on the
work of the press until 1597.

France was somewhat late in availing herself
of the advantages offered by the new art, although
Peter Schoeffer had had a bookseller's shop in
Paris. In 1470, Guillaume Fichet, Rector of the
Sorbonne, invited three German printers—Ulric
Gering, Michael Friburger and Martin Cranz—to
come and set up a printing-press at the Sorbonne.
The first work they produced there was
the
Epistolæ
of Gasparinus Barzizius. For this
and a few other volumes they used a very beautiful
Roman type, but after the closing of the
Sorbonne press in 1472 they established other
presses elsewhere in Paris and adopted a Gothic
character similar to that of the contemporary
French manuscripts, and therefore more likely
to be popular with French readers.

The first work printed in the French language,
however, is believed to have been executed,
chiefly, at any rate, by an Englishman, probably
at Bruges, five years later, that is, about 1476.
The book was
Le Recueil des Histoires de Troyes
,
the Englishman was William Caxton. Caxton
also printed at the same place, and about the
year 1475, the first book in the English language—a
translation of
Le Recueil
. In both these
works he may have been assisted by Colard
Mansion, believed by some to have been his
typographical tutor, though so eminent an
authority as Mr Blades holds that
Le Recueil

was printed by Mansion alone, and that Caxton
had no hand in it. As with so many other
questions concerning early typography, there
seems to be no means of deciding the point.

The first work in French which was issued
in Paris was the
Grands Chroniques de France
,
printed by Pasquier Bonhomme in 1477.

Holland and the Low Countries can show no
printed book with a date earlier than 1473,
while the celebrated city of Haarlem's first
dated book was produced ten years later. But
printing was very possibly practised in these
countries at an earlier period, and some undated
books exist which those who ascribe the invention
of typography to Holland consider to have
been executed by Dutch printers before any
German books had been given to the world.
Those who stand by Germany of course think
otherwise.

In the year just named—1473—Nycolaum
Ketelaer and Gerard de Leempt produced Peter

Comestor's
Historia Scholastica
at Utrecht, and
Alost and Louvain also started printing. The
types of John Veldener, the first Louvain printer,
have a great resemblance to those used by Caxton,
and have led some to believe that Veldener
supplied Caxton with the types he first used
at Westminster. About the same time, Colard
Mansion, noted for his association either as
teacher or assistant with Caxton, is supposed
to have introduced printing into Bruges. His
first dated book was a
Boccaccio
of 1476, and
he continued to print until 1484, when he issued
a fine edition, in French, of Ovid's
Metamorphoses
.
After this nothing more is known of
him. Blades thinks that his printing brought
him financial ruin, and suggests that he may
have joined his old friend Caxton at Westminster,
and helped him in his work, but this
is only conjecture. We have already seen that
it was from Colard Mansion's press that the
first printed books in the English and French
languages were produced.

The first Brussels press was established by the
Brethren of the Common Life, a community who
had hitherto made a speciality of the production
of manuscript books. At what date they began
to print in Brussels is uncertain, but their first
dated book, the
Gnotosolitos sive speculum conscientiae
,
is of the year 1476. The Brethren also
had an earlier press at Marienthal, near Mentz,
and subsequently set up others at Rostock,
Nuremberg, and Gouda.

The Elzevirs belong to a somewhat later period
than that with which we are concerned in these

chapters, but a name so famous in bibliographical
annals as theirs cannot well be passed over. The
first of the Elzevirs was Louis, a native of
Louvain, who in 1580 established a book-shop
in Leyden, gained the patronage of the university,
and opened an important trade with foreign
countries. Certain of his sons and successors
became printers as well as booksellers, and produced
work of the highest excellence. Some
of them opened shops or set up presses at
Amsterdam, The Hague, and Utrecht, and also
established agencies or branches elsewhere, and
extended their trade all over Europe. The history
of the partnerships between different members
of the family, and of the sixteen hundred and
odd publications which they printed or sold, is
a complicated subject upon which there is no
need to enter here. The last of the Elzevirs, a
degenerate great-great-grandson of the first Louis
Elzevir, was Abraham Elzevir of Leyden, who
died in 1712, leaving no heir, and at whose
decease the press and apparatus were sold.

CHAPTER XI

EARLY PRINTING IN ENGLAND

The
first name on the list of early English
printers, it is hardly necessary to say, is that of
Caxton. In his
Life and Typography of William
Caxton
, the late Mr Blades has told all there
is to be known of Caxton's life, and a great deal

about Caxton's work; and although as regards
the latter half of the subject there are authorities
who dissent from some of the theories he advances,
Mr Blades' monograph remains the
standard work on the matter of England's first
printer and the recognised source of information
concerning him and his books.

But notwithstanding Mr Blades' industry and
learning, our knowledge of the early part of
Caxton's life is very scanty, and is derived
mainly from what Caxton himself tells us in
the prologue to his first literary production, the
English translation of the French romance by
Le Fevre, entitled
Le Recueil des Histoires de
Troyes
, or, Anglicised,
The Recuyell of the Histories
of Troye
. Speaking of his boldness in undertaking
the work, he refers to the “symplenes and
vnperfightness that I had in both langages, that
is to wete in frenshe and in englissh, for in france
was I neuer, and was born & lerned myn
englissh in kente in the weeld where I doubte
not is spoken as brode and rude englissh as is in
ony place of englond.” He was born probably
in 1422 or 1423, and further than this we
know nothing of him till his apprenticeship to
Robert Large, a London mercer. Large died
before Caxton's term of apprenticeship expired,
and the next we hear of young Caxton is that he
was living on the Continent, probably at Bruges.
At the time he wrote the prologue from which
quotation has just been made, that is about 1475,
he had been for thirty years “for the most parte
in the contres of Braband, flanders, holand, and
zeland.” Yet notwithstanding so long a residence

in the Low Countries, he describes himself
as “mercer of y
e
cyte of London.”

As a wool merchant in Bruges he prospered,
and in time rose to be Governor of the Company
of Merchant Adventurers, or “The English
Nation,” and in that capacity probably dwelt at
the
Domus Angliæ
, the Company's headquarters
in Bruges. In 1468, and while holding this
honourable and important position, he began
his translation of
Le Recueil
, but soon laid it
aside, unfinished. Two years later he took it
up again, but by this time he had resigned the
governorship, and was engaged in the service of
the Duchess of Burgundy, sister of Edward IV.
of England. When or why he took this position,
and in what capacity he served the Duchess, is
not known, but it was her influence which brought
about the completion of his literary work and
indirectly caused the subsequent metamorphosis
of the mercer into the typographer. In the prologue
to
The Recuyell
he relates that the duchess
commanded him to finish the translation which
he had begun, and this lady's “dredefull comādement,”
he says, “y durste in no wyse disobey
because y am a servāt vnto her sayde grace and
resseiue of her yerly ffee and other many goode
and grete benefetes.”

The Recuyell of the Histories of Troye
, when
finished, immediately found favour in the eyes of
the English dwellers in Bruges, who, rejoiced to
have the favourite romance of the day in their
own tongue, demanded more copies than one
pair of hands could supply. So because of the
weariness and labour of writing, and because of

his promise to various friends to provide them
with the book, “I haue practysed & lerned,”
he tells us, “at my grete charge and dispense,
to ordeyne this said book in prynte after the
maner & forme as ye may here see, and is
not wreton with penne and ynke, as other bokes
ben, to thende that every man may haue them
attones.”

Where Caxton gained his knowledge of printing
is a matter of dispute. Mr Blades holds that
he was taught by Colard Mansion, the first printer
of Bruges, others that he learned at Cologne.
Mr Blades adduces in support of his view the
similarity of the types of Mansion and Caxton,
the reproduction in Caxton's work of various
peculiarities to be observed in Mansion's, the
improbability that Caxton would have travelled
to Cologne to get what was already at hand in
the city where he lived, and the absence in his
work “of any typographical link between him
and the Mentz school.” For the Cologne theory
Wynkyn de Worde, who carried on the work of
Caxton's printing-office at Westminster after the
latter's death, supplies some foundation in his
edition of Bartholomæus
De Proprietatibus
Rerum
, where he says:

“And also of your charyte call to remembraunce

The soule of William Caxton, the first prynter of this boke

In laten tongue at Coleyn, hymself to avaunce,

That every well-disposed man may thereon loke.”

As usual there is something to be said on both

sides, but leaving this debateable ground we will
only add that the
Recuyell of the
Histories
of
Troye
, translated by himself from the French, is
generally considered to be the first book printed
by Caxton, perhaps with Mansion's help, and
probably at Bruges, and in or about the year
1475. It is also the first printed book in English.
It was followed about 1476 by the French
version of the same work, and by the famous

Game and Play of the Chesse Moralised
. This
was once believed to be the first book printed on
English soil, but it is now assigned to Caxton's
press on the Continent, probably at Bruges.

About 1476 Caxton returned to England, and
set up his press at Westminster. It has been
asserted that he worked in the scriptorium, but
it is not known that Westminster Abbey ever had
a scriptorium. Others have thought that he
printed in some other part of the Abbey. His
office, however, was situated in the Almonry, in
the Abbey precincts, and was called the Red Pale,
but it is now impossible to identify the place
where it stood. In 1477 Caxton produced
The
Dictes or Sayengis of the Philosophres
, the first
book, so far as is known, ever printed in
England.

TYPE OF CAXTON'S DICTES OR SAYENGIS OF THE
PHILOSOPHRES, WESTMINSTER
, 1477 (
exact size.
)

The Westminster printer was patronised by
the king and by the mighty of the land, and also
by the Duchess of Burgundy, and with his pen,
as well as with his press, he sought to supply the
books and literature which the taste of the time
demanded. “The clergy wanted service-books,”
says Mr Blades, “and Caxton accordingly provided
them with psalters, commemorations and

directories; the preachers wanted sermons, and
were supplied with the ‘Golden Legend,’ and
other similar books; the ‘prynces, lordes, barons,
knyghtes & gentilmen’ were craving for
‘joyous and pleysaunt historyes’ of chivalry,
and the press at the ‘Red Pale’ produced a fresh
romance nearly every year.” From his arrival
at Westminster about 1476 until his death about
1491—the date is not exactly known—Caxton was
continually occupied in translating, editing, and
printing, though beyond the prologues, epilogues,
and colophons to his various publications he
composed little himself, his principal work being

the addition of a book to Higden's
Polychronicon
,
bringing that history down to 1460. His translations
number twenty-two.

The long list of his printed works includes a

Horæ
, printed about 1478, and now represented
only by a fragment, which is of great interest
as being probably the earliest English-printed
service-book extant. It was found in the cover
of another old book, and is now in the Bodleian
Library.

Other books printed by Caxton were the

Canterbury Tales
;
Boethius
;
Parvus et Magnus
Catho
, a mediæval school-book, the third edition
of which contains two woodcuts, probably the
earliest produced in England;
The Historye of
Reynart the Foxe
, translated from the Dutch by
Caxton;
A Book of the Chesse Moralysed
, a
second edition of the
Game and Play of the
Chesse
, printed by Caxton abroad;
The Cronicles
of Englond
;
The Pylgremage of the Sowle
, believed
to have been translated from the French
by Lydgate; Gower's
Confessio Amantis
;
The
Knyght of the Toure
, translated by Caxton from
the French;
The Golden Legend
, consisting of
lives of saints compiled by Caxton from French
and Latin texts;
The Fables of Esope
, etc., translated
by Caxton from the French; Chaucer's

Book of Fame
;
Troylus and Creside
; Malory's

Morte d'Arthur
;
The Book of Good Manners
,
translated by Caxton from the French of Jacques
Legrand;
Statutes of Henry VII.
, in English, the
“earliest known volume of printed statutes”;

The Governal of Helthe
, from the Latin, author
and translator unknown, the “earliest medical

work printed in English”;
Divers Ghostly
Matters
, including tracts on the seven points of
true love and everlasting wisdom, the Twelve
Profits of Tribulation, and the Rule of St Benet;

The Fifteen Oes and other Prayers
, printed by
command of “our liege ladi Elizabeth …
Quene of Englonde, and of the … pryncesse
Margarete,” and the “prouffytable boke for
mānes soule and right comfortable to the body

and specyally in aduersitee and trybulacyon,
whiche boke is called
The Chastysing of Goddes
Chyldern
.”

Between seventy and eighty different books,
besides indulgences and other small productions,
are attributed to Caxton's press, and the works
just named will serve to give an idea of their
diversity and range. Some of the most popular
were printed more than once; of the
Golden
Legend
, for example, three editions are known,
and of the
Dictes or Sayings
, the
Horæ
, and

Parvus et Magnus Catho
, and several others,
two editions are known. There is also a strong
probability that many of Caxton's productions
have been lost altogether, since thirty-eight of
those yet extant are represented either by single
copies or by fragments.

BOYS LEARNING GRAMMAR
, from Caxton's “Catho” and
“Mirrour of the World.”

Caxton, according to Mr Blades, used six
different founts of Gothic type, but Mr E.
Gordon Duff, in his
Early English Printing
,
credits him with eight founts. His books
are all printed on paper, with the exception
of a copy of the
Speculum Vitæ Christi
in
the British Museum, and one of the
Doctrinal
of Sapyence
, in the Royal Library at Windsor
Castle.

The well-known device of Caxton was not used
by him till 1487. It is usually understood to
stand for W.C. 74, but its exact meaning is not
known. Blades believes that it refers to the
date of printing of
The Recuyell
, the first product
of Caxton's typographical skill.

CAXTON'S DEVICE.

In 1480, three or four years after Caxton had
settled at Westminster, John Lettou, a foreigner

of whom little is known, established the first
London printing-press.
[4]
His workmanship was
particularly good, and he was the first in this
country to print two columns to the page. He

subsequently took into partnership William de
Machlinia, and according to the colophon of
their
Tenores Novelli
the office of these two
printers was located in the Church of All Saints',
but this piece of information is too vague to
assist in the identification of the spot. Machlinia
is afterwards found working alone in an office
near the Flete Bridge. His later books were
printed in Holborn.

A well-known name is that of Wynkyn de
Worde, a native of Holland, and at one time
assistant to Caxton. At Caxton's death he became
master of the Red Pale, and issued a
number of books “from Caxton's house in Westminster,”
including reprints of several of Caxton's
publications. He made use of some modified
forms of Caxton's device, but he also had a
device of his own, which first appears in the

Book of Courtesye
printed some time before 1493.
He printed, among other works, the
Golden
Legend
, the
Book of Courtesye
, Bonaventura's

Speculum Vitæ Christi
, Higden's
Polychronicon
,
which appeared in 1495 and is the first English
book with printed musical notes;
Bartholomæus'

De Proprietatibus Rerum
, which appeared about
1495 and is the first book printed on English-made
paper, and which has already been noticed
as the authority for supposing that Caxton learned
printing at Cologne; the
Boke of St Albans
, the

Chronicles of England
,
Morte D'Arthur
,
The
Canterbury Tales
, etc., etc. He also issued a
host of sermons, almanacs, and other minor
works.

TYPE OF WYNKYN DE WORDE'S HIGDEN'S POLYCHRONICON,
LONDON
, 1495 (
exact size.
)

In 1500 Wynkyn de Worde moved from

Caxton's house in Westminster to the Sign of
the Sun, in Fleet Street, and presently opened
another place of business at the Sign of Our
Lady of Pity, in St Paul's Churchyard.

About a year after Caxton had established
himself at the Red Pale, and had issued the

Dictes or Sayengis
, and two years before the
city of London had attained to the dignity of
a printing-press, typography began to be practised
at Oxford, but by whom is not known, though
very possibly by Theodore Rood of Cologne.
The first Oxford book was the
Exposicio in
Simbolum Apostolorum
of St Jerome, a work
which happens to be dated 1468, and has thereby
led some to assign to Oxford the credit of having
printed the first book in this country. But that
date is now acknowledged to be a printer's error
for 1478. A similar misprint led to a similar
error as to the first book printed in Venice.
The
Decor Puellarum
, executed by Nicolas
Jenson, purports to have appeared in 1461, and
thus was at one time supposed to be the first
book printed in Venice, but the date is now
recognised as a misprint for 1471, which leaves
John of Spires the first Venetian printer and his

Epistolæ familiares
of Cicero, 1469, the first
Venetian printed book.

Cambridge was more than forty years later
than Oxford in providing herself with a printing-press.

In the same year that London began to print
appeared the first books from the press at the
Abbey of St Albans, namely,
Augustini Dacti
elegancie
, and the
Nova Rhetorica
of Saona. As

both were printed in 1480 it is uncertain which
is the earlier. This press was probably started
in 1479, but of the printer nothing is known,
except that when Wynkyn de Worde reprinted
the
Chronicles of England
from a copy printed at
St Albans, he refers to him as the St Albans
“scole mayster.” The famous
Bokys of Haukyng
and Huntyng, and also of Cootarmuris
, commonly
known as the Book of St Albans, written by the
accomplished Juliana Berners, prioress of the
neighbouring nunnery of Sopwell, was printed at
the monastery in 1486, and reprinted ten years
later by Wynkyn de Worde.

CHAPTER XII

EARLY PRINTING IN SCOTLAND

Scotland
was one of the last of the countries of
Europe to appreciate the advantages of typography
so far as to possess herself of a printing-press.
She was also, as we have pointed out in a
previous chapter, the only one, save England,
and possibly Holland, to have the art of printing
brought to her by one of her own sons and not
by a foreigner.

The first Scottish printer was Andrew Myllar,
an Edinburgh bookseller, who imported books
from England and from France, and who, in the
latter country, learned how to print. Two books
are extant which were printed for him on the
continent, probably at Rouen by Laurence

Hostingue, and these are worth noticing. The
first may speak for itself, through its colophon,
of which the following is a translation:—“The
Book of certain ‘Words Equivocal,’ in alphabetical

order, along with an interpretation in
the English tongue, has been happily finished.
Which
Andrew
Myllar, a Scotsman, has been
solicitous should be printed, with admirable art
and corrected with diligent care, both in orthographic
style, according to the ability available,
and cleared from obscurity. In the year of the
Christian Redemption, One thousand five hundred
and fifth.” The second book is an
Expositio
Sequentiarum
, or Book of Sequences, of the
Salisbury use, printed in 1506.

MYLLAR'S DEVICE.

In 1507 Myllar was taken into partnership by
Walter Chepman, and fortified by a royal
privilege these two set up the first Scottish
printing-press, with plant and types and workmen
brought by Myllar from France. Chepman
furnished the capital and Myllar the knowledge.
Their press was situated at the foot of Blackfriars
Wynd in the Southgate in Edinburgh. The
privilege sets forth that Myllar and Chepman
have “at our instance and request, for our
plesour, the honour and proffit of our Realme
and Liegis, takin on thame to furnis and bring
hame ane prent, with all stuff belangand tharto,
and expert men to use the sammyn for imprenting
within our Realme the bukis of our
Lawis, actis of parliament, cronicles, mess bukis,”
etc.

It is believed that the favour and encouragement
shown to Myllar and Chepman by the
King was the result of the influence of William
Elphinstone, Bishop of Aberdeen, who had prepared
a Breviary,
Breviarum Aberdonense
, which
he wished to be used by his countrymen to the

exclusion of the Salisbury Missal, and that the
real purpose of the promotion of the first printing-press
in Scotland was the printing of this
work. For the privilege goes on to say: “And
alis it is divisit and thocht expedient be us and
our consall, that in tyme cuming mess bukis,
efter our awin scottis use, and with legendis of
Scottis sanctis, as is now gaderit and ekit be ane
Reverend fader in God, and our traist consalour
Williame bischope of abirdene and utheris, be
usit generaly within al our Realme alssone as the
sammyn may be imprentit and providet, and that
na maner of sic bukis of Salusbery use be brocht
to be sauld within our Realme in tym cuming.”
Anyone infringing this decree was to be punished
and the books forfeited.

But the earliest work of the Southgate press
consisted of literature of a lighter sort, and, when
dated at all, is dated 1508, while the Breviary did
not make its appearance till later. These early
productions, which survive only in fragments,
included
The Porteous of Noblenes
,
The Knightly
Tale of Golagros and Gawane
,
Sir Eglamoure of
Artoys
,
The Maying or Disport
of Chaucer, and
several others.
The Maying or Disport
of
Chaucer is the most perfect specimen remaining,
and its exact date can be ascertained from its
colophon, which reads as follows:—

Heir endis the maying and disport of Chaucer.
Imprētit in the southgait of Edinburgh be
Walter chepman and Androw myllar the fourth
day of
aprile
the yhere of God M.CCCCC.
and viii yheris.

The
Maying and Disport
is better known as
the
Complaynt of a Lover's Life
, or the
Complaynt
of the Black Knight
.

Strange to say, we hear no more of Myllar
after this. But Chepman comes forward again
in connection with the Breviary (though it is
uncertain whether he was its printer), and probably
printed some other books which have
been lost. The Breviary is a small octavo in
two volumes, the first of which appeared in 1509
and the other in 1510. It is printed in red and
black Gothic characters. The conclusion of the
Latin colophon to the second volume may be
rendered as follows:—

“Printed in the town of Edinburgh, by the
command and at the charge of the honourable
gentleman Walter Chepman, merchant in the
said town, on the fourth day of June in the year
of our Lord 1510.”

The next Scottish printer, so far as is known,
was a certain John Story, though only an
Office
of Our Lady of Pity
, accompanied by a legend
on the subject of the relics of St Andrew, remains
to testify to us of his existence. It was printed
“by command of Charles Steele,” and Dr Dickson
dates it at (perhaps) about 1520.

Rather more than twenty years later, Thomas
Davidson became King's Printer in Edinburgh.
His only dated work was
The Nevv Actis And
Constitvtionis of Parliament Maid Be The Rycht
Excellent Prince Iames The Fift Kyng of Scottis
1540
. The title-page of this book consists of
a large woodcut of the Scottish arms, above

which is the title in four lines printed in Roman
capitals. This book also displays all three forms
of type—black letter, Roman, and Italic. Its
colophon, which is printed in Italics, is as
follows:—

Imprentit in Edinburgh, be Thomas Davidson,
dweling abone the nether bow, on the north syde of
the gait, the aucht day of Februarii, the zeir of
God. 1541. zeris.

But there is some of Davidson's undated work
which is earlier than this, though it is not known
for certain when he began to print. Of these
undated publications,
Ad Serenissimum Scotorum
Regem Iacobum Quintum de suscepto Regni Regimine
a diis feliciter ominato Strena
is notable as
affording the earliest example of the use of
Roman type by a Scottish printer, for its title is
printed in these characters. Only one copy is
known, and that is in the British Museum.
Opinions differ as to its date, but the majority
assign it to the year 1528.

Davidson's most important production, however,
was his beautiful folio edition of Bellenden's
translation of Hector Boece's work,
The hystory
and croniklis of Scotland
. This, says Dr Dickson,
is “an almost unrivalled specimen of early British
typography. It is one of those gems which the
earlier period of the art so frequently produced,
but which no future efforts of the press have
surpassed or even equalled.” It has a title-page
similar to that of the
Nevv Actis
, but the title
itself is printed in handsome red Gothic characters.
Dr Dickson, to whose learned
Annals of Scottish
Printing
(completed, on account of the author's

ill-health, by Mr J. P. Edmond) I am indebted for
the details of early Scottish typography given
above, assigns this book to the year 1542.

Having seen the printing-press fairly set to
work in Scotland, it will not be necessary here
to notice its later productions. But before closing
the chapter it will be interesting to observe
that Edinburgh was the place of publication of
the first work printed in the Gaelic language.
This was Bishop Carswell's translation of the
Scottish Prayer-Book, which was printed in 1567
by Roibeard (Robert) Lekprevik. It is in the
form of Gaelic common at that time to both
Scotland and Ireland, and therefore as regards
language it forestalls the
Irish Alphabet and
Catechism
, Dublin, 1571, to which reference is
made below. The type of Carswell's Prayer-Book,
however, is Roman. The following is a
translation of its title-page, made by Dr
M'Lauchlan:—

FORMS OF

Prayer and

administration of the sacraments and catechism
of the Christian faith, here below. According
as they are practised in the churches of Scotland
which have loved and accepted the faithful gospel
of God, on having put away the false faith, turned
from the Latin and English into Gaelic by Mr
John Carswell Minister of the Church of God in
the bounds of Argyll, whose other name is Bishop
of the Isles.

No other foundation can any man lay save that which is
laid even Jesus Christ.

1 Cor. 3.

Printed in dún Edin whose other name is Dún
monaidh the 24th day of April 1567,

By Roibeard Lekprevik.

Lekprevik, whose first work, so far as is known,
was produced in 1561, printed not only in Edinburgh,
but also in Stirling and St Andrews, at
different times.

CHAPTER XIII

EARLY PRINTING IN IRELAND

In
heading a chapter “Early Printing in Ireland,”
one is somewhat reminded of the celebrated
chapter on snakes. As a matter of fact, however,
there is no real analogy. Ireland was very slow
to adopt the printing-press, and made little use
of it when she did adopt it, yet it would not
be quite accurate to say that there was no early
printing in Ireland. But it can truthfully be said
that Ireland's early printing was late—late, that
is, compared with that of other countries.

The first typographical work known to have
been produced in Ireland is the Book of Common
Prayer—the First Prayer-Book of Edward VI.—which
was printed in Dublin in 1551 by Humfrey
Powell. Powell was a printer in Holborn Conduit
in 1548, and in 1551 went to Dublin and
set up as King's Printer. A “Proclamation …
against the rebels of the O'Conors.… Imprynted
at Dublyn, by Humfrey Powell, 16th

August, 1564,” seems to be the only other known
specimen of his Dublin printing.

The colophon of the first book printed on
Irish ground is as follows:—

Imprinted by Humfrey Powell, Printer to
the Kynges Maiestie, in his hyghnesse realme
of Ireland, dwellyng in the citee of Dublin in
the great toure by the Crane.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum

Anno Domini

M.D.LI.

This Prayer-book is exceedingly rare. The
British Museum possesses no copy, but has to
content itself with photographs showing the title,
colophon, etc., of that in the library of Trinity
College, Dublin. Emanuel College, Cambridge,
has one which formerly belonged to Archbishop
Sancroft. Cotton, in his
Typographical Gazetteer
,
says that Powell's Prayer-book is most creditable
to the early Irish press. It is in the English
language, and printed in black letter.

The first book printed in the Gaelic language,
though in Roman type, has already been spoken
of. The first Gaelic type was exhibited to the
world in a tiny volume of fifty-four pages printed
at Dublin in 1571, and entitled
Irish Alphabet
and Catechism
. This was compiled by John
O'Kearney, and contained the elements of the
Irish language, the Catechism, some prayers, and
Archbishop Parker's articles of the Christian rule.
The following is a facsimile of the title-page to
which a translation is added:—

Irish Alphabet and Catechism.

Precept or instruction of a Christian, together
with certain articles of the Christian rule, which
are proper for everyone to adopt who would be
submissive to the ordinance of God and of the
Queen in this Kingdom; translated from Latin
and English into Irish by John O'Kearney.

Awake, why sleepest thou, O Lord?

Arise, cast us not off for ever.

Ps. xliv. ver. 23.

Printed in Irish in the town of the Ford of
the Hurdles, at the cost of Master John Usher,
alderman, at the head of the Bridge, the 20th
day of June 1571.

With the privilege of the great Queen.

1571

title-page of
O'Kearney's
Irish alphabet and
catechism
(
slightly reduced
)

This book was produced by John O'Kearney,
sometime treasurer of St Patrick's Cathedral,
and his friend Nicholas Walsh, chancellor of
St Patrick's and afterwards Bishop of Ossory,
and the John Usher who defrayed the expense
was then Collector of Customs of the port of
Dublin. Its appearance was considered a momentous
event by those concerned with it, for
great benefits were anticipated for the Irish
people as soon as “their national tongue and
its own dear alphabet” were reduced to print, as
O'Kearney states at some length in the preface.
He also tells us that the types from which this
volume was printed were provided “at the cost

of the high, pious, great, and mighty prince
Elizabeth.”

In this connection it is worth while to notice
two extant records, one among the State Papers
(Irish Series) and the other among the Acts of
the Privy Council. From the first, made some
time in December 1567, we gather that Queen
Elizabeth had already paid £66. 13s. 4d. “for
the making of carecters for the testament in
irishe,” and that this Testament was not yet in
the press. The second (August 1587) states that
the New Testament was translated into Irish by
Walsh and O'Kearney, but “never imprynted,
partlie for want of proper characters and men of
that nacion and language skillful in the mystery
of pryntyng,” and partly on account of the cost.

I can find no other record of the provision of
a fount of Irish types at the Queen's expense, and
having no more definite information at hand on
this point, and taking into consideration the
contents of the book—an Irish alphabet, and
directions for reading Irish, and a catechism, etc.
(by way of exercise?)—its diminutive size and the
imperfection of its print, I venture the suggestion
that O'Kearney's work was printed as a trial of
the new types given by the Queen and intended
for printing the New Testament. This view is
supported by the first words of the preface:
“Here, O reader, you have the first value and
fruit of that great instructive work, which I have
been producing and devising for you for a long
time, that is, the faithful and perfect type of the
Gaelic tongue.” The conclusion seems to be
that the types were inadequate for the larger

work, and that for some reason there was a difficulty
about supplying more or finding anyone to
undertake the printing.

The preface further says, after requesting corrections
and amendments as regards the typography:
“And it is not alone that I am asking
you to give this kind friendly correction to the
printing, but also to the translation or rendering
made of this catechism put forth as far back as
1563 of the age of the Lord and [which] is now
more correct and complete, with the principal
articles of the Christian faith associated therewith.”
This has led some to think that there
was an earlier edition of the
Alphabet and
Catechism
. But it seems plain that O'Kearney
refers to the Catechism only, not to the whole
book, and equally plain that the 1563 work,
whatever it was, was not printed in Irish type, or
there would have been no special occasion to
glorify the 1571
Alphabet and Catechism
. Since
nothing is known of the
Catechism
of 1563, it is
very possible that it existed only in manuscript
and never went to press.

I have gone into this matter of the
Irish
Alphabet and Catechism
of 1571 somewhat at
length, because I am not aware that it has ever
yet received detailed attention. The quotations
I have given from the preface are from an anonymous
manuscript translation inserted in the
British Museum copy.

O'Kearney's
Irish Alphabet and Catechism
is
so rare that only three copies are known to exist:
one being in the British Museum, one in the
Bodleian Library, and one in the library of

Lincoln Cathedral. The fount of types from
which it was printed was not quite correct; for
instance, the small Roman “a” is used, and an
“H” is introduced, a letter foreign to the Gaelic
alphabet.

During the seventeenth century, and even later,
most of the Irish books were sent to be printed
on the continent or in England. Several books
by Irish authors, chiefly catechisms, works on the
language, and dictionaries, bear the names of
Louvain, Antwerp, Rome or Paris, such as the

Catechism
of Bonaventure Hussey, printed at
Louvain in 1608, and reprinted at Antwerp in
1611 and 1618.

CHAPTER XIV

BOOK BINDINGS

A book
as we know it is usually contained in a
case or cover intended primarily for its protection.
The fastening together of the different
sections of the book, and the providing it with a
cover, and, incidentally, the decoration of that
cover, come under the head of bookbinding, or
bibliopegy, as the learned call it. The process of
binding consists of two parts: first, the arrangement
of the leaves and sections in proper order,
their preparation for sewing by beating or pressing,
the stitching of them together, and the
fastening of them into the cover. This is called
“forwarding.” The other half of the work is the
lettering and decoration of the cover, and is called

“finishing.” With the decoration of the cover
only can we concern ourselves here.

The art of binding books is far older than the art
of printing. The first known attempt to provide
a cover by way of protection for a document was
made by the workman who devised a clay case
for the clay tablet-books of Babylonia, but this is
as far from our notion of bookbinding as the
tablets themselves are from our notion of books.
Nor do the Roman bindings, which consisted of
coloured parchment wrappers, come much nearer
the modern conception. The ivory cases of the
double-folding wax tablets or diptychs, too, of the
second and third centuries,
A.D.
, are also outside
the pale, strictly speaking, but they deserve
mention on account of the beautiful carving with
which they are decorated, and on which some of
the finest Byzantine art was expended.

One of the earliest bookbinders or book-cover
decorators whose name has come down to us
was Dagæus, an Irish monk, and a clever worker
in metals. Among the many beautiful objects
in metal wrought in the old Irish monasteries
were skilfully designed covers and clasps for the
books which were so highly prized in the “Isle
of Saints.” Nor were covers alone deemed sufficient
protection from wear and tear. Satchels,
or polaires, such as that mentioned in Adamnan's
story of the miraculous preservation of St
Columba's Hymn-book, were in common use
for conveying books from place to place. Very
few specimens now remain, but there is one at
Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, containing
an Irish missal, and another, which is preserved

at Trinity College, Dublin, together with the

Book of Armagh
, to which it belongs, is thus
described by the Rev. T. K. Abbott, in the

Book of Trinity College
:—

“An interesting object connected with the

Book of Armagh
is its leather satchel, finely
embossed with figures of animals and interlaced
work. It is formed of a single piece of leather,
36 in. long and 12½ broad, folded so as to make
a flat-sided pouch, 12 in. high, 12¾ broad, and
2¼ deep. Part of it is doubled over to make a
flap, in which are eight brass-bound slits, corresponding
to as many brass loops projecting from
the case, in which ran two rods, meeting in the
middle, where they were secured by a lock. In
early times, in Irish monastic libraries, books
were kept in such satchels, which were suspended
by straps from hooks in the wall. Thus it is
related in an old legend that
‘on
the night of
Longaradh's death all the book-satchels in Ireland
fell
down.’”

In Ireland, too, specially valuable volumes were
enclosed in a book-shrine, or cumhdach; and
although, like the satchels, these cumhdachs are
not bindings in the proper sense of the word, yet
since they were intended for the same purpose
as bindings, that is, the protection of the book,
it will not be out of place to speak of them here.

The use of bookshrines in Ireland was very
possibly the survival of an early custom of the
primitive Church. It seems to have been applied
chiefly, if not always, to books too precious or
sacred to be read. We are told that a Psalter
belonging to the O'Donels was fastened up in a

case that was not to be opened; and were it ever
unclosed, deaths and disasters would ensue to
the clan. If borne by a priest of unblemished
character thrice round their troops before a
battle, it was believed to have the power of
granting them victory, provided their cause were
a righteous one.

Cumhdachs were also used in Scotland, but
no Scottish examples have survived. The oldest
cumhdach now existing is one in the Museum of
the Royal Irish Academy, which was made for
the MS. known as Molaise's Gospels, at the
beginning of the eleventh century. It is of
bronze, and ornamented with silver plates bearing
gilt patterns. Another book-shrine, made for
the Stowe Missal a little later, is of oak, covered
with silver plates, and decorated with a large
oval crystal in the middle of one side. The
Book of Kells once had a golden cumhdach, we
are told, or, more correctly, perhaps, a cumhdach
covered with gold plates; but when the book was
stolen from the church of Kells in 1006 it was
despoiled of its costly case, with which the robbers
made off, leaving the most precious part of their
booty, the book itself, lying on the ground hidden
by a sod.

One of the earliest bookbinders in this country
was a bishop, Ethilwold of Lindisfarne, who
bound the great Book of the Gospels that his
predecessor Eadfrid had written. For the same
book Billfrið the anchorite made a beautiful
metal cover, gilded and bejewelled. The Lindisfarne
Gospels still exists, but the cover which
now contains it, though costly, is quite new.

Like most ancient book covers the original one
has been lost, or destroyed for the sake of its
valuable material.

Among the earlier mediæval bindings those
of the Byzantine school of art rank very high.
They were exceedingly splendid, for gold was
their prevailing feature, and jewels and enamel
were also lavished upon them.

The ordinary books of the middle ages were
usually bound in substantial oak boards covered
with leather, and often having clasps, corners,
and protecting bosses of metal. In the twelfth
century the English leather bindings produced at
London, Winchester, Durham and other centres,
were pre-eminent. Miss Prideaux instances some
books which were bound for Bishop Pudsey, and
which are now in the cathedral library of Durham,
as “perhaps the finest monuments of this class of
work in existence.” The sides of these volumes
are blind-tooled; that is, the designs are impressed
by means of dies or tools with various patterns
and representations of men and of fabulous
creatures, but not gilded.

Certain volumes, however, were treated with
particular honour, either at the expense of a
wealthy and book-loving owner, or for the purpose
of presentation to some great personage,
and for these sumptuous bindings the materials
employed were various and costly. A Latin
psalter which was written for Melissenda, wife
of Fulk, Count of Anjou and King of Jerusalem,
has a very wonderful French binding. The
covers are of wood, and each bears a series of
delicate ivory carvings of Byzantine work. The

upper cover shows incidents in the life of David,
and symbolical figures, and the lower cover
scenes representing the works of Mercy, with
figures of birds and animals. Rubies and

turquoises dotted here and there help to
beautify the ivory. This book is in the British
Museum.

UPPER COVER OF MELISSENDA'S PSALTER
(
reduced
).

Another specimen in the same collection may
be taken as an example of the use of enamel as a
decoration for bindings. This is a Latin manuscript
of the Gospels of SS. Luke and John, which
is enclosed in wooden boards bound in red
leather. In the upper cover is a sunk panel
of Limoges enamel on copper gilt, representing
Christ in glory. The work is of the thirteenth
century. These enamelled bindings were often
additionally decorated with gold and jewels.

A curious little modification of the ordinary
leather binding was sometimes made in the case
of small devotional works. The leather of the
back and sides was continued at the bottom in a
long tapering slip, at the end of which was a kind
of button, so that the book might be fastened to
the dress or girdle. Slender chains were often
used for the same purpose.

About the time of the invention of printing,
leather bindings began to be decorated with gold
tooling. Tooling is the name given to the
designs impressed upon the leather with various
small dies so manipulated as to make a connected
pattern. When the impressions are gilded
the dull leather is brightened and beautified in
proportion to the skill and taste expended by the
workman. The art of gold tooling is believed to
have originated in the East, and to have been
brought to Italy by Venetian traders, or, as it has
also been suggested, through the manuscripts
which were dispersed at the fall of Constantinople.

In any case, it was in Italy that it was
first adopted and brought to perfection, and other
European countries learned the art from Italian
craftsmen. Chief among the early Italian gilt
bindings are those made of the finest leathers
and inscribed
THO. MAIOLI ET AMICORVM
.
Nothing whatever is known of Thomasso Maioli,
except that he had a large library and spared no
expense in clothing his books in bibliopegic
purple and fine linen.

What Maioli appears to have been among
Italian book-collectors, Jean Grolier, Vicomte
d'Aguisy, was among French bibliophiles. He
held for a time the post of Treasurer of the
Duchy of Milan, and while in Italy he collected
books for his library and made the acquaintance
of Aldus Manutius. Many of the Aldine books
are dedicated to him, for Aldus occasionally
stood in need of financial aid and found in
Grolier a generous and practical patron of literature.
Some of the famous bindings which distinguish
Grolier's books were executed in Italy,
others in France, where Italian bookbinders were
then teaching their art to the native workmen.
They display the same style of design that
decorates the books of Maioli, and Maioli's
benevolent inscription too, Grolier adapted to
his own use, and stamped upon certain of his
books
IO. GROLIERII ET AMICORVM
. The exact
signification of these words is obscure. At
first sight they might appear to refer delicately
to the joy with which the owner of the book
would place it at the disposal of his friends, but
this does not accord with what is known of the

character of book-lovers. Perhaps their only
meaning is that Maioli and Grolier were at all
times ready to please their friends and to gratify
themselves by exhibiting their treasures. But
since several copies of the same work are known
to have been bound for Grolier—for instance,
five copies of the Aldine Virgil—it has been
suggested that he occasionally made presents of
his books, though he drew the line at lending
them.

Grolier's copy of the
De Medicina
of Celsus,
which is in the British Museum, is bound in a
somewhat different style from that usually associated
with his name. It is in brown leather;
blind-tooled except for some gold and coloured
roundels in different parts of the device. In the
centre of both covers is a medallion in colours,
that on the upper cover representing Curtius leaping
into the abyss in the Forum, and that on
the lower cover representing the defence of the
bridge by Horatius. This is an Italian binding.

Although it was Italy who first improved upon
the usual methods of mediæval binding, and
from her that France took lessons in this new
and better way of clothing books, it was France
who was destined to bring the art to its highest
excellence. Having learned her lesson, she perfected
herself in it, and the workmen of the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, such as
Geoffroy Tory, Nicholas, Clovis, and Robert
Eve, and Le Gascon, carried French bookbinding
into the very first rank, where it may be considered
to remain to this day.

Some of the finest French examples extant are

those which were executed for Henry II. and
Diana of Poitiers, Duchess of Valentinois. Both
were ardent bibliophiles, and both indulged in
very sumptuous bindings for their books. Some
of the chief treasures in our great libraries to-day
are the beautiful volumes which Henry presented
to the duchess, and which are ornamented with
the royal lilies of France, accompanied by the
bows and arrows and crescents which were Diana's
own badges and the initials of the king and the
duchess.

Catherine de Medicis also was an enthusiastic
book collector, which may surprise those who
think that a person who is devoted to books is
necessarily harmless. Some of her books she
brought to France as part of her dowry, others
she acquired by fair means or foul as was most
convenient, and to their bindings she paid particular
attention and kept a staff of bookbinders
in her employ.

To such a pitch of extravagance did the bibliophiles
of the period go in the binding of their
books, that in 1583 Henry III. of France decreed
that ordinary citizens should not use more than
four diamonds to the decoration of one book,
and the nobility not more than five. The king
himself, however, was as extravagant as any of
his subjects, at any rate as regards the designs
he favoured. Many of his books are clad in
black morocco, bearing representations of skulls,
cross-bones, tears, and other melancholy emblems.
He developed his taste for these strange decorations,
it is said, when, as Duke of Anjou, he
loved and lost Mary of Clèves.

The early printers at first executed their own
bookbinding, but presently left it to the stationers.
It was generally only the larger works which they
thought worth covering, and the small ones were
simply stitched. Antony Koburger, of whom
mention has already been made, bound his own
books and ornamented them in a style peculiarly
his own. Caxton bound his according to the
prevailing fashion, with leather sides, plain or
blind-tooled with diagonal lines, forming diamond-shaped
compartments in each of which is
stamped a species of dragon.

About the sixteenth century it became fashionable
to have one's books

“Full goodly bound in pleasant coverture

Of damask, satin, or else of velvet pure,”

as a writer of the time expresses it, and this style
naturally lent itself to the needleworked decoration.
This decoration was especially favoured in
England, and the ladies of the period executed
some very fine pieces of embroidery as “pleasant
covertures” for their books, using coloured silks
and gold and silver thread on velvet or other
material. One of the earliest embroidered bindings
covers a description of the Holy Land, written
by Martin Brion, and dedicated to Henry VIII.
It is of crimson velvet, with the English arms
enclosed in the Garter, between two H's, and the
Tudor rose in each corner, and it is worked in silks,
gold thread, and seed pearls. Queen Elizabeth
is said to have preferred embroidered bindings
to those of leather, and to have been very skilful
in working them. The copy of
De Antiquitate

Britannicæ Ecclesiæ
, which the author, Archbishop
Parker, presented to the Queen, has a
cover which is very elaborately embroidered
indeed. It is of contemporary English work,
and is thus described in the British Museum

Guide to the Printed Books exhibited in the King's
Library
:—

“Green velvet, having as a border a representation
of the paling of a deer park, embroidered
in gold and silver thread; the border on the
upper cover enclosing a rose bush bearing red
and white roses, surrounded by various other
flowers, and by deer; the lower cover has a
similar border, but contains deer, snakes, plants
and flowers; the whole being executed in gold
and silver thread and coloured silks. On the
back are embroidered red and white roses.”
Embroidered bindings remained in fashion during
the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and plain
velvet, too, was often used, sometimes with gold
or silver mounts.

The old Royal Library, which was given to the
nation by George II., contains a large number of
sumptuous bookbindings; and that our Sovereigns
were not unmindful of the welfare of their literary
treasures may also be gathered from various
entries in the Wardrobe Books and from other
documents. Thus, we read that Edward IV.
paid Alice Clavers, “for the makyng of xvj. laces
and xvj. tassels for the garnysshing of divers of the
kinge's bookes ijs. viijd.”; and “Piers Bauduyn,
stacioner, for bynding gilding and dressing of a
booke called
Titus Livius
xxs., for binding gilding
and dressing of a booke of the
The Holy Trinity

xvjs.,” and so on. Again, in the bill delivered
to Henry VIII. by Thomas Berthelet, his
majesty's printer and binder, are found such
entries as these:—

“Item delyvered to the kinge's highnes the vj.
day of January a Psalter in englische and latine
covered with crimoysyn satyne, 2s.”

“Item delyvered to the kinge's hyghnes for a
little Psalter, takyng out of one booke and settyng
in an other in the same place, and for gorgeous
binding of the same booke xijd.; and to the
Goldesmythe for taking off the claspes and corners
and for setting on the same ageyne xvjd.”

Among the various styles which may be classed
as fancy bindings may be instanced the seventeenth
century tortoise-shell covers with silver
mounts and ornaments, which have a very handsome
effect, and the mosaic decoration of the
same period. This mosaic decoration was made
by inlaying minute pieces of differently coloured
leathers, and finishing them with gold tooling.
It was work which called for great dexterity in
manipulation, and in skilful hands the result was
very pretty and graceful.

Even from this slight sketch it will be seen
that bookbindings have always presented unlimited
opportunities for originality on the part
of the worker, as regards both design and
material. Wood and leather, gold and silver,
ivory and precious stones, coloured enamels,
impressed papier-mâché, gold-tooled leather and
embroidered fabric, pasteboard and parchment,
have all been pressed into the service, and the
subject of bookbindings is a fascinating branch

of book history. But from their nature bindings
are difficult to describe in an interesting manner,
and words can hardly do justice to them without
the aid of facsimile illustrations.

The ordinary bindings of to-day are practically
confined to two styles, the cloth and the leather,
and those combinations of leather and cloth
or leather and paper which make the covers of
half-bound and quarter-bound volumes. Cloth
binding, the binding of the nineteenth century,
is an English invention, and came into use in
1823. On the Continent books are still issued
in paper covers and badly stitched, on the
assumption that if worth binding at all, they will
be bound by the purchaser as he pleases. But
although the English commercial cloth binding is
often charged for far too highly, no one can deny
its convenience, and its superiority over the paper
undress of foreign works. Moreover, it is the
homely, everyday garb of the great majority of
our favourite volumes, and though, no doubt, it
is delightful to possess books sumptuously bound,
book-lovers of less ambition, or of lighter purses
than those who can command such luxuries, are
not very much to be pitied. There is something
characteristic about a book in a cloth cover
which it loses when it dons the livery of its
owner's library. Cloth is not only more varied
in texture, but admits of greater freedom and
variety of design than does leather, so there is
something to be said in its favour in spite of the
contention that direct handicraft is preferable to
handicraft which works through a machine, and
that one of a batch of bindings printed by the

thousand is not to be compared with a single
specimen of tooled leather which has cost a pair
of human hands hours of careful toil. The little
libraries with which so many of us have to be
contented owe their bright and cheerful appearance
to the cloth covers of the books, in which
each book stands out with modest directness,
wearing its individuality instead of losing it in
a crowd of neighbours dressed exactly like itself.
In a series uniformly bound, however, a family
likeness is not only admissible, but pleasing. It
gives an idea of unison among, perhaps, widely
differing individuals. But the unison which is
becoming to a family makes a community monotonous.

On the other hand, something stronger than
cloth is necessary when books are to be subjected
to special wear and tear, and desirable when a
volume is to be particularly honoured or when
the library it is to enter is large and important.
Protection is the first purpose of a binding, and
endurance its first quality, and the experience of
centuries has shown that the walls in the fairy-tale
were right when they said,

“Gilding will fade in damp weather,

To endure, there is nothing like
leather
.”

In which, perhaps, the book-lover will see a
parable. For, after all, the book is the thing,
and the cover a mere circumstance, and those
who wish to make books merely pegs to hang
bindings upon deserve to have no books at
all. Yet it is right that though the binding
should not be raised above the book, it should

be worthy of the book, and much of the cheap
and good literature which is now within the
reach of all who care to stretch out their hands
for it, is clothed in a manner to which no exception
can be taken on any score. Those who
have not realised how charming some of the
modern bookbindings can be, should consult the
winter number of
The Studio
for 1899–1900.

CHAPTER XV

HOW A MODERN BOOK IS PRODUCED

A description
of the methods by which a
modern book is produced has to begin at the
second stage of the proceedings. The processes
of the first stage, including the writing of the
book and the arrangements between the publisher
and the author, differ, of course, in individual
cases. The processes of the second stage,
however, are common to a large proportion of the
books produced at the present day, though it
will be easily understood that they can be dealt
with but summarily in this chapter, and that as
regards detail much variation is possible.

The second stage in the history of a modern
book may be said to begin with the overhauling
which the manuscript receives at the hands of
the printer's “Reader,” who goes over it with
the view of instructing the compositor regarding
capitals, punctuation, chapter headings and other
details. Although these are considered minor
and merely clerical details which are frequently

neglected or misused in writing, it is essential
that they be carefully attended to in print. Many
examples can be given of amusing misprints and
alterations of meaning caused by even such a
trifle as the misplacing of a comma. When this
overhauling is completed the manuscript is ready
to be sent to the composing room where the types
are set up.

From experience the printer knows that many
authors get a different impression of what they have
written when they see it in type from what they
had when they read it in manuscript, and it frequently
happens that alterations on proof are very
numerous in consequence. When either from
this or any other cause numerous alterations are
anticipated, the matter is first set up in long slips
called “galleys,” and not put at once into page
form. As soon as a few of those galleys are
composed an impression called a “proof” is
taken from the types so set, and this proof is
passed to a reader whose duty is to see that a
correct copy is made of the manuscript, and that
the spelling is accurate and the punctuation good.
This is a work commanding considerable intelligence
and experience, as the number of types
required for a printed page is very great, and
even the most expert compositor cannot avoid
mistakes. This marked proof is returned to the
compositor to make the necessary corrections.
Fresh proofs are got till no further errors are
detected, when a final proof is pulled and sent
to the author, who makes such alterations as he
may desire.

When the corrected proofs are returned by the

author they are given to the compositor, who
makes the required alterations in the type. After
this a revised proof is submitted. When the
author is satisfied that the reading is as he wishes
he returns the proofs, and the galleys are now
made into page form. If it is not expected that
the author will make many changes the types are
arranged in page shape before any proofs are
shown to him, and the work goes through somewhat
more quickly.

When the types are divided into pages they
are placed in sets or “formes,” each forme being
secured in an iron frame called a “chase,” which
can be conveniently moved about. Each chase is
of a size to enclose as many pages as will cover
one side of the sheet of paper to be used in
printing. Fifty years ago only one or two sizes
of paper were made, and the size of sheet generally
used for books was that which allowed eight
pages of library size on one side, hence called
“octavo” size, or when folded another way
allowed twelve pages, hence “twelvemo” or
“duodecimo.” Other sizes occasionally used are
called “sixteenmo” or “sextodecimo,” “eighteenmo”
or “octodecimo,” etc.

With larger sized printing machines now driven
by steam or electricity, there is greater variety in
the size of formes and papers used in printing.
In all cases, however, the number of pages laid
down for one side of paper must divide by four.
The pages are set in the chase in special positions,
so that when the sheet is printed on both
sides and folded over and over for binding they
will appear in proper sequence.

When only a small edition of a book is wanted
the printing is generally done direct from the
types, but when a large number of copies is
required or frequent editions are expected, stereotype
or electrotype plates are made. By this
means the types are released for further use and
other advantages obtained.

Stereotype plates are cakes of white metal
carrying merely the face of the types, and were
formerly made by taking from the types a mould
of plaster of Paris. They are now formed by
beating or pressing a prepared pulp of papier-mâché
into the face of the lettering. The mould
thus obtained is dried and hardened by heat,
then molten metal is run into it of requisite thickness.
This plate after being properly dressed is
fitted on a block equal in height to the type
stem, and takes the place in the frame or chase
that would have been occupied by the types.

The process of stereotyping is fairly quick and
economical, but electrotypes are better suited for
higher class work and are much more durable.
In this process an impression is taken from the
type on a surface of wax heated to the necessary
degree of plasticity. When the wax mould has
cooled and hardened it is placed in a galvanic
current, where a thin coat of copper is deposited
on its face. This coat is then detached from the
mould and backed with white metal to give it
the requisite body and stiffness and the electrotype
is now, like the stereotype, a metal plate
which can be fixed on a block and secured in a
frame ready for the printing machine.

It is outside the scope of this work to describe

minutely the marvellous machinery used in
printing. It is interesting to know that the first
printers had no machine but a screw handpress
by which they laboriously worked off their books
page by page, and that even so late as the middle
of the nineteenth century all books with scarcely
an exception were printed at handpresses which
enabled two men to throw off about two hundred
and fifty copies of a comparatively small-sized
sheet in the hour. Now the machines commonly
in use, attended by only a man and a lad, throw
off from a thousand to fifteen hundred copies in
an hour of a sheet four or even eight times the
old size.

Books are almost universally printed on what
is called the flat-bed machine, so-called because
the types or plates are placed on an iron table
which with them travels to and fro under a series
of revolving rollers constantly being fed with a
supply of ink which they transfer to the types or
plates. Immediately these get beyond the inking
rollers they pass under a revolving cylinder with
a set of grippers attached, which open and shut
with each revolution. These grippers take hold
of the sheet of paper and carry it round with the
cylinder. When it comes in contact with the
types or plates travelling underneath, the impression
or print is made. Some machines complete
the printing of the sheet on both sides at one
operation. In others the sheet is reversed and
is printed on the other side by passing through
a second time. In either case the sheet forms
only a section of a book; the complete volume
is made up of a number of these sections, folded

and collated in proper order in the bindery.
There they are sewn together and fixed in the
case or cover.

For illustrated books the pictures were formerly
produced by engraving on wood, but they are now
chiefly photographed from the artist's drawing on
a light sensitive film spread on a metal plate,
and etched in by acids. In whatever way produced,
when printed with the text they are
always relief blocks which are placed in proper
position in the chase alongside the types or
plates. Coloured illustrations are produced by
successive printings. Special illustrations are
frequently produced separately by other processes
and inserted in the volume by the binder.

Machines of a different construction, such as
the rotary press, and capable of a very much
higher rate of production, are in use for printing
newspapers and periodicals with a large circulation,
but these do not properly come into consideration
when telling how a modern book is
made.

[
The above chapter has been kindly contributed
by the printers of this volume.

G. B. R.
]

AUTHOR'S POSTSCRIPT.

In our endeavour to note the chief points in
the history of books, and in considering the
manifold interests which are bound up with their
bodies, we have had to neglect their minds.

To have tried even to touch upon the vast subject
of literature in our story would have been as
futile as an attempt to transport the ocean in
a thimble. For literature consists of all that is
transferable of human knowledge and experience,
all that is expressible of human thought on
whatever matter in heaven or earth has been
dreamed of in man's philosophy. And though
our aggregate of knowledge be small, it is vastly
beyond the comprehension of one individual
being.

Of the influence of books, and their manifold
uses, also, this is not the place to speak. Moreover,
even had the theme been unheeded by
abler pens, no one who loves books needs to be
told to how many magic portals they are the
keys, while he who loves them not would not
understand for all the telling in the world.

INDEX

A.

Aberdeen Breviary,
133
–135.

Advertisements, early booksellers',
105
.

Alcuin,
63
,
64
.

Aldus Manutius,
104
,
113
,
115
,
151
.

Aleria, Bp. of,
104
.

Alexandria,
16
,
30
–32.

Alost,
117
.

Alphabet, the,
10
.

Amsterdam,
118
.

Antiquarii,
49
.

Antwerp,
144
.

Arabs, the,
13
.

Assyria,
12
,
14
,
30
.

Assyrians,
11
.

Augsburg
,
104
.

Aungervyle, R. (
see

Richard de Bury
).

Ave Maria Lane,
52
.

Avignon,
85
.

B.

Babylonia,
12
,
30
,
145
.

Babylonians,
11
.

Bamberg,
75
,
94
,
103
.

Basle,
104
.

Benedict Biscop,
63
.

Beowulf,
24
.

Berthelet, Thomas,
156
.

Bible, the,
17
.

—— Mazarin or Gutenberg,
94
–100.

—— thirty-six-line,
97
.

—— Mentz, 1462,
102
.

Biblia Pauperum,
74
–77,
89
.

Bibliothèque Nationale,
67
,
68
.

Bindings,
144
,
159
.

Block-books,
73
,
80
.

Block-printing,
71
.

Bonhomme, Pasquier,
116
.

Book of Durrow,
39
.

—— Kells,
39
–41.

—— St Albans,
25
,
128
,
131
.

—— St Cuthbert (
see

Lindisfarne Gospels
).

Book, production of modern,
159
.

Bookbinding,
144
–159.

Books, adventures of,
144
.

—— beginning of,
10
.

—— chained,
58
,
69
,
70
.

—— heretical,
22
.

—— in classical times,
26
.

—— in monasteries,
21
–24,
47
,
145
.

—— not to be destroyed,
22
.

—— ornamenting of,
37
.

—— prices of,
50
,
53
.

—— sizes of,
161
.

Booksellers,
28
,
29
,
51
–54.

Bordesley Abbey,
68
.

Breslau,
104
.

Brethren of the Common Life,
117
.

Breviary, Aberdeen,
133
–135.

Bruges,
52
,
104
,
116
,
117
,
119
–122.

Brussels,
117
.

“Brussels” Print,
73
.

Byzantium,
18
,
34
.

C.

Caedmon,
24
.

Cambridge,
58
,
130
,
139
,
145
.

Campanus,
104
,
108
.

Canterbury,
45
,
61
,
63
.

Carrells,
57
.

Carswell's Prayer-book,
137
.

Catalogues, early booksellers',
105
.

—— monastic library,
59
–61.

Catechism, Irish Alphabet and,
137
,
139
–144.

Caxton,
85
,
105
–107,
116
–126,
128
,
154
.

Censorship, Ecclesiastical,
54
,
55
.

—— University,
54
.

Chelsea,
70
.

Chepman, Walter,
133
.

China,
14
,
71
,
81
.

Clairvaux Abbey,
57
.

Clement of Padua,
110
,
111
.

Clugni, Abbey of,
60
.

Cologne,
103
,
104
,
121
.

Colophons,
108
.

Copyists,
27
,
28
,
31
,
32
,
49
,
51
,
52
.

Copyright,
28
.

Corvey, Abbot of,
65
.

Coster, Laurenz,
80
,
82
–89.

Cranz, Martin,
115
.

Creed Lane,
53
.

Cumhdachs,
146
,
147
.

D.

Davidson, Thomas,
135
.

Dictes or Sayengis,
122
,
126
.

Diemudis,
49
.

Donatus,
78
,
79
,
112
.

Dorchester,
50
.

Dublin,
109
,
137
–139,
141
,
146
.

Durham,
45
,
61
,
148
.

E.

Edinburgh,
109
,
110
,
131
,
133
,
135
,
137
,
138
.

Egypt,
12
,
14
,
18
,
20
,
21
,
29
–31,
71
.

Electrotype plates, printing from,
162
.

Elizabeth, Queen,
125
,
141
,
142
,
154
.

Elzevirs, the,
117
,
118
.

England,
23
,
36
,
104
,
106
,
118
.

F.

Faust
or
Fust
,
88
,
92
,
93
,
100
,
102
,
103
.

Fichet, Guillaume,
115
.

Florence,
104
.

Fountains Abbey,
57
.

France,
23
,
77
,
78
,
104
,
115
,
131
,
133
,
151
,
152
.

Friburger, Michael,
115
.

G.

Game and Playe of the Chesse,
122
,
124
.

Gering, Ulric,
115
.

Germany,
23
,
65
,
72
,
77
,
83
,
104
,
106
,
116
.

Glastonbury Abbey,
60
.

Gloucester,
58
.

Greece,
12
,
14
,
15
,
18
,
19
,
23
,
30
.

Greeks, the,
11
.

Grolier, Jean,
151
,
152
.

Guild of St John the Evangelist,
52
.

Gutenberg,
82
–85,
89
–92,
101
,
102
.

H.

Haarlem,
80
–82,
85
–87,
116
.

Hahn, Ulric,
104
,
108
,
109
,
112
.

Herculaneum,
18
.

Hereford Cathedral,
70
.

Holborn,
128
,
138
.

Holland,
75
,
77
,
80
,
83
,
89
,
104
,
116
,
119
,
128
,
131
.

Hostingue, Laurence,
131
,
132
.

I.

Illuminators,
49
,
51
,
52
.

Ireland,
36
,
38
,
104
,
138
,
146
.

Irish Alphabet and Catechism,
137
,
139
,
143
.

Italy,
22
,
23
,
36
,
77
,
104
,
106
,
110
,
111
,
113
,
150
,
151
.

Italic type,
114
.

J.

Japan,
71
,
81
.

Jenson, Nicolas,
107
,
113
,
130
.

Junius, Hadrian,
88
.

K.

Kelmscott
press,
80
.

Ketelaer, Nycolaum,
116
.

Kirkstall Abbey,
57
.

Klosterneuburg
,
75
.

Koburger, Antony,
106
,
154
.

L.

Lanfranc,
47
.

Latin document, earliest,
15
.

Latin names of towns,
109
.

Leempt, Gerard de,
116
.

Lettou, John,
126
.

Leicester,
61
.

Lekprevik, Roibeard,
137
,
138
.

Leland,
61
.

Leyden,
118
.

Libraries, ancient,
28
–36.

—— collegiate,
58
.

—— monastic,
56
–65.

Librarii,
16
,
49
.

Lignamine, J. P. de,
111
.

Lindisfarne Gospels
,
42
–45,
147
.

Lincoln Cathedral,
143
,
144
.

Literature, Anglo-Saxon,
24
.

—— beginning of,
13
.

—— of Greece,
14
,
15
,
19
.

Literatures, antique,
14
.

London,
51
,
52
,
54
,
104
,
109
,
110
,
120
,
127
,
148
.

Louvain,
117
,
118
,
144
.

Lubeck,
104
.

Lyons,
104
,
115
.

M.

Machlinia, William de,
109
,
128
.

Maioli, Thomasso,
151
,
152
.

Mansion, Colard,
116
,
117
,
121
,
122
.

Manuscript, oldest Biblical,
17
.

—— oldest Homeric,
17
.

—— oldest New Testament,
18
,
20
.

Manuscripts, Arabic,
21
.

—— Arabic-Spanish,
56
.

—— Byzantine,
37
.

—— Classical,
17
,
20
.

—— Coptic,
21
.

—— of Four Gospels,
19
.

—— Greek,
14
,
15
,
18
.

—— Hiberno-Saxon,
43
.

—— Illuminated,
36
–46.

—— Irish,
37
,
39
–41,
44
.

—— Italian,
37
.

—— Moorish,
56
.

—— printed illustrations in,
73
.

—— Syriac,
21
.

—— Winchester,
45
.

—— of Virgil,
19
.

Marienthal,
117
.

Mentelin, John,
105
.

Mentz,
82
,
87
,
88
,
90
,
92
,
93
,
96
–98,
100
,
101
,
109
,
117
,
121
.

Monasteries, books in,
21
–24,
145
,
146
.

Monastic writing,
15
,
19
,
21
,
22
,
24
,
46
,
47
,
49
.

Morris, William,
80
.

Musical notes printed,
103
,
128
.

Myllar, Andrew,
131
–135.

N.

Naples,
104
.

Netley Abbey,
57
.

New Testament,
17
,
22
.

Nineveh,
14
.

Nuremberg,
104
,
106
,
117
.

O.

O'Kearney
, John,
139
,
141
–143.

Old Testament,
12
,
14
,
17
.

Omar, Caliph,
33
.

Oxford,
53
,
58
,
62
,
64
,
65
,
104
,
130
.

Oxyrhynchus,
20
.

P.

Paternoster Row,
51
,
52
.

Palestine,
21
.

Palimpsests,
24
.

Pannartz (
see

Sweynheim
).

Papyrus,
12
.

Paris,
53
,
62
,
75
,
93
,
104
,
106
,
107
,
109
,
144
.

—— Council of,
62
.

Philobiblon,
15
,
47
,
48
.

Peterborough,
61
.

Petrarch,
23
,
68
,
113
.

Pfister, Albrecht,
94
,
95
.

Poggio Bracciolini,
23
.

Powell, Humfrey,
138
.

Printed illustrations in MSS.,
73
.

Printers as editors and publishers,
104
.

—— as booksellers,
105
.

—— as bookbinders,
154
.

Printing,
11
,
70
–144.

—— in colours,
102
.

—— machines for,
161
,
162
,
164
.

Psalter,
Melissenda's
,
148
–150.

—— Mentz, 1457,
102
.

—— Queen Mary's,
46
.

Publication, mediæval,
51
.

Publishers,
51
,
104
.

Pye or Pica,
105
.

Pynson, Richard,
107
.

R.

“R” Printer,
107
.

Ramsey Abbey,
61
.

Reichenau Abbey,
60
.

Richard de Bury
,
23
,
47
,
50
,
64
,
65
,
68
.

Romans,
11
.

Rome,
12
,
14
,
15
,
17
,
18
,
19
,
28
,
103
,
104
,
106
,
108
,
109
,
111
,
112
,
131
.

Rood, Theodore,
130
.

Rostock,
117
.

Rouen,
106
,
131
.

Royal Library of England,
68
,
155
.

—— of France,
67
.

S.

Satchels or Polaires,
145
,
146
.

Schoeffer
, Peter,
93
,
94
,
100
,
102
,
105
.

Scandinavians,
11
.

Scotland,
104
,
131
,
147
.

Seraglio library,
34
,
35
.

Sopwell,
131
.

Spain,
23
,
104
.

Speculum Humanæ Salvationis,
78
–80,
88
,
89
,

92
.

Spira
, John de,
109
,
112
,
130
.

—— Vindelinus de,
110
,
113
.

Spires,
104
.

—— John of (
see

Spira
).

St Albans,
104
,
130
,
131
.

St Andrews,
138
.

St Boniface,
37
.

St Columba,
41
,
145
.

“St Christopher” Print,
72
.

St Gall, Abbey of,
23
,
60
.

St Paul's Cathedral,
52
.

Stationers,
51
,
154
.

—— Company of,
51
.

Stereotype plates, printing from,
162
.

Stirling,
138
.

Story, John,
135
.

Strasburg,
89
,
90
,
92
,
93
,
103
,
105
,
107
,
110
.

Subiaco,
103
,
111
.

Sweynheim
and Pannartz,
103
,
104
,
107
,
111
,
112
.

T.

Tablets,
11
,
12
,
145
.

The Hague,
118
.

Theodore, Abp.,
45
,
63
.

Therhoernen, Arnold,
109
,
110
.

Tintern Abbey,
57
.

Titchfield Abbey,
58
,
59
.

Title-page,
107
–109.

Tooling,
150
.

Type or Types, Aldino,
113
,
114
.

—— Caxton's,
126
.

—— Early,
107
.

—— Gaelic or Irish,
139
,
141
–143.

—— Gothic,
107
,
115
.

—— Greek,
103
.

—— Italic,
114
.

—— Moveable,
81
–89.

—— Roman,
107
,
115
.

—— Subiaco,
112
.

—— Scottish printers',
135
,
136
.

—— Wood and metal,
106
,
107
.

U.

Ulm,
104
.

Usher, John,
141
.

Utrecht,
117
,
118
.

V.

Veldener
, John,
117
.

Venice,
68
,
104
,
107
,
109
,
110
,
112
,
113
,
130
.

Vienna,
75
.

Virgil, Aldine,
114
,
115
,
152
.

W.

Waldfoghel
, Procopius,
85
.

Walsh, Nicholas,
141
,
142
.

Westminster,
104
,
117
,
121
–123,
128
.

Whitby,
60
.

Wimborne Minster,
70
.

Winchester,
45
,
50
,
62
,
148
.

Woodcuts, early English,
124
.

Worcester,
57
.

Writers of Text Letter,
51
.

Writing,
10
,
11
.

Wynkyn de Worde,
121
,
128
,
131
.

Z.

Zel
, Ulric,
103
.

Zutphen,
70
.

TURNBULL AND SPEARS, PRINTERS, EDINBURGH.

[1]
The Codex Sinaiticus, now at St Petersburg.

[2]
The first printed musical notes appear in de Gerson's

Collectorium super Magnificat
, printed at Esslingen in
1473 by Conrad Fyner.

[3]
The Pye, or Pica, directed how saints'-days falling in
Lent, Easter, Whitsuntide, and the octave of Trinity,
were to be observed with respect to the “commemorations”
of these seasons.

[4]
It is hardly necessary to remind the reader that at this
period Westminster was quite distinct from London.

End of Project Gutenberg's The Story of Books, by Gertrude Burford Rawlings

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF BOOKS ***

***** This file should be named 33413-h.htm or 33413-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/4/1/33413/

Produced by Adrian Mastronardi, Jana Srna and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.

*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).

Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License.  You must require such a user to return or
destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.

Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.

Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate

Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.