The Project Gutenberg EBook of Wild Bees, Wasps and Ants, by Edward Saunders

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

Title: Wild Bees, Wasps and Ants
and Other Stinging Insects

Author: Edward Saunders

Illustrator: Constance A. Saunders

Release Date: October 18, 2010 [EBook #33874]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WILD BEES, WASPS AND ANTS ***

Produced by Chris Curnow, Keith Edkins and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)

WILD BEES, WASPS AND ANTS

Plate A.

1.
Formica sanguinea, male.
2.
Formica
sanguinea, female.
3.
Formica sanguinea, worker.
4.

Mutilla europæa, male.
5.
Mutilla Europæa, female.
6.

Cerceris arenaria, female.
7.
Ammophila sabulosa, female.

8.
Crabro cribrarius, male.
9.
Odynerus spinipes,
male.

[
front.

WILD BEES, WASPS

AND ANTS

And Other Stinging Insects

By

EDWARD SAUNDERS

F.R.S., F.L.S., etc

With numerous Illustrations in the text, and

Four Coloured Plates by

CONSTANCE A. SAUNDERS

LONDON

GEORGE ROUTLEDGE & SONS, LIMITED

New York
: E. P. DUTTON & CO.

{v}

PREFACE

The object of this little book is to give in as simple a form as
possible a short account of some of the British Wild Bees, Wasps, Ants,
etc., scientifically known as the
Hymenoptera Aculeata
. Of these
the non-scientific public rarely recognizes more than the Hive Bee, the
Humble Bee, the Wasp, and the Hornet, whereas there are about 400
different kinds to be found in this country, and they can be recognized
by any one who is disposed to make a special study of the group.

The author has not hesitated to make free use of the experiences of
others in regard to the habits of the insects he describes, and he has
not thought it necessary in each case to make separate acknowledgment of
this. He takes this opportunity of thanking Mr. H. Donisthorpe and Mr.
F. W. L. Sladen for assistance in the chapters on Ants and their Lodgers,
and Humble Bees, respectively.
{vi}

These pages are written only for the non-scientific, as the scientific
entomologist will be already familiar with the elementary facts recorded;
but it is hoped that they may be of interest to lovers of Nature who wish
to know a little about the insects they see round them and how they spend
their lives. Of this knowledge very little exists, as the scraps which
have been here brought together evidence. There is an immense field open
for research and observation, and the writer of this little book will be
very glad if the following pages should encourage any one to take up the
subject and add to our present scanty stock of information.

EDWARD SAUNDERS.

St. Ann's, Woking.

{vii}

CONTENTS

PAGE

The Subject in General
,

1

The Solitary Groups
,

6

The Solitary Bees
,

9

The Cuckoo Bees
,

14

The Fossors, or Diggers
,

18

The Solitary Wasps
,

24

The Social Groups
,

28

The Ants
,

31

The Social Wasps
,

35

The Humble Bees
,

39

The Bees With Bifid Tongues
,

44

The Bees with Pointed Tongues
,

48

Leaf-Cutting Bees
,

52

Osmia

and Its Habits
,

55

A Colony of

Anthophora
,

61

Bees and Pollen-Collecting
,

65

On Bees' Tongues, and how They suck Honey
,

72

A Dreadful Parasite
,

77

{viii}

Amongst the Bees at Work
,

81

Ants, their Guests, and their Lodgers
,

88

How can an "Aculeate" be Recognized?
,

92

Males and Females
,

95

The Vagaries of Colour and Structure in the Sexes
,

100

The Distribution, Rarity, or Abundance of Various Species
,

105

On Bees' Wings
,

110

On Breeding Aculeates, etc.
,

113

On Colour
,

119

The Development of Insects from the Egg
,

124

On Structure
,

132

Index
,

141

{ix}

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS IN THE
TEXT

PAGE

Fig.  1.
Bombus
, larva and nymph: after Packard

11

,,    2.
Ammophila

22

,,  3-4. Spines on the tarsi of female
Ammophila

23

,,    5. Tubular entrance to hole of wasp

25

,,    6. Basal segments of ants

33

,,    7. Rose-leaf partially eaten by bees

52

,,    8. Tufted hairs of hind leg of
Andrena

67

,,    9. Corbicula of humble bee

67

,,  10-12. Cleaning apparatus of bees

69

,,  13-18. Hairs of bees, magnified

71

,,  19. Tongues of bees, magnified

73

,,  20. Diagram of tongue of bee

75

,,  21.
Stylops

77

,,  22.
Stylops
larva in abdominal cavity of bee

78

,,  23. Antennæ of "Keyhole" wasps

101

,,  24. Legs of male "Keyhole" wasps

101

,,  25. Tibia of male
Crabro cribrarius

103

,,  26. Antennæ of male
Crabro cribrarius

103

,,  27. Head of male and female
Crabro clypeatus

103

,,  28. Parts of the insect

133

{xi}

DESCRIPTION OF THE COLOURED
PLATES

PLATE A

Figs. 1, 2, 3.
Formica sanguinea Latr.
: male, female, and
worker. The host of
Lomechusa
(p.
89
), also
a slave-making species; makes irregular nests of dead leaves, etc.,
generally against a sloping bank.

Figs. 4, 5.
Mutilla europæa Linn.
: male and female. One of the
few British species of Aculeates where the female is wingless; found in
sandy places running in the sun.

Fig. 6.
Cerceris arenaria L.
: female; burrows in the sand, and
provisions its nest with beetles (p.
20
).

Fig. 7.
Ammophila sabulosa L.
: female; burrows in the sand,
provisions its nest with caterpillars, peculiar for its very elongated
waist (p.
22
).

Fig. 8.
Crabro cribrarius L.
: male; peculiar for its
paddle-like tibiæ and flattened antennæ (p.
103
).

Fig. 9.
Odynerus spinipes L.
: male; peculiar for the form of
its middle femora, which are cut out almost in two semicircles (p.
101
); female makes a tubular entrance to her nest (p.

25
).

PLATE B

Fig. 10.—
Colletes succinctus L.
: female; lines its cells
with a gluey material (p.
44
); colonizes in sandy
banks; host of
Epeolus rufipes
(fig.
19
).

{xii}

Fig. 11.
Sphecodes subquadratus Smith
: female; cuckoo of a
species of
Halictus
; female hibernates like its host (p.
17
).

Fig. 12.
Halictus lencozonius Schr.
: burrows in the ground; the
host of
Sphecodes pilifrons Thoms
(p.
17
).

Fig. 13.
Vespa crabro L.
: female (the Hornet), nests in hollow
trees; host of the rare beetle
Velleius dilatatus
(p.
38
).

Fig. 14.
Vespa vulgaris L.
: female: one of our commonest wasps;
nests usually in the ground (p.
35
); host of a
peculiar beetle (
Metœcus paradoxus
) (p.
38
)

Figs. 15, 16.
Andrena fulva Schr.
: male and female; the bee
which burrows in lawns, etc. (p.
9
); host of

Nomada ruficornis var. signata
(p.
15
).

Fig. 17.
Panurgus ursinus Gmel.
: Female; legs loaded with
pollen, burrows in hard sandy paths, etc. (p.
49
).
Males sleep curled up amongst the rays of yellow composite flowers.

Fig. 18.
Nomada ruficornis L. var. signata
: cuckoo of

Andrena fulva
(figs. 15 and 16).

Fig. 19.
Epeolus rufipes Thoms
: female; cuckoo of
Colletes
succinctus
(fig. 10).

PLATE C

Fig. 20.—
Megachile maritima Kirby
: female; burrows in the
ground, makes its cells of pieces of leaves, which it cuts out with its
mandibles; host of
Cœlioxys conoidea
.

Figs. 21, 22.
Cœlioxys conoidea Illig
: male and female;
cuckoo of
Megachile maritima
.

Fig. 23. Burrows of
Megachile Willughbiella Kirby
, in a piece
of rotten willow; each burrow originally contained six cells, but two of
the left-hand series have been lost.

{xiii}

PLATE D

Figs. 24 and 25.
Anthophora pilipes F.
: male and female. A
spring bee, the male of which may often be seen in gardens, darting from
flower to flower (p.
81
); while the female collects
pollen; it forms large colonies (p.
62
).

Fig. 26.
Melecta armata Pz.
: cuckoo of
Anthophora
pilipes
.

Fig. 27.
Anthidium manicatum L.
: invests its cells with the
down off the stems of labiate plants, which it strips off with its
mandibles (p.
50
).

Fig. 28.
Osmia bicolor Schr.
: female; nests in snail-shells,
which it sometimes covers up with small pieces of grass-stems till a
little mound is formed, resembling a diminutive ants' nest (p.
59
).

Fig. 29.
Bombus terrestris L.
: female. One of the commonest of
our Humble Bees; it nests in the ground. It is the host of
Psithyrus
vestalis
, which resembles it very closely in colour; it is this
species that was exhibited by Mr. Sladen at the Maidstone Agricultural
Hall (p.
41
).

Fig. 30.
Bombus lapidarius L.
: another common Humble Bee, also
an underground builder; it is the host of
Psithyrus rupestris
.

Fig. 31.
Psithyrus rupestris F.
: female; the cuckoo of

Bombus lapidarius
, which it closely resembles except for the
nearly black colour of the wings.

{1}

THE SUBJECT IN GENERAL

I think I ought here to say why I propose to limit myself to an
account of a certain portion only of the Hymenoptera. The reason for
this, in the first place, is that the section which I have selected is
the only one of which I have any special knowledge; it consists of the
bees, wasps, ants and sandwasps, four groups which make up the stinging
section of the order—or perhaps more accurately, which have poison
bags connected with their egg-laying apparatus or
ovipositor
.
Another reason for their selection lies in their nesting habits; these
enable one to get a further insight into their economy and ways than can
be obtained from those of almost any other group or order—at any
rate they make them comparatively easy to study; one can, so to say, find
these little creatures at home, whereas in most orders there seems to be
no definite home to which the
{2}
individuals may be traced; a great advantage
also in selecting the stinging groups for study is that they are
creatures of the spring and summer, and of the sunshine, so that the
weather which tempts them out to their duties is of the kind most
agreeable to those who wish to investigate their habits.

The habits of the hive bee have not been touched on, as so many
excellent treatises have been written on them that any observations here
would be superfluous.

Although these groups are distinguished by their stinging habits, it
is only the female that possesses a sting—the male is a most
harmless creature and quite incapable of injuring any one. A male wasp or
even a male hornet may be handled with absolute impunity, only it is wise
to be certain as to the sex of the individual before presuming to play
with it too much! A word here may perhaps be said about stinging. People
often talk about a gnat stinging or a stinging fly; it may be difficult
to define exactly what "to sting" means, but the writer has always
considered that a sting is inflicted by the tail end of the creature or a

{3}
bite
by the mouth. A fly or gnat no doubt inserts its proboscis into one's
flesh just as a wasp does its sting; but the actions of such opposite
parts of the body surely demand distinct names. As we have been alluding
to flies it may not be inappropriate to say here that all the creatures
we are going to consider have four membranous wings except the worker
ants and a very few forms which are comparatively seldom met with. By
this character they may at once be known from flies, which have only two
membranous wings. The large brown "drone flies", so often seen on the
windows of our rooms, especially in autumn, and which most people mistake
for hive bees, to which they certainly bear a considerable general
resemblance, may be detected at once by wanting the two hind wings of the
bee.

The "aculeate", or stinging, Hymenoptera, are divided into sections
and families according to their structure; but the groups which stand out
most clearly in regard to their habits are the solitary and social
species, the predaceous and non-predaceous and the inquilines or cuckoos.

{4}

The vast majority of the aculeate Hymenoptera are what are called
"solitary", i.e. one male and one female alone are interested in the
production of the nest; but there are also three "social"
groups—the ants, the true wasps, and the humble and hive bees.

These are called social because they form communities and all work
together towards the maintenance of the nest. In the social species there
are two forms of the females—the queens and the workers; these
latter have the ovaries imperfectly developed, and in the humble bees and
wasps they only differ outwardly from the fully developed females or
queens by being smaller. In the ants, however, the workers are wingless,
and of a very different form from that of the queen. The rôle of these
workers seems to be to do the general work of the nest; they have been
known to lay fertile eggs, but the resulting offspring has always been
male.

Between these conditions of solitary and social we know of no actually
intermediate stages. We do not seem to see any attempts on the part of
solitary bees to become social or vice versâ. The only condition known
which
{5}
could possibly be considered as intermediate
is shown in certain species where a number of individuals make their
nests close to each other in some particular bank, forming a colony.
These colonies are sometimes very extensive, and the burrows of the
individual bees very close together; it has also been shown that the
burrows sometimes unite—at the same time there seems to be no
positive evidence that there is any work done in the colony which could
be considered as done for the common good.

{6}

THE SOLITARY GROUPS

All the solitary kinds appear to feed themselves on vegetable juices,
honey, etc., but there is a well-marked division between those who
provision the cells of their offspring with insects, either fully
developed or in the larval stages, and those who provision them with the
pollen of flowers, honey, etc. The theory is that originally all fed
their cells with insects, but that by degrees the more progressive found
that the food which suited themselves would equally nourish their
offspring, and accordingly provided them with vegetable nourishment. We
find no intermediate stages. A certain class still goes on feeding on the
old principle. The members of this class are known as "
fossors
" or
diggers, while those which feed on the new principle are called
"
Anthophila
" or flower-lovers. These are not very happy names, as
many of the
Anthophila
dig out holes for their nests just
{7}
in the same
way as the
fossors
do, and many of the
fossors
are found in
flowers, apparently enjoying them just as much as a truly anthophilous
species would, although no doubt often with the ulterior object of
capturing some insect for their young! Still these names are known as
representing these two sections all over the world, and therefore it is
better to keep to them even if they are not as descriptive as one would
like them to be.

The
fossors
, or "diggers", have all comparatively short and
bifid tongues, and have, as a rule, little in the way of hairy covering,
and what hairs they have are simple and only in very rare instances
branched or feather-like. The hind legs of the females are not modified
in any way so as to enable them to collect pollen, their legs are usually
long and slender, and they are admirably adapted to their life habits of
hunting spiders, insects, etc., for their young.

On the other hand, the
Anthophila
or "flower-lovers", are
specially adapted for pollen collecting. Their tongues vary from a short
form like that of some
fossors
to the long tongues of the humble
bees. Their hairs are always plumose
{8}
or branched on some part of
the body and the hind legs of the females in most species are provided on
the tibia or shin with a special brush on which pollen may be collected.
In some of the long-tongued bees, however, this brush occurs on the
underside of the body instead of on the tibia. The pollen-collecting
arrangements of the different genera of the
Anthophila
and the
corresponding organs for cleaning off the pollen again are amongst the
most interesting instances of modification and adaptation: some of the
more striking of these will be mentioned later on. (See pp.
65

sqq.
)

{9}

THE SOLITARY BEES

The life-history of an ordinary pair of solitary bees is, roughly, as
follows: I will take for an example one of the spring species of

Andrena
. Many people know the little red bee, which for some
apparently unaccountable reason suddenly appears in myriads on their lawn
or gravel path, throwing up little mounds of finely powdered
earth—in this respect being quite different from worm casts, which
are formed of wet mould and the particles of which cling
together—sometimes causing considerable alarm as to the possible
effect on the lawn. These have hatched out from burrows made by their
parents in the previous year, the mouths of which have been filled up
with earth and therefore are quite invisible till the newly fledged bees
gnaw their way out. They, in their turn, are now making fresh burrows for
their own broods; possibly they infested some one else's lawn the year
before or were only in comparatively small
{10}
numbers on the lawn under
notice and so passed unrecognized. They may safely be left alone, as they
never seem to breed many consecutive years in one such locality: probably
the treatment of a lawn does not suit them, mowing and rolling upsetting
their arrangements. We will now consider these arrangements. The female
bee, so soon as she realizes that she is charged with the duty of
providing for her future offspring, makes a burrow in the ground, and the
earth thrown up from the tunnel forms the little heap which is so
observable; this burrow varies in depth from 6 to 12 inches and has short
lateral branches; each of these she shapes, more or less, into the form
of a cell, provisions it with a small mass of pollen mixed with honey for
the maintenance of the larva when hatched, and lays her egg; she then
seals up that cell and proceeds to the next, and in this way fills the
burrow up until pretty near the surface. The bee caterpillar when hatched
is a white grub-like creature which, after devouring the food provided
for it, becomes more or less torpid; it then makes its final change of
skin, after how long a period is probably uncertain, and appears in the
nymph stage.
{11}
Fig.
1. Bombus, larva and nymph: after Packard.

This stage corresponds to the chrysalis of a moth or butterfly, the
creature being shortened up and rather more like the perfect insect
compacted into the smallest form possible. People are often misled into
the idea that the caterpillar forms the chrysalis over its former self,
whereas the chrysalis has been all the time forming inside the
caterpillar and only shows itself when the final skin is shed; of course
some caterpillars spin a cocoon over themselves before they change their
skin, but then the true chrysalis is found inside the cocoon. A curious
fact connected with the change from the nymph to the perfect insect is
that this takes place sometimes as early as August in the year preceding
their appearance; so that cells dug up in August may contain fully
fledged insects which are not due to appear till April or May of the
following year. It is wonderful also how long life can be
{12}
sustained by
these creatures in the "full-fed larva" condition. Some years ago I
collected a number of pierced bramble stems in order to breed out some of
the small "sandwasps" which nest in them. On opening them in May, when
the perfect insects are generally ready to appear, I found that several
of the larvæ had rather shrunk up and had not changed into nymphs. These
I left in the stems, covering them up again, and they appeared as perfect
insects in the May of the following year.

The account given of the nesting habits of the above
Andrena
of
our lawns, etc., is more or less true of nearly all the solitary bees.
Their methods vary, some burrow in the ground, some in old wood, some in
snail shells, some in bramble stems or straws or the hollow stems of
various plants, some in holes or crevices in walls, etc., and their
methods of building their cells vary exceedingly: all of these are of
great interest and some display an ingenuity which is quite surprising.
Of these special nesting habits some of the most striking will be
mentioned later on.

Before leaving these general remarks on the
{13}
solitary bees the habits
of two genera must be specially noticed, as they differ in an essential
point from those of the others. These are known to entomologists under
the names of
Halictus
and
Sphecodes
.

In most species of these the males and females of the new brood are
not hatched out till after midsummer, and no work is done for the
provisioning of new burrows that autumn; but the female, after having
undertaken the duties of maternity, hibernates, i.e. goes back into a
burrow and lives there till the next spring, the males dying off before
the winter. In the spring the ♀ wakes up and does the necessary
work for the future brood just as any ordinary spring bee would—but
there are no attendant males—the duties of that sex having been
performed in the autumn. The larvæ contained in these burrows hatch out
after midsummer and therefore never spend a winter in the ground. In this
respect they resemble the social bees and wasps, about which more
hereafter; in the meanwhile a few words must be said about the cuckoos or
inquilines, which are perhaps the most interesting creatures of all.

{14}

THE CUCKOO BEES

These cuckoos live at the expense of their hosts. The mother of the
industrial brood makes her cell and provisions it, and lays her egg. The
cuckoo bee manages to enter also and lay her egg in the same cell, the
usual result being that the cuckoo devours most of the food instead of
the rightful offspring, which gradually gets starved and dies, the cuckoo
appearing in its place; but there have been cases, how frequent they are
is difficult to say, in which both offsprings have emerged.

The whole problem of the relationships between host and cuckoo is most
interesting. In some cases the cuckoos are so like their hosts that it is
difficult to tell one from the other, in others they are so unlike that
it is difficult to trace any resemblance between them. There are a great
number of different kinds of cuckoos, and most of them select a special
host to associate
{15}
with, and are never found except with that
species. There are, however, cases of cuckoos which visit the nests of
more than one host, and cases of hosts which are visited by several kinds
of cuckoos. In the short-tongued bees, with the exception of

Halictus
and
Sphecodes
, the cuckoos are quite unlike their
hosts both in form and colour. In the
Andrenas
(the lawn bee being
one of them) the hosts are clothed with reddish, or brown and black,
hairs, and are of a more or less stout build (
pl.
B
, 15, 16). The cuckoos are elegant in shape, almost devoid of hairs,
and most of them are striped with yellow or brown across the body so that
they present a wasp-like appearance (
pl. B
, 18).
Species more unlike one another than host and cuckoo one could hardly
imagine; still this stranger seems to get access to the nest of its host
without opposition. In a colony of
Andrena
one may see the cuckoos
(which rejoice in the name of
Nomada
or wanderers) flying about
among the females of the industrious bee, and no alarm or concern appears
to be felt by the latter. As we go up in the scale of bees, i.e. towards
the more specialized, and arrive at those with longer tongues, the
{16}
cuckoos
are found as a rule to resemble their hosts more closely, both in colour
and structure, and when we reach the social genus
Bombus
(i.e. the
humble bees) we find the cuckoos so like their hosts (
pl. D
, 30, 31) that even entomologists of experience
mistake one for the other.
Apis
(the hive bee) has no cuckoo. It
seems to be theoretically probable that both cuckoo and host once
originated from common parents; this is suggested by the similarity of
structure of certain parts of both host and cuckoo, even in cases where
they are otherwise most dissimilar.
Andrena
and
Nomada
, for
instance, which are very unlike, as stated above, agree in both having
very feeble stings and in possessing three conspicuous spines on the
upper and posterior edge of the orbit of the larva. Also, although

Andrena
the host has a short tongue, and
Nomada
, its
cuckoo, a long one, the appendages (
labial palpi
) of the latter's
tongue are framed on the same plan as those of the tongue of

Andrena
, and are quite unlike those of the other long-tongued
bees. On the other hand, the cuckoos of the social species resemble them
so closely in structure as well as
{17}
appearance that it is
more necessary to search for points of difference than of similarity.
There is only one case known of a cuckoo wasp, and that resembles its
host even more closely than do the cuckoos of the humble bees. All these
points certainly suggest the probability that the social bees and wasps
and their cuckoos adopted different habits at a much more recent date
than the solitary species, and therefore have not had so much time to
become differentiated in structure. The only short-tongued bees which
have cuckoos of similar structure are the species of
Halictus
(
pl. B
, 12); their cuckoos,
Sphecodes
(
pl. B
, 11), are closely allied to them, but then

Halictus
and
Sphecodes
are most peculiar genera; although
short-tongued, their females spend the winter in the earth, as do the
social bees and wasps (see p.
13
), and they
colonize largely, which may prove to be a step towards socialism.

{18}

THE FOSSORS OR DIGGERS

In many respects the insects of this section adopt the same methods as
the solitary bees so far as the construction of their nests is concerned,
but the food brought home for their offspring is animal instead of
vegetable. In order to supply their larvæ with "fresh meat" these little
creatures, when they have captured a suitable prey, sting it in such a
way that it becomes paralyzed, but does not die; after provisioning a
cell with the necessary number of these paralytics, the mother lays her
egg on one of them or amongst them, and closes up the cell. In
consequence of this wonderful maternal instinct, foresight, or whatever
the faculty may be, the larva when hatched finds fresh food ready for
consumption. The various species provision their nests with different
kinds of foods, and some appear to be most fastidious in their selection,
and are said never to err in choosing
{19}
species of some
particular family, thereby displaying a discernment worthy of any
advanced entomologist. Some provision their cells with beetles, some with
grasshoppers, others with spiders, caterpillars, plant lice, etc.

The strength possessed by the female fossor must be proportionately
enormous, as she can bring back to her burrow, after paralyzing them,
insects many times her own size. It is a most interesting sight to see
the excitement and flurry of the captor as it tries to drag along some
huge prey to its nest. I remember seeing one dragging along a good-sized
caterpillar, of a noctuid moth, over rather rough ground: the poor
creature had a difficult job; it had to go backwards itself, and pull the
body of the caterpillar, after it—its behaviour was very much like
that of an ant which has a large burden; at times it would loose its hold
of it and try it from some other quarter; however, by degrees, by pulling
and tugging, the prey was safely brought home, but the force expended
must have been very great. Many species, however, hunt insects of much
smaller size than themselves, and it is those which take a fancy to
grasshoppers and
{20}
caterpillars which seem to be the most
doughty in deeds of force. One, a very rare kind in this country, sets
its affection especially on the honey bee as a prey; the two insects are
about equal in size, but the hive bee must be a dangerous foe to attack,
and one would have thought as likely to sting its captor as its captor
would be to sting it; also one would imagine that a hive bee, unless
thoroughly paralyzed, would be a dangerous subject for a juvenile larva
to commence making a meal upon! but whether the venture ever turns out
unsatisfactorily there are no data to show, so far as I am aware. The
larvæ must vary very much in their tastes; one can imagine that a nice
juicy caterpillar, or even a good fat grasshopper, may be appetizing and
easily assimilated, but one can equally fancy that the larvæ, who wake up
to find their food consisting of small hard beetles, may feel more or
less resentment against their parents' ideas of dainties for the young!
Still they seem to thrive on it, and come out eventually as exact
likenesses of their parents. A large number of the fossors inhabit dry
sandy wastes, such as the dunes along the sea coast at Deal, Lowestoft,

{21}
etc.; many of these, when they leave their
burrows, throw up some sand over the hole so as completely to cover it;
how these insects find the spot again after a lengthy chase after spiders
or other prey is a marvel; and yet those who have observed carefully say
that they come home from long distances with unerring precision. No sense
of which we have any knowledge, however accentuated, seems to explain
this. To be able to arrive back at a home in an extensive arid sandy
plain, where no outward sign indicates its whereabouts, must surely
require perception of a different nature from any of those with which we
are endowed. Some fossors are subject to the depredations of cuckoos,
just as the solitary bees are, but their cuckoos are rarely of aculeate
origin. The only ones which I have had any opportunity of studying are
the species which nest in bramble stems. The cuckoos which associate with
them are some of the smaller jewel flies and
Ichneumons
: the
habits of both these differ from those of the aculeate cuckoos, the jewel
flies devouring the larva of the aculeate and the
Ichneumon
laying
its eggs in it. The fossors
{22}
Fig.
2.
vary exceedingly in size, shape and
colour. Our largest species are about an inch long and our smallest about
the eighth of an inch, nearly all having the body where it joins the
thorax constricted into a very narrow waist; this is sometimes of
considerable length. In one genus known to entomologists by the name

Ammophila
(fig. 2) or "lover of the sand", the waist is
practically the longest part of the body, so that looking at one sideways
as it flies along, one could almost be deceived into thinking that there
were two insects, one following the other (cf.
pl.
A
, fig. 7). In colour, there seem to be three dominant schemes: Black
(cf.
pl. B
, fig. 17); black with a red band across
the body (cf.
pl. A
, fig. 7); and black banded with
yellow, like a wasp (cf.
pl. A
, figs. 6 and 8,
etc.) In some the yellow bands may not be complete, and appear only as
spots on each side of the body segments, or the red band may be almost
obliterated, or the black species may
{23}
Fig.
3.

Fig.
4.
be more or less variegated
with yellow spots on the head and thorax, but as a general rule all our
species fall into one or other of these colour schemes. The females of
some of our sand frequenting species have beautiful combs on their front
feet, each joint of the tarsi having one or more long spines on its
external side (figs. 3 and 4). These are of importance to them in their
burrowing, as they enable them to move with one kick of their front leg a
considerable amount of the dry sand in which they make their nests.
Although sandy commons, etc., are the resort of many fossors, others may
be found burrowing in wood or in hard pathways or banks; in fact, like
most other insects, some of their members may be found almost
anywhere.

{24}

THE SOLITARY WASPS

The ordinary wasps are acquaintances of every one, but the solitary or
keyhole wasps are not so well known, although they are far from uncommon.
They are little narrow black insects striped across the body with yellow,
belonging to the genus
Odynerus
(
pl. A
, 9),
and might hardly be recognized as belonging to the same family as the
true or social wasps. Still they have considerable powers of stinging,
and fold their wings lengthwise when at rest like their larger relatives.
I dare say some people may have noticed that a wasp's wing sometimes
assumes a narrow straight form, quite unlike what it is when expanded.
This is due to the wasp being able to fold its wing lengthwise like a
fan. The wasp tribe are, so far as I know, the only stinging Hymenoptera
which have this power.

Fig.
5.

They make their nests of mud, etc., in crevices of walls, in banks, in
plant stems, and often
{25}
in most inconvenient places, such as
keyholes, etc. Some of the solitary wasps have a very curious habit of
making a tubular entrance to their hole. These may sometimes be seen
projecting from sandy banks. The tube is composed of a series of little
pellets of mud, which the wasp by degrees, with the help of its mouth
secretions, sticks together till a sort of openwork curved tube of
sometimes an inch long is formed (fig. 5). This curve is directed
downwards, so that the wasp has to creep up it before reaching the actual
orifice of the nest. It looks as if the first shower of rain would wash
the whole structure away, and I have very little doubt that it often does
so. The object of these tubes is difficult to appreciate. There is a bee
on the continent which makes straight chimneys above its holes, so as to
raise the entrance above the surrounding herbage; possibly these solitary
wasps once required
{26}
their tubes also for some such purpose, and
have continued on truly conservative lines to build them long after all
usefulness has passed away from the habit; anyhow they are very
interesting and beautiful structures. I have found the tubes of one of
our rarer species projecting perpendicularly out of the level sand, but
even then the tubes were curved over at the end, so that the wasp had to
go up and down again before entering its actual hole. The Rev. F. D.
Morice in 1906 found the tubes of the same species in numbers projecting
from the walls of an old stuccoed cottage situated close to the locality
where I found mine, so it is evident that more than one situation suits
its requirements. The solitary wasps provision their cells with
caterpillars, stinging them in the same way as the fossors do. One very
peculiar genus, of one species only in this country, has its body much
narrowed at the waist by reason of the constricted form of the basal
segment; it makes a little round nest of clay which it suspends from a
twig of heather or other plant. This species is rarely met with except on
the heathery commons of Surrey, Hants, Dorset, etc. The
{27}
solitary wasps
are subject to the attacks of cuckoos belonging to the jewel fly or

Chrysis
tribe; these behave differently from those belonging to
the aculeate groups, as their larvæ do not eat the food laid up for the
wasp, but wait till the wasp larva has finished feeding up, and then
devour it. Unlike as these cuckoos are to their hosts in their brilliant
metallic coloration, etc., they have structural characters curiously like
theirs, so that even here a common parentage in bygone generations may be
reasonably suspected. At present, however, they are placed, except by a
few systematists, in quite distinct families of the Hymenoptera.

In general form these solitary wasps resemble the fossors more than
the bees; they have mostly short tongues (I think all our British ones
have), and their hairs are simple or more or less spirally twisted.

{28}

THE SOCIAL GROUPS

The social bees are certainly the most highly specialized of the

Anthophila
, and the social wasps of the
Diploptera
or
insects with folded wings. The ants occupy a less definite position: they
would seem to be the outcome of specialization among the fossors, only
they feed their young with vegetable juices and not with animal as the
latter do. They are always kept as a separate tribe under the name

Heterogyna
, but for our purposes the better known word "ant" will
suffice.

The hive bee and the social wasps are the only British Hymenoptera
which adopt the hexagonal cell-formation in their nests, the bee
fashioning its cells in wax, the wasps and hornet in masticated wood or
paper. The formation of ants' nests is far less regular, being composed
of irregular passages, called galleries, and open spaces, no doubt built
on a plan, but probably
{29}
in respect of plan no two nests are exactly
alike. The humble bees again differ from either in their nesting habits:
the female in the spring seeks out a mouse's nest or other suitable
foundation of moss, etc., in or on the surface of the ground, according
to the species. This she lines with wax, deposits a heap of pollen, and
lays her eggs in it. She also makes waxen cells for honey, but these are
not hexagonal and symmetrical as are those of the hive bee, but are more
like little pots, and are known as "honey pots".

It must be borne in mind that the economic arrangements of the wasps
and humble bees only last for a single season, whereas those of the ant
and hive bee exist for many years. In consequence of this the swarming
habits belong exclusively to the ants and hive bee. That of the hive bee
is well known to all, and most people must have observed the swarms of
male and female ants which fill the air on some sultry summer or autumn
evening. Thousands of these must perish, but a certain number of the
females accept the responsibility of starting a fresh nest, and so the
ant population is kept up.
{30}
It will be seen from these remarks that the
three social groups are very distinct in their methods of nest making,
and have really very little in common except the social habit. The humble
bees have their cuckoos; one species of wasp has a cuckoo, and there is a
possible case of a cuckoo amongst the continental ants, but this has not
yet been observed in this country. The ants harbour so many species of
insects in their nests besides their own family that it is difficult to
form an idea as to whether the case in question is at all analogous to
that of host and cuckoo in the other aculeates or not.

{31}

THE ANTS

These little creatures are probably the most intelligent of all the
insects—and yet at times they seem to wander about almost
aimlessly. A worker may be found with an insect or something which it is
eagerly dragging along and drops probably from fear. It appears anxious
to regain its hold of it, but goes about in all sorts of wrong directions
before it again finds it, it may be to make sure its enemy is clear away
before it resumes operations, but the effect to the ordinary onlooker is
one of sheer incapacity—at the same time the wonderful habits of
the tribe, the way in which they keep plant lice for their larvæ, their
methods of carrying each other, their nest-building, and the slave-making
instincts of some of the species, show an intelligence surpassed by no
other family of insects. Their nests are formed in very various ways: the
same species even will sometimes nest under a stone and sometimes make
ant hills; some
{32}
of the large species make their nests of
huge heaps of fir needles, and number 400 to 500 thousand in one
nest—others live in quite small communities, nesting in bramble
stems, old rotten wood, moss, etc. One little species, rare with us,
lives in the walls of other ants' nests, just as mice live in the walls
of our houses; another quite small species lives apparently on friendly
terms with the common large red or horse ant, and may be found running
about amongst them, on and in their nests, but, so far as I know, nothing
is known as to how its young are reared. There is a curious division in
the family between the ants that have true stings and those which have
not. The large ants of our fir woods can bite and are able to eject
poison through the apical opening of the body into the wound they create,
but these as well as the larger and smaller black ants and some others
have the sting undeveloped, whereas some of our small species have a
sting which they can use with considerable effect; this difference in
habit is accompanied by a difference in the structure in the basal
segments of the body. In the stingless species the basal segment is
reduced
{33}
Fig.
6
to a flat upright transverse
scale (fig. 6, 1); in the stinging ants two segments at the base are
reduced to nodes (fig. 6, 3). There is an exception in the case of one
little rare genus,
Ponera
, which has only the basal abdominal
segment reduced to a scale although a much thicker scale than in the
others (fig. 6, 2), and yet which has a distinct sting. These
arrangements give the body very free movement so that the tail can be
bent forward till it reaches the head. Another curious distinction
between the stingers and non-stingers is that the larvæ of the former
spin cocoons and those of the latter do not; the larvæ of
Formica
fusca
occasionally do not do so, but they are an exception to the
rule. Cocoon spinning seems to involve the larvæ in some difficulties, as
without the help of the worker ants they are often unable to extract
themselves from their prison. This is a condition which does not, I
believe, exist in other groups. In the stingless ants there is a curious
difference in habit between the
{34}
species of the genus
Formica
, where,
according to Forel, the workers do not follow in line over unknown
ground, and frequently carry one another, the one carried being rolled up
under the head of the other, and the species of
Lasius
, where the
workers follow one another in line, but never carry each other. Among the
stinging ants another method of carrying occurs in certain genera. The
porter seizes the one she wishes to carry by the external edge of one of
her mandibles and then throws her over her back, so that she lies along
the back of her porter with her ventral aspect uppermost and her legs and
antennæ folded as in the nymph state. Neither of these methods sounds
very comfortable, but then probably an ant's idea of comfort and our own
may be very different.

Lord Avebury, in his
Ants, Bees and Wasps
, tells us that he has
known a male of
Myrmica ruginodis
live for nine months, although
no doubt, as he says, they generally die almost immediately, and he has
known queen ants to live for seven years, and workers, which he had in
his nest, for six years.

{35}

THE SOCIAL WASPS

Of these we have only seven different kinds, and with the exception of
the hornet they are all very much alike. One often hears people say that
they have seen such a large wasp that they think it must have been a
hornet, but no one who has ever seen a hornet could mistake a wasp for
one. A hornet is
red-brown
with yellow markings (
pl. B
, 13), a wasp is
black
and yellow, and
altogether a less formidable-looking creature (
pl.
B
, 14). Even a queen wasp is not so large as a small worker hornet.
The hornet nests in hollow trees, our three commoner wasps nest, as a
rule, in the ground, but occasionally in outhouses, under roofs, etc. One
of the others as a rule makes its nest in shrubs, but occasionally in the
ground, another always nests in a bush or shrub, preferring a gooseberry
or currant bush, and the only remaining one is a cuckoo of one of the
ground species. The gooseberry-bush
{36}
wasp is not a common
species in the south, but in the midlands and north it is abundant. Wasps
will eat most things, but are especially fond of syrups and sweets. One
species,
Vespa sylvestris
, which seldom enters our houses, is very
partial to the flowers of
Scrophularia
(Figwort). One rarely finds
a plant of this in full blossom without finding its attendant wasps. I
have seen other species of wasps also visiting it, but
sylvestris

is practically sure to be there. The diet which wasps provide for their
larvæ is probably a mixed one, but consists largely of insects. Dr.
Ormerod says that a microscopic examination of the contents of a larval
stomach shows "the mass to consist of scales, hairs and other fragments
of insects, hairs of vegetables and other substances less easy of
recognition."

Plate B.

10.
Colletes succinctus
,
female.
11.

Sphecodes subquadratus
,
female.
12.
Halictus
leucozonius
,
female.
13.
Vespa crabro
,
female.

14.
Vespa vulgaris
,
female.
15.
Andrena fulva
,

male.
16.
Andrena fulva
,
female.
17.
Panurgus
banksianus
,
female.
18.
Nomada ruficornis
,
var.
signata
,
female.
19.
Epeolus rufipes
,

female.

[
face p. 36.

{37}

Wasps do not store honey in their nest; the papery nature of their
cells would make such storage impossible. I dare say some of my readers
will have noticed wasps sitting in the sun on a wooden paling busily
engaged apparently eating something—they are really pulling off
little fibres of wood which they chew up into a substance fitted for the
walls of their cells; they will also chew paper, and the experiment has
been tried of giving them coloured papers, which resulted in stripes of
colour appearing in their nests. The different species vary somewhat in
the architecture of their nests; but they are built very much on the same
general plan. The population of some underground nests is very large. The
Rev. G. A. Crawshay estimated the number in a large nest of
Vespa
vulgaris
, which he took on September 20, 1904, at about 12,000; of
these he actually counted, including eggs and larvæ, 11,370, and
estimated the rest as having left the nest and escaped, so that anyhow
the computation cannot be far wrong. This, however, was probably a very
large nest. The cuckoo wasp (
Vespa austriaca
), formerly known as

V. arborea
, is an associate of
Vespa rufa
; its habits had
been suspected for a long time, but Mr. Robson set all doubts at rest by
finding the nymphs of the cuckoo in the actual nest of
rufa
. It is
a rare species in the south, but far from uncommon as one goes north, and
also in Ireland, where the relationship of the host and cuckoo have been

{38}
carefully studied by Prof. Carpenter and Mr.
Pack Beresford.
Vespa vulgaris
has a beetle parasite, but this is
somewhat of a rarity. This creature
Metœcus paradoxus
lays
its egg in the cell of the wasp, and enters the body of the larva,
eventually entirely devouring it. The hornet also has a beetle associate,
but this is a great rarity. It is a large black species of the "Devil's
coach horse" or "Cock tail" tribe (
Velleius dilatatus
), but in
what relation it stands to the hornet beyond inhabiting its nest is not
known.

{39}

THE HUMBLE BEES

Of these beautiful creatures we have thirteen kinds in this country.
Their velvety clothing and bright colours make them the favourites of
most people. They are most industrious and may be seen on the wing from
early morning often till quite late on summer evenings, whereas the
solitary bees do not, as a rule, commence work till nine or ten in the
morning, except in very hot weather, and generally retire about four or
five p.m. There is an idea prevalent that humble bees do not sting, but
this is fallacious. They can sting pretty severely, but I do not think
they are so ready to use their defensive weapon as a wasp or hive bee is.
The length of the tongue in these creatures makes them of great value to
the farmer and gardener, as they can fertilize the red clover and
probably other flowers which require a longer tongue to reach the nectary
than is possessed by the hive bee.
{40}
In New Zealand, when
first the red clover was introduced from this country, it was found
impossible to fertilize it, and humble bees had to be sent out. Now they
are established there its fertilization is carried on quite successfully.
The humble bees are divided into two natural groups, the underground
species, i.e. those that make a subterranean nest, and the carder bees,
as they have been called, which make a nest on the surface of the ground.
The former live in much larger communities and are far more aggressive
and pugnacious than the latter. They also feed their young, according to
Mr. F. W. L. Sladen, of Ripple Court, in a different way. The carder bees
"form little pockets or pouches of wax at the side of a wax-covered mass
of growing larvæ into which the workers drop the pellets of pollen direct
from their hind tibiæ. The pollen storers, on the contrary, store the
newly gathered pollen in waxen cells, made for the purpose, or in old
cocoons, specially set apart to receive it, from which it is taken and
given to the larvæ mixed with honey through the mouths of the nurse-bees
as required." As the author remarks, the methods of the underground
{41}
species
more resemble those of the hive bee than do those of the carder bees. Mr.
Sladen has made many experiments in trying to domesticate humble bees,
and succeeded so far with
Bombus terrestris
(
pl.
D
, 29, our common black and yellow banded species with a tawny tail)
as to get it to breed in captivity, and in 1899 was able to show nests in
full work at the Maidstone agricultural show, the bees coming in and out
of the building to their nest. An interesting case of one of the carder
bees (
Bombus agrorum
) is recorded by F. Smith. It invaded a wren's
nest, heaping up its pollen, etc., amongst the eggs of the bird, till the
parent bird was forced to desert the nest. The underground species are
more subject to the attacks of cuckoos than the carder bees. Altogether
the humble bees afford an excellent subject for study, as they appear to
be amenable to treatment, and to any one who could give time and careful
attention to them many interesting problems connected with them and not
yet understood might have light thrown upon them. Dead humble bees are
often found in numbers in a mutilated state, under lime trees. These
{42}
have
been caught after they have filled themselves with honey, and become
torpid in consequence, by the great tomtit and possibly other birds. The
bird pecks a hole in the insect's thorax, enjoys the honey it has eaten
and then drops the quivering body which falls to the ground. I once had
the opportunity of seeing this slaughter going on, and was able to detect
the great tomtit as the murderer.

In colour the humble bees vary remarkably, the variation occurring
chiefly in the females. This variation is not so noticeable in this
country, although in many species even here the variability is very
great, but when we trace a common species such as
terrestris
,
which varies very little here, over a large area such as the Palæarctic
region its liveries are so diverse that its females have been treated as
belonging to many different species. In the Siberian district its yellow
bands become of a pale, almost whitish or straw colour, and the whole
appearance of the insect is altered. If, instead of going north, we go to
the Mediterranean region we find a large, fine form tolerably common,
with bright yellow hairs on the legs. In Corsica
{43}
again we find a quite
different form; entirely black except for the bright red hairs on the
apex of the body, and bright red tibiæ, clothed with red hairs. In the
Canaries another coloration occurs: the whole insect is black with the
exception of the apex of the body which is clothed with white hairs; but
in all these the male varies comparatively little. In the Siberian and
Canary forms it resembles the female, but in the others it varies very
little from some varieties we find here. A rather similar series of
varieties occurs in
Bombus hortorum
, another species little liable
to variation here. In Italy and south-east Europe a form with entirely
black body and black wings occurs, and in Corsica a black form with
reddish hairs on the apical segments. The male keeps throughout very
constant to its normal coloration. The tendency to vary towards an
entirely black form seems to exist in nearly all the species, although in
Britain black varieties of some are very rare.

{44}

THE BEES WITH BIFID TONGUES

In this country we have only two genera in which the tongue is bifid
at the apex, and on this account they are kept together as close allies
in our classification. They are, however, very different in general
appearance. One of these groups is called
Colletes
, on account of
its habit of lining its cells with a gluey material, the other,

Prosopis
, on account of the markings on the face. The various
kinds of
Colletes
are densely clothed on the head and thorax with
brownish hairs, and the segments of the body have whitish bands composed
of a dense, tight-fitting, duvet of hairs (
pl. B
,
10). There is in this country only one exception, a large insect like a
hive bee, but rarely met with, its headquarters being the Wallasey
Sandhills near Liverpool, and other localities in Lancashire. All the
species tend to colonize; some building in huge colonies
{45}
in sandy
cuttings, etc. They are preyed upon by a pretty little cuckoo bee called

Epeolus
(
pl. B
, 19), which is black,
ornamented with brownish red and whitish spots. One of our best known
species,
Colletes fodiens
, can often be found in abundance on the
heads of ragwort along the sea-coast in July.

The other genus
Prosopis
is outwardly entirely unlike

Colletes
: its species are nearly all very small coal-black
insects, with scarcely any noticeable hairs, rather unusually narrow and
cylindrical in form; they emit a peculiar, agreeably scented fluid when
handled; in the males the face is almost always white or yellow, in the
females there is generally a yellow spot on each side near the eye. These
little creatures are especially fond of burrowing in bramble stems. They
like those which have been cut off in trimming the hedges, because in
them the pith is exposed and they can burrow their way into it without
gnawing through the wood. If any one, going along a hedge which has been
trimmed, containing a lot of brambles, in the autumn or winter, would
examine the cut-off ends they would soon find some with holes in them.
These
{46}
may be the work of
Prosopis
, but
there are other bees and fossors which also burrow in this way. So the
stems should be brought home and opened. Then the
Prosopis
cells
may be known by the fine membranous pellicle which surrounds them, but
possibly even then a little jewel-bee cuckoo may be found in possession
of the cell, instead of the rightful owner. When these little bees emerge
they are generally to be found on wild mignonette, bramble flowers or
those of the wild parsley tribe. Some are very common, others of great
rarity. The males of this genus seem to have a peculiar tendency to
develop eccentricities in the shape of the first joint of the antennæ, or
feelers, some having it expanded and concave, others rounded but
thickened towards the apex; in only one British species,
P.
cornuta
, does the female show any special peculiarity of form, but in
this the face is produced on each side between the eyes into a distinct
horn-shaped process. In the females there is scarcely any indication of
pollen brush, and for this reason they used to be considered as
possessors of cuckoo instincts, but there is now no doubt of their
industrious habits; but
{47}
there is no other genus of industrious bees
in this country, with the exception of
Ceratina
, with so little
specialization for pollen collecting.

{48}

THE BEES WITH POINTED TONGUES

All the genera, except the two mentioned in the last chapter, belong
to this section, which comprises a variety of very different styles of
bees, beginning with the short spear-shape-tongued species and ascending
to the long-tongued species, which are considered to culminate in the
hive bee. The habits of these genera vary very greatly in some respects;
special notice has been or will be given of
Halictus
(
pl. B
, 12) and
Sphecodes
(
B
, 11),
Andrena
(
B
, 15,
16),
Nomada
(
B
, 18) and the other cuckoos,

Osmia
(
D
, 28) and
Anthophora
(
D
, 24, 25) and the leaf-cutting bees, but there are
several other genera which deserve a passing notice, although their
habits are not so peculiar as those of the specially selected ones.

Cilissa
, which is a very close ally of
Andrena
, is peculiar
in having the hairs of the tongue erect and arranged almost in
bottle-brush fashion. Its habits are much like those of
{49}
Andrena
.

Dasypoda
, so called on account of the enormously long hairs of the
pollen brushes of the legs in the female, is one of our most beautiful
bees; it is of moderate size, a little more than half an inch long, with
a brown haired thorax, and a black body with white apical bands on the
segments; the hind legs are rather unusually long and the brush is
composed of very long bright fulvous hairs, and when the bee returns home
laden with pollen it is, as F. Smith says, "sufficiently singular to
attract the attention of the most apathetic observer." It burrows in
sandy places much after the fashion of
Andrena
, etc. The male is a
different looking insect, entirely covered with yellowish hairs.

Panurgus
(
pl. B
, 17) is a curious genus of
coal-black bees, whose females have bright yellow pollen brushes on their
hind legs; they visit yellow composite flowers and the males often sleep
curled up amongst their rays; they are most active bees, and burrow
generally in hard pathways. I was watching a large colony of one of the
species near Chobham in the end of June—they were burrowing in a
gravel path, under which the soil was of a black sandy nature; the path
was scattered all over with little black
{50}
hillocks of sand, and
seemed alive with bees. It was showery weather, and occasionally the
hillocks were washed nearly flat and a lot of sand must have entered
their burrows—however, as soon as the sun came out again they
cleaned out their holes and returned to their work.
Panurgus
is
most businesslike in its pollen collecting; it flies in a rapid headlong
way into a flower, and seems to do its best to bury itself, with a
remarkable amount of action as if it was in a great hurry, and often
bustles out of it again almost immediately and goes on to the next. Its
methods suggest that it does more work in five minutes than any other bee
would do in ten.

Another genus,
Anthidium
(
pl. D
, 27),
this time one of the long-tongued bees, is peculiar in having the male
larger than the female. Both sexes are black, variegated with yellow
markings and spots, but the male is more ornate in this respect than the
female and also has a peculiarly shaped body, which is unusually flat,
curving downwards towards the apex, which is armed with five teeth, two
bent ones on the sixth segment and three on the seventh. The female
collects pollen on the underside of its body and collects the
{51}
down off the
stems of various plants, especially those of the dead nettle or "labiate"
tribe, with which it invests its cells. I cannot do better than quote the
following from F. Smith: "This is the social bee which White in his
History of Selbourne has so well described in the following words: 'There
is a sort of wild bee frequenting the Garden Campion for the sake of its
tomentum, which probably it turns to some purpose in the business of
nidification. It is very pleasant to see with what address it strips off
the pubes running from the top to the bottom of a branch and shaving it
bare with the dexterity of a hoop shaver; when it has got a vast bundle,
almost as large as itself, it flies away, holding it secure between its
chin and fore legs.'"

{52}

LEAF-CUTTING BEES

Fig. 7.

These are amongst the specially interesting of the bees in their
habits. They are dull-brown coloured creatures rather like a stout hive
bee in form (
pl. C
, 20). They all collect pollen on
the underside of their body. They burrow either in decayed wood or in the
ground, but they make their cells of pieces of leaves which they cut off
from rose bushes or other plants; these cells when completed are
wonderful works of art. Probably some of my readers may have noticed rose
leaves with semicircular pieces cut out of them, and often with almost
circular ones; this is the work of the leaf cutter (fig. 7).

Plate C.

20.
Megachile maritima
,
female
. 21.

Cœlioxys conoidea
,
male
. 22.
Cœlioxys
conoidea
,
female
. 23.
Nest of Megachile
willughbiella.

[
face p. 52.

{53}

She alights on a leaf, holds on to the edge of the piece she wants to
cut off with her legs, and then cuts it out by means of her jaws, or
mandibles; as soon as it is cut free she uses her wings and so prevents
herself from falling, and goes off with the cut off piece safely held
under her body by her legs. I have frequently seen bees flying home with
their leafy burden, and once or twice I have seen them cutting the pieces
out. They cut round the piece they select with great rapidity—the
marvel is that they can arrange so exactly as not to fall when the last
attachment is removed. The pieces they cut have to be of several shapes
in order to build up the cell they require; some are more or less lozenge
shaped, some almost circular; the cells they make are somewhat
thimble-shaped. The lozenge-shaped pieces are used to build up the sides
and lower end of the cell, and the circular pieces to close it in with at
the top; it is all cemented together with a gluey substance excreted by
the bee. The burrows of the leaf-cutters are made, as stated above,
either in the ground or in rotten wood. I have never had a subterranean
nest to examine, but have had several nests in rotten wood under my
notice, one of which is now before me (
pl. C
, 23).
It is in a piece of very
{54}
soft willow, almost in a touchwood
condition. So that by carefully cutting away the wood I have been able to
expose the whole series of cells. Two distinct burrows run almost
parallel to each other; both of them are slightly curved and each has
contained six cells; these are about half an inch long, and they fit one
over another in the tube as closely as possible so as to look like two
long thick green worms. Each cell is composed of many pieces of leaf, and
the final plug which closes the cell is often made of several rounds of
leaf one over the other. The amount of labour taken by the mother bee to
make these cells must be enormous. The cells are provisioned like those
of any other solitary bee with pollen, etc., and the egg is laid upon it.
Most of the leaf-cutters have their attendant cuckoos, which are rather
smaller than themselves, of a deep black with white bands on the sides of
the body. The female has a very pointed tail, and the male's body ends in
a series of spine-like projections (
pl. C
, 21,
22).

{55}

OSMIA AND ITS HABITS

I have tried as much as possible to avoid scientific names, but the
misfortune is that there are hardly any popular names in use which can be
attached for certain to any particular species, and unless this can be
done it is of no use using vague names like the "Carpenter Bee", the
"Mason Bee", etc. There are many carpenter bees and many mason bees, and
though their habits may be alike in this one particular they differ among
themselves in the way they use their tools, and it is necessary to know
which one we are talking about. It is a common thing to hear people
inveighing against Latin names, etc., but they forget that there are no
English ones in use, and what is more important, that Greek and Latin
names are common property to all nations, so that we can all know what we
are talking about, whereas if we call an insect by an English name and
the Russians
{56}
call it by a Russian name, the difficulty of
coming to a mutual understanding is very great. This is only an aside to
justify the use of classical names. I quite feel that for popular use in
this country a good series of English names might be useful, but we have
not got one, and it would require a great deal of care and thought to
frame a nomenclature which would really be useable by the persons who
require it.

I have made these remarks here because
Osmia
is a genus whose
members vary very much in their habits, and some species of which, like
sensible beings, adapt their habits to their surroundings, so that no
name such as carpenter bee, etc., would apply to all the species, or, as
a rule, even to one.
Osmia rufa
especially adopts several methods
of nesting. This little bee is clothed more or less all over with
yellowish hairs; it is compact in shape like all the other species of

Osmia
, and like them collects its pollen on the underside of the
body. It may sometimes be seen flying up and down the walls of a house
looking for a crevice to build in, but it is not the least particular as
to where to form its cells. In one memorable case the female selected a
flute
{57}
which had been left in a garden-arbour. The
bee constructed fourteen cells in the tube of the instrument, commencing
its first cell a quarter of an inch below the mouthhole. The flute is
preserved in the Natural History Museum at South Kensington. At other
times this species burrows in the ground, at others it makes its cells in
crevices of old walls; it has been known to build in a lock, and is said
sometimes to inhabit snail shells. Other species of
Osmia
almost
always burrow in banks, but in no case does a habit seem to be uniformly
adopted by a species. One well known and rare species,
Osmia
leucomelana
, is a regular bramble-stick species, tunnelling down the
pith in the centre of the stalks, but I once found it to my surprise in
fair numbers nesting in a sandy bank. Other species again, as a rule,
select snail shells to build in; they find an old disused shell lying
about in some sheltered place and adapt it to their purposes, commencing
their cells singly in the narrow whorls of the shell and side by side as
they approach its mouth, i.e. if the shell be a wide-mouthed one like the
common garden snail (
Helix aspersa
). F. Smith, who gives a very
interesting account of these
{58}
creatures in his
Catalogue of British
Hymenoptera in the British Museum
, mentions a case where the bee
finding the larger whorls of the shell too wide constructed two cells
across the whorl. Another very interesting case given by Smith is of a
nest of many cells of the rare
Osmia inermis
(which in his days
was known as
Osmia parietina
). A slab of stone, 10 inches by 6,
was brought to him with 230 cocoons of this
Osmia
attached to its
under side; when found in the month of November, 1849, about a third of
them were empty; in March of the following year a few males made their
appearance and shortly afterwards a few females, and they continued to
come out at intervals till the end of June, at which time he had 35
cocoons still unopened; in 1851 some more emerged, and he opened one or
two of the closed ones and found that they still contained living larvæ;
he closed them up again, and in April, 1852, examined them and found the
larvæ still alive; at the end of May they changed to pupæ and appeared as
perfect insects, the result being that some of the specimens were at
least three years before reaching maturity.
{59}

There is a nest of yet another style adopted by one of our species
(
Osmia xanthomelana
). This is formed of a series of pitcher-shaped
cells made of mud, constructed at the roots of grass. The species which
makes it is rare and seems to have its headquarters on the coasts of
Wales, although it has occurred in the Isle of Wight and elsewhere. This
species also is not constant in its habits, as it has been known to make
its cells underground. A very curious habit was noticed some years ago by
Mr. Vincent R. Perkins in another species of this genus (
Osmia
bicolor
;
pl. D
, 28); the species nests in the
ground or in snail shells, but, in the case under his observation, Mr.
Perkins found that the little bees covered up all the snail shells in
which they had built their cells with short pieces of "bents" so as to
make a little hillock over each about two or three inches in height,
somewhat resembling a miniature nest of
Formica rufa
, the large
horse ant, each mound containing hundreds of pieces. This is the only
record I know of this habit, which must entail a large amount of labour
for the bee.

These varying habits in the same species
{60}
show pretty clearly that
these little creatures are not driven by any blind instinct in the
adoption of their methods of nest building: they appear to have a
distinct power of choice and adaptation according to their environment,
unless of course it can be shown that the offspring of, say, a snail
shell inhabitant follows its parents' habits, and that that of a ground
borer does the same—but even that would not explain the case given
by F. Smith, and quoted above, where an
Osmia
had filled up the
whorls of a shell and then, finding the final whorl too large, placed two
cells horizontally to fill it: that seems to indicate distinct design on
the part of the bee and would be hard to explain as due to instinct.
Unfortunately, with the exception of a very few, the species of

Osmia
are rare in this country, so that few opportunities are
available for studying their habits, which are certainly amongst the most
interesting of any genus.

Plate D.

24.
Anthophora pilipes, male.
25.
Anthophora
pilipes, female.
26.
Melecta armata, female.
27.

Anthidium manicatum, female.
28.
Osmia bicolor, female.

29.
Bombus terrestris, female.
30.
Bombus lapidarius.
female.
31.
Psithyrus rupestris, female.

[
face p. 61.

{61}

A COLONY OF ANTHOPHORA

Anthophora pilipes
(
pl. D
, 24, 25), one
of our early spring bees, often forms enormous colonies. I have sometimes
seen sandpits in which the sides were riddled all over with holes of this
species, and where the insects were in such numbers that a distinct hum
was audible from the vibration of their wings. In such colonies one is
sure to detect some of their cuckoo associates,
Melecta armata
(
pl. D
, 26). They are deep black bees, much of the same
size as their hosts but with more pointed tails and with a small spot of
snow-white hairs on the side of each segment of the body; like other
cuckoos they sail about in a more demure way than their hosts, but a more
lively scene than a large colony of
Anthophora
can hardly be
found. The
Anthophora
provisions its cells with honey and pollen,
and its egg in consequence floats on the top—the
{62}
number of cells
varies from five or six up to ten or eleven.

Anthophora pilipes
has a very close relative in
Anthophora
retusa
, which also forms large colonies, but it is as a rule less
common. These two species are exceedingly alike, in fact it requires some
skill on the part of the observer to differentiate their females. They
are both black and clothed with black hairs, and both have yellow
pollen-brushes, but in
retusa
the hairs are shorter and not quite
of such a deep black as those of
pilipes
, and the spurs of the
tibiæ are pale, whereas in
pilipes
they are black. The males,
however, differ widely, although much alike in colour; in
pilipes

the feet of the middle pair of legs are clothed with enormously long
hairs, the basal joint has a dense fringe of black hairs in front and
some long black hairs behind (see
pl. D
, fig. 24);
in
retusa
the basal joint of the middle pair of feet have a
fan-shaped fringe of black hairs, and the rest of the joints are clothed
with longer hairs, but not long enough to be specially noticeable.
A.
retusa
is visited by the same cuckoo as
A. pilipes
and also by
its rare ally
Melecta luctuosa
, which only differs from

armata

{63}
(
pl. D
, 26) in the
larger and squarer spots of the body and various small structural
characters hardly appreciable except by specialists. The Anthophoras have
other parasites besides their cuckoos; one is a beetle, which, however,
is rare, and which lays its egg in the
Anthophora
cells; the other
is a very minute member of the Hymenopterous family, whose larva when
hatched feeds upon the larva of the bee. Notwithstanding these
disadvantages both species are abundant, although
retusa
is more
local than
pilipes
. A very interesting fact connected with this
genus has just been communicated to me by the Rev. F. D. Morice. John
Ray, who lived in the seventeenth century, mentions in his book

Historia Insectorum
(published posthumously in 1710), p. 243, that
a large colony of a bee, which from his description was clearly an

Anthophora
, as he specially calls attention to the great
difference between the males and females, inhabited a certain locality at
Kilby near "Hill Morton" in Northamptonshire. Mr. Morice, who for many
years resided at Rugby, knew Hillmorton, as it is now spelled, well, and
tells me that a large colony of
Anthophora
was in that same
locality when he knew it only
{64}
a few years ago. Of course there is no proof
that it has been there throughout the intervening period, but there seems
to be no reason to doubt it, and if so it is a most interesting case of a
persistent colony.

{65}

BEES AND POLLEN-COLLECTING

Bees whether solitary or social enter flowers for the sake of the
honey in their nectaries and the pollen on their anthers. In some cases
the flowers automatically deposit pollen on the bees during the
operation, which enables them to fertilize other flowers of the same
species, but the pollen which the bee requires for its own use has to be
worked for and collected on organs specially adapted for the purpose.
These vary very much in the different families and genera; they exist
only in the females, and, if the males get covered with pollen, as they
often do, it is probably more by chance than purpose, and it is doubtful
if it is of any value to the brood, although no doubt useful in
fertilizing other flowers. All our bees, as has been pointed out before,
are clothed more or less with branched or feather-like hairs, which would
appear to be admirably adapted for the collecting of pollen.
{66}
At the same time
some species which have their bodies clothed with branched hairs have
simple or spirally grooved hairs on the collecting organ—others
collect on very much branched hairs—so that there seems to be no
exact relationship between the plumosity of the hairs and their utility
in collecting. The collecting brushes are either on the hind legs or, as
in some cases, on the ventral surface of the body. In a female

Andrena
, the hind leg has a tuft of curled hairs near the base of
the leg, and a more or less heavy brush on the outside of the tibia or
shin (fig. 8). When a female returns after a collecting expedition these
specially hairy regions are a mass of pollen grains, and the "beautiful
yellow legs", so often remarked upon in some bees, are not always due to
the colour of the hairs but to that of the grains of pollen adhering to
them. The genera which collect on the under surface of the body have to
visit flowers where the anthers lie in such a position that they can
transfer the pollen on to it; the pea flower tribe are favourites with
them, and also the
Compositæ
. All this section have long tongues
so that they are able to reach the nectaries of
{67}
Fig.
8.

Fig.
9.
plants with long tubular
flowers. In visiting these the pollen is often deposited on the back of
the bee; this it is able to transfer to its under side by means of the
brushes on its feet or tarsi. The arrangements of the humble bees for
pollen gathering are altogether different from those mentioned above.
They have the hind shin outwardly shining and rather concave, with a
series of long curved hairs running down each side of it and partly
curving over it, so that they carry their mass of pollen in a sort of
basket, scientifically called the "corbicula" (fig. 9); this would be
impossible if the pollen were gathered dry, as it is by most of the
solitary bees, so the bee moistens it on the flower with the nectar she
has been sucking so as to make it sticky, and then transfers it into her
basket by means of her foot brushes. The pollen therefore on the hind leg
of a humble bee is all in one mass and can be
{68}
removed as such. When the
bee reaches her nest this must of course save her the trouble which the
solitary bee must have of cleaning off all the separate grains of pollen
which are mixed up among the hairs.

A word or two may be convenient here on the combs and cleaning
apparatus of bees. Any one who has watched a bee clean itself will have
noticed that the front legs work more or less horizontally—a bee
will lower its head and bring its front leg over it with a curved
motion—and that it will clean the sides of the face with a sort of
shaving-like action, also that the antennæ are apparently pulled through
the foot-joint in a remarkable way, often many times in succession. Now
the foot of a bee consists of five joints, and is clothed with bristly
looking hairs. If these hairs be examined through a microscope they will
be found to be more or less razor-shaped, having a thick back and a
dilated wing or knife-like blade (fig. 10). In some the blade is of some
width, and the edge is evidently very sharp: these hairs or spines no
doubt do the cleaning work, and admirably adapted they are to the
purpose. The antennæ-cleaner
{69}
Fig. 10.

Fig. 11.

Fig. 12.
(it may possibly be used
for other purposes too) is a still more wonderful adaptation; in the
basal joint of the foot there is a semicircular incision, which, when
examined under the microscope, is seen to be a small toothed comb. The
foot itself fits into the tibia or shin, and at the apex of the latter is
a modified spine which is dilated on one side into a wing, or knife-like
blade; this shuts down on to the semicircular comb, and the insect by
passing the antennæ between the two can clean off anything which may have
stuck to it (fig. 11). When we come to examine the other legs we find
that the inner surface of their tibiæ and tarsi, i.e. that which is
nearest the body, is clothed with hairs which have the points dilated and
spade-like (fig. 12), which
{70}
allowing for the different action of the
hind legs makes them just as good cleaners as the razors of the front
pair; the spurs at the apex of the tibiæ, which are known as the

calcaria
, are also doubtless useful for cleaning purposes, and
this is specially suggested by the beautiful saw-like form which they
assume in some species; although there is no actual semicircular comb in
the first joint of the tarsi, yet there can be little doubt that the spur
and this joint in conjunction can act as a cleaning organ very much in
the same way as the more elaborate arrangement in the front legs. Any one
who has the opportunity of examining the hairs of bees under a microscope
will be amply repaid for the trouble in noticing the beautiful shapes and
structures which these organs assume. (Figs. 13-18; 17 showing pollen
grains adhering.) At one time, when I was specially examining bee hairs,
I shaved the various parts of a large number of species and mounted their
hairs dry in microscopic slides, merely securing the cover glass with
liquid glue; this was twenty years ago, and many are still quite good. It
may seem a difficult operation to shave a bee, but
{71}
the hairs come off very
easily, and with a sharp dissecting knife for a razor as many hairs as
one wants are almost immediately at one's disposal.

Fig. 13.

Fig. 14.

Fig. 15.

Fig. 16.

Fig. 17.

Fig. 18.

{72}

ON BEES' TONGUES, AND HOW THEY
SUCK HONEY

In order to understand how a bee sucks honey it will be necessary to
go into some rather careful details as to the construction of its tongue
and mouth organs. These I will make as short and simple as I can, but the
apparatus is a very complicated one, and it will be impossible to
describe it without a good deal of technical phraseology.

The tongue has always been considered such an important feature in a
bee's structure that it has been made the chief basis of their
classification. On this subject I will only say that there are three
principal types of tongues—a short bifid tongue (fig.
19
,
3
[1]
), resembling those of the
fossors; a short pointed one, shaped somewhat like a spear head (fig.

19
, 2, 2a); and a long parallel-sided, ribbon-like tongue (fig.

19
, 1, 1a). The bees are classified on what is considered to be an

{73}
ascending scale, beginning with the
bifid-tongued species, through those with the short spear shaped tongues
to the higher forms, which have this organ elongate and
parallel-sided.

Fig. 19.

The tongue is the central organ of an elaborate combination of mouth
parts, which I will now try to explain. If we turn a bee's head over and
look at its underside we shall find a deep cavity, filled up with the
base of this combination which fits into it. If we extend the tongue (a
humble bee is a good subject on account of its large size, fig. 20) so as
to draw its base out of the cavity, we shall find that in the edge of
each side of the cavity there is articulated a short rod (20, A), more or
less dilated at its apex, called
{74}
the
stipes
; on the flattened ends of
these rods there swings a joint shaped something like the "merrythought"
bone of a chicken, called the
lora
or reins (20, B), to the
central angle of which are suspended the pieces of the apparatus which
terminate in the tongue. This
V
-shaped joint can swing over on its
feet, and can therefore lie either between the
stipites
or rods
with its angle pointing towards the tail of the bee, or in the opposite
direction with its angle projecting beyond them and pointing forwards. It
will at once be seen that by this turn of the
V
the tongue can be
projected a distance equivalent to twice the length of the
V
.

This
V
-shaped joint varies much in the length of its arms,
which are much longer in the long-tongued than in the short-tongued
bees.

When we examine the parts that are suspended from this joint, we shall
find that the actual tongue is separated from it by two distinct pieces;
the first (i.e. that next to the
lora
) a short joint (the

submentum
, 20, C), the second (the
mentum
, 20, D) a long
semi-cylindrical joint which holds as in a trough the softer parts at the
base of the tongue. From the apex of the
mentum

{75}
project three
organs; the central one is the actual tongue (or
ligula
, 20, E),
and on each side are the organs which are called the
labial palpi

(20, F); these in the long-tongued bees more or less fold over the base
of the tongue and protect it. There are two other large and important
mouth parts called the
maxillæ
(20, G); these articulate on to the
flattened apices of the
cardines
, outside the articulation of the
feet of the
lora
, and extend on each side of the
mentum
;
they also have flattened blades sheathing, when closed, the whole of the

mentum
above, as well as the base of the tongue.

Fig. 20.

So far we have been looking at the back of the head and mouth parts;
if we now look at the front we shall see the
maxillæ
; if we open
these we shall see the tongue lying between the
{76}
labial palpi, and at the
base of the tongue we shall see two little sheaths called the

paraglossæ
; above these the softer parts lying in the trough of
the
mentum
; from the base of the
mentum
, connecting with
the
maxillæ
, there extends a membrane which entirely invests the
spaces between the bases of these organs and extends up to the mouth. A
membrane also extends between the
stipites
and
lora
, and
closes the cavity at the back of the head. The back of the tongue in the
act of sucking can be formed into a tube through which, partly, probably
by capillary action, partly by the pumping action caused by the dilating
and contracting of certain parts of the mechanism, the liquid food is
drawn up into the æsophagus. This, I believe, has been shown to be the
principle on which all bees, short- or long-tongued, suck up their honey.
The subject could be treated at much greater length, and many other
structures connected with the mouth parts discussed, but more minute
details are unnecessary in an elementary work such as this, and I have
therefore limited myself to a description of the broad principles of the
process.

{77}

A DREADFUL PARASITE

Fig.
21.

Of all the evils to which bee flesh is heir, there can hardly be any
so terrible as the effects of the parasite
Stylops
on the species
of
Andrena
and
Halictus
which it attacks. This very
extraordinary creature, which is now considered to be a beetle, lives
during the early stages of both sexes in the body of the bee, which it
enters when the bee is in the larval state. Its head protrudes like a
minute flat seed between the body segments (fig. 21), and so is visible
externally, but the rest of the creature, which is a grub-like larva,
rests amongst the intestines of the bee; the female matures in the bee's
body and never leaves it. The male, however, when mature, escapes,
leaving the
{78}
Fig.
22. Stylops larva in abdominal cavity: after
Perez.
great hole which he inhabited open; he is provided with
wings, and I have more than once caught one flying in the open—but
to return to our afflicted bee. This may be attacked in either sex, and
by one to five of the parasites. I have specimens myself with four
parasites in them, and a case of five has been recorded. Mr. R. C. L.
Perkins, writing on this subject, says: "On removing the integument
dorsally from the bee, the large body of the female parasite will be seen
lying above the viscera, often almost entirely concealing them". If this
is the condition of a bee nourishing only one parasite, I must leave it
to my readers to imagine the state of the poor wretch who is supporting
five! The outward appearance of one with several parasites is generally
much distorted; the abdomen is very much inflated, and the poor creature
is unable to fly any
{79}
distance, and can only crawl about, or
perhaps take short flights of a foot or so. The effects, however, seem to
be very different in different cases. I have caught
Andrenas
with
two
Stylops
in them, flying about as usual and apparently none the
worse for their inmates. Probably the position the parasite occupies may
make a great difference in its effects on the bee.

The most notable effect produced by
Stylops
is the alteration
in the structure and colour of certain of the bee's characteristic
features. In
Andrena
the males differ very considerably from the
females both in form and colouring. They have no pollen-brushes on their
legs, and in some few species the face above the mouth is white, whereas
in the female it is black. Now the effect of the parasite seems to be to
unsex as it were its victims so far as their outward appearance is
concerned. This is no doubt due to the internal effects it has on the
larva of the bee. Anyhow, if a female is attacked, in most cases the
pollen-brush is much reduced, the face tends to become more hairy, and,
if it be the female of a white-faced male, spots of white are often
produced on the face. On the other hand,
{80}
if it be a male subject,
the hairiness of the face is diminished, the white colour is often
reduced or absent, and the hairiness of the legs is increased.

Before the effects of the parasite were recognized, several new
species were described simply on specimens of unusual appearance in
consequence of its presence.

These effects, however, like the effects produced on the activity of
the bee, vary exceedingly in extent. On some the parasite seems to have
no effect, in others the alteration in appearance is very great. This,
again, is probably due to the position of the parasites and to the
pressure they exert on the reproductive organs of the body in the larval
state.

{81}

AMONGST THE BEES AT WORK

Now I feel sure many will be thinking "It is all very well to talk
about all these solitary and social bees, but I never see them. I
certainly know a humble bee with a white tail and another with a red
tail, and a wasp, and perhaps a hornet, but I never notice any others."
The reason for this, no doubt, is that people are not as a rule
observant, and even if they notice a creature one moment they probably
forget all about it the next. If any one goes out on a bright spring
morning, late in March or early in April, about 11 o'clock, into a garden
well stocked with flowers, it will not, I think, be many minutes before
an insect darts on the wing along some border, and, if attention be paid
to the flowers, a little black hairy bee with yellow legs, like a small
humble bee, will be seen diligently at work sucking honey from one of
them. The darting bee, which is of a brownish red colour, gradually
{82}
fading
to grey after a few days' exposure to the sun, is the male, and the black
one the female. The male rarely settles, but flies about courting the
female. Often two or three males may be seen dodging and crossing each
other in their flight. The name of this bee is
Anthophora
. It is
quite a harbinger of spring, and I mention it especially as it so forces
itself on one's attention, and there are few who will not meet with it
without going especially on its quest.

Another opportunity of seeing several kinds of solitary bees flying
together may be secured by standing on a sunny day in front of a sallow
bush in full blossom, I mean what is commonly called "palm." Its catkins,
when the anthers are out and covered with yellow pollen, are most
attractive to all kinds of bees, humble bees, hive bees, and solitary
bees, and any one who can manage to watch a sallow bush for some time
will realize that there are many kinds of bees at work. Of course it is
difficult, without special knowledge, to recognize which are bees and
which are flies amongst the many which are coming and going, but the
yellow-pollened legs of the female bees will generally betray them, as
well
{83}
as their steadier flight. A fly turns about
more rapidly than a bee, and sits down much more abruptly. Bees are very
captious about the weather; they do not like an east wind and are,
apparently, very sensitive to coming wet. I have often gone out on a
bright morning and been surprised to find nothing stirring, and then
clouds have come up and proved the wisdom of the bees in staying at home.
They also fly very little in cloudy weather, especially in the early
spring, when the temperature is reduced by cloud below their fancy. One
may be watching a sallow bush and see dozens of insects flying about. A
cloud shadows it, and almost immediately they disappear, to appear again
as suddenly with the return of the sun's rays. It is interesting to watch
bees at work collecting pollen, etc., but if any one wishes to study them
at home, their nesting haunts must, of course, be visited. These are so
various that it is impossible to point them all out, but the best
locality to select is a sandy bank facing south. In June or July such a
bank is often alive with bees, sand-wasps, etc.; here, again, we want
sunshine or the bees will stay in their holes.
{84}
Even when dull, however,
it is a very interesting spot, and we can notice the numbers of holes
bored in the bank, and their different sizes and shapes; most of them are
round, but some sandwasps make very irregular holes. If we look closely
at some of the holes we shall see something closing the aperture, and, if
we are too inquisitive, that something will disappear down the hole like
lightning; it is the face of the owner of the burrow waiting to come out
for the first ray of sunshine, but the owner is very timid and it will be
some minutes before she puts her face so near danger again. In most of
the sandwasps the face is clothed with bright silvery, or sometimes
golden, hairs, and it is a very pretty sight to see these little silvery
faces peering out of their burrows. Again, one may sometimes notice a
little stream of sand emerging from a hole; this is from some bee who is
enlarging her domain or clearing out some of the sand which occasionally
falls in. In some cases this ejection of sand is done with a great deal
of action: the sand comes streaming out and then the bee follows, quite
up to the mouth of the passage, kicking out the sand as hard as it can.

{85}
The
moment, however, that the sun comes out the whole bank is full of life;
and just as in the case of the sallow bush, one wonders where it has all
been during the shadow. Bees will now be seen flying home laden with
pollen; they will pause at the opening of their burrow and then disappear
suddenly into its depths. In a very short time they will reappear quite
clean and ready for another journey. Their cleaning apparatus must be
wonderfully well adapted to its purpose. I have often had to remove the
pollen from a bee's leg to see what colour the hairs are, and it takes
some time even to brush enough of it off to ascertain this, and yet the
natural cleaning process seems to take no time in comparison. But to
return to our bank, numbers of bees will be seen coursing up and down and
hardly ever settling; these are males paying what attention they can to
any females who have time to attend to them, and often falling foul of
other males intent on similar pursuits. If one has good luck in the
choice of one's bank an elegant wasp-like creature may occasionally be
seen amongst the others; this is one of the cuckoos. The flight of all
the cuckoo bees is peculiar; it is much
{86}
quieter and slower than
that of the hosts, and a cuckoo may easily be seen solemnly flying up and
down the bank, over the various holes, no doubt watching for the proper
opportunity to enter one, and deposit its egg in it. This deliberate
flight seems a curious habit in a creature which one would think would
wish to escape detection. If it seemed to inspire fear in the mind of its
host it would be different, but they appear to fly about together
unconcerned at each other's presence, and the cuckoo sails along demurely
and imposes on its hosts' labours without any apparent resentment on the
latter's part; both seem to accept their relationship as a matter of
course. Another very interesting frequenter of sandy banks is a pretty
little stout sandwasp, about a quarter of an inch long, called

Oxybelus
. It has a very bright silvery face which shines most
brilliantly in the sun, and the body has a row of white spots on each
side, and it brings flies back to its nest. It is very active and common,
and may often be seen with its fly going back to its hole. There is a
rare species of the same genus, which is clothed all over with silvery
hairs, and this in some places, curiously
{87}
enough, selects as its
victim a fly which is also coated with silver. There are, of course, many
other inhabitants in such a bank as this. There are sure to be ants,
which are always interesting to watch, and probably now and then a

Pompilus
will appear on the scene. These exceedingly lively
creatures which run at a very rapid pace, vibrating their wings as they
go, and taking short flights between the runs, are on the hunt for
spiders. They will be seen to forage amongst any grass or herbage there
may be on the bank, and if they can only secure a spider it is stung and
paralyzed and carried off at once to the nest. Of course every sand bank
will not yield a great number of insects, but some, especially in sandy
districts like Woking, Oxshott, and other parts of the Surrey commons,
and the New Forest, simply teem with life—and would repay any one
for hours of watching and observation.

{88}

ANTS, THEIR GUESTS AND THEIR
LODGERS

The number of insects of different kinds which live in ants' nests,
either as scavengers, stray visitors who have found a lodging for the
moment, as guests carefully taken care of and appreciated by the ants, or
as lodgers, either tolerated or hostile to their hosts and persecuted,
and parasites, is very great. The most interesting of these from the
ordinary observer's point of view are the true guests and the lodgers.
The true guests are carefully attended to by the ants; they include such
insects as the
Aphides
or plant lice, and others which the ants
use as "cows" to secure the saccharine juices which they can obtain from
them, and also certain strange beetles which have tufts of golden hairs
on their body, which the ants lick—on account of what E. Wasmann
[2]
calls the etherealized oil

{89}
given off by them. These beetles are fairly
numerous and belong to several quite distinct families; the one which
perhaps is amongst the most interesting is a creature called
Lomechusa
strumosa
. This insect has rather an interesting history in connexion
with our British fauna. It used to be considered as an indigenous insect,
but so many years passed without any one finding it, that the old records
were suspected as doubtful, and it was removed from the list of British
species. In 1906, however, it was rediscovered near Woking in a nest of

Formica sanguinea
(
pl. A
, 1, 2, 3), one of
the large red ants, by Mr. H. Donisthorpe. The life-history of

Lomechusa
is a very curious one: it is taken great care of by the
ants, and its larvæ are even placed by them with their own, on which it
feeds. Its numbers are kept down apparently by the overzeal of the ants
to take care of them. The ants bring their own pupæ up frequently to
obtain light and air and with them it brings up the
Lomechusa

pupæ—this seems not to suit the latter and results in the death of
many of them. It is a most interesting case of how a due balance can be
maintained, and what might prove an enemy
{90}
kept in his proper place
by kind intentions. There are also in ants' nests what Dr. Wasmann calls
"tolerated lodgers"; these are mostly creatures which are supposed to
escape the notice of the ants, either by their small size or by their
slow, lethargic, or on the other hand very rapid movements—these in
many cases act as scavengers, living on the dead bodies of insects, etc.,
brought in by the ants.

The hostile lodgers are real enemies to the ants and devour their
brood, and in consequence they are always at war with each other. These
creatures generally resemble the ants considerably in form and colour and
especially in their movements.

Besides these lodgers there are numerous parasites of the ants, such
as mites, etc., so that an ant colony is a very wonderful mixture of
diverse inhabitants. The distinctions given above as to the habits of the
various lodgers are not always kept up, as, in some, two or more of these
habits are combined. The whole study of ants and their guests is a most
fascinating one: many of the latter are great rarities and much sought
after by collectors. Unfortunately, the great
{91}
drawback in collecting
them is the havoc caused to the nests of the ants. These structures have
been the result of enormous labour on the part of these little creatures,
and one cannot regard their destruction without sincere regret. I think
any one who, when collecting beetles, disturbs a large nest of the little
garden ant (
Lasius niger
) or the little yellow ant (
Lasius
flavus
) by turning over a stone, as the writer has often done
himself, must have experienced a like regret at having broken up all the
beautiful passages and galleries which the ants have constructed so
carefully.

{92}

HOW CAN AN "ACULEATE" BE
RECOGNIZED?

This is not an easy question to answer. We cannot make hard and fast
definitions which will determine exactly what belongs to this group and
what to that; there are always some intermediate forms which present
themselves and make our classification unsatisfactory, but, I think, for
all purposes of practical observation in the field we may say that if we
find a creature with four membranous wings, burrowing in the ground or
making a nest in any way, it is an aculeate or stinger. Also, that if we
find a hairy-bodied insect with four clear wings collecting pollen or
sucking nectar from a flower it is a bee. There are, of course,
characters by which the stinging groups can be known almost for certain,
but there is no single one which can be given to recognize them by.
{93}
They are
known by a combination of many, and these are frequently small structural
details which do not appeal to the field observer; in fact, which are
unappreciable except under magnification. One of the chief difficulties
experienced by an observer who is not versed in classification is to
avoid being deceived by various flies, which in many cases greatly
resemble bees, and especially wasps or the wasp-like fossors. They may
mostly be known by their flight, and, when they settle, by their
behaviour. A fly is more sudden in its movements—those wasp-like
flies, for instance, which poise themselves in the air and appear quite
stationary but dart off in a second when approached, betray themselves at
once by their alertness.
Anthophora
and
Saropoda
poise in
the air and dart somewhat after the same fashion, but they never remain
poised for long, and do not get away from their position so rapidly.
Also, a fly when it settles remains quiet, whereas an aculeate if in a
flower sets to work collecting pollen, or if basking in the sun on a leaf
rarely rests for many seconds without moving in some way. On a flower, if
an insect is seen quietly sitting with its head away from the centre of
the
{94}
flower, it is almost certain to be a fly.
Most of the little bees (
Halicti
) which visit dandelions and such
like "composites" fly in to them with some rapidity, attack them
sideways, and move round the "flower", no doubt getting pollen from each
floret in succession and with a businesslike action about it all, which
is very different from the behaviour of any fly. The flies which really
closely resemble bees in their flight are those which lay their eggs in
the burrows of various bees and sandwasps. They are really deceptive.
Last summer on the sandhills at Southbourne, near Bournemouth, I again
and again was deceived by a small fly with a red belt across its body,
thinking it was a red-bodied sandwasp. These it really only resembles on
the wing. After having been taken in once or twice one felt ashamed of
oneself for not recognizing it. The flies also which associate with the
humble bees are often coloured very much like them, and could easily be
mistaken for small specimens of the bees were it not for their behaviour
and wings, which show a dark spot on the upper margin, not existing in
the wing of the bee.

{95}

MALES AND FEMALES

These differ from each other very greatly in many cases. Eccentricity
in structure almost always occurs in the male; excess of coloration
usually in the female. In size the male is generally the smaller and the
less robustly built of the two. Among the pollen-collectors, the male is
usually less densely clothed with hairs than the ♀. In the fossors
this rule is rather reversed, but in that section neither sex is densely
clothed with hairs as are most of the pollenigerous bees.

The male has normally thirteen joints in its antennæ, and the female
only twelve. There are exceptions to this rule amongst the ants and in
certain fossors of the genus
Crabro
, some species of which have
the antennæ considerably distorted, and have two joints welded apparently
into one. Another distinction between the sexes is that the male has
seven dorsal segments
{96}
of the body exposed to view, and the female
only six. In the males of some of those bees which collect pollen on the
underside of the body, the body above terminates with the sixth segment.
This is because the seventh is turned over on to the underside, and faces
downwards, its apex pointing towards the head. This arrangement of course
leaves less room for the regular ventral segments, and the usual apical
segments are in consequence "telescoped" up under the fourth, so that the
apical opening of the body lies on its underside between the fourth
ventral and the inverted seventh dorsal segments. This very curious
structure occurs only in those bees whose females collect pollen on the
underside, and the reason of it is to me quite inexplicable. The females
of a few of the fossors are destitute of wings; but in this country we
have no wingless males, except in the case of one little ant
(
Formicoxenus
); this lives in the nest of the common large red
ant, and its male can hardly be known from the worker except by the
number of joints in the antennæ and the absence of a sting. In the cases
where the female is wingless, the male as a rule is much the larger of
the two sexes.
{97}
There are few more puzzling questions than
those which arise over these eccentricities of structure; they seem to
have no relation to any habits of the creatures' lives so far as we can
judge, neither can one suggest any useful purpose which they can serve.
In some groups the males of all the species seem built on one regular
plan—in others the males of each species seem to vie with the next
as to what eccentricity of structure in antennæ or legs or apex of the
body it can exhibit. In numbers, the males probably considerably exceed
the females, and are far more frequently met with, as they seem to be
less particular as to weather, and not being intent on obtaining food for
their offspring they fly about more casually, and certainly are more in
evidence generally.

The great difference in structure, etc., between the males and females
makes the work of pairing the sexes very difficult, especially in those
genera where the males and females appear together only for a few weeks,
as is the case in
Halictus
and
Sphecodes
. If one visits a
locality in the spring one may catch any number of females of

Halictus
, but no males appear till the late
{98}
summer or autumn, and,
unless one visits the same spot again when both sexes are out, it is
impossible to associate males and females. I have at the present moment
in my collection several males, which, being in doubt about myself, I
have communicated to continental authorities, who have returned them to
me as possibly the male of so and so! and we shall have to remain in
uncertainty about them till some one happens to take both sexes together,
when the mystery will be solved.

In time of appearance the males always precede the females—in
burrows, such as those of the leaf-cutting bees, etc., it may seem
puzzling as to how this is arranged, as one cell is placed over the other
so that those lower down in the tube cannot pass those higher up. This
difficulty is got over by the arrangement that the first eggs laid by the
mother bee are female and the last male, so that those at the top belong
to this latter sex; these emerge as soon as the warmth of the sun is
great enough to energize them sufficiently to break through their cell
covering, when they emerge and wait for the appearance of their females.
The males of
{99}
some species of
Andrena
seem to take
great pleasure in flying rapidly up and down hedgerows, hardly ever
settling, and apparently far away from their females, which are probably
pollen collecting in dandelions or some such flowers in the
neighbourhood.

{100}

THE VAGARIES OF COLOUR AND
STRUCTURE IN THE SEXES

As a rule the male is rather smaller and especially slenderer than the
female, but there are notable exceptions; in one genus of the fossors,

Myrmosa
for instance, the male is many times larger than the
female. In this case the male is winged and the female is wingless. Also,
if there is a difference in brightness of coloration between the sexes,
as a rule the male is duller than the female—this is especially the
case among the bees—but if there is any eccentricity in the form of
the limbs it is almost sure to occur in the male, and I think one would
not go far wrong in saying that when peculiar features occur in the
female, the reason for them is more or less apparent, whereas for the
eccentricities of the male there really often seems to be no assignable
cause. These male eccentricities are often exceedingly marked. A very
good
{101}
Fig. 23.

Fig. 24.
example of them occurs
among the small "keyhole" wasps. All the British species are practically
alike in coloration. They may vary in having a greater or less number of
yellow bands on the body, but otherwise their distinctions rest on
structure. In the females the antennæ are slightly thickened towards the
apex, but otherwise they are simple. The males, however, are divided into
three quite distinct groups. In the first of these, the end joints of the
antennæ are rolled up in more or less of a spiral (fig. 23, 2); in the
second, the apical joint is turned sharply back like a hook (fig. 23, 1);
in the third, the end joints of the antennæ are simple and more or less
like those of the female. Now if we examine the legs of the males in the
first group we shall find still greater peculiarities; in two of our
species there is a long yellow spine at the extreme base of the middle
leg on the little joint by which it articulates on to the body (fig. 24,
2), and a curious pencil of hairs
{102}
on each side of the
mouth. In two others, the femora, or thighs of the middle legs, are cut
into two deep somewhat semicircular incisions (fig. 24, 1)—a most
curious character; but here again the females have no corresponding
peculiarities. There seems to be no explanation known for these vagaries,
and yet one feels that there must be some object served by them. If we
turn to the bees we shall find that in many species the face of the male
is white to a greater or less extent, whereas that character is very rare
in the female. The front feet are produced into a wide flattened form in
some, in others the middle legs are extraordinarily developed, and
provided with tufts of hairs, etc. Another form of male development lies
in the form of the head. This is sometimes very much enlarged—often
varying considerably in this respect in specimens of the same species;
there is often a projecting tooth or spine on the mandible or jaw at its
base, or frequently on the cheek just above it. Then in the fossors the
males of the genus
Crabro
break out into numerous eccentricities;
in some, two or more of the joints of the antennæ are soldered together
and curved or cut out into
{103}
curious forms (fig. 26); in others the
front shin or tibia is formed like a concave shield or shell (fig. 25),
and all the joints of that leg more or less distorted; in another male (a
rather doubtful native which has not been taken in this country for fifty
years) the head is narrowed behind into an almost ridiculously small
neck, being quite triangular in form, viewed from above, with the eyes
projecting from its anterior angles (fig. 27, 1), the female head being
of normal form (fig. 27, 2).

Fig. 25.

Fig. 26.

Fig. 27.

In the males of several species of fossors and bees the eyes are
enormously developed, joining one another on the top of the head. This
condition occurs also in the drone of the hive bee. The male of

Astatus
, which has this character, has also a peculiar habit. It
sits basking in the sun on some bare sandy spot, and when disturbed makes
a sort of circular detour and pitches down again exactly on the spot from
which it started up. An
{104}
increased length of the antennæ is another
male characteristic. This is carried to an extraordinary development in
what is called the "long horned bee"; this bee, which is pretty common in
some places, has antennæ which, when directed backwards, are almost as
long as its body—the female has quite an ordinary pair.

Another set of male characters which are of great value to
systematists lies in the hidden apical segments of the underside;
although these are hidden, being telescoped up inside the segments which
close the apical opening of the body, they often assume most curious and
beautiful forms, and are characters whereby the males of a species may be
determined with certainty when the females defy all one's endeavours to
discover their identity.

{105}

THE DISTRIBUTION, RARITY, OR ABUNDANCE
OF VARIOUS SPECIES

There are few points about which we know less than the causes of
distribution and rarity, although there are certain tolerably well
recognized laws which govern the occurrence of some species in certain
localities. What I mean is that marshy spots, say salt marshes for
instance, attract certain beetles and bugs which are never found except
in such places; certain kinds of flowers attract bees which never appear
to visit any others, but these localities and kinds of flowers occur
often at great distances from each other, and why—given a certain
flower you probably find a certain bee peculiar to it; or given a certain
kind of marsh you probably find a certain beetle, although the localities
may be hundreds of miles apart—I think still awaits explanation. I
will give an example with which I am personally well acquainted.
{106}
There
is a rare little bee (
Macropis labiata
) which at one time was
looked upon as an extreme rarity, having only occurred three or four
times in this country. Mr. F. Enoch, comparatively lately, took a fair
number on the flowers of the greater loose-strife (
Lysimachia
vulgaris
) along the canal at Woking; now that its food-plant is
known, it has occurred in several other places in numbers, and no doubt
wherever the
Lysimachia
is abundant
Macropis
will probably
occur, but how the little creature has been distributed over the places
where this plant occurs, which are often far distant from each other,
seems to me to be an unsolved problem. Then there is another puzzling
point, and that is the extreme rarity of certain insects. No doubt in
many cases this is due to ignorance of their habits, as it has frequently
happened that species once considered of great rarity have occurred in
abundance when their habits have been discovered, as in the case of

Macropis
, but there are some cases which do not seem to be
explainable in this way. I will again give an example which has been
specially under my own observation.
Dufourea vulgaris
, a little
black bee,
{107}
which certainly might not be recognized
from its outward appearance, as there are many which very closely
resemble it, is still one of our greatest rarities, only three British
examples having been recorded. The first was taken by Sir Sidney Saunders
at Chewton, Hants, on the twelfth of August, 1879; this was a male; the
second, a female, was taken by Mr. T. R. Billups at Woking, on the first
of August, 1881; and the third by myself at Chobham (about four miles
from Woking) on the first of August, 1891. I believe in all cases these
were taken on yellow composite flowers. The flight and behaviour of the
male I caught were so peculiar, as it wriggled itself into the flower,
that I knew at once I had caught a rarity, and remarked to my companions
that I believed I had got a
Dufourea
. I also hazarded the remark
that it was "ten years since it had been taken." When I got home and
looked up the former record it was ten years to a day. Now there are few
places in England that have been better worked for the bee tribe than the
Woking, Chobham, and Weybridge neighbourhood; it has been worked by
experienced men who would see a difference
{108}
in the flight of an
insect directly. The late Mr. F. Smith, in his day our leading authority,
the Rev. F. D. Morice, than whom no one has probably worked the
neighbourhood more thoroughly, Mr. T. R. Billups, Mr. E. B. Nevinson, and
the late Mr. A. Beaumont, have all been over the ground again and again,
and yet only these two
Dufoureas
! and these taken four miles
apart. Here again is a problem which is very perplexing! What part in
nature does this little rarity play? No doubt like everything else it has
its duties, and its corner to fill, but beyond that one can suggest
nothing.

Other bees are often exceedingly abundant in one season and very rare
the next, or they will entirely desert a locality where they have been
abundant, and move somewhere else—the occasional scarceness is due
probably to continued wet weather, which often appears to kill the larvæ.
Cold winters seem to have no injurious effect, although at one time they
were thought to determine the scarcity or otherwise of the bees of the
following summer. It has, I think, been clearly shown that larvæ can
stand almost any amount of cold, although they succumb to
{109}
the effects of
mildew produced by wet, but there is often no apparent reason why a well
established colony should migrate to quite new pastures. Sometimes the
proximity of new buildings or the digging up of ground may disturb them,
but I know of colonies that have gone from where I knew them a
comparatively few years ago, and where I can detect no change likely to
have affected them. On the other hand there are colonies which one has
known all one's life and which still go on as strongly or more strongly
than ever—the case quoted under
Anthophora
, p.
63
, shows what persistence there can be in some.

{110}

ON BEES' WINGS

The Bees and the other stinging groups have four wings like all the

Hymenoptera
. These wings are almost always clear and transparent,
at any rate amongst the British species, there being only one exception
which I can call to mind in the female of the cuckoo of our large
red-tailed humble-bee, which has the wings blackish; also they are never
spotted, as in some flies. The hind or lower wings unite with the upper
by a series of very beautiful hooks which extend along their upper margin
and fix on to the posterior edge of the front wing, which is folded back
on itself so as to receive them; in flight the two wings are united, but
when at rest they separate; these hooks are beautiful objects under a
microscope; their numbers vary; and in some cases this variation is
useful in distinguishing closely allied species from one another. The hum
of a bee is caused, to a great extent, by
{111}
the vibration of the
wings, but it has been shown that a loud buzzing noise can be emitted by
bees which have lost their wings; this proceeds from the spiracles or
holes in the outer covering of the creature through which it breathes. It
is therefore not always easy to say how much of the hum is caused by wing
vibration and how much by the action of the spiracles. Some, in fact
most, of our solitary bees are almost silent in flight, and their note
can be heard only when large numbers are flying together; others have a
very peculiar shrill hum, by which even the species can almost be
recognized. In bright, hot, sunny weather their flight is more rapid and
their note attains a higher pitch. The bees with the highest pitched hum
with which I am acquainted are the two smaller species of

Anthophora
and
Saropoda bimaculata
.

In early spring, when it is hot in the sunshine and cold when a cloud
covers the sun, it is no unusual thing to see a bee drop to the ground.
The cold seems to paralyze altogether their powers of flight. When at
rest a bee folds its wings along the sides of its back, but only in the
wasp tribe is there the arrangement for them to be
{112}
folded longitudinally.
The shape of the wings varies very little, but the arrangement and number
of their cells vary considerably. There are some very interesting genera
in which the neuration of some of the cells is so slightly indicated that
they are hardly visible, and can be seen only when the wing is held in
certain lights; these faintly indicated cells are nearly always those
towards the apex of the wing, the neuration of the basal part of the wing
being as strong as in the other genera. There are a few moths in this
country which very much resemble, both in the colour of their bodies and
their clear wings, the wasp tribe, but they may be known by the brown
band of scales at the apex of the wings and also by the absence of the
narrow waist, which exists in all the stinging tribes. The only wingless
forms which we know are to be found amongst the ants and the fossors, and
as a rule are females, but in a few cases in the ants, and in some
foreign species of the genus
Mutilla
, the male is apterous
also.

{113}

ON BREEDING ACULEATES, ETC.

Any one who wishes to study the life-histories of these insects, and
has leisure to do so, can easily obtain various larvæ by digging for them
in suitable places. If, for instance, during the summer, bees, etc., have
been noticed entering holes in a certain bank or sandy spot, their larvæ
or nymphs can be got in the autumn by digging down for about a foot in
the direction of the holes, and if they be brought home and put into
glass-top boxes they will generally emerge at their right time without
giving any further trouble; it must, however, be remembered that the
grubs are very soft and tender skinned, and it is better to avoid
handling them if possible; they should be moved with a small soft
camel-hair pencil, and it is well to put something soft at the bottom of
the box so that if they fall in they will not be damaged. If the
wood-boring
{114}
species are being collected, care must of
course be taken in splitting the wood; most of these make a pupa case
over themselves, and are in that respect easier to deal with. A label
should be put in each box to show where the larvæ, etc., were found. An
old rotten stump of a tree will often produce a good number of species.
Then there are the bramble-stem borers; these can be left in the stems. I
have generally found it convenient, after arriving home, to split the
stems down, to see if there are any living creatures in them, and, if
there are, to close them up again, and, tie a little very fine net or
gauze bag over the top of each stem; in this way one can find out exactly
what insects come from what stem, and determine the cuckoos (if any)
which belong to each. As the season advances towards May, it is well to
give all the larvæ, etc., an occasional glimpse of the sun; they should
not be left in the sun long enough for them to get dried up too much, but
the sun is a very important factor in tempting them to emerge; naked
larvæ and nymphs, in glass-top boxes, should be treated very carefully in
this respect, as they are deprived of their
{115}
natural surroundings,
in which the actual sunshine would never reach them—it would be
better to place them in a sunny room, screened off from the actual rays
of the sun, so that its warmth only would be felt. If they do not emerge
the first year, it should not be taken for granted that they are dead, as
very likely they will appear in the following spring. I have bred
leaf-cutting bees several times with great success, and others I know
have been successful with many species. The fear is to get them dried up
too much; it is therefore not desirable to keep them in a very hot room.
When first the insects emerge, their hairs are often more or less matted
together, and they should be put in the sun in a larger box, so that they
can crawl about and clean themselves; portions also of the skin in which
they have been enveloped frequently adhere to them for some little time,
but as a rule, unless the creature be too weak, these are very soon
cleaned off. Breeding is a fascinating amusement, but it requires a great
deal of attention when the emerging season begins, as the boxes want
constant watching, or the insects will emerge unnoticed, and, if not
given proper
{116}
air and sunshine, may die without cleaning
themselves properly.

If it is desired to preserve the specimens, they should be killed
either with cyanide of potassium, ether, or chloroform. If the first of
these agents is used, a piece of about the size of a small hazel nut
should be put at the bottom of a bottle (for collecting purposes, an
ordinary "Coleoptera bottle", which can be obtained from any naturalist's
shop, is the most convenient) and should be kept down by a wad of
blotting paper, well pressed down upon it; this prevents the cyanide, as
it liquifies, from wetting the hairs, etc., of the insects. Over this a
piece of white paper should be placed; this will get stained at once when
there is much damp, and should then be changed. The objections to cyanide
are its very poisonous nature, and the stiffness which is caused by its
use to the specimens killed by it, and also its tendency to turn yellow
colours red. I always use it myself as I think it is preferable to the
other insecticides, notwithstanding its demerits, but then I do not
extend the legs and wings of my specimens, but simply leave them in
whatever position they happen to
{117}
die. Ether is a very
favourite method of killing with many; a few drops in a bottle with some
paper in it is sufficient to last for some hours; it however soon
evaporates in hot weather, and it is necessary to carry a small phial of
it in one's pocket to replenish the supply when exhausted; this makes one
smell of ether perpetually, which is more than I can stand. But the
insects killed in this way are beautifully supple, and, for those who
wish to set their captures as they would
Lepidoptera
, it is an
excellent medium, i.e. if they don't mind its smell; it has also the
benefit of not affecting colour. Chloroform acts much as ether does. When
killed, I strongly recommend collectors to pin their specimens through
the thorax with a very fine pin (those used for micro-lepidoptera are the
best), and then to pin this through a narrow strip of card, mounted on a
long stout pin; in this way the insect can be moved about by the strong
pin, and the thorax of the insect itself is not destroyed, as it often is
in the case of the smaller species by the use of thicker pins. The cards
should be cut as small as possible; they need not be more than a quarter
of an inch long. The insect
{118}
should be pinned at right angles to the
long axis of the card, and the long pin should be inserted on the
right-hand side of the insect so as not quite to touch it. In this way
the insects look quite as neat as if they were pinned direct. Locality
labels, etc., should be affixed to the long pin, and the insects should
be stored in cabinets or boxes.

{119}

ON COLOUR

There is but little tendency towards brilliant coloration amongst our
native aculeates. No doubt our comparatively high latitude accounts for
this to some extent, as also the fact that the aculeates do not, as a
rule, elsewhere assume great brilliancy. Even in the tropics and other
warm regions, where bright green, blue or coppery coloured species occur,
they are comparatively few in number. In this country metallic colours
are to be found in less than a dozen species, and in most of these it
exists only as a tinge. Amongst our ants and wasps it does not exist at
all, unless the slight bronziness of the typical form of
Formica
fusca
be so considered. The fossors can exhibit only a bluish tint in

Mutilla Europæa
(
pl. A
, 4, 5), and a slight
bronzy tinge in two of quite the smallest species,
Miscophus
maritimus
and the ♂ of
Crabro albilabris
. The bees can
do a little better; five species of
Halictus
have a distinctly

{120}
bronzy head and thorax, and in three the
bronzy colour extends to the abdomen; there is also another with a very
dull green tinge on the thorax; besides these there is a little bright
blue bee,
Ceratina
(unfortunately a great rarity in this country)
and two or three species of
Osmia
, showing more or less tendency
to bronziness, and one which is distinctly bluish; but, considering our
indigenous species number nearly 400, this is a very small, and compared
with other countries I should think an abnormally small, proportion.

Species with bodies banded like a wasp's are much more
abundant—no less than eighty of our native kinds having this style
of coloration. The bands may be reduced to lateral spots, but such cases,
I think, are only modifications of the banded scheme.

Black species with a more or less pronounced red band across the body
number about seventy, and a general testaceous or yellowish colour occurs
in a few ants, but not elsewhere among the British aculeates. Nearly all
the rest are black or dark brown so far as the actual surface of the body
is concerned; but amongst the bees
{121}
there is often a dense
clothing of coloured hairs sometimes so dense that the surface of the
body may be rendered invisible. These coloured hairs may be distributed
into brilliant bands, as in the humble bees, or they may be uniformly
black, as in some of their varieties and in the females of the spring
species of
Anthophora
(
pl. D
, 25), or
entirely red as in
Andrena fulva
(
pl. B
,
16), or black on the thorax and red on the abdomen as in
Osmia
bicolor
(
pl. D
, 28), or vice versâ as in

Andrena thoracica
, etc., but the most usual condition is that
where the hairs form more or less pale bands along the joints of the
segments, either immediately above or below them or both; sometimes these
bands are very obscurely indicated, and visible only in certain
positions. At others they are vividly white; to a certain extent this
banded condition recalls the waspy coloration. The hairs, however, of the
bands are rarely yellow, but as a rule greyish or white, or of a grade of
colour slightly paler than those of the disc. There are some rather
interesting points which arise out of this rough analysis. Among the
bees, all the species which have a waspy coloration are cuckoos, with
only one exception (
Anthidium
)
{122}
(
pl.
D
, 27), as are also nearly all those which have red bands. With the
exception of the males of three species of
Halictus
, and both
sexes of three or four species of
Andrena
, all the red-banded
forms belong to the genus
Sphecodes
(
pl. B
,
11), which is a cuckoo genus. The red coloration occurs chiefly on nearly
naked surfaces; this is specially noticeable in those bees which have two
varieties, such as
Andrena rosæ
, one dull coloured and the other
red-banded: in these cases the dull form is hairy and the red nearly
naked. The greatest proportionate number of banded species occurs amongst
the fossors, and these are seldom clothed with hairs to any extent. These
bands seem to me probably to depend a good deal on retarded development.
Dark and hairy bands, both as a rule, follow the joints of the segments,
as stated above. I only say as a rule, as there are many where the
banding does not follow this principle, but in far the larger majority
the bands, whether of dark colour or hairs, are apical. As the segments
overlap at the joints it is evident that their discs would tend to mature
more rapidly than the overlapping bases and apices,
{123}
and the longer
period spent in hardening and drying of the overlapping parts would
favour the development of dark pigment and of hairs. Many species have
the extreme apices of the segments pale, but with the apical integument
so very thin, often looking nearly transparent and membranous, that its
development would be very rapid. Again, in the case of red coloration,
the red generally occurs on the discs of the segments, the apices and
sides often being dark, and in cases where in one species both black and
banded forms occur, with intermediate varieties, the last remnant of red
colour is generally situated in the centre of the segment. By far the
gayest effect is displayed by our humble bees, and, but for them and a
few of the species of
Andrena
and the wasp-coloured species, our
aculeates would be a very sombre lot.

{124}

THE DEVELOPMENT OF INSECTS FROM
THE EGG

Although this and the following chapter may not be interesting to all
my readers, I think it is only right to add some remarks on the structure
and classification of insects, so that any one who wishes to follow up
the subject may gather a few general ideas which may induce them to take
up some technical and scientific work in which they will get fuller and
more exact data on the difficulties which are involved in such simple
questions as "What is an insect?" "How are the different orders of
insects distinguished from each other?" "What is a species?" etc.

To realize the characters of an insect in its perfect or "imago"
state, we may for the moment forget what often seems to be its most
important features, and which are frequently its most extensive parts,
viz. its limbs or
{125}
appendages; by limbs are meant its wings,
legs, horns or antennæ, jaws or mandibles, etc.: strip these all off, and
we have a limbless trunk, which many would not recognize as belonging to
an insect at all; still this limbless trunk possesses characters which
assert its insect nature, as it may be known from other limbless trunks
by being divided into three parts by two great transverse divisions; in
most insects these are extremely well marked, and in all they have a very
real existence. The parts thus divided off are known by the names of
head, thorax, and abdomen. Anybody knows how easy it is to break off the
head or body of a dried insect. Now the head or body breaks off at one of
these divisions, and it is this partitioning of the body into three
sections which makes one of the strongest characters in the definition of
an insect. The three parts, thus divided off, each possesses special
functions in the life of the creature. In the head are contained the
principal organs of sense and brain; in the thorax, the organs of
locomotion; and in the body those of digestion, reproduction, etc.

This division into three parts does not however
{126}
always hold good in the
early stages of the insect's life, and we must remember that the creature
commences life on leaving the egg, and not merely on its emergence from
the chrysalis, so that we have to reckon with caterpillars, grubs and all
sorts of curious immature forms in our conceptions of an insect.

These early stages do not as a rule interest the public much, but it
is well to bear in mind that the "perfect insect" stage is reached by
some insects along apparently a very different road from that travelled
by others. Some leave the egg as caterpillars or grubs, and after various
changes of skin become apparently lifeless chrysalids, from which they
emerge as perfect insects. Others leave the egg as diminutive likenesses
of their parents, and run or hop about much as they do, attaining the
perfect insect stage simply by a series of changes of skin, without any
definite quiescent or chrysalis condition.

The observation, therefore, which one often hears that insects never
grow, has to be taken with caution; all insects grow in their early
stages, but it is an obvious truth that insects do not
{127}
grow after
they attain the imago or "perfect insect" condition. A small fly will
never become a large fly, nor a small beetle a large beetle. This is only
because we do not recognize their caterpillars or grubs as flies and
beetles; but a grasshopper we know grows, because its early stages are of
the same general form as the perfect insect, and we see the little ones
hopping about in some places, and if we visit the same place later on we
notice that they have grown, but as soon as they cast their last skin and
obtain the free use of their wings, growth ceases, as it does in a fly or
a beetle or in any other insect.

It must not be supposed that the limbs of insects are of no value in
their identification. We only removed them in order to emphasize the
great importance of the character derived from the regional constrictions
of the body, which is considered to be certainly one of the most, if not
the most, important of any. Besides this character every perfect insect
should have six legs, four wings, and various appendages on the head,
such as antennæ, mandibles, maxillæ, labium, etc.; some of these may be
so modified as hardly to
{128}
be recognizable, but they are hardly ever
absent altogether; for instance, the two fore wings of a beetle are
modified into what are called wing cases, and fold over its back,
protecting the two hind wings, which are more or less membranous, as are
those of a bee. They have not the functions of locomotive organs, and are
used in flight as poisers. Again in the case of a fly, the hind wings
seem to be absent, but they are considered to be represented by two
little projecting organs which look like large headed pins or nails, but
which are quite useless for locomotive purposes.

The organs of the mouth are especially liable to modification, and on
these the older authors used to frame their classification. Insects were
divided by them, primarily, into two great divisions, viz. those which
had a biting and those which had a sucking mouth; treated in this way,
the following orders fall into the division with biting
mouths:—

Coleoptera
, or beetles;
Hymenoptera
, or bees, wasps,
ants, etc.;
Orthoptera
and
Neuroptera
, which include the
grasshoppers, earwigs, cockroaches, dragonflies, May flies, etc.
{129}

And into the division with sucking mouths:—

Lepidoptera
, or butterflies and moths;
Diptera
or flies,
gnats, etc.;
Hemiptera
, or bugs, including the plant-lice,
etc.

These divisions, however, have not been found to be very satisfactory,
although very simple when dealing only with the perfect insect stage. In
the first place, being framed on this stage only, they are not always
applicable to the earlier phases of the insect's life—for instance,
although a butterfly or moth has a sucking proboscis, their caterpillars
have strong biting jaws, as any gardener well knows. Also bees, wasps,
etc., rather upset the arrangement, as they have not only a sucking mouth
but also strong biting jaws.

This system of classification has therefore been discarded by most
entomologists in favour of that based on the difference between those
insects which pass through the distinctive stages of caterpillar and
chrysalis on the one hand, and those which emerge from the egg as
diminutive likenesses of their parents on the other. In this arrangement,
the
Coleoptera
,
Hymenoptera
,
Lepidoptera
,

Diptera
and
Neuroptera
, fall into the
{130}
first
division, or
Heteromorphæ
as they are called; and the

Hemiptera
and
Orthoptera
into the second or

Homomorphæ
. The dragonflies are the only slightly discordant
elements in this arrangement, as, although their larvæ have six legs and
walk about under the water and never assume an actual chrysalis
condition, still they can hardly be said to resemble their gorgeously
coloured parents which fly about so majestically over our ponds, etc.;
still this is only one of the many cases which show that nature cannot be
held down by any of the arbitrary rules we make for her
classification.

The
Hymenoptera
are therefore characterized and distinguished
from other insects by having both a biting and sucking mouth, four clear
wings, and by passing through the distinctive liveries of caterpillar or
grub, and chrysalis or nymph. It is with this order only with which we
have been dealing. To distinguish the aculeate section from the many
other forms of the
Hymenoptera
is too complex a task to undertake
here, but the presence of a narrow waist between the thorax and the body,
the number of joints in the antennæ never exceeding thirteen in
{131}
the male,
twelve in the female, and the presence of a sting capable of ejecting
poison in this latter sex, are the most prominent features by which the
aculeates may be recognized.

{132}

ON STRUCTURE

Although in the foregoing chapter a little has been said on this
subject, there is a great deal more that a student should learn about the
general form of these creatures.

They begin life as white or nearly colourless grubs, which, after
various changes of skin, assume what is called the nymph or pupa stage,
during which a change occurs, believed to be peculiar to the

Hymenoptera
; the fifth segment of the larval body is transferred
to the mass which is called the thorax, so that a portion of what looks
like thorax is really the first segment of the abdomen. Continental
writers call this portion sometimes the first abdominal segment and
sometimes the median segment, but Newman gave it a definite name, the
"propodeum", and the most convenient method seems to be to call it so,
and treat it as a part of the thorax, calling the first or basal segment
of the abdomen
{133}
that which immediately follows the
regional constriction, which occurs between the propodeum and the
abdomen.

Fig. 28.

a
Head.
a
1
Antennæ.
a
2

Ocelli.
a
3
Compound eyes.

b
1
Prothorax.
b
2
Scutum of
Mesothorax.
b
3
Scutellum of Mesothorax.

b
4
Post-Scutellum of Metathorax.
b
5

Propodeum.

c
1

c
2
, etc., Segments of
Abdomen.

Legs.
d
1
Coxa.
d
2
Trochanter.

d
3
Femur.
d
4
Tibia.

d
5
Tarsi.
d
6
Calcaria or Spurs.

d
7
Unguiculi or claws.
d
8

Pulvillus.

e
Front wing. 1 Costal nervure. 2 Post Costal nervure. 3 Median
nervure. 4 Posterior nervure. 5 Basal nervure. 6 Cubital nervure. 10 1st
Recurrent nervure. 11 2nd Recurrent nervure.

f.
Hind wing. 7 Anterior nervure. 8 Median nervure. 9 Posterior
nervure.

Cells.
A
Marginal.
B
Upper basal.
C
Lower basal.

D
1st Submarginal.
E
2nd Submarginal.
F
3rd
Submarginal.
G
1st Discoidal.
H
2nd Discoidal.
I
3rd
Discoidal.
J
1st Apical.
K
2nd Apical.

{134}

The perfect insect when it emerges has therefore a head, a thorax of
four segments, and an abdomen of seven visible dorsal segments in the
male, and of six in the female. The ♂ has six ventral segments
exposed, and often the apex of the eighth, which is frequently elongate,
the seventh being almost always short and hidden; the eighth dorsal
segment can be discovered hidden under the seventh, but it is very rarely
exposed. The head (
a
) bears numerous appendages; a pair of antennæ
(
a
1
), usually of thirteen joints in the male and of
twelve in the female; two compound eyes (
a
3
), composed
of many facets; three simple eyes (or ocelli) (
a
2
),
which are situated on its vertex; two
mandibles
; two

maxillæ
, bearing
palpi
on each side, of a varying number of
joints; and a
labium
, or tongue, which also bears at its base two
four-jointed palpi (cf. fig. 20).

The thorax, as we are considering it, consists of four
segments—the
prothorax
(
b
1
), which bears
the two front legs; the
mesothorax
(
b
2
), which
bears the intermediate pair of legs and the anterior pair of wings; and
the
metathorax
(
b
3
), which bears the posterior
pair of wings and the hind legs. The
{135}
propodeum has no
appendages. The mesothorax above has two parts, a larger portion in front
called by some the
scutum
(
b
2
), and a smaller
portion behind called the
scutellum
(
b
3
). These
are separated from each other by a transverse impression, and the
scutellum is often raised into a sort of little shield; behind this is
another little elevation called the
post-scutellum

(
b
4
); this is really the dorsal apex of the metathorax,
and behind this lies the
propodeum
(
b
5
). Each
leg is composed of various parts, and articulates into a cavity of the
thorax called the
acetabulum
. The first two joints of the leg, the

coxa
(
d
1
) and the
trochanter

(
d
2
), are very short; then follows the
femur
or
thigh (
d
3
); then the
tibia
or shin
(
d
4
); and finally the
tarsi

(
d
5
), which compose the foot. At the apex of the

tibia
are usually two spines called the
calcaria

(
d
6
). The
tarsi
are five-jointed, the joints
following each other in a linear arrangement, and in the

Anthophila
the basal joint is more or less dilated; the apical
joint bears two claws (
unguiculi
,
d
7
) which are
sometimes toothed, and between them, in some genera, there is what is
called a
pulvillus
(
d
8
) or cushion; this is very
large and dilated in some of the fossors.
{136}

The wing neuration is always rather troublesome, as various authors
use different names for the veins and cells. To begin with the anterior
wing (
e
), there are four nerves which start from the base and run
horizontally; the first of these, which forms the anterior margin of the
wing, is called the
costal nervure
(1); immediately below this,
and running almost parallel to it with scarcely any space between them,
is the
post-costal nervure
(2); these end in the
stigma

(
s
), a dark in-crassation towards the apex of the wing; from the
stigma a nerve, curving first downwards and then up to the anterior
margin of the wing, encloses the
marginal cell
(
A
). Below
the
post-costal
nervure, and situated about the centre of the
wing, is the third longitudinal nervure called the
median nervure

(3); behind this again runs the
posterior nervure
(4), and behind
that the actual margin of the wing which is not provided with a
protecting nervure, but is only folded back so as to receive the hooks of
the posterior wing. Across the wing at, roughly, about a third of its
length from the body runs the
basal nervure
(5); this extends in a
somewhat zigzag line from the
post-costal
to the
posterior
nervure
crossing the
median
, and
{137}
thereby enclosing two
cells, the
upper basal cell
(
B
) and the
lower basal
cell
(
C
). From the centre of the apical nerve of each of these
cells extends a longitudinal nervure; the upper of these runs out nearly
to the apical margin of the wing and is called the
cubital nervure

(6); this is united to the nervure of the
marginal cell
by one,
two, or three cross nervures, enclosing thereby one, two, or three cells
called the first (
D
), second (
E
), and third (
F
)

submarginal cells
. The nervure from the lower basal cell is a
short one, as it is met by a cross nervure called the first
recurrent
nervure
(10), which runs from the
cubital
to the

posterior
, thereby enclosing two cells, the first (
G
) and
second (
H
)
discoidal
. The
second recurrent
(11)
leaves the
cubital
nearer the apex of the wing than the first,
meeting a nervure which, springing from the outer posterior angle of the
second discoidal, closes the third discoidal (
I
), and, curving
slightly upwards, nearly reaches the apical margin of the wing. Beyond
the second recurrent, and behind this last nervure which we have been
talking about, are two spaces not actually enclosed, but called the

first
(
J
)
and second
(
K
)
apical
cells
.

The posterior wings have very few cells.
{138}
Like the anterior pair
they have three longitudinal nervures; the
anterior
(7), which
runs close and parallel to the anterior nerveless margin, and often
touches it at about half the length of the wing; the
median
(8)
and
posterior
(9) run in diverging lines from the base towards the
exterior margin of the wing, the anterior and median nervures being
almost always joined by a cross nervure, and the median usually united to
the posterior by a cross or curved nervure. The actual base of the
anterior wing is covered by a little convex somewhat shell-like cap,
called the
tegula
(
T
). The abdomen is composed of a series
of segments in linear arrangement (
c
1

c
2
, etc.). These call for no special remark, beyond
what has been said in the chapter on males and females, but those who
wish to investigate the very interesting questions connected with the
terminal segments of these creatures should consult some more technical
work.
[3]
The arrangements of
the mouth parts and of the apical segments of the Hymenoptera afford
perhaps the most important structural
{139}
characters of the
order, but they involve an amount of dissection and study which can only
be undertaken by those who are inclined to give themselves up to this
subject as a speciality.

{141}

INDEX

Abdomen,
125

Acetabulum,
135

Ammophila,
22

Andrena,
9
,
12
,
15
,
48
,
77
,
79
,
122
,
139

— fulva,
121

— rosæ,
138

— thoracica,
121

Antennæ,
101
,
103
,
134

Anthidium,
50
,
121

Anthophila,
6

Anthophora,
48
,
61
,
82
,
93
,
109
,
111
,
121

— pilipes,
61

— retusa,
62

Ants,
28
,
31
,
88

Aphides,
88

Apis,
16

Astatus,
103

Banded bodies,
120

Beetles,
20

Biting,
3
,
32

Black Species,
120

Bombus,
16

— terrestris,
41
,
42

Brain,
125

Bramble Stems,
12

Breeding,
113

Broods,
13

Burrows,
9

Calcaria,
70
,
135

Carder Bees,
40

Cardines,
75

Carpenter bee,
55

Caterpillar,
19
,
20

Cells,
10
,
12
,
28
,
29
,
40
,
58

— hexagonal,
28

— pitcher-shaped,
58

— waxen,
29
,
40

Ceratina,
47
,
128

Chimneys,
25

Chloroform,
118

Chrysis,
27

Cilissa,
48

Cleaning hairs,
68

Clover fertilization,
39

Cockroaches,
128

Cocoons,
33
,
58

Coleoptera,
128
,
129

Colletes,
44

Colonies,
5
,
63

Colour,
100

Colour schemes,
22

Combs,
23
,
68
,
69

Corbicula,
67

Coxæ,
135

Crabro,
95
,
102

— albilabris,
119

Cuckoos,
3
,
14
,
30
,
54

— flight of,
85

Cyanide,
116

Dasypoda,
48

Development,
124

Digestion,
125

Diggers,
6
,
7

{142}

Diptera,
129

Distribution,
105

Domestication,
41

Drone flies,
3

Dufourea,
106

Earwigs,
128

English names,
55

Epeolus,
45

Ether,
117

Eyes,
134

Females,
95

Femur,
135

Figwort,
36

Figure of insect,
133

Flies,
3
,
129

Flower lovers,
6

Flute,
57

Food,
6
,
28

Foot,
135

Formica,
34
,
59

— fusca,
119

— sanguinea,
89

Formicoxenus,
96

Fossors,
6
,
7

Galleries,
28

Grasshoppers,
19
,
128

Growth,
126

Guests of Ants,
89

Hairs,
65
,
71

Halictus,
13
,
15
,
17
,
77
,
94
,
97
,
119
,
122

Head,
125

Hemiptera,
129
,
130

Heterogyna,
28
,
31

Heteromorphæ,
130

Hive bee,
2
,
16

Homing instinct,
21

Homomorphæ,
130

Honey pots,
29

Hornets,
35

Humble bees,
39

— mutilated,
41

Hymenoptera,
128
,
129

Ichneumons,
21

Inquilines,
3

Jewel flies,
21
,
27

Keyhole wasps,
101

Killing bottles,
126

Knife-like hairs,
68

Labels,
118

Labial palpi,
5

Labium,
127
,
134

Larva,
11
,
13

Lasius niger,
91

— flavus,
91

Latin names,
55

Lawn bee,
9

Leaf-cutting bees,
52

Lepidoptera,
129

Ligula,
75
,
134

Limbs,
125
,
127

Locomotion,
125

Lodgers with ants,
89

Lomechusa,
89

Long-horned bee,
104

Lora,
74

Lysimachia,
106

Macropis,
106

Males,
95

Male wasp,
2

— hornet,
2

Mandibles,
127
,
129

Mason bee,
55

Maxillæ,
75
,
127
,
134

Mayflies,
128

{143}

Melecta armata,
61

— luctuosa,
62

Mentum,
74

Metœcus paradoxus,
38

Mimicking flies,
94

Miscophus,
119

Moss,
29

Mouse's nest,
29

Mouth,
128

Mutilla,
112
,
119

Myrmica,
34

Myrmosa,
100

Nests,
24
,
26
,
31
,
35
,
45
,
49

— in bramble stems,
45

— Humble bees,
40

— of leaves,
53

— of paper,
37

— in wren's nest,
41

Neuration,
136

— figure and explanation of,
133

Neuroptera,
128
,
129

Nodes,
33

Nomada,
15
,
48

Non-predaceous hymenoptera,
3

Nymph,
11

Odynerus,
24

Orthoptera,
128
,
130

Osmia,
48
,
56
,
120

— bicolor,
59
,
121

— inermis,
58

— leucomelana,
57

— parietina,
58

— rufa,
56

Ovaries,
4

Ovipositer,
1

Oxybelus,
86

Palm,
82

Palpi,
134

Panurgus,
49

Paper,
37

Paraglossæ,
76

Paralytics,
18

Plant lice,
19

Poison bags,
1

Pollen collecting,
65

Pompilus,
87

Ponera,
33

Porterage,
34

Post-scutellum,
135

Predaceous species,
3

Preservation,
116

Propodeum,
132
,
135

Prosopis,
44
,
46

— cornuta,
47

Pulvillus,
135

Queens,
4

Rarity,
105

Ray, John,
63

Sallows,
82

Sandy bank,
83

Saropoda,
93
,
111

Scale,
33

Scrophularia,
36

Scutellum,
135

Scutum,
135

Segments,
96

Setting,
117

Sexual structure,
100

Shin,
135

Snail shells,
12
,
57

Social species,
3
,
4
,
28

Solitary species,
3
,
4
,
6

Spade-like hairs,
69

Sphecodes,
13
,
15
,
17
,
48
,
97
,
122

Spiders,
19

Stinging,
2
,
38

Stings,
2
,
32

Stipes,
74

{144}

Straws,
12

Structure,
132

Stylops,
77

Submentum,
74

Swarming,
29

Tarsi,
135

Tegula,
133
,
138

Thigh,
135

Thorax,
125
,
129

Tibia,
135

Tomtit,
42

Tongues,
15
,
39
,
44
,
49
,
66
,
72

Trochanter,
135

Tubular entrance,
25

Unguiculi,
135

Vagaries of structure,
104

Velleius dilatatus,
38

Vespa sylvestris,
36

Walls,
12

Wasps, social,
35

— solitary,
24

Waspy coloration,
120
,
121

Wings,
110

— cells,
112
,
133

— folded,
24
,
28

— hooks,
110

— nervures,
133

Workers,
4

Wrens' nests,
41

Yellow-coloured species,
120

NOTES

[1]
In this case, only the actual
tongue (or
ligula
) and its
paraglossæ
are figured.

[2]

The Guests of Ants and
Termites
, by E. Wasmann, S. J., translated by H. Donisthorpe, F.Z.S.
(
Ent. Record
, Vol. xii., 1900.)

[3]
cf.
Transactions of the
Entomological Society of London
, 1884, p. 251 et seq.: Hymenoptera
Aculeate of the British Islands, etc.

End of Project Gutenberg's Wild Bees, Wasps and Ants, by Edward Saunders

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WILD BEES, WASPS AND ANTS ***

***** This file should be named 33874-h.htm or 33874-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/8/7/33874/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Keith Edkins and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.

*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).

Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License.  You must require such a user to return or
destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.

Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.

Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate

Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.