The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Children of Alsace, by René Bazin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

Title: The Children of Alsace
Les Oberlés

Author: René Bazin

Release Date: January 14, 2011 [EBook #34957]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHILDREN OF ALSACE ***

Produced by Hélène de Mink and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
been preserved. Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.
Further transcriber's notes are indicated by dotted lines under the text.
Scroll the mouse over the word and the original text will
appear
.

THE CHILDREN OF ALSACE

THE CHILDREN OF ALSACE

(
LES OBERLÉS
)

BY

RENÉ BAZIN

AUTHOR OF "THE NUN," "REDEMPTION," ETC.

WITH A PREFACE

BY

DR. ANGELO S. RAPPOPORT

NEW YORK

JOHN LANE COMPANY

MCMXII

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN

5

PREFACE

René Bazin is already known to the English public
as a writer of exquisite charm and wonderful sensibility.
"The Nun," "Redemption," and "This My
Son" have revealed his powers to appreciative
readers. Bazin is not only an original writer, a
charming story-teller, but also a deep thinker, a clear
delineator of human character and life, a wonderful
landscape-painter, and a bold realist. For it is real
life, humble, poignant, palpitating, which we meet
in his stories. Life, full of misery and suffering, but
also of pity and charity, of self-sacrifice and heroic
traits. Bazin is a passionate admirer of Nature, and
this admiration and love manifest themselves in his
preference for pastoral and rural scenes, and his
description of nature and peasant life.

Nature and climate, M. Bazin thinks, exercise a
paramount influence upon the soul, and produce deep
and permanent impressions.

But in none of his books has he laid so much stress
upon this mysterious influence of a country upon the
soul of its inhabitants as in "Les Oberlés," which is
now placed before English readers under the title
of "The Children of Alsace." For it is the country
of Alsace, with her woes and sorrows and sufferings,

6

her aspirations and hopes and dreams, which speaks
to us through the mouth of Jean Oberlé, the hero,
who mysteriously feels the influence of soil upon his
soul, and is drawn to France, since Alsace is sighing
under the German yoke, and her weeping soul has
fled to France there to wait the day of delivery
and freedom!

"Les Oberlés," or "The Children of Alsace,"
possesses all the elements necessary for a real drama,
for a great tragedy, namely, the clash of conflicting
passions, emotions, and duties. And these conflicting
passions arise where one has a right to expect
peace and goodwill. The author introduces us to
a divided family, and we see the husband rise against
his wife, the son against his father, and the brother
against the sister. Their different modes of thinking
and of feeling, their ambitions and dreams, turn these
beings, united by the ties of blood, into enemies.
But "Les Oberlés" is not only a family drama,
tragic, irreparable, but also depicts the love of the
native soil, a love almost physical, in conflict with
the love for the Greater Fatherland. It also shows
the clash of two civilisations, the Latin and the
Teuton, which for forty years have now been waging
war on the soil of conquered Alsace.

All these elements make "Les Oberlés" a really
tragic novel—a novel full of dramatic incidents, of
poignant scenes, but also full of life and love.

A. S. Rappoport.

London
,

November 1911
.

7

CONTENTS

PAGE

CHAPTER I

A February Night in Alsace

9

CHAPTER II

The Examination

36

CHAPTER III

The First Family Meeting

55

CHAPTER IV

The Guardians of the Hearth

75

CHAPTER V

Companions of the Road

88

CHAPTER VI

The Frontier

102

CHAPTER VII

The Easter Vigil

112

8

CHAPTER VIII

At Carolis

137

CHAPTER IX

The Meeting

150

CHAPTER X

The Dinner at the Brausigs'

163

CHAPTER XI

In Suspense

180

CHAPTER XII

The Hop-picking

184

CHAPTER XIII

The Ramparts of Obernai

216

CHAPTER XIV

The Last Evening

232

CHAPTER XV

Joining the Regiment

238

CHAPTER XVI

In the Forest of the Minières

255

9

THE CHILDREN OF ALSACE

CHAPTER I

A FEBRUARY NIGHT IN ALSACE

The moon was rising above the mists of the Rhine.
A man who was coming down from the Vosges by a
path—a good sportsman and great walker whom
nothing escaped—had just caught sight of her through
the slope of forest trees. Then he at once stepped
into the shadow of the plantations. But this single
glance through the opening, at the night growing
more and more luminous, was sufficient to make him
realise afresh the natural beauty amidst which he
lived. The man trembled with delight. The weather
was cold and calm—a slight mist rose from the
hollows. It did not bring with it yet the scent of
jonquils and wild strawberries, but only that other
perfume which has no name and no season—the
perfume of rosin, of dead leaves, of grass once again
grown green, of bark raised on the fresh skin of the
trees, and the breath of that everlasting flower which
is the forest moss. The traveller breathed in this
smell which he loved; he drank it in great draughts,
with open mouth, for more than ten strides, and
although accustomed to this nocturnal festival of the
forest, to these lights of heaven, to these perfumes of
earth, to these rustlings of silent life, he said aloud:

10

"Bravo, Winter! Bravo, the Vosges! They have
not been able to spoil you." And he put his stick
under his arm in order to make still less noise on the
sand and pine-needles of the winding path. Then
turning his head:

"Carefully, Fidèle, good friend. It is too beautiful."

Three steps behind him trotted a spaniel, long-limbed
and lean, with a nose like a greyhound, who
seemed quite grey, but who by daylight was a
mixture of fire-and-coffee-and-milk colour, with fringes
of soft hair marking the outline of his paws, belly,
and tail. The beast seemed to understand his master,
for he followed him without making any more noise
than the moon made in passing over the tops of the
pine-trees.

Soon the moonlight pierced through the branches;
breaking up the shade or sweeping it away from the
open spaces, it spread out across the slopes, enveloped
the trunks of trees, or studded them with stars, and
quite cold, formless, and blue, created out of these
same trees a new forest, which daylight never knew.
It was an immense creation—quick and enchanting.
It took but ten minutes. Not a tremor foretold it.
M. Ulrich Biehler continued his downward path, a
prey to growing emotion, stooping sometimes to get
a better view of the undergrowth, sometimes bending
over the ravines with beating heart, but watching
with head erect, like the roebucks when about to
leave the valleys for the upland pastures.

This enthusiastic traveller, still young in mind,
was, however, not a young man. M. Ulrich Biehler,
called M. Ulrich throughout the countryside, was
sixty years old, and his hair and beard, almost white,
proclaimed his age; but there had been more of the
sap of youth in him than in most, just as some possess
more bravery or more beauty, and something of this
youthfulness he had retained. He lived in the middle
of the mountain of Sainte Odile, exactly twelve

11

hundred feet in the air, in a forest-house without any
pretension to architecture, and without lands of any
sort except the sloping meadow on which it stood,
and at the back was a very small orchard, ravaged
periodically by hard winters. He had remained
faithful to this house, inherited from his father, who
had bought it for a holiday residence only, and here
he spent the whole year alone, although his friends,
like his lands, were plentiful in the plains. He was not
shy of men, but he did not like to give up his own
way of living, consequently there were some fanciful
stories told about him. They said that in 1870 he
had gone through the whole campaign wearing a
silver helmet, from the crest of which hung, instead
of horsehair, the hair of a woman. No one could say
if this legend were history. But twenty good people
from the plains of Alsace could affirm that there was
not among the French Dragoons a more indefatigable
horseman, a bolder scout, a more tender companion
in misery, or one more forgetful of his own suffering,
than M. Ulrich, proprietor of Heidenbruch, in the
mountain of Sainte Odile.

He had remained French under German rule. That
was at once his joy and the cause of the many difficulties
which he tried to surmount or to endure as a
set-off for the favour they showed him in allowing
him to breathe the air of Alsace. He knew how to
make himself respected in the rôle of a man vanquished,
tolerated, and watched. There must be no concession
which would show forgetfulness of the dear French
country, but there must be no provocation; he had
no taste for useless demonstration. M. Ulrich
travelled much in the Vosges, where he possessed
forests here and there, which he looked after himself.
His woods had the reputation of being among the
best managed in Lower Alsace. His house, shut up
for thirty years because of mourning, had, however,
a reputation for comfort and refinement. The few

12

persons, French or Alsatians, who had crossed the
threshold spoke of the graciousness of the host and
the art with which he made his guests welcome.
Above all, the peasants loved him, those who had
gone through the war with him, and even their sons,
who took off their hats when M. Ulrich appeared at
the corner of their vineyard or of their lucerne-field.

They recognised him a long way off because of his
slim, tall figure and his habit of wearing only light
clothes, which he bought in Paris, and invariably
chose in shades of brown, varying from the dark
brown of the walnut to the light brown of the oak.
His pointed beard, very well kept, added length to a
face which had but little colour and few wrinkles;
his mouth smiled readily under his moustaches, and
his prominent nose, with its fine outline, showed
purity of race; his kind, intelligent grey eyes would
quickly become haughty and defiant if one spoke of
Alsace; and the wide brow, which imparted a touch
of dreaminess to this face of a fighting man, seemed
larger still because of two bare patches extending
into the thick growth of stiff short hairs.

Now, on this particular evening M. Ulrich had
returned from visiting the wood-cutting going on
in the mountains of the Valley of the Bruche, and
his servants were not expecting him to go out again,
when after dinner he said to his servant, the old Lisa,
who was waiting at table:

"My nephew, Jean, arrives to-night at Alsheim,
and no doubt if I waited till to-morrow I should see
him here, but I prefer to see him down there, and
to-night. So I am starting. Leave the key under
the door, and go to bed."

He had immediately whistled for Fidèle, taken his
stick and gone down the path, which entered the
wood at some fifty paces below Heidenbruch. M.
Ulrich was clad, according to his custom, in a loose
coat and trousers of dead-leaf colour and a velvet

13

shooting-cap. He walked quickly, and in less than
half an hour he found himself at a place where the
path joined a wider alley, made for pedestrians and
for the pilgrims of Sainte Odile. The place was
mentioned in the guide-books, because for a hundred
yards one could look down on the course of a swift
stream which lower down the plain flowed through
the village of Alsheim; and especially because in an
opening of the ravine in the angle formed by two
slopes of the mountains, one could see, in daylight, a
corner of Alsace—villages, fields, meadows—and very
far away a vague streak of silver, which was the
Rhine, and beyond that the mountains of the Black
Forest—blue as flax and rounded as the loops of a
garland. In spite of the night, which limited his
vision, M. Ulrich, on arriving in the alley, looked in
front of him, through force of habit, but saw only a
triangle of steel-coloured darkness in the upper part
of which real stars shone, and lower down gleamed
luminous points the same size as the stars, lightly
veiled and surrounded with a halo—the lamps and
candles of the village of Alsheim. The traveller
thought of his nephew, whom he was presently to
embrace, and asked himself: "Whom am I going to
find? What has he become after three years' absence,
and three years in Germany?"

It was only a momentary pause. M. Ulrich crossed
the alley, and wishing to go the shortest way, passed
under the branches of a forest of great beech-trees,
which sloped steeply down towards a fir plantation,
where he could regain the road. Some dead leaves still
trembled at the ends of the lower branches, but the
greater number had fallen on those of the preceding
year. They had not left an inch of the soil uncovered,
and as thin as silk themselves, and quite pale, they
looked like a pavement of extremely smooth light-coloured
flagstones: the trunks, marbled with moss,
regular as columns, rose to a great height at the top,

14

very high up, the tips leant towards each other, and
their tenuous branches touched each other, outlined
the arch, and let the light pass through. A few
bushes broke the harmony of the lines. About a
hundred yards lower down, the barrier of green
trees seemed to form the solid wall of this ruined
cathedral.

Suddenly M. Ulrich heard a slight noise, which
another man would probably not have noticed: it
was in front of him, among the green firs towards
which he was advancing. It was the sound of a stone
rolling down the slopes, faster and faster, striking
against obstacles and rebounding. The noise grew
fainter and fainter and ended with a detonation,
sharply distinct, which proved that the stone had
reached the pebbly bottom of the hollow and split.
The forest had again become silent, when a second
stone, much smaller still, to judge by the sound it
called forth, also began to roll along in the shadow.
At the same time the dog's hair stood up, and he
came back growling to his master.

"Be quiet, Fidèle," he said. "They must not see
me!"

M. Ulrich thrust himself behind the trunk of a tree,
understanding that a living being was coming up
across the wood, and guessing who was going to
appear. Indeed, making a hole in the black curtain
of pine-trees, he now saw the head, the two forelegs,
and soon the whole body of a horse. A white, hurried
breath escaped from its nostrils and smoked in the
darkness. The animal was making immense efforts
to climb the steep slope. With straining muscles its
forefeet doubled up like hooks, its belly all but on
the ground, it advanced by jerks, but almost noiselessly,
sinking into the moss and the thick mass of
vegetation heaped on the soil, and hardly displacing
anything but the leaves, which slipped one over the
other with a murmur as of dropping water. It carried

15

a pale-blue horseman bending over the animal's neck
and shoulders, and holding his lance almost horizontally,
as if an enemy were near. The breath of the
man mingled with the breath of the horse in the cold
night air. They advanced, showing by their bearing
the difficulty of the upward struggle. Soon the
traveller distinguished the yellow cord on the rider's
tunic, the black boots beneath the dark breeches, the
straight sword hanging at the saddle-bow, and he
recognised a horseman of the regiment of Rhenish
Hussars garrisoned at Strasburg; then nearer still
he was able to distinguish on the black-and-white flag
of the lance a yellow eagle, indicating a non-commissioned
officer; he saw under the flat cap a beardless
face, ruddy and perspiring, with red-brown, fierce and
restless eyes, a face buffeted by the horse's mane in
motion, and frequently turning to the right, and he
named under his breath Gottfried Hamm, quartermaster
in the Rhenish Hussars, and son of Hamm
the police-constable of Obernai. The man passed by,
brushing against the tree behind which M. Ulrich was
hiding; the shadow of his body and of his horse
stretched across the feet of the Alsatian and on to
the neighbouring moss: they left in their wake an
odour of harness and of perspiration.

At the moment when he passed the tree he turned
his head again towards the right. M. Ulrich looked
in the same direction, which was where the greatest
length of the beech-wood could be seen. Thirty yards
farther on he discovered a second horseman coming
up the same track, then a third, who had become no
more than a grey silhouette between the columns of
beech-trees and then, judging by the shadowy movements,
farther on still, he divined that there were other
soldiers and other horses climbing the mountain.
Suddenly there was a flash in the depths of the wood,
as if a glowworm were flying by. It was an order.
All the men took one step to the right, and, forming

16

in single file, silently, without uttering a word,
continued their mysterious manœuvre. The shadows
moved for an instant in the depths of the forest; the
murmur of crushed and falling leaves became more
and more indistinct, then ceased, and the night seemed
once more to be empty of life.

"A formidable enemy," said M. Ulrich half aloud,
"who is kept in training day and night! There was
certainly an officer down there on the path. It was
in his direction they were all looking. He raised his
sword, bright in the moonlight, and those nearest saw
it. They all turned. How little noise they made!
All the same, I could have finished off two of them—if
we had been at war."

Then, noticing that his dog was now quietly looking
at him with nose in air and tail wagging, he added:

"Yes, yes, they are gone. You don't like them any
more than I do."

Before continuing his way, he waited to make sure
that the Hussars would not return in his direction.
He did not like meeting German soldiers. These
encountered hurt the sore and suspicious pride of the
conquered man; they hurt him through his fidelity to
France—through his love, which always dreaded a new
war—a war, the date of which he saw with astonishment
recede and recede. He would sometimes go a
long way round in order to avoid a troop on the march
on the high roads. Why had those Hussars come to
disturb his descent to Alsheim? Always these
manœuvres, always this thought of the West away
down there, to which they clung with such tenacity;
always this beast of prey who prowls supple and agile
on the summit of the Vosges, and who watches the
moment for descending.

M. Ulrich went down the beech-wood slopes, his
head bent, his mind full of sad memories, which a
word had been sufficient to call up—less than a word
even—for alas! mingled with them, and ready to rise

17

again out of the past, was all the youth of the man.
He was careful to make no noise, keeping his dog
behind him, and not caressing him when the poor
beast rubbed his nose against his master's hand as
if to say, "What is the matter then? Are they not
gone?"

In a quarter of an hour, by the wider road which
he re-entered at the end of the beech-wood, M. Ulrich
gained the edge of the forest. A cooler, stronger
breeze blew through the oak and hazel copses which
bordered the plain. He stopped and listened towards
the right, saying, with a displeased shrug of the
shoulders:

"That is how they will come back! Not a soul
will have heard them! For the moment let us forget
them and go and say 'How do you do?' to Jean
Oberlé."

M. Ulrich went down a last bit of short, steep path.
A few more steps and the screens of undergrowth and
brushwood which hid the view were passed. He
saw the entire sky unveiled, and below him, in front,
to the left and to the right, something of a softer,
more misty blue, the land of Alsace. The smell of
the fields and of plants wet with the dew, rose from
the soil like a harvest of the night. The wind wafted
it, the cold wind, the familiar passer-by on this plain,
the vagabond companion of the Rhine. One could
distinguish no detail in the shadow where Alsace
slept, except at a distance of a few hundred yards,
where lines of roofs clustered about a round grey
belfry ending in a steeple. That was the village of
Alsheim. M. Ulrich hastened on and soon found the
course of the stream again, now more rapid than
ever, the bank of which he had skirted in the
mountain; walked along by it, and saw stand out,
high and massive, in its park of trees despoiled by
winter, the first house of Alsheim—the house of the
Oberlés.

18

It was built on the right of the road, from which it
was separated, first by a white wall, then by a brook
which ran through the domain more than two hundred
yards farther, providing the water necessary for the
engines, and then flowing, enlarged and cunningly
directed, among the trees, to its outlet. M. Ulrich
went through the large gate of wrought iron which
opened on to the road, and passing by the lodge-keeper's
cottage, leaving to the right the timber-yard
full of piled-up wood, of cris-crossed planks, of poles,
and of sheds, he took the left avenue, which wound
between clumps of trees and the lawn, and reached
the flight of steps before a two-storied house, with
dormer windows, built of the red stone of Saverne
and dating from the middle of the century. It was
half-past eight. He went eagerly up to the first floor
and knocked at the door of a room.

A young voice answered:

"Come in!"

M. Ulrich had not time to take off his shooting-cap.
He was seized round the neck, drawn forward, and
embraced by his nephew, Jean Oberlé, who said:

"Good evening, Uncle Ulrich! Ah! How glad I
am! What a good idea!"

"Come, let go of me! Good evening, my Jean!
You have just arrived?"

"I got here at three o'clock this afternoon. I
should have come to see you to-morrow, you know!"

"I was certain of it! But I could not wait so long.
I simply had to come down and see you. It is three
years since I saw you, Jean! Let me look at you!"

"At your leisure," said the young man, laughing.
"Have I changed?"

He had just pushed a leathern arm-chair up to his
uncle, and sat down facing him, on a sofa covered
with a rug and placed against the wall.

Between them there was a table, on which burned a
little oil lamp of chased metal. Near by through the

19

window, whose curtains were drawn aside, the park
could be seen all motionless and solitary in the moonlight.
M. Ulrich scrutinised Jean with a curiosity at
once affectionate and proud. He had grown—he was
a little taller than his uncle. His solid Alsatian face
had taken on a quiet firmness and more pleasing
lines. His brown moustache was thicker, his easy
gestures were now those of a man who has seen
the world. He might have been mistaken for a
Southerner because of the Italian paleness of his
shaven cheeks, of his eyes encircled with shadow,
because of his dark hair which he wore parted
at the side, and because of his pale lips opening
over fine healthy teeth, which he showed when
he spoke or smiled. But several signs marked him
a Child of Alsace. The width of his face across
the cheek-bones, his eyes green as the forests of
the Vosges, and the square chin of the peasants of
the valley.

He had inherited some of their characteristics, for
his great grandfather had guided the plough. He
had their sturdy horseman's body. The uncle also
guessed, by the youthfulness of the glance which met
his, that Jean Oberlé, the man of twenty-four, whom
he was now looking at once more, was not very
different morally from him whom he had known
formerly.

"No," he said, after a long pause, "you are the
same!—only you are a man—I was afraid of greater
changes."

"And why?"

"Because, my boy, at your age especially there are
certain journeys which are crucial tests. But first,
where do you come from, exactly?"

"From Berlin, where I passed my
Referendar

examination."

The uncle laughed a jerky laugh, which he repressed
quickly, and which was lost in his grey beard.

20

"Let us call that the
Licence en droit
examination—if
you kindly will."

"Most willingly, uncle."

"Then give me a fuller explanation and one more
up-to-date, for you must have had your diploma in
your pocket more than a year. What have you
done with your time?"

"It's very simple. The year before last I passed
my examination, as you know, in Berlin, so finishing
my law studies. Last year I worked with a lawyer
till August. Then I travelled through Bohemia,
Hungary, Croatia, and the Caucasus—with father's
permission. I took six months over it. I returned to
Berlin to get my student's luggage and to pay some
farewell visits—and here I am."

"Well, and your father? In my haste to see you
again I have not asked after him. Is he well?"

"He is not here."

"What! Was he obliged to be absent on the very
evening of your return?"

Jean answered with a little bitterness:

"He was obliged to be present at a great dinner at
the Councillor von Boscher's. He has taken my
sister. It is a very grand reception, it seems."

There was a short silence. The two men smiled no
longer. They felt between them—quite near—the
supreme question, imposing itself upon them after a
three minutes' conversation, that exasperating and
fatal question which cannot be avoided, which unites
and divides, which lurks beneath all social intercourse,
honours, mortifications, and institutions, the
question which has kept Europe under arms for
thirty years.

"I dined alone," said Jean, "that is to say, with my
grandfather."

"Not much of a companion, poor man. Is he not
always so depressed, and so very infirm?"

"But his mind is very much alive, I assure you!"

21

There was a second silence, after which M. Ulrich
asked, hesitatingly:

"And my sister? Your mother? Is she with
them?"

The young man nodded an affirmative.

The elder man's grief was so intense that he turned
away his eyes so that Jean might not see all the
suffering they expressed. He raised them by chance
to a water-colour by that master of decorative art,
Spindler, hanging on the wall, and which represented
three beautiful Alsatian girls amusing themselves
swinging. Quickly he looked his nephew straight in
the face, and, his voice broken with emotion, said:

"And you? You, too, could have dined with the
Councillor von Boscher, considering how intimate
you are with these Germans. Did you not wish to
follow your parents?"

"No."

The word was said decidedly, simply. But M. Ulrich
had not got the information he sought. Yes, Jean
Oberlé had certainly become a man. He refused to
blame his family, to voice any opinion which would
be an accusation of the others. His uncle continued
with the same ironical accent:

"Nevertheless, my nephew, all the winter through
your Berlin successes were dinned into my ears.
They did not spare me. I knew you were dancing
with our fair enemies. I knew their names."

"Oh, I beg you," said Jean seriously, "do not let us
joke about these questions—like people who dare not
face them and give their opinion. I have had a
different education from yours, it is true, uncle—a
German education. But that does not diminish my
love for this country; on the contrary...."

M. Ulrich stretched his hand across the table and
pressed that of Jean.

"So much the better," he said.

"Did you doubt it?"

22

"I did not doubt it, my child—I did not know.
I see so many things that pain me—and so many
convictions surrendered."

"The proof that I love our Alsace is shown by my
intention to live in Alsheim."

"What!" said M. Ulrich, stupefied. "You give up
the idea of entering the German Administration—as
your father desires you should do? It is grave—a
serious thing, my friend, to rob him of his ambition.
You were the subject of the future. Does
he know?"

"He suspects; but we have not yet had any
explanations on the matter. I have not had time
since my return."

"And what will you do?"

The youthful smile reappeared on the lips of Jean
Oberlé.

"I shall cut wood, as he does, as my grandfather
Phillipe does; I shall settle among you here. When
I travelled in Germany and in Austria, after my
examination, it was chiefly that I might study the
forests, the saw-mills, and the factories like our own.
You are weeping?"

"Not quite."

M. Ulrich was not weeping, but he was obliged to
dry his wet eyelids with the tip of his finger.

"It would be for joy, in any case, my dear boy.
Oh, for a true and great joy. To see you faithful to
what I love best in the world. To keep you with us—to
see you determined not to accept appointments
and honours from those who have violated your
country.... Yes, it was the dream I dared no
longer dream.... Only, quite frankly, I cannot
understand it. I am surprised. Why are you not
like your father, or like Lucienne, who have so
openly rallied to the enemy? You studied law in
Munich, in Bonn, in Heidelberg, in Berlin; you have
just passed four years in Germany, without speaking

23

of your college years. How did you avoid becoming
German?"

"I am less so than you."

"That is hardly possible."

"Less than you, because I know them better.
I have judged them by comparison. Well, they are
our inferiors."

"Well, I
am
pleased. We hear nothing but the
opposite of this. In France, above all, the praise
of the conquerors of 1870 continues without intermission."

The young man, touched by M. Ulrich's emotion,
leaned no longer on the sofa, but bending forwards,
his face lit up by the lamp, which made his green
eyes appear more brilliant, said:

"Do not mistake me, Uncle Ulrich. I do not hate
the Germans, and in that I differ from you. I even
admire them, for in some things they are admirable.
Among them I have friends I esteem greatly. I shall
have others. I belong to a generation which has
not seen what you have seen, and which has lived
differently—I have not been conquered!"

"Happily, not!"

"Only the more I know them, the more I feel myself
different from them; I feel I am of another race,
with another category of ideals into which they do
not enter, which I find superior, and which, without
knowing why, I call 'France.'"

"Bravo, Jean, bravo!"

The old dragoon officer bent forward—he also was
quite pale—and the two men were only separated by
the width of the table.

"What I call France, uncle, what I have in my
heart, like a dream, is a country where there is a
greater facility for thought."

"Yes——"

"For speech——"

"That's it!"

24

"For laughter."

"How right you are!"

"Where souls have infinite shades of colour! A
country that has the charm of a woman one loves, as
it were a still more beautiful Alsace."

Both had risen, and M. Ulrich drew his nephew
towards him, and pressed that fervent head against
his breast.

"Frenchman!" said he, "Frenchman to the marrow
of your bones, and in every drop of blood in your
veins! My poor boy!"

The young man continued, his head still resting on
the older man's shoulder:

"That is why I cannot live over yonder—across
the Rhine—and why I shall live here!"

"Well might I say 'poor boy'!" answered M.
Ulrich. "All is changed—alas! Even here in your
home. You will suffer, Jean, with a nature like yours.
I understand everything now—everything."

Then letting his nephew go:

"How glad I am I came to-night. Sit down there
quite close to me. We have so much to say to each
other—Jean, my Jean!"

They sat down side by side, happy, on the sofa.
M. Ulrich stroked his pointed beard into its habitual
well-groomed neatness. He recovered from his
emotion, and said:

"Do you know that by speaking of France as we
have spoken this evening, we have committed misdemeanours
such as I delight in? It is not allowed.
If we had been out of doors and Hamm had heard us,
we should have been speedily dealt with—there would
have been an official report!"

"I met him this afternoon."

"And I saw the son pass by in the depths of the
wood just now. He is a non-commissioned officer in
the Rhenish Hussars—the regiment which will soon
be yours. Is that the carriage I hear?"

25

"No."

"Listen, then!"

They listened, gazing out of the window at the
park, which was lit up by the full high moon; at the
lawn in the shape of a lyre with its two white avenues,
at the clumps of trees, and farther on the tile roofs of
the saw-mill. Not a sound could be heard save the
fall of the brook at the factory sluice, a monotonous
sound which seemed now near, now far, according to
the direction and strength of the freshening wind
which was now blowing from the north-east, "from
the Cathedral platform," as Uncle Ulrich said, thinking
of Strasburg.

"No; what you hear," said Jean Oberlé, after listening
for a while, "is the noise of the sluice. Father
told the coachman to go to Molsheim to wait for the
eleven-thirty train. We have time to chat."

They had time, and they made good use of it.
They began to speak softly, without haste or difficulty,
like those who have recognised that they agree on
essentials and who can now safely open up all other
questions, even the smallest. They spoke of the
year's voluntary service Jean had been allowed to
postpone until he was twenty-four, and of that new
life he was going to begin at Strasburg—of the ease
with which he could come nearly every Sunday to
Alsheim. Then, this dear name having been repeated,
uncle and nephew took pleasure in their recollections
of the country, first of Alsheim, then of Sainte Odile,
of the forest-dwelling of Heidenbruch, of Obernai, of
Saverne, where the uncle had forests, of Guebwiller,
where he had relations. It was Alsace they evoked.
They thoroughly understood one another. They
smoked, their legs crossed, seated one in each corner
of the sofa, letting their words flow freely, and
laughing often. Their conversation was so prolonged
that the Black Forest cuckoo clock hanging over the
door struck midnight.

26

"Do you suppose we have disturbed your grandfather?"
asked M. Ulrich, getting up, and pointing
with his hand to the wall which separated the young
man's room from that of the sick man.

"No," said Jean; "he hardly sleeps at all now—I
am sure it has pleased him to hear me laugh. As
my family left me at five o'clock I spent a good deal
of my time with him, and I watched him closely.
He hears and understands everything. He recognised
your voice, I am sure, and perhaps he has caught a
word here and there."

"That will have pleased him, my boy. He belongs
to the very old Alsace, that country which seems
almost fabulous to you, and to which I also belong,
although I am much younger than M. Oberlé. It
was wholly French, that Alsace, and not a man of
that time has changed. Look at your grandfather—look
at old Bastian. We are the generation who
suffered. We represent grief—we others. Your
father embodies resignation."

"And I?"

Uncle Ulrich looked at the young man, with his
far-seeing eyes, and said:

"You—oh, you are Romance."

They would have smiled, both of them, but they
could not, as if that word had been too perfectly
accurate, which is not always the case with human
judgments—as if they felt that Fate was there in this
room, invisible, who repeated to them at the bottom
of their hearts at the same time: "Yes, it is true—"this
one is Romance." The grief which was oppressing
them was only to be explained by the imminence
of life's mystery. It faded away. M. Ulrich reached
out his hand to his nephew, more gravely than he
would have done if that word had not escaped him,
which he did not regret, but which remained present
with him.

"Good-bye, dear Jean. I would rather not wait

27

for my brother-in-law. I do not know what attitude
I should take up towards him. All you have told me
would embarrass me. You will wish him good night
for me. I will go home through the woods by moonlight.
What a pity I have not my gun with me and
the good luck to come across a brace of grouse in the
fir wood."

To reach the staircase he took some careful steps
on the carpet in the passage.

"Uncle," said Jean, in a low tone, "if you would
go to my grandfather I am sure he would be pleased—I
am sure he is not sleeping."

Uncle Ulrich, who was walking in front, stopped
and retraced his steps. Jean turned the handle of
the door near which he was, and going first into the
room, said, in a lowered voice:

"Grandfather, I bring you a visitor—Uncle Ulrich—who
wishes to see you."

They were in the semi-darkness of a large room,
the curtains of which had been drawn, and a nightlight,
in transparent china, placed at the end of the
room on the left between the closed window and a
bed which occupied the corner, was the sole light.
On the table beside the bed, in the little luminous
halo which surrounded the nightlight, was a small
crucifix of copper, and a gold watch, the only shining
objects in the room. In the bed an old man was
sitting rather than lying, his shoulders covered with
a grey wool crossover, his back and head supported
by pillows, his hands hidden under the sheets, which
still kept the folds of the linen press. A tapestry
riband, serving as bell-cord and finishing in a fringe,
reached to the middle of the bed. The man who was
sleeping or waking there was impotent. Life with
him was withdrawing more and more within. He
walked and moved with difficulty. He no longer
spoke. Under his thick, pale cheeks his mouth moved
only to eat and to say three words—three cries—always

28

the same: "Hunger, Thirst. Go away!" A
sort of senile laziness allowed his jaw to hang, the
jaw that had commanded many men. M. Ulrich and
Jean went to the middle of the room without his
giving the least sign that he was conscious of their
presence. This poor human ruin was, however, the
same man who had founded the factory at Alsheim,
who had raised himself from the condition of a little
country proprietor, who had been elected
protesting

deputy, who had been seen and heard in the Reichstag,
claiming the unrecognised rights of Alsace and
demanding justice of Prince Bismarck. Intelligence
was watching, imprisoned, like the flame which lit up
the room that night; but it expressed itself no longer.
In this uninterrupted dream what men and things
must pass before the mental vision of him who knew
the whole of Alsace, who had gone through it in
every direction, who had drunk of its white wines at
all the tables of the rich and the poor; traveller,
merchant, forester, and patriot! And it was he—this
wrinkled bald head, this lowering face, these heavy
eyelids, between which a slow, sad eye slipped to and
fro like a billiard ball in the immovable slit of a bell.
However, the two visitors had the impression that his
gaze rested on them with an unusual pleasure.

They kept silence so as to let the old man savour
the sweetness of a thought they would never, never
know. Then Uncle Ulrich went near the bed, and,
placing his hand upon the arm of Philippe Oberlé,
bending down slightly to be nearer his ear and to
more easily meet his eyes, which were raised with
difficulty:

"We have talked a good deal, M. Oberlé, your
grandson and myself. He is a good fellow—your
Jean!"

A movement of the whole upper part of the body
slowly changed the position of the head of the old
man, who was trying to see his grandson.

29

"A good fellow," continued the forester, "whose
stay in Berlin has not spoiled him. He has remained
worthy of you—an Alsatian, a patriot. He does you
honour."

Though there was only the tiny floating light in
the room, Uncle Ulrich and Jean thought they perceived
a smile on the face of the old man, the answer
from a soul still young.

They quietly withdrew, saying:

"Good night, M. Oberlé. Good night, grandfather."

The flame of the nightlight flickered, displacing
lights and shadows; the door was shut, and the
interrupted dream continued in the room, where
hardly anything had entered since sunset save the
hours struck in the belfry of the church of Alsheim.
M. Ulrich and his nephew parted at the foot of the
staircase. The night was cold, the grass all white
with frost.

"Good time for walking!" said M. Ulrich; "I shall
expect you at Heidenbruch."

He whistled for his dog, and stroking its red-brown
head, said:

"Take me home, for I am going to dream all the
time of what that boy told me!"

Scarcely had he gone some few hundreds of yards—the
sound of his footstep could still be heard on the
road going up towards the Wood of Urlosen—when
in the calm of the night Jean caught the sound of the
trotting horses coming from the Obernai district.
The noise of their shoes striking the metalled road
sounded like flails on a threshing-floor; it was a rural
sound, and not disturbing; it broke no rest. Fidèle,
who was barking furiously towards the edge of the
forest, must have had other reasons to show her teeth
and give tongue. Jean listened to the carriage
coming nearer. Soon the noise grew less and less,
then became deadened, and he knew that the carriage
had passed between the walls of the village, or at

30

least had entered the circle of orchards which made
Alsheim in the summer a nest of apple-trees, cherries,
and walnuts. Then it swelled and sounded clear like
a train coming out of a tunnel. The gravel scrunched
at the end of the avenue. Two lamps turned and
passed rapidly across the park; the grass, the shrubs,
the lower trunks of trees, arose abruptly out of the
darkness and as abruptly sank back into it again, and
the brougham stopped before the house. Jean, who
had remained at the top of the staircase, went down
and opened the door. A young girl got out at once;
her face was rosy, and she was wrapped all in white—white
mantilla, coat of white wool, and white shoes.
In passing, almost in the air, she bent to the right,
just touched Jean's forehead with a kiss, and half
opened two lips heavy with sleep.

"Good night, little brother."

And picking up her skirt with a loose grasp, with
wavering movements, her head already on the pillow
as it were, she went up the stairs and disappeared
into the vestibule.

"Good evening, my son," said the authoritative
voice of a man. "You have waited for us; you were
wrong. Come quickly, Monica, the horses are very
hot. Auguste, you will give them twelve litres
to-morrow. You would have done better to have
gone with us, Jean. It was all very nice. M. von
Boscher asked twice about you."

The person who spoke thus, now to one and now
to the other, had had time to get out of the carriage,
to shake hands with Jean, to turn towards
Madame Oberlé, still seated in the back of the
carriage, to go half-way up the flight of steps, to
inspect with the eye of a connoisseur the two black
horses, whose wet backs looked as if they had been
rubbed with soap. His grey whiskers framed a full
and solid face; his overcoat was unbuttoned, showing
the open waistcoat and the shirt, where three Rhine

31

stones shone; his oratorical hand only appeared a
moment. After having given his opinion and his
orders, Joseph Oberlé—vigilant master who forgot
nothing—quickly raised his double chin and fixed his
eyes on the end of the enclosure, where the pyramids
of felled trees were resting, to see if there were any
signs of fire visible, or if any shadow prowled round
the saw-mill; then, nimbly mounting the second
flight of steps two at a time, he entered the house.
His son had answered nothing. He was helping
Madame Oberlé out of the carriage, taking from her
her gloves and fan, and asking:

"You are not so very tired, are you, mother
darling?"

Her dear eyes smiled, her long mouth said:

"Not too tired; but it is not for me, now, my dear.
You have an old mother!"

She leaned on the arm of her son—from a mother's
pride more than from necessity. There was infinite
sadness in her smile, and she seemed to ask Jean, at
whom she looked while going up the steps, "You
forgive me for having gone there? I have suffered."

She was wearing a black satin dress. She had
diamonds in her hair, still black, and a collar of blue
fox on her shoulders. Jean thought she looked like
an unhappy queen, and he admired the elegance of
her head, of her walk, and her fine carriage. She
was of an old Alsatian family, and he felt himself the
son of this woman with a pride he showed only to
her.

He accompanied her, giving her his arm all the
time so as to have the joy of being nearer to her,
and to stop her on nearly every step of the staircase.

"Mamma, I have spent an excellent evening. It
would have been delicious if only you had been
there! Imagine, Uncle Ulrich came at half-past
eight, and he only set out for home at midnight, just
now."

32

Madame Oberlé smiled a melancholy smile and said:

"He never stops as long as that for us. He keeps
away."

"You mean to say that he keeps away! I will
bring him back to you."

She stopped in her turn, looked at this son, whom
she had not seen since the afternoon, and smiled
more gaily.

"You love my brother?"

"Better than I used to. I seem to have just
discovered him."

"You were too young before."

"And how we have talked! We agree on all
points."

The gentle maternal eyes sought those of her child
in the twilight of the staircase.

"Oh, all?" she asked.

"Yes, mamma, on all!"

They had arrived at the top of the stairs. She
placed her gloved finger on her mouth. She withdrew
her arm which she had placed in that of her
son. She was at the door of her room, facing M.
Philippe Oberlé's room. Jean kissed her, withdrew a
little, returned to her, and pressed her once again to
his heart silently.

Then he took a few steps down the passage,
looked again at this woman dressed in black, and
whom mourning suited so well—so simple with her
drooping white hands and her erect head, so firm of
feature, so gentle in expression.

He murmured gaily:

"Saint Monica Oberlé, pray for us!"

She did not seem to hear him, but she remained,
her hand on the door-handle without entering, as
long as Jean could see her, Jean, who was going
backwards step by step, farther away, into the shadows
of the passage.

He entered his room, his heart joyful, his mind full

33

of thoughts, all those thoughts of the past evening
coming back now with swift flight in the solitude of
the present. Feeling that he would not sleep at once,
he opened the window. The cold air blew steadily
from the north-east. The mist had fled. From his
room Jean could see, beyond the wide strip of
cultivated hilly ground, the forests where Shadow
all night long wound and unwound her folds, away to
the heights crowned here and there by a spiked cluster
of ancient woods, which broke the line of hills and
wreathed itself about in stars. He tried to find the
house of M. Ulrich. And in thought he saw again
him who ought to be arriving home, when voices
began to sing on the edge of the forest. A shiver
of pleasure seized the nerves of the young man, who
was a passionate musician. The voices were beautiful,
young, and in tune. There were more than
twenty of them certainly, perhaps thirty or fifty.
He missed the words because of the distance. It
was like the sound of an organ in the night. They
flung out to the wind of Alsace a song of a spirited
rhythm. Then three distinct words reached Jean's
ears. He shrugged his shoulders, irritated with
himself for not having understood at once. It was
a chorus of German soldiers coming back from the
manœuvre of those Rhenish Hussars M. Ulrich had
met coming down the mountain. According to
custom, they sang to keep themselves awake, and
because there was in their songs the power of the
word Fatherland. The horses' hoofs accompanied
the melody like muffled cymbals. The words escaped
and vibrated:

Stimmt an mit hellem hohen Klang,

Stimmt an das Lied der Lieder.

Des Faterlandes Hochgesang,

Das Waldthal hall es wieder."

Jean would have been glad to stop the song.

34

How many times, however, and in all the German
Provinces, had he not heard the soldiers sing? Why
should he feel sad at the song of these men?
Why did the words enter into his soul so painfully,
although he knew them and could repeat them from
memory? When some two hundred yards from the
village they became silent. Only the clatter of hoofs
continued drawing nearer to Alsheim and echoing
above it. Jean leaned forward to see the horsemen
pass in the little market town. He could see them
through a large opening in the wall surrounding the
park, secured by an iron gate just in front of the
house—a moving mass in a brown dust that the wind
blew back, leaning like barley beards in the ear. The
men were not to be distinguished from each other,
nor the horses. Jean thought, with a secret and
increasing pain, "How many there are!"

At Berlin, at Munich, at Heidelberg, they only
aroused an idea of strength without any immediate
aim or object. The enemy had not been specially
singled out; it was everything opposed to the greatness
of the German Empire. Jean Oberlé had more
than once admired the march of regiments and the
wonderful power of the man who commanded so many
men. But here on the frontier, on the ground still
bloody with the last war, there were memories
which showed only too well who was aimed at and
threatened. The sight—the noise—of the soldiers
made him dream of butcheries, of death, and of the
fearful mourning which remains. They were passing
between the houses. The noise of the squadrons, of
men and beasts shook the windows. The little town
seemed asleep. Neither the soldiers nor their leaders
noticed anything; but in many of the houses a
mother woke and sat up in her bed, shivering; a
man stretched out his fist and cursed these conquerors
of past days. God alone knew the drama.
They passed by. When the last squadron had

35

finished throwing shadows across the road, between
the two pillars of the gate, Jean thought he saw, in
the dust that was settling, a horseman facing the
house. Was the horse refusing to advance? No;
he was at rest. The horseman must be an officer—something
golden placed in several rows across his
breast sparkled. He did not move, firm in his saddle,
young certainly, he gazed in front of him. This
lasted scarcely a minute. Then he lowered the sabre
he held in his hand, and having saluted, put spurs to
his horse, which rushed away. The scene had been
so quick that Jean might have thought it an illusion,
if the gallop of the beast had not sounded in the
village street.

"Some Teutonic joke," he thought—"a way this
officer has found of saying that the house pleases
him! Thanks!"

The regiment had already left the village and
ridden away to the wide plain. The houses had gone
to sleep once more. The wind blew towards the
green Vosges. In the opposite quarter, far away
now, like a religious hymn, rose again the song of
the German soldiers, who were celebrating the German
Fatherland whilst marching towards Strasburg.

36

CHAPTER II

THE EXAMINATION

On the following day the morning was far advanced
when Jean left his room and appeared on the flight
of steps built of the red stone of Saverne like the
house, which opened on to the park in two flights
of long steps. He was dressed in shooting clothes—of
which he was fond—gaiters of black leather,
breeches and coat of blue wool, with a hat of soft
felt, in the ribbon of which he stuck a grouse feather.
From the steps he asked:

"Where is my father?"

The man whom he addressed, the gardener, busy
raking the avenue, answered:

"Monsieur is in the office at the saw-mill."

The first thing that Jean Oberlé saw on raising his
eyes was the Vosges mountains, clothed with forests
of pines, with trails of snow in the hollows, and with
low, rapid clouds hiding the peaks. He trembled with
joy. Then having gazed at the lowest mountain
slopes, at the vineyards, and then the meadows, as if
to impress on his memory all the details of these
places found again after a long absence, and above
all with the added satisfaction of remaining among
them, his eyes fastened on the red roofs of the saw-mill,
which made a barrier at the end of the Oberlé
property, on the chimneys, on the high building
where the turbines were, to the right on the course of

37

the mountain stream of Alsheim, and nearer on the
timber-yard whence the factory got its supplies, on
the heaps of wood from trees of all sorts—beams,
planks, which rose in pyramids and enormous cubes,
beyond the winding alleys and the clumps of trees,
some two hundred yards from the house. Jets of
white steam in many places escaped from the roof of
the saw-mill, and rested on the north wind like the
clouds up above.

The young man went to the left, crossed the park,
formerly planted and designed by M. Philippe Oberlé,
and which was now beginning to be a freer and more
harmonious corner of nature, and turning towards
the piles of oak trunks, elms, and pines, went to
knock at the door of the long building.

He entered the glass pavilion which served the
master for a workroom. He was engaged in reading
the day's letters. Seeing his son appear, he put the
papers on the table, made a sign with his hand which
meant "I expected your visit—sit down"—and moving
his arm-chair, he said:

"Well, my boy! What have you to say to me?"

M. Joseph Oberlé was a ruddy man, quick and
authoritative. Because of his shaven lips, his short
whiskers, the correctness of his clothes, the easiness
of his words and manners, he had sometimes been
taken for an old French magistrate. The mistake did
not arise with those who thought thus. It had been
made by circumstances which had taken M. Joseph
Oberlé in spite of himself from the way wherein he
had intended to go, and which should have led him to
some public office in the magistrature or the administration.
The father, the founder of the dynasty,
Philippe Oberlé, son of a race of peasant proprietors,
had founded at Alsheim in 1850 this mechanical saw-mill,
which had rapidly prospered. He had become in
a few years rich and powerful, very much beloved,
because he neglected no means to that end; increasingly

38

influential, but without at all foreseeing
the events which would one day induce him to put
his influence at the service of Alsace.

The son of this industrial workman could hardly
escape the ambition of being a public functionary.
That is what happened—his education had prepared
him for it. Taken early from Alsace, pupil for eight
years at the Lycée Louis le Grand, then law student,
he was at twenty-two years old attached to the office
of the Prefect of Charente, when the war broke out.
Retained for some months by his chief, who thought
it would please his friend the great manufacturer of
Alsace if he sheltered the young man behind the
walls of the prefecture of Angoulême; then on his
demand incorporated tardily in the Army of the Loire,
Joseph Oberlé marched much, retired much, suffered
much from cold, and fought well on rare occasions.
When the war was finished he had to make his choice.

If he had consulted his personal preferences only,
he would have remained French, and he would have
continued to follow an administrative career, having
a taste for authority and few personal opinions on
the quality of an order to be transmitted. But
his father recalled him to Alsace. He implored him
not to leave the work begun and prospering. He
said: "My industry is become German by conquest;
I cannot leave the instrument of my fortune and your
future to perish. I detest the Prussians, but I take
the only means which I have of continuing my life
usefully. I was a Frenchman, I become an Alsatian.
Do the same. I hope it will not be for long."

Joseph Oberlé had obeyed with real repugnance—repugnance
at submitting to the law of the conqueror,
repugnance at living in the village of Alsheim, lost at
the foot of the Vosges. He had even committed at
this time imprudences of speech and attitude which he
regretted now. For the conquest had lasted; the
fortunes of Germany were strengthened, and the young

39

man, associated with his father and become the master
of a factory, had felt the meshes of an administration
similar to the French administration, but more harassing,
stricter, and better obeyed, knotting itself and
drawing closer round him. He saw that on every
occasion, without any exception, the German
authorities would put him in the wrong; the police,
the magistrates, the functionaries established for
public services which he used daily, the commission of
public roads, the railways, the water supply, the
forests, the customs. The malevolence which he met
with on all sides and in all departments of German
administration, although he had become a German
subject, was aggravated and had become quite a
danger to the prosperity of the house of Alsheim,
when, in 1874, M. Philippe Oberlé, giving to his son
the direction of the saw-mill, had yielded to the
insistences of that poor forsaken country, which
wanted to make of him, and did make him, the representative
of her interests at the Reichstag, and
one of the protesting deputies of Alsace.

This experience, the weariness of waiting, the removal
of M. Philippe Oberlé, who spent a part of the
year at Berlin, modified sensibly the attitude of the
young head of the industrial enterprise. His first
fervour, and that of others, grew less. He saw the
anti-German manifestations of Alsatian peasants becoming
rarer and more prudent. He hardly did any
business with France; he no longer received visits
from French people, even those made from interested
and commercial motives. France, so near by distance,
became like a walled-in country, shut up, and whence
nothing more came to Alsace, neither travellers nor
merchandise. The newspapers he received left him
in no doubt as to the slow abandonment which certain
French politicians counselled under the name of wisdom
and concentration.

In ten years M. Joseph Oberlé had used up, till he

40

could no longer find a trace in himself, all that his

temperament
allowed him of resistance to oppose to
an established power. He was rallied. His marriage
with Monica Biehler, desired and arranged by the old
and ardent patriot who voted in the Reichstag against
Prince Bismarck, had had no influence on his new ideas
and attitude, at first secret, soon suspected, then known,
then affirmed, then scandalously published by M.
Joseph Oberlé. He gave pledges to the Germans,
then hostages. He overstepped the boundary. He
went farther than obedience. The foremen of the
factory, old soldiers of France, admirers of M. Philippe
Oberlé, companions of his struggle against the Germanisation
of Alsace, bore with difficulty the attitude of
the new master and blamed him. One of them in a
moment of impatience had said to him one day, "Do
you think we are so particularly proud to work for a
renegade like you?" He had been discharged. His
comrades immediately had taken his part, interceded,
talked, and threatened a strike. "Well, do it," the
master had said; "I shall be delighted. You are all
quarrelsome fellows; I shall replace you by Germans!"
They did not believe in the threat, but when a fresh
crisis arose M. Joseph Oberlé carried it into execution
a little later, that he might not be accused of weakness,
which he feared more than injustice, and because
he thought he could gain some advantage by replacing
the Alsatians, continual grumblers, by workmen from
Baden and Wurtemburg who were better disciplined
and more easily managed. A third of the employés
at the saw-mill had thus been replaced. A little
German colony had been established to the north of
the village, in the houses built by the master, and the
Alsatians who remained had to bend before the argument
of daily bread. That happened in 1882. Some
years later, they learned that M. Oberlé had sent his
son Jean to be educated in Bavaria at the Munich
gymnasium. In the same way he sent off his daughter

41

Lucienne, placing her in the charge of the mistress
of the most German school in Baden-Baden, the
Mündner boarding-school. This last measure roused
public opinion most of all. They were furious at this
repudiation of Alsatian education and influence. They
pitied Madame Oberlé thus separated from her son
and deprived, as if she had been unworthy, of the right
of bringing up her own daughter. To all those who
blamed him the father replied, "It is for their good.
I have spoiled my life; I do not wish them to spoil
theirs. They will choose their road later when they
have been able to make comparisons. But I will not
have them from their very youth catalogued, pointed
at, and inscribed on the official list as Alsatian
pariahs."

Sometimes he added: "You do not understand, then,
all the sacrifice that I am making! I am sparing my
children these sacrifices; I am devoting myself to
them. But that does not mean that I am not
suffering."

He did suffer in fact, and so much the more that
the confidence of the German administration was
hard to gain. The reward of so much effort did not
seem enviable. True, those in office began to flatter,
to draw nearer, to seek out M. Joseph Oberlé, a
precious conquest, of which many district directors
had boasted in high places. But they watched him,
whilst loading him with invitations and kind
attentions. He felt the hesitation, the mistrust,
scarcely disguised, sometimes even emphasised by the
new masters he wished to please. Was he safe?
Had he taken the side of the Annexation without any
mental reservation? Did he sufficiently admire the
German genius, German civilisation, German commerce,
the German future? One had to admire so
much and so many things!

The answer, however, became more and more
affirmative. There was the acknowledged desire to

42

make his son, Jean, enter the German magistracy,
and there was the systematic continuation of this
kind of exile imposed on the young man. When his
classical studies were finished and his final examination
passed with success at the end of the scholastic
year, 1895, Jean spent his first year of law studies at
the University of Munich; he divided the next year
between Bonn and Heidelberg; then took his
licentiate's degree at Berlin, where he went through
the Referendar Examination. At last, after a fourth
year, when as a licentiate in law he entered the office
of a lawyer at Berlin, after long travel in foreign
countries, the young man came back to his home
to rest before joining a regiment.

Truly the plan had been thoroughly carried out.
In the first years of his student life, in his holidays
even, excepting some days given to his family, his
time had been given to travelling. During the last
years he had not even appeared in Alsheim.

The end of it was that the administration no
longer suspected him. Besides, one of the great
obstacles to a public reconciliation between the
functionaries of Alsace and M. Joseph Oberlé had
disappeared. The old protesting deputy, seized by
the illness which became chronic, retired from
political life in 1890. From that moment dated, for
the son, the smiles, the promises, the favours so long
solicited. M. Joseph Oberlé recognised in the development
his affairs had taken—in the Rhenish
country and even beyond it—in the diminution of
the official reports directed against his employés, or
against himself in cases of contravention, in the signs
of deference which the small officials showed him—formerly
the most arrogant of all, in the ease with
which he had ruled disputable points, obtained
authorisations, altered the rules in divers points—in
all these signs, as well as in others, he recognised that
the governmental mind, present everywhere, incarnate

43

everywhere in a multitude of men of gold lace—was
no longer against him.

More definite advances were made to him. The
preceding winter, while Lucienne, who had returned
from the Mündner school, pretty, witty, charming,
was dancing in the German salons of Strasburg, the
father was talking with the representatives of the
Empire. One of them, the prefect of Strasburg,
Count Kassewitz, acting probably in accordance with
superior orders, had let drop that the Government
would see, without displeasure, M. Joseph Oberlé
present himself as candidate for the deputyship in
one of the districts of Alsace, and that the official
support of the administration would be given to
the son of the old protesting deputy.

This prospect filled M. Oberlé with joy. It had
revived the ambition of this man who found himself
up to then repaid but badly for the sacrifices of self-respect,
friendships, and memories, which he had had
to make. It gave new energies and a definite object
to this official temperament, depressed by circumstances.
M. Oberlé saw his justification in it,
without being able to reveal it. He said to himself
that, thanks to his energy, to his contempt for Utopia,
to his clear sight of what was possible and what
was not, he could hope for a future for himself—a
participation in public life—a part he had believed to
be reserved for his son. And henceforward it would
be the answer that he would make to himself; if
ever a doubt entered his mind, it would be his
revenge against the mute insults offered him by
some backward peasants, who forgot to recognise
him in the streets, and by certain citizens of Strasburg
or Alsheim, who scarcely, or no longer, saluted
him.

He was therefore now going to receive his son in a
frame of mind very different from that of the past.
To-day, when he knew himself in full personal favour

44

with the Government of Alsace-Lorraine, he was
less set on his son carrying out to the letter the plan
that he had traced at first. Jean had already assisted
his father, as Lucienne was assisting him. He had
been an argument, and one of the causes of this long-expected
change of the governmental attitude. His
collaboration was still going to be useful, but not
necessary; and the father, warned by certain allusions
and a certain reticence in the last letters written
from Berlin by his son, did not feel so irritated when
he thought that perhaps he would not follow the
career in the German magistracy so carefully prepared
for him, and would give up his last three years
of terms and his State examinations. Such were the
reflections of this man, whose life had been guided by
the most unadulterated egotism, at the moment when
he was preparing to receive his son's visit. For he
had seen Jean and had watched him coming across
the park. M. Oberlé had built at the extreme end of
the saw-mill a sort of cage or footbridge, from which
he could survey everything at once. One window
opened on to the timber yard, and allowed him
to follow the movements of the men occupied in
stowing away and transporting the wood. Another,
composed of a double glazed framework, placed the
book-keepers under the eye of their master, ranged
along a wall in a room like the master's room; and
by a third, that is to say by a glass partition, which
separated him from the workshop, he took in at a
glance the immense hall where machines of all kinds,
great saws in leather bands, cogged wheels, drills,
and planes, were cutting, boring, and polishing trunks
of trees brought to them on sliding grooves. Round
him the low woodwork painted water-green; electric
lamps in the shape of violets, the call-buttons placed
on a copper plaque which served as a pediment
to his work bureau, a telephone, a typewriter, light
chairs painted white, spoke of his taste for bright

45

colours, for convenient innovations, and for fragile-looking
objects.

Seeing his son enter, he had turned towards the
window overlooking the park; he had crossed his legs,
and placed his right elbow on the desk. He examined
curiously this tall, thin, handsome man, his son, who
sat down facing him, and he smiled. To see him
thus, leaning back in his arm-chair, and smiling his
own mechanical and irrelevant smile, by only
judging from the full face framed by two grey
whiskers, and the gesture of his raised right hand,
touching his head and playing with the cord of his
eyeglass, it would be easy to understand the mistake
of those who took M. Oberlé for a magistrate. But
the eyes, a little closed on account of the bright
light, were too quick and too hard to belong to any
but a man of action. They gave the lie to the
mechanical smile of his lips. They had no scientific
curiosity, worldly or paternal; they sought simply a
way, like those of a ship's captain—in order to pass
on. Scarcely had M. Oberlé asked, "What have
you to tell me?" than he added, "Have you spoken
with your mother this morning?"

"No!"

"With Lucienne?"

"Neither; I have just come from my room."

"It is better so. It is better for us to make our
plans together, we two, without any one interfering.
I have allowed you to return and to stay here precisely
that we may arrange your future. Firstly,
your military service in the month of October, with
the fixed determination—am I right?"—and he dwelt
on the following words—"to become an officer of the
reserve?"

Jean, motionless, with head erect and straight look,
and with the charming gravity of a young man who
speaks of his future and who keeps a sort of quiet
hold on himself which is not quite natural to him:

46

"Yes, father, that is my intention."

"The first point is then settled—and afterwards?
You have seen the world. You know the people
among whom you are called to live. You know that
with regard to the German magistracy the chances of
succeeding increased some time ago, because my own
position has been considerably bettered in Alsace?"

"I know it."

"You know equally well that I have never wavered
in my desire to see you follow the career which would
have been mine if circumstances had not been stronger
than my will."

As if this word had suddenly excited in him the
strength to will, the eyes of M. Oberlé were fixed,
imperious and masterful, on those of his son, like the
claws of a bird of prey. He left off playing with his
eyeglass, and said quickly:

"Your last letters indicated, however, a certain
hesitation. Answer me. Will you become a magistrate?"

Jean became slightly pale, and answered:

"No!"

The father bent forward as if he were going to
rise, and without taking his eyes off him whose moral
energy he was weighing and judging at that moment:

"Administrator?"

"Neither. Nothing official."

"Then your law studies?"

"Useless."

"Because?"

"Because," said the young man, trying to steady
his voice, "I have not the German spirit."

M. Oberlé had not expected this answer. It was a
disavowal. He started, and instinctively looked into
the workshop to make sure that no one had heard or
even guessed at such words. He met the raised eyes
of many workmen, who thought he was supervising
the work, and who turned away at once.

47

M. Oberlé turned again to his son. A violent
irritation had seized him. But he understood that
it was best not to let it be seen. For fear that his
hands should show his agitation, he had seized the
two arms of the arm-chair in which he was seated,
bent forward as before, but now considering this
young man from head to foot, considering his attitude,
his clothes, his manner, this young man who was
voicing ideas which seemed like a judgment on the
conduct of his father. After a moment of silence,
his voice broken, he asked:

"Who has put you against me? Your mother?"

"No one," said Jean Oberlé quickly. "I have
nothing against you. Why do you take it like that?
I say simply that I have not the German spirit. It
is the result of a long comparison, and nothing else."

M. Joseph Oberlé saw that he had shown his hand
too much. He withdrew into himself, and putting on
that expression of cold irony with which he was
accustomed to disguise his true sentiments:

"Then, since you refuse to follow the career which
I destined for you, have you chosen another?"

"Without doubt, with your consent."

"Which?"

"Yours. Do not be mistaken with regard to what
I have just told you. I have lived without a quarrel
for ten years in an exclusively German centre. I
know what it has cost me. You ask me the result of
my experience. Well, I do not believe that my
character is supple enough, or easy-going enough if
you like, to do more than that, or to become a
German official. I am sure that I should not always
understand, and that I should disobey sometimes.
My decision is irrevocable. And, on the contrary,
your work pleases me."

"You imagine that a manufacturer is independent?"

"No; but he is more independent than many are.

48

I studied law so that I should not refuse to follow
without reflection, without examination, the way you
pointed out to me. But I have profited by the travels
which you suggested, every year."

"You may say which I imposed upon you; that is
the truth, and I am going to explain my reasons."

"I have profited by them to study the forest
industry wherever I could—in Germany, in Austria,
in the Caucasus. I have given more thought and
consideration to those questions than you might
suppose. And I wish to live in Alsheim. Will you
allow me to?"

The father did not answer at first. He was trying
on his son an experiment to which he deliberately
submitted other men who came to treat with him
about some important affair. He was silent at the
moment when decisive words were to be expected
from him. If the questioner, disturbed, turned away
to escape the look which seemed to be oppressive, or
if he renewed the explanation already made, M. Joseph
Oberlé classed him among weak men, his inferiors.
Jean bore his father's look, and did not open his
mouth. M. Oberlé was secretly flattered. He understood
that he found himself in the presence of a man
completely formed, of a very resolute, and probably
inflexible spirit. He knew others like him in the
neighbourhood. He secretly appreciated their independence
of temper, and feared it. With the quickness
of combination and organisation habitual to him,
he perceived very clearly the industry of Alsheim
directed by Jean, and the father of Jean, Joseph
Oberlé, sitting in the Reichstag, admitted among the
financiers, the administrators, and the powerful men
of Germany. He was one of those who know how to
turn his mistakes to some advantage, just as he
managed to get something from the factory waste.
This new vision softened him. Far from being angry,
he let the ironical expression relax which he had

49

put on while speaking of his son's project. With a
movement of his hand he pointed to the immense
workshop, where, without ceasing, with a roar which
slightly shook the double windows, the steel blades
entered into the heart of the old trees of the Vosges,
and said, in a tone of affectionate scolding:

"So be it, my son. It will give joy to my father,
to your mother, and to Ulrich. I agree that you put
me in the wrong on one point with regard to them,
but in one point only. Some years ago I should not
have allowed you to refuse the career which seemed
to me the best for you, and which would have saved
us all from difficulties which you could not take the
measure of. At that moment you were not able to
judge for yourself. And further, I found my work,
my position, too precarious and too dangerous to pass
it on to you. That has changed. My business has
increased. Life has become possible for me and for
you all, thanks to the efforts, and perhaps to the
sacrifices, for which those about me are not sufficiently
grateful. To-day I admit that the business has a
future. You wish to succeed me? I open the door
for you immediately! You will go through the
practical part of your apprenticeship in the seven
months which remain before you join your regiment.
Yes, I consent, but on one condition."

"Which?"

"You will not mix yourself up with politics."

"I have no taste for politics."

"Ah, excuse me," continued M. Oberlé with animation;
"we must understand one another, must we
not? I do not think you have any political ambition
for yourself; you are not old enough, and perhaps
you are not of the right stuff. And that is not what
I forbid—I forbid you to have anything to do with
Alsatian chauvinism; to go about repeating, as
others do, on every occasion—'France, France'; to
wear under your waistcoat a tricolour belt; to

50

imitate the Alsatian students of Strasburg, who, to
recognise and encourage one another, and for the fun
of it, whistle in the ears of the police the six notes of
the Marseillaise 'Form your battalions.' I won't
have any of those little proceedings, of those little
bravadoes, and of those great risks, my dear fellow!
They are forbidden manifestations for us business
men who work in a German country. They go
against our efforts and interests, for it is not France
who buys. France is very far away, my dear fellow;
she is more than two hundred leagues from here, at
least one would think so, considering the little noise,
movement, or money which come to us from there.
Do not forget that! You are by your own wish a
German manufacturer; if you turn your back on the
Germans you are lost. Think what you please about
the history of your country, of its past, and of its
present. I am ignorant of your opinions on that subject.
I will not try to guess what they will be in a
neighbourhood so behind the times as ours at Alsheim;
but whatever you think, either try to hold your
tongue, or make a career for yourself elsewhere."

A smile stole round Jean's turned-up moustache,
while the upper part of his face remained grave and
firm.

"You are asking yourself, I am sure, what I think
about France?"

"Let us hear."

"I love her."

"You do not know her!"

"I have read her history and her literature carefully,
and I have compared: that is all. When one is
oneself of the nation, that enables one to divine
much. I do not know it otherwise, it is true. You
have taken your precautions."

"What you say is true, though at the same time
you intended to wound——"

"Not at all."

51

"Yes, I have taken my precautions, in order to
free your sister and you from that deadly spirit of
opposition which would have made your lives barren
from the beginning, which would have made you
discontented people, powerless, poor; there are too
many people of that sort in Alsace, who render no
service to France or to Alsace, or to themselves, by
perpetually furnishing Germany with reasons for
anger. I do not regret that you make me explain
myself as to the system of education which I desired
for you, and which I alone desired. I wished to
spare you the trial I have borne, of which I have
just spoken to you: to fail in life. There is still
another reason. Ah, I know well that credit will
not be given me for that! I am obliged to praise
myself in my own family. My child, it is not possible
to have been brought up in France, to belong to
France through all one's ancestry, and not to love
French culture."

He interrupted himself a moment to see the impression
this phrase produced, and he could see
nothing, not a movement on the impassible face of his
son, who decidedly was a highly self-controlled man.
The implacable desire for justification which governed
M. Oberlé, made him go on:

"You know that the French language is not
favourably looked upon here, my dear Jean. In
Bavaria you had a literary and historical education,
better from that point of view than you would have
had in Strasburg. I was able to desire, without
prejudicing your masters against you, that you should
have many extra French lessons. In Alsace, you and
I would both have suffered for that. Those are the
motives which guided me. Experience will show
whether I was mistaken. I did it in any case in good
faith, and for your good."

"My dear father," said Jean, "I have no right to
judge what you have done. What I can tell you is

52

that, thanks to that education I have received, if I
have not an unbounded taste or admiration for
German civilisation, I have at least the habit of living
with the Germans. And I am persuaded that I could
live with them in Alsace."

The father raised his eyebrows as if he would say,
"I am not so sure of that."

"My ideas, up to now, have made me no enemy in
Germany; and it seems to me that one can direct a
saw-mill in an annexed country with the opinions I
have just shown you."

"I hope so," said M. Oberlé simply.

"Then you accept me? I come to you?"

For answer the master pressed his finger on an
electric button.

A man came up the steps which led from the
machine hall to the observatory that M. Oberlé had
had built, and opened the port-hole, and in the opening
one saw a square blond beard, long hair, and two
eyes like two blue gems.

"Wilhelm," said the master in German, "you
will make my son conversant with the works, and
you will explain to him the purchases we have made
for the past six months. From to-morrow he will
accompany you in your round of visits to where the
fellings and cuttings are being carried out in the
interests of the firm."

The door was shut again.

That young enthusiast, the elegant Jean Oberlé,
was standing in front of his father. He held out his
hand to him and said, pale with joy:

"Now I am again some one in Alsace! How I
thank you!"

The father took his son's hand with a somewhat
studied effusion. He thought:

"He is the image of his mother! In him I find
again the spirit, the words, and the enthusiasm of
Monica." Aloud he said:

53

"You see, my son, that I have only one aim in
view, to make you happy. I have always had it. I
agree to your adopting a career quite different from
the one I chose for you. Try now to understand our
position as your sister understands it."

Jean went away, and his father, a few minutes
later, went out also. But while M. Joseph Oberlé
went towards the house, being in haste to see his
daughter, the only confidante of his thoughts, and to
report the conversation he had just had with Jean,
the latter crossed the timber yard to the left, passed
before the lodge, and took the road to the forest.
But he did not go far, because the luncheon hour
was approaching. By the road that wound upward
he reached the region of the vineyards of Alsheim,
beyond the hop-fields which were still bare, where
the poles rose tied together, like a stack of arms.
His soul was glad. When he came to the entrance
of a vineyard which he had known since his earliest
childhood, where he had gathered the grapes in the
days of long ago, he climbed on to a hill which
overlooked the road and the rows of vines at the
bottom. In spite of the grey light, in spite of the
clouds and the wind, he found his Alsace beautiful,
divinely beautiful—Alsace, sloping down very gently
in front of him, and becoming a smooth plain with
strips of grass and strips of ploughed land, and
whence the villages here and there lifted their tile
roofs and the point of their belfries. Round, isolated
trees—leafless because it was winter—resembled dry
thistles; some crows were flying, helped by the
north wind, and seeking a newly sown spot.

Jean raised his hands, and spread them as if to
embrace the expanse of land stretching out from
Obernai, which he saw in the farthest undulations to
the left, as far as Barr, half buried under the
avalanche of pines down the mountain-side. "I
love thee, Alsace, and I have come back to thee!"

54

he cried. He gazed at the village of Alsheim, at
the house of red stone which rose a little below him,
and which was his; then at the other extremity of
the pile of houses, inhabited by the workmen and
peasants, he marked a sort of forest promontory
which pushed out into the smooth plain. It was
an avenue ending in a great group of leafless trees,
grey, between which one could see the slopes of a
roof. Jean let his eyes rest a long time on this
half-hidden dwelling, and said: "Good day, Alsatian
woman! Perhaps I am going to find that I love
you. It would be so good to live here with you!"

The bell rang for luncheon, rang out from the
Oberlés' house, and recalled him to himself. It had
a thin, miserable sound, which gave some idea of the
immensity of free space in which the noise vanished
away, and the strength of the tide of the wind which
carried it away over the lands of Alsace.

55

CHAPTER III

THE FIRST FAMILY MEETING

Jean turned slowly towards this bell which was
calling him. He was full of joy at this moment.
He was taking possession of a world which, after
some years, had just been opened to him and
pointed out as his place of habitation, of work,
and of happiness. These words played on his
troubled mind deliciously. They pursued each other
like a troop of porpoises, those travellers on the
surface, and other words accompanied them. Family
life, comfort, social authority, embellishments, enlargements.
The house took to itself a name—"the
paternal home." He looked at it with tenderness,
following the alley near the stream; he went
up the steps with a feeling of respect, remembering
that they had been built by the grandfather to
whom the house still belonged, as also all the
grounds except the saw-mill and the timber yard.

After having gone across the entrance hall, which
extended from the front to the back of the house,
he opened the last door on the left. The dining-room
was the only room which had been "done up"
according to the directions and the taste of M. Joseph
Oberlé. Whilst one found elsewhere—in the drawing-room,
the billiard-room, and the other rooms—the
furniture bought by the grandfather, of yellow or
green Utrecht velvet and mahogany, "My Creation,"

56

according to the expression of M. Joseph Oberlé,
showed a complete absence of line. Colour took
the place of style. The walls were covered with
wainscoting of veined maple, blue-grey, purple in
places, ash-grey, and pink-grey, covering half the
height of the room. Above this, and reaching to
the small beams, were four panels of stretched
cloth, decorated with designs of smooth felt representing
irises, hollyhocks, verbena, and gladioli.
Everywhere, as far as possible, the straight line had
been modified. The door mouldings described curves
which rambled madly like stalks of tropical bindweed
without any apparent reason. The framework of
the large window was curved. The chairs of bent
beechwood came from Vienna. The whole had
no character, but a charm of softened light, and a
remote resemblance to the vegetable kingdom. One
would have taken it for the dining-room of a newly
married couple.

The four usual table companions Jean was going to
meet there hardly corresponded to this joyous picture,
and there was no harmony between them and the
decorations of the room. They invariably sat in the
same places, round the square table, according to
the established order of deep affinities and antipathies.

The first to the left of the window, the nearest to
the glass, which shed on her the reflection of its
levelled edges, was Madame Monica Oberlé, tall and
slender, with a face that had been rounded and fresh,
but was now pale, lined, and thin. She gave the
impression of a being accustomed only to hear
around her the words "You are wrong." Her short-sighted
eyes, very gentle, glanced at the guests who
were introduced to her with a smile always ready to
withdraw and fade away. They only paused after
they had looked about for a little time, when nothing
had repulsed or misunderstood them. Then they
revealed a clear intelligence, a very kind heart,

57

become a little shy and sad, but still capable of illusions
and outbursts of youth. No one could have had a
more careless youth, nor one that seemed a less
fitting preparation for the part she had to play later.
She was then called Monica Biehler, of the ancient
family Biehler of Obernai. From the top of her
father's house, whose fortified gable-end rises on the
ramparts of the little town, she saw the immense
plain all round her. The garden full of trimmed box
and pear-trees, and hawthorn, where she played, was
only separated by an iron railing from the public
promenade built on the old wall, so that the vision of
Alsace was printed each day on this child's soul, and
at the same time love of her country, so happy then—love
of its beauty, its peace, and its liberty, of its
villages, whose names she knew, whose rosy bunches
of grapes she could have pointed out among the
harvest fields. Monica Biehler knew nothing else.
She only left Obernai to go with all the family to
spend two summer months in the lodge at Heidenbruch,
in the Forest of Sainte Odile. Only once did
she happen to cross the Vosges, the year before
her wedding, to make a pilgrimage to Domrémy in
Lorraine. Those had been three days full of enthusiasm.
Madame Oberlé remembered those three days
as the purest joy of her life. She would say: "My
journey in France." She had remained simple; she
had kept, in her very retired life at Alsheim, the easy
fears, but also the sincerity—the secret boldness of
her youthful affection for the country and for the
country people. She had therefore suffered more
than another would have done in her place, in seeing
her husband draw near to the German party in
Alsace, and finally join it. She had suffered in her
Alsatian pride, and still more in her maternal love.
For the same cause which separated her morally from
her husband, her children were taken from her. The
lines on her face, faded before its time, could each

58

have borne a name, that of the grief which had
scored them there: the line of despised goodness, the
line of useless warnings, the line of her insulted
country, of separation from Jean and Lucienne, of the
uselessness of the treasure of love she had stored up
for them during her single and married life.

Her bitterness had been the greater because Madame
Oberlé had no illusions as to the true motives which
guided her husband. And this he had divined. He
was humiliated by this witness whom he could not
deceive, and whom he could not help esteeming. She
personified for him the cause which he had abandoned.
It was to her he spoke when he felt the need of
justifying himself, and he did so whenever he had the
chance. It was against her that his anger rose,
against her mute disapproval. Never once in twenty
years had he been able to get her to agree—not by
one word—that Alsace was German. This timid
woman yielded to force but she did not approve of it.
She followed her husband into German society; there
she bore herself with such dignity that one could
neither deceive oneself as to her attitude, nor bear a
grudge against her for it. There she safeguarded
more than appearances. A mother, separated from
her children, she had not separated herself from her
husband. They still used the twin-bedsteads in the
same room. They had continual scenes, sometimes
on one side, sometimes acrimonious and violent on
both sides. Nevertheless Madame Oberlé understood
that her husband only hated her clear-sightedness
and judgment. She hoped she would not always be
in the wrong. Now that the children were grown up
she believed that some very important decisions
would have to be made with regard to them, and
that by her long patience and by her numerous concessions
she had perhaps gained the right to speak
then and be heard.

Near her, and at her right, the grandfather,

59

M. Philippe Oberlé, had always sat. For some years,
five minutes before the time of the meal the dining-room
door would open, the old man would come in,
leaning on the arm of his valet, trying to walk
straight, clothed in an anomalous garment of dark
wool, his red ribbon in his button-hole, his head
weary and bent, his eyelids nearly closed, his face
swollen and bloodless. They placed him in a large
chair with arms upholstered in grey; they tied his
table napkin round his neck, and he waited, his
body leaning against the chair-back, his hands on
the table—hands pale as wax, in which the knotted
blue veins were distinctly visible. When the others
arrived M. Joseph Oberlé shook him by the hand;
Lucienne threw him a kiss and a number of words
audibly spoken in her fresh young voice; Madame
Oberlé bent down and pressed her faithful lips on the
old man's forehead. He thanked her by watching
her sit down. He did not look at the others. Then
he made the sign of the cross, she and he alone, being
a son of that old Alsace which still prayed. And
served by this neighbour so silently charitable, who
knew all his tastes, his shame of a certain clumsiness,
and who forestalled his wishes, he began to eat,
slowly, with difficulty moving his relaxed muscles.
His dreamy head remained leaning against the chair.
His head alone was watching in a body nearly
destroyed. It was the theatre where, for the pleasure
and pain of one alone, there passed before his mental
vision the forebears of those whose names were
mentioned before him. He did not speak, but he
remembered. Sometimes he drew from his pocket a
schoolboy's slate and pencil, and he wrote, with an
uncertain writing, two or three words, which he
made his neighbour read; some rectification, some
forgotten date, his approval or disapproval to join in
with the words just spoken on the other side of the
table. Generally they knew when he was interested

60

by the movement of his heavy eyelids. It was only
for a moment. Life sank again to the depth of the
prison whose bars she had tried to shake. Night
closed in once more round those thoughts of his,
unable to make themselves intelligible. And in spite
of being accustomed to it, the sight of this suffering
and of this ruin weighed on each of the members of
the assembled family. It was less painful to strangers
who sat for one evening at the Alsheim table, for the
grandfather on those days did not try to break the
circle of darkness and death which oppressed him.
Until these last years M. Joseph Oberlé had always
continued to present his guests to his father, up to
the day when he wrote on his slate: "Do not present
any one to me, above all, no Germans. Let them
acknowledge my presence: that will be enough."
The son had kept the habit—and it was a touching
thought on the part of this selfish man—to give
every evening an account of the business of the
factory to the old chief. After dinner, smoking in
the dining-room, while the two women went into
the drawing-room, he told him all about the day's
mail, the consignments, and the purchases of wood.
Although M. Philippe Oberlé was now only the
sleeping partner of the business he had founded, he
was under the illusion that he was advising and
directing still. He heard talk of the maples, pines
and firs, oaks and beeches among which he had
breathed for fifty years. He thought much of the
"conference," as he called it, as the only moment in
the day in which he appeared himself, to himself, and
as some one of importance in the lives of others.
Except for that he was only a shadow, a dumb soul
present, who judged his house, but rarely gave voice
to his decision.

His son on some important question disagreed
with him. Seated at table just opposite his father,
M. Joseph Oberlé could make a show of addressing

61

himself to his wife and daughter only; during the
whole of the meal he could avoid seeing the fingers
which moved impatiently or which wrote to Madame
Oberlé, but he was not the man to keep off painful
subjects. Like all those who have had to make a
great decision in their lives, and who have not taken
it without a profound disturbance of their conscience,
he was always reverting to the German
Question. Everything gave him a pretext to begin
it, praise or blame—various facts, political events
announced in the morning's newspaper, a visiting
card brought by the postman, an order for planks
received from Hanover or Dresden, the wish expressed
by Lucienne to accept an invitation to some
ball. He felt the need of applauding himself for
what he had done, like defeated generals who want
to explain the battle, and to demonstrate how the
force of circumstances had compelled them to act in
such or such a manner. All the resources of his
fertile mind were brought to bear on this case of
conscience, on which he declared himself a long time
resolute, and which aroused no more discussion, either
on the part of the sick grandfather or on that of
the depressed wife, who had decided to keep silence.

Lucienne alone approved and supported her father.

She did it with the decision of youth, which judges
without consideration the grief of old people, the
memories and all the charm of the past, without
understanding, and as if they were dead things to
be dealt with by reason only. She was only twenty,
at once very proud and very sincere; she had an
artless confidence in herself, an impetuous nature,
and a reputation for beauty only partly justified.
Tall, like her mother, and, like her, well made, she
had her father's larger features more conformed to
the usual Alsatian type—with a tendency to thicken.
All the lines of her body were already formed and
fully developed. To those who saw her for the first

62

time, Lucienne Oberlé gave the impression of being
a young woman rather than a young girl. Her face
was extremely open and mobile. When she listened,
her eyes—not so large as, and of a lighter green than,
her brother's, her eyes and her mouth equally sharp
when she smiled—followed the conversation and told
her thoughts. She dreamed little. Another charm
besides the vivacity of her mind explained her social
success: the incomparable brightness of her complexion,
of her red lips, the splendour of her fair
hair, with its shining tresses of blonde and auburn
intermingled, so abundant and so heavy that it broke
tortoise-shell combs, escaped from hairpins, and
hung down behind in a heavy mass and obliged her
to raise her brow, which was enhaloed by the light
from it, and gave to Lucienne Oberlé the carriage of
a proud young goddess.

Her Uncle Ulrich said to her, laughing: "When I
kiss you, I think I am kissing a peach growing in the
open air." She walked well; she played tennis well;
she swam to perfection, and more than once the
papers of Baden-Baden had printed the initials of
her name in articles in which they spoke of "our
best skaters."

This physical education had already alienated her
from her mother, who had never been more than a
good walker, and was now only a fair one. But
other causes had been at work and had separated
them more deeply and more irrevocably from each
other. Doubtless it was the entirely German education
of the Mündner school, more scientific, more
solemn, more pedantic, more varied, and much less
pious than that which her mother had received, who
had been educated partly at Obernai, and partly
with the nuns of Notre-Dame, in the convent of
the rue des Mineurs in Strasburg. But above all
it was owing to the acquaintances she made, and her
surroundings. Lucienne, ambitious like her father,

63

like him bent on success, entirely removed from
maternal influence, entrusted to German mistresses
for seven years, received in German families, living
among pupils chiefly German, flattered a little by
everybody—here because of the charm of her nature,
there for political motives and unconscious proselytism,
Lucienne had formed habits of mind very
different from those of old Alsace. Once more at
home, she no longer understood the past of her
people or her family. For her, those who stood up
for the old state of things or regretted it—her mother,
her grandfather, her uncle Ulrich—were the representatives
of an epoch ended, of an unreasonable
and childish attitude of mind. At once she placed
herself on her father's side against the others. And
she suffered from it. It depressed her to be brought
into such close contact with persons of this sort,
whom the Mündner school and all her worldly
acquaintances of Baden-Baden and Strasburg would
look upon as behind the times. For two years she
had lived in an atmosphere of contradiction. For
her family she felt conflicting sentiments; for her
mother, for example, she felt a true tenderness and
a great pity because she belonged to a condemned
society and to another century. She had no confidants.
Would her brother Jean be one? Restless
at his arrival, almost a stranger to him, desiring
affection, worn out with family quarrels, and hoping
that Jean would place himself on the side she had
chosen, that he would be a support and a new
argument, she at once desired and feared this
meeting. Her father came to tell her of the conversation
he had had with Jean. She had said—cried
out rather—"Thank you for giving me my brother!"

They were all four at table when the young man
entered the dining-room. The two women who were
facing each other and in the light of the window,
turned their heads, one sweetly with a smile that

64

said, "How proud I am of my child!"; the other
leaning back on her chair, her lips half open, her
eyes as tender as if he had been her betrothed who
entered, desirous to please and sure of pleasing him,
saying aloud: "Come and sit here near me, at the
end of the table. I have made myself fine in your
honour! Look!" and kissing him, she said in a low
tone, "Oh, how good it is to have some one young to
say good morning to!" She knew she was pleasant
to look upon in her bodice of mauve surah silk
trimmed with lace insertion. It also gave her real
pleasure to meet this brother whom she had only
seen for a moment last night, before catching the
train to Strasburg. Jean thanked her with a friendly
glance and seated himself at the end of the table
between Lucienne and his mother. He unfolded his
table napkin, and the servant Victor, son of an Alsatian
farmer, with his full-moon face and eyes like a little
girl's, always afraid of doing something wrong, approached
him, carrying a dish of
hors-d'œuvre
, when
M. Joseph Oberlé, who had just finished writing a
note in his pocket-book, stroked his whiskers and
said:

"You see Jean Oberlé here present, you my father,
you Monica, and you Lucienne. Well, I have a piece
of news to give you concerning him. I have agreed
that he shall live definitely at Alsheim and become a
manufacturer and a wood merchant."

Three faces coloured at once; even Victor, shaking
like a leaf, withdrew his
hors-d'œuvre
dish.

"Is it possible?" said Lucienne, who did not wish
to let her mother see that she had already been told
of the arrangement. "Will he not finish his
referendary course?"

"No."

"After his year's service he will come back here
for always?"

"Yes; to stay with us always."

65

The second moment of emotion is sometimes more
unnerving than the first. Lucienne's eyelids fluttered
quickly and became moist. She laughed at the same
time, tender words trembling on her red lips.

"Oh," said she, "so much the better. I don't know
if it is in your own interest, Jean, but for us, so much
the better."

She was really pretty at that moment, leaning
towards her brother, vibrating with a joy which was
not feigned.

"I thank you," said Madame Oberlé, looking
gravely at her husband to try to guess what reason
he had obeyed; "I thank you, Joseph; I should not
have dared to ask it of you."

"But you see, my dear," answered the manufacturer,
bending towards her, "you see, when proposals
are reasonable I accept them. Besides, I am so little
accustomed to be thanked that for once the word
pleases me. Yes; we have just had a decisive conversation.
Jean will accompany my buyer to-morrow
and visit some of our cuttings in work. I never lose
time—you know that."

Madame Oberlé saw the awkward hand of the
grandfather stretch towards her. She took the slate
which he held and read this line:

"That is the final joy of my life!"

There was no sign of happiness on this face, expressionless
as a mask, none, if not perhaps the
fixedness with which M. Philippe Oberlé looked at
his son, who had given back a child to Alsace and a
successor to the family. He was astonished, and he
rejoiced. He forgot to eat, and all at the table were
like him. The servant also forgot to serve; he
was thinking of the importance he would have in
announcing in the kitchen and in the village:
"M. Jean has decided to take the factory! He will
never leave the country again!" For some minutes
in the dining-room of grey maple each of the four

66

persons who met there every day had a different
dream and passed a secret judgment; each had a
vision, which was not divulged, of possible or probable
consequences which the event would have
relative to him or herself; each felt disturbed at
the thought that to-morrow might be quite different
from what had been imagined. Something was
falling to pieces—habits, plans, a rule accepted or
submitted to for years. It was like a disorder, or a
defeat mixed with joy at the news.

The youngest of all was the first to regain her
freedom of mind. Lucienne said:

"Are we not going to have lunch because Jean
lunches with us? My dear, we are just like what we
were before you came, not every day, but sometimes—mute
beings who think only for themselves. That
is quite contrary to the charms of meeting again.
We are not going to begin again. Tell me?"

She began to laugh, as if from henceforward misunderstandings
had disappeared. She joked wittily
about silent meals, about the parties at Alsheim that
finished at nine o'clock, the rare visits, and the
importance of an invitation received from Strasburg.
And everybody tacitly encouraged her to speak ill of
the past, abolished by the resolution of this man,
thoroughly happy, master of himself, who was
watching and studying his sister with astonished
admiration.

"Now," she said, "all is going to change. From
now to October we shall be five instead of four under
the roof of Alsheim. Then you will do your service;
but that only lasts a year—and besides, you will have
leave?"

"Every Sunday."

"You will sleep here?" asked Madame Oberlé.

"I should think so—on Saturday nights."

"And a nice uniform. Do you know," continued
Lucienne, "that Attila tunic, cornflower colour,

67

braided with yellow, black boots; but above all I
like the full dress sealskin busby, with its plume of
black-and-white horsehair—and the white frogs. It
is one of the handsomest uniforms in our army."

"Yes, one of the handsomest in the German
army," Madame Oberlé hastened to correct, wishing
to make amends for the unlucky words of her
daughter, for the grandfather had made a gesture
with his hand as if to rub out something from the
cloth.

M. Joseph Oberlé added, laughing:

"And equally one of the dearest. I am giving you
a nice present, Jean, in leaving you to choose the
Rhenish Hussars, No. 9, as your regiment. I shall
not get off for less than eight thousand marks."

"Do you think so? As expensive as that?"

"I am sure of it. Only yesterday, at the Councillor
Von Boscher's, before two officers, I mentioned the
amount which I thought exact, and no one contradicted
me. Officially, the one year's service man
in the infantry should spend two thousand two
hundred marks; in reality he spends four thousand.
In the artillery he should spend two thousand seven
hundred, and spends five thousand; in the cavalry the
difference is still more; and when people maintain that
you can finish the business with three thousand six
hundred marks they are making fun of you. You
must reckon seven or eight thousand marks. That is
what I contend, and what I uphold."

"The regiment is admirably made up, father," interrupted
Lucienne.

"A good deal of fortune in fact...."

"A good deal of nobility also, mixed with the sons
of the rich manufacturers on the banks of the Rhine."

A quick smile of intelligence passed between
Lucienne and her father. Jean was the only one
who noticed it. Scarcely had the young girl had
time to straighten her lips when she said:

68

"The volunteer places in the regiment are taken
up so quickly that it is necessary to apply early in
order to get one."

"I spoke to your colonel three months ago," said
M. Oberlé. "You will be recommended to several of
the chiefs."

Lucienne chimed in giddily:

"You will be able to bring some here; it would be
amusing!"

Jean did not answer. Madame Oberlé blushed, as
she often did when a word too much had been said
before her. Lucienne was laughing again, when the
grandfather stopped eating, and painfully, by jerks,
each of which must have been painful, turned his sad,
white head towards his grand-daughter. The eyes of
the old Alsatian must have spoken a language very
easy to translate, for the young girl ceased laughing,
made a gesture of impatience as if she said, "Oh!
I did not remember that you were here," and bent
towards her father to offer him some Wolxheim wine,
but really to escape the reproach she felt weighing
on her.

The three others, M. Joseph Oberlé, Jean, and his
mother, as if they were agreed not to prolong the
incident, began to talk of the service, men at the
St. Nicolas barracks, but hurriedly, multiplying their
words and their signs of interest with useless gestures.

No one dared raise his head in the direction of the
grandfather. M. Philippe Oberlé continued to stare
with his look as implacable as remorse, at his grand-daughter,
guilty of a giddy and regrettable speech.
The meal was shortened owing to the general awkwardness,
which had become almost unbearable, when
M. Philippe Oberlé, begged by his daughter-in-law to
forget what Lucienne had said, had answered "No,"
and refused to eat further.

Ten minutes later, Lucienne went into the alleys of
the park, to rejoin her brother, who had gone out

69

before and was lighting a cigar. Hearing her approach
behind him, he turned round. She was no longer
laughing. She had put on no hat, in spite of the
wind, which disarranged her hair; but having thrown
a shawl of white wool round her shoulders, no longer
trying to charm but become all at once passionate and
domineering, she ran up to him.

"You saw it? It is intolerable!"

Jean lit his cigar, clasping his hands to protect the
lighted match, then throwing away the glowing vesta.

"Without doubt, but one must learn to put up with
it, little one."

"There is no little one," she interrupted quickly,
"there is a grown-up one, on the contrary, who
wants to have a clear explanation with you. We
have been separated for a long time, my dear, we
must learn to know each other, for I hardly know you
and you do not know me. I am going to help you—don't
be afraid—I came for that."

He had a look of admiration for this fine creature
violently moved, who had deliberately come to him;
then, without losing his calmness, feeling that his
part and his man's honour commanded him to be
judge and not to get excited in his turn, he began
to walk along by the side of Lucienne, in the alley
which ran between a clump of trees on one side and
the lawn on the other.

"You can speak to me, Lucienne—you may be
sure...."

"Of your discretion? I thank you. I do not want
any this morning. I came simply to explain to you
my way of thinking on a certain point, and I am not
going to make any mystery about it. I repeat that
it is intolerable. You may say nothing here about
Germany or the Germans, if it is not something bad.
As soon as one has a word of praise or only of justice
for them mamma bites her lips, and grandfather
makes a disgraceful scene and shames me in front of

70

the servants, as happened just now. Is it a crime to
say to a volunteer: 'You will bring us some officers
to Alsheim'? Can we prevent you serving your
turn in a German regiment, in a German town, commanded
by officers who, in spite of being Germans,
are not the less men of the world?"

She walked nervously, and with her right hand
twisted a gold chain which she wore on her mauve
bodice.

"If you knew, Jean, what I have suffered by this
want of liberty in the house, to find our parents so
different from what they have had us trained to be.
For I ask, why did they give it to me?"

The young man took the cigar he was smoking
from his lips:

"Our education, Lucienne? It was only our father
who wished it."

"He alone is intelligent."

"Oh, how can you speak like that of your
mother?"

"Understand clearly," she answered, embarrassed.
"I am not of those who hide one half of their
thoughts and who make the others unrecognisable
because of the flowery language they are wrapped up
in. I love mamma very much more than you think,
but I judge her also. She is possessed of intelligence
as regards household affairs; she is refined; she has
some little taste for literature, but she cannot deal intelligently
with general questions. She does not see
farther than Alsheim. My father has understood far
better the position which is given us in Alsace; he
has been enlightened by his intercourse, which is very
wide and of all kinds, by his commercial interest and
by his ambition...."

And as Jean made a questioning movement:
"What ambition do you mean?"

Lucienne continued:
"I surprise you; yes, for a young girl, as you said,

71

I seem audacious and even irreverent. Is it not
true?"

"A little."

"My dear Jean, I am only anticipating your own
judgment—only hindering you from losing time in
comparative psychological studies. You have just
come home, I left school two years and a half ago.
I am letting you benefit by my experience. Well,
there is no doubt about it: our father is ambitious.
He has all that is necessary for success. A will
of iron for his inferiors, much flexibility
vis-à-vis

others, wealth, a quickness of mind which makes
him the superior of all the manufacturers or German
officials we meet here. I prophesy you that now that
he is in favour with the Stadthalter you will not
be long in seeing him a candidate for the Reichstag."

"That is impossible, Lucienne."

"Perhaps; but it will come to pass, nevertheless;
I am sure of it. I do not say that he will stand for
Obernai, but for some place in Alsace, and he will be
elected, because he will be supported by the Government
and he will settle the price.... Perhaps you did
not give this a place in your calculations when you
decided to return to Alsheim? I know I upset your
ideas. You will have many such disturbances. What
you must know, my dear Jean"—she laid stress on the
word "dear"—"is that the home of the family is not
an amusing one. We are irremediably divided."

Jean and Lucienne were silent for a moment,
because the lodge was quite near; then they turned
towards the lawn and took the second alley, which led
to the house.

"Irremediably? You believe this?"

"It would be childish to doubt it. My father will
not change and will not become French again,
because that would be to give up his future for ever,
and many commercial advantages. Mamma will not
change, because she is a woman, and because to

72

become a German would be to give up a sentiment
which she thinks very noble. You surely do not
aim at converting grandfather? Well then?"

She stopped and faced Jean.

"Well, my dear, as you cannot bring peace into
the family by gentleness, bring it by being strong.
Do not imagine you can remain neutral. Even if
you would, circumstances will not permit it. I am
sure of that. Join with me and father, even if you
do not think as we do in everything.

"I have sought you out to implore you to be on
our side. When mamma understands that her two
children think her wrong she will defend her childhood's
memories less energetically; she will advise
grandfather to abstain from demonstrations like those
of to-day, and our meals will be less like combats
at close quarters. We shall command the situation.
It is all that we can hope for. Will you? Papa told
me, quickly this morning, that your tenderness for
the Germans was not a lively one. But you do not
hate them?"

"No."

"I only ask for tolerance and a certain amount of
consideration for them—that is to say, for us who
see them. You have lived ten years in Germany;
you will continue to do here what you did there.
You will not leave the drawing-room when one of
them comes to see us?"

"Of course not. But you see, Lucienne, even if I
act differently from mamma, because my education
has made me put up with what is odious to her, I
cannot blame her. I can find the most touching
reasons why she should be what she is."

"Touching?"

"Yes."

"I find them unreasonable."

Jean's green eyes and Lucienne's lighter ones
questioned one another for a moment. The two

73

young people, both grave, with an expression of
astonishment and defiance, measured each other and
thought: "Is it she I saw just now so smiling and
so tender?" "Is it really he who resists me, a
brother brought up like me, and who ought to yield
to me, if it were only because I am young and he
is glad to see me again?" She was displeased.
This first meeting had placed in opposition the
paternal violence which Lucienne had inherited and
the inflexible will which the mother had transmitted
to her son. It was Lucienne who broke the silence.
She turned to continue the walk, and shaking her
head:

"I see," she said. "You imagine that you will
have a confidante in mamma, a friend to whom you
can open your heart fully? She is worthy of all
respect, my dear. But there again you are mistaken.
I have tried. She is, or thinks she is, too miserable.
All you tell her will immediately serve her as an
argument in her own quarrel. If you wished, for
example, to marry a German——"

"No, no; but no."

"I am only supposing. Mamma would go at once
to find my father, and would say to him: 'Look at
this! It is horrible! It is your fault! Yours!'
And if you wished to marry an Alsatian our mother
would at once take advantage of it and say: 'He
is on my side, against you, against you.' No, my
dear, the real, true confidante at Alsheim is Lucienne."

She took Jean's hand, and without ceasing to walk
she looked up at him, her face beaming with life and
youthfulness.

"Believe me, let us be frank with each other.
You do not know me well. You have travelled so
much. I astonish you. You will see that I have
great faults. I am proud and selfish, hardly capable
of making sacrifices; something of a flirt, but I have
no roundabout ways. Lately, when I was looking

74

forward to your arrival, I promised myself a lasting
joy, the joy of having your youth near mine to
understand it. I will tell you all that is important
in my life, all that I am resolved to do—I have no
one here whom I can trust absolutely. You cannot
know what I have suffered. Will you?"

"Oh yes."

"You will tell me your thoughts, but above all I
shall have spoken to you. I shall not suffocate, as
I have often done in this house. I shall have many
things to tell you. It will be some way of regaining
the intimacy we have almost lost, and will give us a
little tardy fraternal companionship. What are you
thinking about?"

"About this poor house."

Lucienne lifted her eyes above the slate roof which
rose in front. She wished to say, "If you knew how
sad it really is," then she embraced her brother, and
said:

"I am not so bad as you think me, brother, nor
so ungrateful to mamma. I am going to find her to
talk about your return. She certainly wants to
speak of her happiness to some one."

Lucienne left her brother, turning again to smile
at him, and walking as a goddess might, with steps free
and finely poised, with her hand replacing the pins
which held up her hair so badly, disarranged as it
was by the walk and blown about by the wind, she
took the fifty steps which separated her from the
staircase, and disappeared.

75

CHAPTER IV

THE GUARDIANS OF THE HEARTH

When Lucienne left Jean he had turned round the
house, crossed a semicircular court formed by
stables and coach-houses, then a large kitchen-garden
surrounded by walls, and opening a private
door at the end on the right he found himself in the
country, behind the village of Alsheim. His first
joy at his return had already lessened and faded.
He heard again sentences which had sunk into the
depths of his soul; their very accent came back to
him with the appearance and the gesture of the one
who had uttered them.

He thought of the "sad house" there quite close
to the wall which enclosed the grounds, and it
pained him to remember what an entirely different
idea he had formed years ago of the welcome which
awaited him at Alsheim, and the almost religious
emotion he had felt far away, in the towns and on
the roads of Europe and the East, when he thought,
"My mother, my father, my sister! My first day at
home after my father has said yes!" The first day
had begun. It had not been, up to the present,
worthy of this old-time dream.

Even the weather was bad. Before him the plain
of Alsace, smooth, scarcely marked with some lines
of trees, stretched out to the foot of the Vosges,
covered with forests which made their height appear

76

less than it was. The north wind, blowing from
the sea, filling all the valley with its continuous
wailing, chased the dark clouds from the sky, broken
and heaped together like furrows in fields, clouds
full of rain and hail, which would dissolve in
compact masses to fall in the south, on the side of
the Alps. It was cold.

Meanwhile Jean Oberlé, having looked to the left,
from the side where the land declined a little,
perceived the avenue ending in a little wood, which
he had seen in the morning, and he felt again that
his youth called to
her
. He made sure no one
was watching him from the windows of his home,
and he took the path which turned round the
village.

It was really only a track traced by people going
to, and coming from work. It followed very nearly
the zigzag line made by the sheds, the pig-styes,
the stables, the barns, the low boundaries commanded
by the manure-heaps, fowl-houses, all the back buildings
of the dwellings of Alsheim, which had on the
other side, on the road, their principal façade, or at
least a white wall, a cart-door, and a great mulberry-tree
overflowing the edge of it. The young man
walked quietly on the beaten track. He passed the
church which, almost in the centre of Alsheim, raised
its square tower, surmounted by a slate roof in the
form of a steeple, with a metal point, and came to the
centre of a group of four enormous walnut-trees,
serving as landmarks, as ornament and shelter to
the last farm in the village. There began the
property of M. Xavier Bastian, the mayor of Alsheim,
the old friend of M. Joseph Oberlé, a man of
influence, rich and patriotic, and to whose house
Jean was going. The sound of flails could be heard
in the neighbouring yard. It must be the fine, big
sons of the Ramspacher, the Bastians' tenants. One
had served his time in the German army, the other

77

was going to join his regiment in the month of
November. They were threshing under the barn in
the old style. Every autumn, every winter, when
the miller's store of corn diminished, and when the
weather was bad outside, they spread out some
sheaves in the shelter, and their flails struck
blithely and galloped like colts let loose in high
grass. Nothing had stopped the tradition.

"Isn't my Alsheim old?" said Jean to himself.
Although he was very anxious not to be recognised,
he approached the latticed door which opened on to
the fields on this side, and if he did not see the
workers, hidden by an unharnessed cart, he saw
again with a friendly smile the yard of the old farm,
a kind of road bordered with buildings which were
only apparently framework with a little earth between
the wooden beams, a demonstration of the everlasting
strength of the chestnut which had furnished the
jambs, the raising pieces, the wooden balconies, and
the framework of the windows. No one heard him,
no one saw him. He went on his way and his heart
began to beat violently. For immediately after the
farm of the Ramspachers, the path fell, at right
angles, to an avenue of cherry-trees leading from the
village to the house of M. Bastian. It was not
probable that in this bad weather the Mayor would
be far from home. In a few moments Jean would
speak with him; he would meet Odile; he would find
some means of knowing if she were betrothed.

Odile. All Jean's early childhood was full of that
name. The daughter of M. Bastian had formerly
been the playfellow of Lucienne and of Jean when
the evolution of M. Oberlé had not been affirmed and
known in the country-side; a little later she had
become the charming vision which Jean saw again
at the Munich Gymnasium when he thought of
Alsheim; the young, growing girl, whom one saw
in the holidays, on Sundays in church, whom one

78

saluted without approaching when Monsieur or
Madame Oberlé were present, but also the passer-by
of the grape harvest and of the woods, and the walker
who had a smile for Lucienne or for Jean met at the
turn of a road. What secret enchantment did this
girl of Alsheim possess, brought up entirely in the
country, except for two or three years passed with
the nuns of Notre-Dame in Strasburg, not worldly—less
brilliant than Lucienne, more silent and more
grave? The same, no doubt, as the country where
she was born. Jean had left her, as he had left
Alsace, without being able to forget her. He had
forbidden himself to see her during his last short
stay in Alsheim, in order to prove himself and to
find out if truly the memory of Odile would resist a
long separation, studies, and travels. He had thought:
"If she marries in the interval, it will be a proof that
she has never thought of me, and I shall not weep
for her." She had not married. Nothing showed
that she was engaged. And certainly Jean was
going to see her again.

He preferred not to go down the wild cherry
avenue, celebrated for its beauty, which guarded the
Bastians' property. The people of the little town,
the few workers in the neighbouring country, although
they were few, would have recognised the manufacturer's
son going to the Mayor of Alsheim's. He
followed the trimmed blackthorn hedge, which
bounded the alley, walking on the red earth or on
the narrow border of grass left by the plough at the
edge of the ditch. Behind him the noise of the flails
in the barn followed him, fading in the distance and
scattered by the wind. Jean asked himself: "How
shall I approach M. Bastian? How will he receive
me? Bah! I arrive; I am supposed to be ignorant
of much!"

Two hundred yards to the south of the farm the
avenue of wild cherries ended, and the grove, which

79

one saw from so far off, bordered the sown fields. The
wood was composed of fine old trees, oaks, planes, and
elms, at this time bare of leaves—under which evergreen
trees had grown up: pines, spindletrees, and
laurels. Jean continued to follow the hedge as it
curved across a field of lucerne to a rustic gate, with
worn paint and half rotten, which rose between two
jambs. A piece of sandstone thrown across the
ditch served as a bridge. The laurel-trees growing
out over the fence of blackthorn on each side of the
upright posts, closed in the view at two yards. When
Jean came near, a blackbird flew off, uttering a
warning note. Jean remembered that to enter one
had only to pass one's hand through the hedge and
to lift an iron hook. So he opened the door, and, a
little uneasy at his audacity, grazed from his coat to
his gaiters by the overgrown branches of an alley
far too narrow and hardly ever entered, he came
out on to a sanded space, passed several clumps of
shrubs edged with box, and arrived at the house on the
far side from Alsheim. Here there were plane-trees
more than a hundred years old, planted in a semi-circle,
which sheltered a tiny lawn and spread their
branches over the tiles of an old, low, squat house,
from which two balconies projected, topped with
overhanging roofs. Store-rooms, presses, barns, and
a bee-hive formed the continuation of the master's
house, where abundance, good nature, and the
simplicity of the old Alsatian homely spirit were in
evidence. Jean, kept back for a moment by the
irresistible attraction of these places, once so familiar
to him, looked at the plane-trees, the roof, a window
with a balcony on which ivy grew. He was going
to take the few steps which separated him from the
half-open door, when on the threshold a tall man
appeared, and recognising the visitor made a sign of
surprise. It was M. Xavier Bastian. No man of
sixty years of age in the division of Erstein was

80

more robust or of a more youthful turn of mind. He
had wide shoulders, a massive head, as wide below as
above, quite white hair, divided in short locks overlapping
each other, his cheeks and the upper lip
shaven, the nose large, the eyes fine and grey, the
mouth thickset, and on his countenance the sort of
prepossessing pride of those who have never known
fear of anything. He wore the long frock-coat to
which many notable Alsatians remained faithful,
even in the villages such as Alsheim, where the
inhabitants have no special costume or any memory
of having had any.

Seeing Jean Oberlé, whom he had often dandled on
his knees, he made a movement of surprise.

"Is it you, my boy?" he said, in the dialect of
Alsace, which he mostly used, and with which he
was more familiar than with French. "What has
happened to bring you here?"

"Nothing, M. Bastian, if not that I have just come
home."

He held out his hand to the old Alsatian, who took
it, pressed it, and suddenly lost that gaiety which
had been in his welcome, for he thought: "It is now
ten years since your father last came here, ten years
that your family and mine have been enemies." But
he only said, in answer to himself, and as if doing
away with an objection:

"Come in all the same, Jean; there is no harm for
once."

But the gladness of the first meeting was gone, and
did not return.

"How did you know that I was on your land?"
asked Jean, who did not understand. "Did you
hear me?"

"No; I heard the blackbird. I thought it was my
servant, whom I have sent to Obernai to get the
lamps of my victoria mended. Come into the hall."

He thought, with a feeling of regret and reprobation:

81

"As your father used to come in when he was
worthy."

In the corridor to the left he opened a door, and
both went into the "big room," which was at the
same time the dining-room and the reception-room of
this rich citizen, heir of lands and of the traditions of
a long series of ancestors, who had only left the house
at Alsheim for the cemetery. Nearly all the picturesque
furniture which one still meets with in the
old houses of rural Alsace had disappeared from the
dwelling of M. Bastian. No more carved cupboards;
no more chairs of solid wood, with the backs
cut in the shape of hearts; no clock in its painted
case; no more little weights at the windows. The few
chairs in the big, square, light hall, the table, the
cupboard, and the big chest, on the top of which was
the cast of a Pietà not known to fame, were all of
polished walnut. The only thing that was old was
the historical stove of faience, bearing the signature
of Master Hugelin of Strasburg, and of which
M. Bastian was as proud as if it had been a treasure.
About two-thirds down the room, between the stove
and the table, a woman of about fifty was sitting,
dressed in black, rather stout, having regular, thick
features, bands of grey hair, the forehead almost
without lines, fine long eyebrows, and eyes as dark
as if she had come from the south, calm and dignified,
which she lifted first to Jean and then to her husband
as if to ask, "How does he come here?"

She was sewing the hem of an unbleached linen
sheet, which fell about her in big folds. Seeing Jean
enter, she dropped it. She remained dumb with
surprise, not understanding how her husband could
bring to her the son, educated in Germany, of a
renegade father, traitor to Alsace. During the war
she had had three brothers killed in the service of
France.

"I met him coming to see me," M. Bastian said, as

82

if to excuse himself, "and I begged him to enter,
Marie."

"Good day, madame," said the young man, who
was hurt by the astonishment and coolness of
Madame Bastian's first glance, and who had stopped
in the middle of the hall. "Old memories brought
me here."

"Good day, Jean."

The words died away before reaching the walls,
papered with old peonies. One could hardly hear
them. The silence which followed was so cruel that
Jean grew pale, and M. Bastian, who had shut the
door, and who, a little behind Jean, was scolding
gently, with a shake of the head, those beautiful,
severe eyes of the Alsatian woman, which did not
lower themselves, intervened, saying:

"I have not told you, Marie, that I saw our friend
Ulrich this morning in our vineyards of Sainte Odile.
He spoke to me of this boy's return to Alsheim. He
assured me that we ought to congratulate ourselves
that we are going to see his nephew settle in the
country. He told me that he was one of ours."

The silent lips of the Alsatian wore a vague smile
of incredulity, which died as the words died. And
Madame Bastian again began to sew.

Jean turned round, pale, as yet more miserable
than irritated, and said in a low voice to M. Bastian:

"I knew that our two families were divided, but
not to such an extent as they evidently are. I left
Alsheim some time ago. You will excuse me for
having come."

"Stay, stay! I will explain to you. Believe me
that we have nothing against you, no animosity
whatever, neither one nor the other."

The old man placed his hand on Jean's arm in a
friendly manner:

"I do not want you to go like that. No; since you
are here I will not let you say that I have sent you

83

away without doing the honours. The thought would
weigh heavy on me. I will not!"

"No, M. Bastian, I ought not to be here. I am in
the way; I cannot stay one instant."

He moved to go away. The solid hand of the old
Mayor of Alsheim fastened round the wrist he held.
His voice rose and became harsh.

"Presently. But do not at least refuse the civility
I am accustomed to show to all who come here. It is
the custom of the country and of the house. Drink
with me, Jean Oberlé, or I shall repudiate you, and
we shall not even recognise each other."

Jean remembered that no house in the country
round Barr or Obernai, not even the oldest and
richest, possessed better recipes for making beam-tree-berry
brandy or cherry brandy, or elderberry
wine, or wine made with dried grapes, or spring
drinks. He saw that the old Mayor of Alsheim
would be deeply hurt by a refusal, and that the offer
was a means of showing his cordiality without disavowing
in words, or in thought, the mother, queen,
and mistress of the big house, who continued to
ignore the guest, because the guest was the son of
Joseph Oberlé.

"So be it," he said.

Then M. Bastian called, "Odile!"

The hands that held the linen, near the stove,
rested on the folds of her black dress, and for half a
minute there were three human beings, each with
very different thoughts, who awaited her who was
going to enter at the end of the room, on the right,
near the great walnut cupboard. She came out of
the shadow of a neighbouring room and advanced
into the light, while Jean controlled his feelings and
was saying to himself, "I did well to remember her!"

"Give me the oldest brandy that we have," said
the father.

Odile Bastian had at first smiled at her father,

84

whom she saw near the door, then she had, with a
movement of her brown eyebrows, shown her
astonishment, without displeasure, when she recognised
Jean Oberlé near him; then the smile had
disappeared when she saw her mother, bending over
her work-table, dumb and holding herself aloof from
what was going on around her. Then her bosom
heaved, the words she was going to say were arrested
before reaching her lips; and Odile Bastian, too
intelligent not to guess the affront, too much a
woman to emphasise the secret trouble, had simply
and silently obeyed. She had sought a key in the
drawer of a chest, had gone to the big cupboard, and
raising herself on the tips of her toes, one hand
leaning on one of the doors at the top of the piece of
furniture, her head thrown back, she ransacked the
depths of the hiding-place.

She was just the same girl, but more developed,
who had lived in Jean's memory for years, and who
had followed him over the world. Her features were
not regular. But in spite of that she was beautiful,
with a strong, glowing beauty. She seemed like the
statues of Alsace, which one sees on monuments and
in French souvenir pictures, like those daughters of
rich and warlike blood, wrathful and daring, while
near them a more feminine Lorraine weeps sadly.
She was tall; there were no hollows in her full cheeks,
curving to a chin as firm and pink. It is true she
did not wear the wide bows of black ribbon which
make two wings on the head, but that only accentuated
the unusual, the exceptional beauty of her
hair, which was of the colour of ripe corn, of a
perfectly dull, even tint, bound in bands round her
temples and there twisted and raised on her head.
Her eyebrows were of the same colour, long and
finely marked, and the lashes, and even the eyes,
slightly apart, where dwelt a soul at rest, were deep
and passionate. In a moment M. Bastian had on a

85

stand two glasses of cut crystal and a big-bellied
black bottle. He took the bottle in one hand and
with the other he drew out, without shaking it, a
cork which swelled out as it left the neck, being
damp as sapwood in spring time. At the same time
a smell of ripe fruit was diffused under the beams of
the room.

"It is fifty years old," said he, pouring a little of
the liqueur into each of the glasses.

He added seriously, "I drink to your health, Jean
Oberlé, and to your return to Alsheim!"

But Jean, without answering directly, and with
every one silent, and looking at Odile, who had withdrawn
to the cupboard, and who, standing erect
against it, was also looking at and studying her old
playfellow returned to his native country, said:

"I drink to the land of Alsace!"

By the tone of the words, by the gesture of the
hand raising the little sparkling glass, by the look
fixed on the end of the room, some one understood
that the land of Alsace was here personified and
present. The tall, beautiful daughter of the Bastians
remained motionless, leaning against the cupboard,
which framed her in its yellowish shadow. But her
eyes had the brightness that wheat has when it
waves at a breath of wind in the sunshine, and without
turning her head, without ceasing to look
straight in front of her, her eyelids slowly lowered
and shut, saying thank you!

And that was all.

Madame Bastian had not even looked up. Odile
had said not a word—Jean bowed and went out.

The old Mayor of Alsheim rejoined him outside.

"I will go with you to the other end of my garden,"
he said, "for it is better for us—for you—and for
your father, that you should not be seen coming down
the avenue. You will seem to be coming from the
fields."

86

"What a strange country this has become!" said
the young man in an angry tone. "Because you do
not hold the same opinions as my father you cannot
receive me, and when I leave you I must do so
secretly, and after having had to submit to the insult
of a silence which was hard to bear. I can tell you
that!"

He spoke loudly enough to be heard from the
house, from which he was only a few steps away.
The usual paleness of his complexion was more
noticeable, and emotion contracted the muscles of
his neck and jaws, and all his face had a tragic
expression.

M. Bastian led him on.

"I have another reason for taking you that way,"
he said, "it will be longer, and I have things to
explain to you."

They took a path that was not gravelled, which
went by the plane-trees, passed a kitchen garden and
then crossed a little wood.

"You do not understand, dear boy," said M. Bastian,
in a voice which was firm without being harsh,
"because you have not yet really lived among us. It
has not changed; what you see dates back for thirty
years."

Through an opening in the trees they saw a little
bit of the plain, with the belfry of Barr in the distance,
and the blue Vosges mountains above and
beyond.

"Formerly," continued M. Bastian, pointing vaguely
to the country, "our Alsace was just one family.
Big and little knew each other and lived happily
together. You know that even now I make no
difference between rich and poor, between a citizen of
Strasburg and a wood-cutter from the mountain.
But what is done is done—we have been torn away,
against our will, from France, and treated brutally
because we did not say 'Yes.' We cannot revolt—we

87

cannot drive away our masters, who know nothing
about our hearts or our lives. But we do not admit
them to our friendship, neither them nor those amongst
us who have taken the side of the stronger."

He stopped speaking for a moment, not wishing to
say all that he thought on this subject, and went on,
taking Jean's hand.

"You are very angry with my wife because of her
reception of you; but you are not the cause of it,
neither is she. Until the doubt which rests on you is
lifted, you are he who was educated in Germany,
and the woman you have just seen is this country.
Reflect—you must not bear a grudge against her.
We have not all been faithful to Alsace, we men; and
the best of us have compromised and have more or
less recognised the new master. Not so the women—Ah!
Jean Oberlé, I have not the courage to disclaim
them even when you whom I love so well are the
subject. Our Alsatian women are not insulting you
in any ordinary way when they do not receive you;
they are defending their country, they are carrying
on the war." The old man had tears in his red and
wrinkled eyes.

"You will know me later," said Jean.

They were at the end of the little park before a
wooden door as mouldy as the other. M. Bastian
opened it, shook the young man's hand and stayed a
long time at the end of the wood watching Jean go
away and get smaller on the plain, his head bent
against the wind, which was still blowing, and more
violently.

Jean was troubled to the depth of his soul.

Between him and each family in this old country
he felt he was going to find his father. He was
suffering from having been born in the house towards
which he was going. He saw the image of Odile as
the only sweet thing of this first day, and her eyes
were slowly, slowly closing.

88

CHAPTER V

COMPANIONS OF THE ROAD

The winter did not allow M. Oberlé's ideas about the
professional education of Jean to be carried out
exactly. The snow which remained on the summits
of the Vosges, without being thick, made travelling
very difficult. So Jean paid only two or three visits
to the wood-cutting centres situated near Alsheim
and in the Vosges valleys. The excursions to more
distant places were put off for a warmer season. But
he learned to cube a pine or a beech without making
a mistake, to value it according to the place it occupied
in the forest, according to the height of the
trunk below the branches, the appearance of the
bark, which indicated the health of the tree, and by
other calculations into which a kind of divining
quality enters, which cannot be taught anywhere,
and which makes the expert. His father initiated
him into the working of the factory and the management
of the machines, the reading of agreements, and
the traditions of fifty years kept up by the Oberlés
regarding sale and carriage contracts. He put him
into relationship with two officials of the administration
of the forests of Strasburg, who showed
themselves very ready to be of service, and proposed
to Jean to explain to him personally the
new forest legislation, of which he still knew but
little. "Come," said the younger, "come to see me

89

at my office, and I will tell you more things you will
find it useful to know than you will learn in books.
For the law is the law, but the administration is
another thing."

Jean promised to profit when occasions offered
themselves. But several weeks went by without his
having the time to go to the town. Then March
came in mildly and melted the snows. In a week,
and much earlier than usual, the brooks swelled to
overflowing, and the high peaks of the Vosges and
Sainte Odile which one could see from Alsheim, which
had had their slopes and paths white with snow,
appeared in their summer robes of dark and pale
green.

The walks round Alsheim were going to be exquisite
and such as the young man had pictured to himself in
his youthful memories. The home, without being a
model of family unity, had witnessed no repetition of
the painful scene which occurred the day after Jean's
return. In each camp words were noted and deeds
observed, which would one day become arguments
and subjects of reproach and discussion, but just now
there was a sort of truce brought about by different
causes.

In M. Joseph Oberlé it was the desire not to be
wrong in his son's eyes; for his son was going to be
useful, and he did not wish to be accused of provocation.
In Lucienne it was the diversion which the
presence of her brother had brought into her life,
and the interest, not yet exhausted, that she took in
his tales of travel and student life. In Madame Oberlé
it was fear of making her son suffer, and of alienating
him by letting him see the family feuds. Nothing
had really changed. There was only a superficial
gaiety, an appearance of peace, a truce. But although
Jean felt that the agreement of the hearts and minds
around him was not real, he enjoyed it because he
had spent long years in moral solitude.

90

The worries and clashing of interests came from
elsewhere, and were not wanting. Nearly every day
Jean had occasion to go through the village of Alsheim,
which was built on each side of three roads forming
a fork, the handle of which was the mountain side,
and the two prongs towards the plain. At the bifurcation
was the tavern, the Swan, which took up a
corner of the church square. A little farther on,
on the left road leading to Bernhardsweiler, dwelt the
German workmen engaged by M. Joseph Oberlé, and
lodged in little houses all alike, each with a little
garden in front. So that in whatever part of Alsheim
he showed himself, the young man could not help
reading, in the faces and gestures of those he met,
different opinions, and all equally distressing. The
Germans and their wives—the workmen, better disciplined
and more tame-spirited than the Alsatians,
fearing all authority without respecting it, quartered
in a corner of Alsheim by the hatred of the population
on which they hoped to take vengeance some day,
when they should be the more numerous, having with
the other inhabitants no ties of origin, family, customs,
or religion—could only have indifference or hostility
for the master, which were badly disguised by the
salutations of the men, and the furtive smiles of the
women.

But many of the Alsatians were less under restraint.
It was enough that Jean had entered the business and
that he was seen constantly with his father, for their
disapproval to extend to him. He saw himself covered
with a prudent contempt, the kind that little people
can always express towards powerful neighbours.
The forest workmen, the labourers, the women, and
even the children pretended not to see him when he
passed, others withdrew into their houses; others,
the old ones especially, watched the rich man come
and go as if he had been from another country.
Those who showed the most signs of respect were

91

the tradesmen or the employés, or the relations
of the employés of the house. And Jean found it
difficult to bear the reopening of this wound each
time he left the park.

On Sunday, at church, in the whitewashed nave,
he waited for the coming of Odile. To reach the seat
reserved for her family for years, which was the
first on the Epistle side, she had to pass near Jean.
She passed, with her father and her mother, without
any of them appearing to know that Jean was
there, and M. Oberlé, and Lucienne. She only smiled
at the end of Mass, when she came down the aisle,
but she smiled at whole rows of friendly faces, at
women, old men, at big boys who would have died
for her, and at the children of the choir, the chanters
of the "Concordia," who scampered off by the sacristy
door, to be able to salute, surround, and welcome
at the door the daughter of M. Bastian, the Alsatian
girl, the friend, the beloved of all this poor village;
she did not give away more money than Madame
Oberlé, but they knew that there was no division
in her house, no treachery, and that the only
difference between it and the other houses in the
valleys and mountains of Alsace was its wealth.
What did she think of Jean? She, whose eyes
never spoke in vain, did not look at him. She who
used to speak to him in the roads now said nothing.

The first month of Jean's new life passed away like
this in Alsheim. Then spring was born. M. Joseph
Oberlé waited two days and then, seeing the buds of
his birch-trees burst in the sunshine, he said to his
son on the third day:

"You are a good enough apprentice now to go
alone and inspect our timber-yard in the Vosges.
You will get ready to start. This year I have made
exceptional purchases. I have cuttings as far as the
Schlucht, and to visit them you will have to visit
nearly all the Vosges. I give you no instructions,

92

only observe, and bring me a report, in which you
will note down your observations of each of our
cuttings."

"When shall I start?"

"To-morrow, if you like—the winter is over." M.
Oberlé said that with the assurance of a man who
has had need to know the weather like a peasant,
and who knows it. He had, before speaking, ordered
a list to be prepared of the cuttings of wood bought
by the house either from the German State or from
the Communes, or from private people, with the
detailed directions on the position they occupied in
the mountains, and he gave this list to Jean.

There were a dozen cuttings distributed over the
whole length of the Vosges, from the valley of
the Bruche on the north to the mouth of the
Schlucht.

The next day Jean put a little linen and a change
of shoes in a bag, and without telling any one of his
intention hurried to the mountain, and up to the lodge
of Heidenbruch.

The square house, with green shutters, and the
meadow, and the forest all round the clearing, were
smoking as if a fire had devoured the heath and grass,
and left the beech and pines intact. Long wreaths
of mist seemed to emanate from the soil, and to grow
tenuous, and uniting, lose themselves in the low
clouds, which glided along, rising from the valleys
and going up the slopes towards the invisible monastery
of Sainte Odile. The humidity penetrated to
the very depths of the forests. It was everywhere.
Drops of water shone on the pine needles, streamed in
threads down the bare trunks of the beeches, polished
the pebbles, swelled the many mosses, and travelling
over the land, and flowing on dead leaves, went to
swell the brooks, whose cadenced song could be heard
on all sides—the grasshopper of winter whose song
never ceases.

93

Jean went up to the middle of the wooden palisade
painted green, which surrounded Heidenbruch, passed
through the gate, and in the front of the lodge called
out gaily to the windows closed because of the fog,
"Uncle Ulrich."

A cap appeared behind the window panes, the cap
of an Alsatian woman who takes care of her big
black ribbons—and under the cap there was the smile
of an old friend.

"Lise, tell uncle!"

This time the last window to the left opened, and
the refined face, the eyes of a watcher, the pointed
beard of M. Ulrich Biehler were framed between two
shutters thrown back against the white wall.

"Uncle, I have at least a dozen wood-cutting places
to visit. I begin this morning, and I come to take
you for a companion, to-day, to-morrow, and every
day...."

"Twelve journeys in the forest," answered his
uncle, who leaned, his arms crossed, on the window
sill, "this is a fine ending to Lent! My compliments
on your mission!" He looked at his nephew in
walking-clothes, his strong, masculine face raised in
the fog; he was thinking that one could have sworn
that he was a French officer, and then, carried away
by his imagination, he forgot to say whether or not
he would accompany his morning visitor.

"Come, uncle," continued Jean. "Come! Don't
refuse me! We will sleep in the inns; you will show
me Alsace."

"I walked seven leagues yesterday, my friend!"

"We will only do six to-day."

"You really want me to come?"

"An absence of three years, Uncle Ulrich, think of
that, and a whole education to go through!"

"Well! I won't refuse you, Jean; I am too delighted
that you should have thought of me. I
have even a second reason for agreeing to the

94

journey and to thank you for it. I will tell you
presently."

He shut the window. In the silence of the woods
Jean heard him call the old valet, who was second in
command in Heidenbruch.

"Pierre! Pierre! Ah! there you are! We are
going for twelve days into the mountains. I take
you with me. You will pack my bag; put it on
your back with my nephew's bag. Take your shoes
with the nails, your stick, and you will go in front
to the halting-place, while Jean and I go to visit the
cuttings. Do not forget my waterproof, nor my
pocket medicine chest."

Going into the house, the young man saw Uncle
Ulrich, full of business and radiant, pass him, open
the drawing-room door, go to the wall, take down a
long object in copper on two nails, and go quickly
upstairs again.

"What are you taking away, uncle?"

"My telescope."

"Such an old one."

"I cling to it, my friend; it belonged to my great
uncle, General Biehler. It saw the back of the
Prussians at Jena!"

Half an hour later, in the meadow on the slope in
front of the house was M. Ulrich, gaitered like Jean,
with a soft hat, the telescope slung over his shoulder,
his dog gambolling round him; old Pierre very
dignified and solemn, carrying on his mountaineer's
shoulders a great pack wrapped in linen and fastened
by straps; then Jean Oberlé, bending over a staff-officer's
map, which the others knew by heart, discussing
the two ways to go—the way of the baggage
and the way of the walkers. The discussion was
short. The servant went on in front, bearing to the
left to reach the village where they would sleep,
while the uncle and nephew took a path to the
middle of the mountain—in a north-easterly direction.

95

"So much the better that it is a long way," said
M. Ulrich, when they gained the shade of the wood.
"So much the better. I wish it were for a lifetime.
Two people who understand one another and go
through the forest—what a dream!"

He half shut his eyes, as painters do, and breathed
in the mist with pleasure.

"Do you know," he added, in the way he would
have confided to him something delightful, "Do you
know that we have had spring here for three days?
There it is—that's my second reason!"

The forester said with enthusiasm what the manufacturer
had said without admiration. By the same
signs he recognised that a new season had begun.
With his stick he pointed out to Jean the pine buds,
red like arbutus berries; the bursting bark on the
beech trunks, the shoots of wild strawberries running
along the stones. In the uncovered pathways the
north wind still blew, but in the hollows, the combes,
the sheltered spots, one felt, in spite of the fog, the
first warmth of the sun, which goes to the heart and
makes men tremble, that warmth which touches the
germ of the plants.

That day, and during those which followed, uncle
and nephew lived under wood. They understood one
another perfectly, whether they spoke fully on any
subject or were silent. M. Ulrich knew the forest
and the mountains by heart. He enjoyed this opportunity
which had been given him to explain the
Vosges and to discover his nephew. Jean's ardent
youthfulness often amused him and recalled bygone
times. The instincts of the forester and hunter,
slumbering in the young man's heart, were ripening
and strengthening. But he had also his rage, his
revolts, his juvenile threatening words, against which
the uncle protested but feebly, because he really
approved of them.

The plaint of Alsace rose to his ear for the first

96

time, the complaining cry the stranger does not hear
and the conqueror only half listens to, but can never
understand. For Jean did not only observe the
forest; he also observed the people of the forest, from
the merchants and the officials, feudal lords on whom
depend a multitude almost past numbering, down
to woodcutters, jobbers, fellers, carters, charcoal
burners, down even to wanderers, shepherds, and
swineherds, pedlars of dead wood, freebooters,
poachers, myrtle gatherers, who also gather mushrooms
and wild strawberries and raspberries.

Introduced by Uncle Ulrich, or passing by in his
shadow, he aroused no suspicions.

He talked freely with the people—in their words,
their silence, and in the atmosphere in which he lived
day and night, he absorbed unto himself the very soul
of his race. Many did not know France, among the
young ones, and could not have said if they loved
her, but even those had France in their veins. They
did not get on with the German. A gesture, a look,
an allusion, showed the secret disdain of the Alsatian
peasant for his conqueror. The idea of a yoke was
everywhere, and everywhere there was antipathy
against the master who only knew how to govern
by fear. Other young men of the families with
traditions, instructed by their parents in the history
of the past, faithful without any precise hope, complained
that the poor of the mountain and plain were
denied justice and subjected to annoyances if they
were suspected of the crime of regretting France.
They spoke of the tricks played by way of revenge
on the custom officers, on the police, on the forest
guard—proud of their green uniform and of their
Tyrolese hat—the stories of smuggling and desertion,
of the Marseillaise sung in the taverns with closed
doors, of fêtes on French land, of perquisitions, domiciliary
visits and pursuits, of the comic or tragic duel,
useless and exasperating, between the strength of a

97

great country and the mind of a small one. When
the latter suffered, its thoughts, inherited from
ancestors, through habit and from affection, went
over the mountains.

There were also the old folk, and it was M. Ulrich's
delight to make them talk. When on the roads, and
in the villages, he saw a man of fifty years or more,
and he knew him to be an Alsatian, it was seldom
that he himself was not recognised and that a
mysterious smile did not prepare the question for
the Master of Heidenbruch:

"Come, is this not another friend—a child of our
family?"

If M. Ulrich, by the expression of the face, by the
movement of the eyes, by a little fear sometimes, felt
that his conclusion was justified, he added in a low
voice:

"You—you have the face of a French soldier!"

Then there were smiles or tears, sudden shocks to
the heart, which changed the expression of the face
pallors, flushings, pipes taken from the corner of the
lips, and often, very often, a hand raised, turned palm
outwards, touching the brim of the felt hat, thus
making the military salute, as long as the two
travellers were in sight.

"Do you see him?" said Uncle Ulrich, quite softly;
"if he had a bugle he would play 'La Casquette.'"

Jean Oberlé never ceased talking of France. He
asked when he came to the top of a mountain ridge:
"Are we far from the frontier?" He made the uncle
tell him what Alsace was like under the "gentle rule"—what
liberty was enjoyed by each and all, how
the towns were administered? What difference
was there between the French gendarmes—whom
M. Ulrich mentioned with a friendly smile as good
fellows, not too hard on the poor—and these German
gendarmes, common informers, brutal, always officious
and full of zeal, whom the whole of the Alsace of

98

to-day hated? What was the name of that prefect
of the First Empire who placed by the roadsides of
Lower Alsace benches of stone of two tiers so that
the women going to market could sit down, and
place at the same time their load above them?
"The marquis de Lezay Marnésia, my boy."

"Tell me the story of our artists, of our deputies in
the old days, of our bishops. Tell me what Strasburg
was like in your youth, and what a sight it was when
the military band played at Contades?"

M. Ulrich, with the joy of living over again which
mingles with all our memories, remembered and related.
While climbing and descending the intersections of
the Vosges he went through the history of French
Alsace. He had only to let his ardent heart speak,
and it made him weep. It also made him sing, with
the gaiety of a child, the songs of Nadaud, of
Béranger, La Marseillaise, or the old Noels, which he
sang to the pointed arches of the forest.

Jean took such a passionate interest in these
evocations of old Alsace, and he so naturally
entered into the hatreds and revolts of the present
that his uncle, who was at first pleased at it as a sign
of good family, ended by growing uneasy. One
evening, when they had given alms to an old
teacher, deprived of the right of teaching French,
and reduced to misery because she was too old to get
a German diploma, Jean's anger had carried him
away.

"My dear Jean," said the uncle, "you must be
careful not to go too far. You have to live with
Germans."

Since then M. Ulrich had avoided returning so
often to the question of the annexation. But alas!
it was the whole of Alsace, it was the landscape, the
descending road, the sign of some shop, the women's
dress, the type of men, the sight of soldiers, the
fortifications at the top of a hill, a finger-post, the

99

different items in a newspaper bought in the Alsatian
inn where they had dined in the evening—it was
every hour of the day which called their minds back
to the condition of Alsace, a nation conquered but
not assimilated. In vain did M. Ulrich answer more
carelessly and quickly—he could not hinder Jean's
thought from travelling the road to the unknown.
And when they climbed together a neck of the
Vosges, the elder man saw with pleasure and
apprehension Jean's eyes travel to seek the horizon
on the west, and gaze there as at some loved face.
Jean did not look so long at the east or the
south.

A fortnight was employed in visiting the forest of
the Vosges, and during this time M. Ulrich came
back to Heidenbruch only twice for some hours. The
separation took place only on Palm Sunday, in a
village of the Valley of Münster.

It was evening—the hour when the valleys of the
German side of the mountains were quite blue, and
there was only a strip of light on the last pines which
surrounded the shade. M. Ulrich Biehler had
already said good-bye to this nephew, his dearest
friend.

The servant had taken the train that same morning
for Obernai, M. Ulrich, the collar of his cloak turned
up because the cold was piercing, had just whistled
to Fidèle and was leaving the inn, when Jean, in his
blue hunting-costume, without a hat, came down the
flight of steps.

"Again good-bye," he said.

And as the uncle, very upset, and not wishing to
show it, made a sign with his hand to avoid words
which might be tremulous—

"I will go with you to the last house of the village,"
continued Jean.

"Why, my boy, it is useless to prolong——"

His head turned towards his uncle, and his uncle,

100

looking down the road, Jean began to walk. He
commenced in his cajoling young voice:

"I am inexpressibly sorry to leave you, Uncle
Ulrich, and I must tell you why. You understand
before one says twenty words. You do not contradict
aggressively: when you are not of my
opinion, I know it by your mouth, which makes
the point of your white beard rise—that is all. You
are kind. You do not get angry, and I feel you are
very decided. Other people's ideas all seem familiar
to you—you are able to answer them so easily; you
are respected by the weak. I was not accustomed to
that on the other side of the Rhine."

"Bah! bah!"

"I even appreciate your fears about me."

"My fears?"

"Yes. Do you think that I did not see that there
is another question which interests me intensely,
and of which you have not spoken to me for six
days?"

This time Jean did not see his uncle's profile; he
saw his full face, and its expression was a little
anxious.

"My boy, I did that purposely," said M. Ulrich.
"When you questioned me, I told you what we were
and what we are. And then I saw that I must not
insist too much, because you would be full of grief.
You see, grief is good for me; but for you, youth, it
is better that you should start off like the horses
which have not yet run a race, and only carry a
very slight weight."

The last house was passed. They were in the
country, between a stream strewn with many
boulders, and a steep slope which joined the forest
up above.

"Too late," said Jean Oberlé, holding out his hand
and stopping, "too late; you have said too much,
Uncle Ulrich. I feel I belong to the older times, as

101

you do. And so much the worse, as to-morrow I go up
to the Schlucht. I shall see her—I shall say good
day to our country of France!"

He laughed as he uttered these words. M. Ulrich
shook his head once or twice to scold him, but without
answering, and he went away into the mist.

102

CHAPTER VI

THE FRONTIER

The next day Jean started in the morning on foot
to go to the cutting bought by the House of Oberlé,
which was situated on the crest of the mountains,
enclosing the valley, to the left of the neck of the
Schlucht, in the forest of Stosswihr. The way was
long—the soil made slippery by a recent shower;
besides, Jean lost several hours in going round a
great rock he ought to have climbed. The afternoon
was well advanced when he came to a wood cabin at
the place where the road ended: just the time to
talk to the German foreman who directed, under the
supervision of the forest administration, the felling
and transport of the firs; and the young man, continuing
his climb, passed the workmen from the
timber-yard coming down before the end of the day,
to regain the valley. The sun, still splendid, was
about to disappear on the other side of the Vosges.
Jean was thinking with a beating heart of the
frontier now quite near; however, he would not ask
the way of the men who saluted him in passing, for
he prided himself on hiding his emotions, and his
words might have betrayed him before this gang of
woodcutters released from work, and curious at the
meeting. He entered the cutting they had just left.
Around him the pine-trees, branchless and despoiled
of their bark, were lying on the slopes, which they

103

seemed to light up by the whiteness of their trunks.
They had rolled—and stopped—one could not see
why. At other times they had made a barrier and
placed themselves pell-mell like spilikins on a game
board. In the high forest there only remained one
workman, an old man dressed in dark clothes who,
kneeling, tied up in his handkerchief, a store of mushrooms
he had gathered. When he had finished tying
the ends of the red stuff with his clumsy fingers he
got up, pushed his woollen cap well on to his head,
and began to descend, with long strides over the moss,
his mouth open to the odour of the forests.

"Ah," said Jean, "one minute, my man."

The man between two immense pine trunks, himself
the colour of the bark, turned his head.

"Which is my nearest way to get to the neck of
the Schlucht?"

"Go down by the waterfall, the way I go, and
then turn up again. But do not go up there another
two hundred yards, for then you go down into France;
you will find paths which will lead you to the Schlucht.
Good evening!"

"Good evening!"

The words rang out, soon lost in the vast silence.
But one of them went on speaking to Jean Oberlé's
heart: "You will go down into France." He was in
a hurry to see her, this mysterious France, which held
such a large place in his dreams, in his life—she,
who had destroyed the unity of his family because
the older members, some of them at least, remained
faithful to her charms. France, for whom so many
Alsatians had died and for whom so many others
were waiting and whom they were loving with that
silent love which makes hearts sad. So near him—she
from whom he had been so jealously kept—she
for whom Uncle Ulrich, M. Bastian, his mother, his
grandfather Philippe, and thousands and thousands of
others said a prayer every night!

104

In a few minutes he had reached the top and begun
his descent on the other side. But the trees formed a
thick curtain round him. And he began to run to
find a road and a free space to see France. He took
pleasure in sliding down and letting himself almost
fall, head foremost, seeking the desired opening.
On this side of the mountain the sun was touching
the earth; here and there the air was still warm; but
the pines always made a wall.

"Halt!" cried a man, showing himself suddenly,
and coming out from behind the trunk of a tree.
Jean went on running some steps—carried away by
the impetus. Then he came back to the customs
official who had called to him. Then the man, who
was a brigadier, young and squat, with defective
eyes, a little wild, two locks of yellow hair framing
the thick-set face—the real type of a man of the
Vosges, looked at the young man and said:

"Why the devil did you run? I thought you were
a smuggler."

"I was trying to find a place to see a landscape in
France...."

"Does that interest you? You are from the other
side?"

"Yes."

"Not a Prussian all the same?"

"No; an Alsatian."

The man smiled slightly and said, "That is
better!"

But Jean continued without taking up the conversation,
and as if he had forgotten his question, to
look at this poor officer of France, his face, his
uniform, and to photograph them on his mind. The
officer seemed amused at his curiosity and said,
laughing:

"If it is a view you are after, you have only to
follow me. I have one which the Government offers
me to complete my treatment."

105

They both began to laugh, looking straight into
each other's eyes quickly—less for what the customs
officer had said than because of a certain sympathy
which they felt for each other.

"We have no time to lose," said the brigadier, "the
sun is dying down."

They went on under the vault of pines, turning
round a cliff of bare rocks on which were planted at
some distance two posts marking the spot where
Germany ended and where France began, and at the
end point, which was like a spur in the green, on a
straight platform, which had its bed down in the
forest, they found a watch-house of heavy planks of
pines nailed on to the beams. From there one could
see an immense landscape, which went on and on,
sloping down—as far as human eye could see. In this
moment and in the setting sun a pale golden light
bathed the terraced lands, forests, villages, and rivers,
the lakes of Retournemer and Longemer, softening
the reliefs, and casting a colour like that of corn on
uncultivated lands covered with heath. Jean remained
standing, drinking in the picture to intoxication, and
kept silence, while his emotion increased. He felt
that the whole depth of his soul was full of joy.

"How beautiful it is!" he said.

The brigadier of customs, who was observing him
from the corner of his eye, was flattered by the
other's unstinted praise of his native district and
answered:

"It is tiring, but in summer it is good to walk—for
those who have the time. People come from
Gérardmer, and from Saint Dié and Remiremont
and from farther still. Many people come from over
there——"

Over his shoulder, with his thumb reversed and
turned backwards, he pointed to the country beyond
the frontier.

Jean was shown in which direction lay the three

106

towns of which the Custom House official had spoken.
But he only followed his own thought with attention.
What delighted him was the clearness of the air, and
the idea of the illimitable, of the sweetness of life
and of fertility which came to his mind at the
sight of the French land. It was all he knew of
France, what he had read, and what he had heard
his mother, grandfather, and uncle Ulrich talk about,
what he had pictured to himself, memories buried
deep in his mind, which rose again suddenly like
millions of grains of corn to the call of the sun.

The brigadier was seated on a bench, along the
side of the hut; he had taken his short pipe from
his pocket and was smoking.

When he saw the visitor turn towards him, his
eyes full of tears, and seat himself on the bench, he
guessed Jean's feelings; for Jean's admiration of the
picturesque had escaped him, but the tears of regret
at once made the brigadier grave. Those were from
the heart, and a sublime equality united the two
men. However, as he did not dare to question he
stiffened his neck, until the muscles were visible, and
began to study the horizon silently.

"What part of France do you come from?" asked
Jean.

"About five leagues from here, in the mountain."

"Have you served your time in the army?"

The brigadier took his pipe from his mouth and his
hand quickly touched the medal hanging on his breast.

"Six years," said he—"two furloughs. When I
left I was a sergeant, with this medal, which I brought
back from Tonquin. A fine time when it is finished."
He spoke like travellers who prefer the remembrance
of a journey but all the same have not disliked it.
And he continued:

"With you, they say it is harder."

"Yes."

"I have always heard it said Germany is a great

107

country, but the officer and the soldier are not relatives
as in France."

The sun was going down; the great golden landscape
became tawny in places and purple in shadow.
This purple spread with the rapidity of racing clouds
on shadowed slopes and veiled plains—how Jean
Oberlé would have loved to see you again in strong
light! He asked:

"Do you ever see any deserters?"

Those who pass the frontier before their service
begins are naturally not known, only the soldiers
serving in the Alsace-Lorraine regiments and who
desert in uniform. "Yes; I have seen several poor
fellows who had been too severely punished or
whose tempers were too proud. You will say that
some desert from our side too, and it is true; but
then they are not so many——"

Shaking his head and looking tenderly at the
sleeping forests:

"When one belongs to this side, you see, one can
speak ill of it, but one is not satisfied elsewhere.
You do not know the country, sir, and yet to look at
you one would swear you belonged to it."

Jean felt himself getting red; his throat was dry;
he could not answer. And the man, thinking that he
had taken a liberty, said:

"Excuse me, sir; one never knows whom one
meets; and it is better not to talk about these things.
I must continue my rounds and go down again."

He was going to salute in military fashion; Jean
took his hand and pressed it.

"You are not mistaken, my friend," he said.

Then, feeling in his pocket, he held out his cigar-case
to him.

"Come, take a cigar!"

And then, with a kind of childish joy, he emptied
his case into the hand which the Custom House official
held out.

108

"Take them all; you will give me pleasure. Do
not refuse me!"

It seemed as if he wanted to give something to
France.

The brigadier hesitated for a moment, and closed
his hand over them, saying:

"I will smoke them on Sunday. Thank you, sir!
Good-bye!"

He saluted quickly, and was lost to sight almost
immediately in the firs that clothe the mountains.
Jean heard his footsteps growing fainter in the
distance. Above all, he heard echoing in his soul,
and with indescribable emotion, the words of this
unknown man.

"You belong to us." "Yes, I belong here; I feel
it, I see it; and that explains to me so many things in
my life."

The shadow descended.

Jean saw the land darkening. He thought of
those of his family who had fought there, round
the villages submerged by the night, so that Alsace
should remain united to that great country stretched
out before him. "Sweet country—my country—every
one has tender words for her; and I, why did
I come? Why am I as moved as if she were living
before me?"

In a little while, on the fringe of the sky just
where the blue began, rose the evening star. Alone,
faint but dominating as an idea.

Jean rose; the night was becoming quite dark, and
he took the path which follows the crest of the hills;
but he could not take his eyes from the star. Walking
all alone in the deep silence, on the summit of the
divided Vosges, he said to the star and to the shadow
beneath:

"I belong to you; I am happy to have seen you.
It frightens me to love you as I do!"

Soon he reached the frontier, and by the magnificent

109

road crossing the Schlucht, went back again
into the German-land.

The following day, the Tuesday of Holy Week, he
was again at Alsheim, and handed to his father the
report he had drawn up. Every one welcomed his
return with such evident pleasure that he was
very much touched by it. The evening after the
"conference" between the old grandfather and the
manufacturer, and at which Jean was present, since
he had just returned from visiting the cuttings,
Lucienne called her brother to the fire before which
she was warming herself in the large yellow drawing-room.
Madame Oberlé was reading near the window;
her husband had gone out, the coachman having
informed him that one of the horses had gone lame.

"Well!" asked Lucienne. "What is the most
beautiful thing you saw?"

"You."

"No, do not joke; tell me, the most beautiful
thing during your journey?"

"France!"

"Where?"

"At the Schlucht. You cannot imagine the
emotion it made me feel. It was a shock—like a
revelation. You do not seem to understand me."

She answered in an indifferent manner:

"Yes; I am delighted that you were pleased. It
ought to be a very fine excursion at this time of the
year. The first spring flowers, are there not? And
the breeze in the woods? Ah, my dear boy, there
is so much convention in all that!"

Jean did not go on. She it was who continued, and
in a confidential voice, which she modulated, and
made marvellously musical:

"Here we've had grand visits—oh, visits which
nearly cost a scene. Imagine, two German officers
came last Wednesday in a motor car to the lodge,
and asked permission to see the saw-mills. Happily

110

they were in mufti. The Alsheim people only saw
two gentlemen like any others. Very fashionable;
an old one—a commandant, and a young one with a
grand air, and accustomed to society. If you had
seen him bow to papa! I was in the park. They
bowed to me too, and visited the whole of the works,
personally conducted by our father. While this was
going on that idiot Victor informed grandfather,
who showed he was annoyed when we came in.
I ought to have run away, it appears. As the gentlemen
did not enter the house—'my house,' as grandfather
says—his irritation did not last long. However,
there was a sequel——"

Lucienne laughed a little stifled laugh.

"My dear, Madame Bastian did not approve of me."

"You were then present during their visit to the
works, when these gentlemen——"

"Yes."

"All the time?"

"My father kept me. In any case, I do not see
how that should affect the Mayor's wife. But I had
such a cold bow from her, my dear, last Sunday
at the church door. Do you care about the Bastians'
bows?"

"Yes; in the same way that I care for the greetings
of all good people."

"Good people—yes; but they do not know what
life is! To be blamed by them is just the same to
me as if I were to be blamed by an Egyptian mummy
come to life for the purpose. I should answer:
'You do not understand anything about it; go and
wrap yourself up again.' Is it not strange that you
do not think as I do—you, my brother?"

Jean stroked the hand which was raised in front of
him to make a screen.

"Even mummies can judge of certain things of
our time, my darling—the things which are of all
times."

111

"Oh! how serious you are. Come now, where was
I wrong? Was it in going for a walk? In not
looking away? In answering a greeting? In obeying
my father, who told me to come and stay?"

"No; assuredly not!"

"What harm have I done?"

"None. I have danced with many German girls.
You can acknowledge an officer's greeting."

"Then I did right?"

"As a fact, yes. But there are so many sorrows
around us—real sorrows, and so noble. You must
remember that they all come to life again at a word,
or a gesture."

"I shall never consider that. Since what I do is
not wrong, no one shall ever stop me. Do you
hear?"

"That is where we differ, Lucienne. It is not
so much in our ideas; it is in a whole range of
feelings which your education prevents you from
possessing."

He kissed her, and the conversation wandered to
different topics.

112

CHAPTER VII

THE EASTER VIGIL

The weather had settled fine. Jean found the plain
of Alsace in full spring glory.

However, he only felt a faint and mixed pleasure
in the sight he had longed for. He came back from
this excursion more upset than he cared to own to
himself. It had revealed to him the opposition of
the two nations—that is to say, of two minds, the
persistent memory of many of the poor, and the
difficulty they found to make a livelihood which
their prudent and even hidden opinions created for
them. He understood better now how difficult a part
his would be to play in the family, at the works, in
the village, in Alsace.

The pleasure he felt the morning after his return
at his father's congratulations on the report of the
forest cultivation by the House of Oberlé made only a
short diversion in the midst of this worry. He tried
in vain to appear quite happy, and he duly deceived
those whose interest it was to be deceived.

"My Jean," said his mother, kissing him as he was
going to sit down to breakfast, "I think you look
splendid. The strong Alsheim air agrees with you,
and also being near your poor mamma!"

"Fancy that!" said Lucienne, "and I thought him
very gloomy!"

"Business," explained M. Joseph Oberlé, turning

113

towards the window where his son was sitting,
"cares of business. He has handed me a report, on
which I must congratulate him publicly; it is very
well drawn up, very clear, and the result of which
will be that I shall economise, in four places at least,
in the transport of my trees. You understand,
father?"

The grandfather made a sign with his head. But
he finished writing something on the slate, and
showed it to his daughter-in-law.

"Has he already seen the country weep?"

Madame Monica rubbed the sentences out quickly
with her fingers. The others looked at her, and
all were uneasy, as if there had been some painful
explanation between them.

Jean again experienced that intimate sorrow for
which there is no remedy. All the afternoon he
worked in the office at the saw-mills, but he was
distracted and dreamy. He reflected that Lucienne
would go away one day, and that nothing would be
altered; that the grandfather might disappear also,
and that the division would still go on. All the plans
that he had had when far away, the hope of being
himself a diversion, of bringing peace, of uniting
them or of giving them an appearance of union: all
that appeared childish to him now. He saw that
Lucienne had spoken truly when she made fun of his
illusions.

No, the evil was not in his family, it was in the
whole of Alsace. Even if no one of his name lived
at Alsheim, Jean Oberlé would meet at his door, in
the village, among his workmen, his clients, and his
friends the same annoyance at certain moments,
always the same question. Neither his will nor any
will like his could deliver his race, either now or
later.

In this melancholy mood the idea of seeing Odile
again, and making her love him, came back to him

114

and took possession of his mind. Who else besides
Odile could make life at Alsheim acceptable to him,
and bring back his scattered and suspicious friends,
and re-establish the name of Oberlé in the esteem of
"Old Alsace"? He saw now that she was more than
a pretty woman towards whom his youthful heart
went out in song; he saw in her peace and dignity,
and the only strength possible in the difficult future
which awaited him.

She was the brave and faithful creature whom he
needed here.

How to tell her? How to find an opportunity to
speak freely to her, without the risk of being
surprised, and troubling this orderly and jealous
family? Evidently not at Alsheim. Then where
should he arrange to meet her? And how could he
forewarn her?

Jean thought of this all the evening.

The next day, Maundy Thursday, was the day on
which in Catholic churches the Tomb would be
decorated with flowers, branches of trees, materials,
and torches placed in ledges, where the faithful
hasten to adore the Host. It was beautiful weather,
clear, even too clear for the time of year, when clearness
calls up mist or rain.

After he had talked with his mother and Lucienne
in M. Philippe Oberlé's room—it was the first time
that he had felt that his home held a family—Jean
went towards the orchards, which are behind the
houses of Alsheim, and followed the road which he
had taken a few weeks ago to call on the Bastians.
But a little beyond the Ramspachers' farm he
took the path which up to there ran at right
angles to the avenue, and was now parallel with it,
and with it joined the village road. He came out on
to a piece of waste land, used for carts by many
farmers on the plain. The neighbouring fields were
deserted. The road was partially screened by a bank

115

of earth planted with hazel-trees. Jean walked
along the quick-set hedge which ran round the
Bastians' property, approached the village, and came
back again. He waited. He hoped that Odile would
soon come into the path on the other side of the
hedge to go to the Alsheim church to pray at the
Tomb.

The remembrance of former meetings, at the same
place and on the same day, had come into his mind,
and had decided him. As he began the walk for the
third time he saw what he had not seen at first.

"How wonderful," he said to himself. "The road
was made for her!"

At the end of the avenue, for more than two
hundred yards in front, the fence, the clumps of trees,
a small portion of the long roof appeared in a
marvellous frame.

The old cherry-trees had flowered all together in
the same week with the almond-trees and the pear-trees.
The pear-trees blossom in clusters, the almond-trees
in stars; as for the wild cherry-trees, from
the forest transplanted to the plain—they blossom
into white distaffs of bloom.

Round the substantial branches, swollen and
coloured red with sap, thousands of white corollas like
a drift of snowflakes, trembled on their fragile stalks,
and so thick were they that in many places one
could not see the branch itself. Every tree cast its
flowery spindles in all directions. So many of the
cherry-trees were old that from one side of the avenue
to the other the points of the flowering branches
touched and intermingled. A swarm of bees covered
them with hovering wings. A subtle odour of honey
floated in waves down the avenue, and was wafted
on the wind far away to the plain, to the fields, to
the scarcely covered ground surprised by this feeling
of spring. There were no trees in the large open
valley which could vie with these for splendour—only

116

to the right—and quite close, the four walnut-trees
of the Ramspachers had begun to show their
leaves, and seemed with their heavy branches to be
enamels encrusting the farm walls.

The minutes passed by—the petals of the cherry-blossoms
fell in showers. And lo, here is a woman
stooping to unlatch the gate—it is she! She stands
erect, and walks onwards in the middle of the path,
between its two borders of grass—quite slowly, for
she is gazing upwards. She is looking at the white
blossoms which are open. The idea of a bride's
wedding wreath, an idea so familiar to young girls,
passes through her mind. Odile does not smile, only
her face beams with an uplifted look, and an involuntary
stretching out of her hands gives the
greeting and thanks of her youth to the joyous
earth.

She goes down towards Alsheim. On her fur cap,
on her rounded cheeks, on her blue cloth dress, the
wild cherry-trees shed their blossoms. She is serious.
In her left hand she carries a prayer book, half
hidden in the folds of her skirt. She thinks she is
alone.

The splendour of the day speaks to her. But there
is nothing languid about her. She is a valiant
creature; she is made to face life bravely. Her eyes,
which seek the tree-tops, are alive and masters of her
thoughts, and do not give themselves up to a tempting
dream. She was drawing near, never suspecting that
Jean was waiting for her. The meal-time ended,
the usual noises were going on in the village of
Alsheim, rumbling cart-wheels, barking dogs, voices
of men, of children calling to each other, but all
softened by the distance, scattered in the vast aerial
space, drowned in the tide of the wind, as is the noise
of a clod of earth which has become loose and falls
into the sea.

As she came near, Jean took off his hat and stood

117

up a little on the other side of the hedge. And she
who walked between two walls of blossoms, although
she was gazing upwards, turned her head, her glance
still full of the spring which had excited her.

"Oh, is that you?" she said.

And she came at once across the strip of grass
where the cherry-trees were planted, up to the place
in the hedge where Jean was.

"I cannot come to you freely as I used to," he said,
"so I came to wait for you. I have a favour to ask
of you...."

"A favour? And you say that so seriously!"
She tried to smile, but her lips refused. They had
both become pale.

"I am going," said Jean, as if he was making
a grave declaration; "I am going up to Sainte Odile
the day after to-morrow—I shall go to hear the bells
ring in Easter. If you also asked for permission to
come——"

"You have made a vow?"

He answered:

"Something like it. I must speak to you—to you
alone."

Odile withdrew slightly. With something of fear
in her look she was trying to find out if Jean was
speaking the truth—if she had guessed aright. He
was watching her in an agony of anxiety. They
were motionless, trembling, and so near and yet so
far from each other that one would have said that
they were threatening each other. And in fact both
felt that the peace of their lives was at stake. They
were not children, but a man and a woman of a
strong and passionate race. All the powers of their
being asserted themselves and broke through the
hackneyed commonplaces of custom, because in
these simple words, "I must speak to you," Odile
had heard the breath of a soul which was giving
itself, and which demanded a return.

118

In the deserted avenue the old cherry-trees lifted
their white distaffs of blossom, and in the cup of each
flower the spring sun was resting.

"The day after to-morrow?" she said, "at Sainte
Odile—to hear the bells ring?"

She repeated what he had said. But that was to
gain time, and to gaze deeper into those eyes fixed
upon her, eyes which looked like the green depths
of the forest.

There was a great calm in the plain and in the
next village. The wind ceased for a moment—Odile
turned away.

"I will go," she said.

Neither of them explained themselves further. A
covered cart rolled along the road, not far off. A
man shut the gate through which carts pass to the
Bastians' farm. But the great thing was Jean had
said what he had to say.

In the profound depths of their souls the words
echoed and re-echoed. They were no longer alone.
Both had the sacred moment of their meeting enclosed,
as it were, in themselves, and they fell back
on their own thoughts as the earth in the furrows
does when the sowing is done, and the germinating
seed is beginning to expand.

Odile went away. Jean admired the healthy and
beautiful woman disappearing along the road. She
walked well, without swinging her body. Above
the white neck, Jean placed in imagination the big
black bows of the Alsatian women who live beyond
Strasburg. She no longer raised her eyes towards
the cherry-trees. She let her skirt trail, and it swept
the grass, making a little dust fly, and the petals of
cherry blossoms, which flew about a little in the
wind before dying.

The day after to-morrow was slow in coming.
Jean had said to his father:

119

"Some pilgrims are going up to Sainte Odile on
Saturday to hear the Easter bells. I have never been
there at this time. If you do not mind, it is an
excursion I should much like to make."

He did not mind.

Jean opened his window when he woke that
morning. There was a thick fog. The fields near
the house were invisible.

"You will not go in this weather?" asked Lucienne,
when she saw her brother come into the dining-room,
where she was drinking her chocolate.

"Yes, I shall go."

"You will see nothing."

"I shall hear."

"Is it then so extraordinary?"

"Yes."

"Then will you take me?"

She did not wish to go to Sainte Odile. Dressed in
a light morning-gown trimmed with lace, and drinking
her chocolate in little sips, she had no intention whatever
of doing anything but stop her brother on his
way and kiss him.

"Seriously, are you making a kind of pilgrimage
up there?"

"Yes—a kind of——"

Bending at this moment over her cup, she did not
see the quick smile which accompanied the words.
She answered a little bitterly:

"You know I'm not devout. I fulfil my obligations
as a Catholic but poorly, and the practices of devotion
do not tempt me. But you, you have more faith
than I have. I am going to tell you what you ought
to ask for—it will be worth a pilgrimage, I can tell
you." She changed her tone, and her voice became
suddenly passionate; she raised her eyebrows, her
eyes were at once self-willed and affectionate, and
she said:

"You must ask for that miracle of perfection

120

among women who will live with you here. When
I am married and go away life will be terrible for
you here. You will have to bear all alone the
misery of the family quarrels, and the suspicions
of the peasants. You will have no one to pity you.
That is the part to play. Ask for some one strong
enough, gay enough, and with a conscience fine
enough to do it, since you would live at Alsheim.
You see, my thought is that of a friend."

"Of a great friend."

They kissed each other.

"Good-bye, Pilgrim, good-bye—good luck!"

"Good-bye."

Jean got away. He was soon in the park, turned
after passing through the gate, went through the
hop-fields and the vineyards, and so into the forest.

The forest was also full of mist. The serried
masses of pines, which took the hill as it were by
storm, appeared grey from one bank of the stream
to the other, and were almost immediately lost in a
thick mist without sun and without shadow.

Jean did not go up the beaten track. He went
gaily climbing up the woods when not too steep,
and stopping sometimes to take breath and to listen
if he could not catch above as below, somewhere in
the mysterious and impenetrable mists of the mountain,
either the voice of Odile or the chant of the
pilgrims. But no; he only heard the rushing of
water, or perhaps the voice of some one calling to
his dog, or the timid call of some poor peasant of
Obernai picking up dead sticks with his child, in spite
of the regulation which allows wood-picking only
on Thursdays. The saucepan must boil on Easter
Sunday! And was not this fog which hid everything
a divine protection against the forest guard?

Jean experienced great pleasure from this solitary,
stiff climb. As he went up he thought of Odile
more and more, and he was more and more glad

121

that he had chosen this holy place of Alsace in
which to meet her—and this day—doubly affecting.
Everywhere around him the beautiful scalefern
which carpets the rocky slopes unfolded its velvet
fronds. On all last year's shoots of honeysuckle
there were little leaves; the first strawberries were
in flower, and the first lilies of the valley. The
geraniums, which are so fine in Sainte Odile, lifted
their hairy stalks, and the multitude of whortle
berries and bilberries and raspberries, that is the
entire undergrowth, whole fields of it, began to pour
out on the breeze the perfume of their moving sap.
The fog retained these few scents and kept them in
like a net work on the sides of the Vosges.

Jean came close to Heidenbruch, looked at the
green shutters and went on his way. "Uncle
Ulrich," he murmured, "you would be glad if you
saw me, and if you knew where I am going, and
with whom, perhaps, I shall be presently!" Fidèle
barked, half asleep, but did not come. The mountain
was again deserted. A buzzard called above the mist.
Jean, who had not been this way since his childhood,
enjoyed the wildness and peacefulness of the place.
He reached the higher part, which is the property of
the bishopric of Strasburg, and followed the "pagan
wall" which surrounds the summit for ten miles,
that he might recall his school-boy impressions of
long ago.

At midday he had passed the Männelstein rock
and entered the convent courtyard, built on the
mountain top, a crown of old stone placed above the
summit of the pine forests; and there, although there
was no crowd, he found groups of pilgrims, carriages
with horses unharnessed, fastened to the trunks of
ancient lime-trees, grown no one knew how at this
altitude, and covering with their branches nearly the
whole enclosure. Jean remembered the way; he
went towards the chapels on the right. He merely

122

passed through the first, which is painted, but
stopped in the second, with elliptical arches leading
to the shrine, where lies the wax figure of the
patroness of Alsace, the Abbess Sainte Odile—so
gentle, with her pink face, her veil, and her golden
crozier, her purple mantle lined with ermine. Jean
knelt down: with all the strength of his faith he
prayed for his home, so sadly divided against itself,
from which he felt glad to be away, and that Odile
Bastian should not fail to keep this love tryst, the
hour for which was so near at hand. As his was a
sincere soul, he added: "Let our way be made clear
to us! May we follow it together! Let us see all
obstacles removed from our path!"

The whole of Alsace had knelt at the same spot for
centuries.

Then he went out to the refectory, where the nuns
had begun to help the first visitors. Odile was not
there. After the lunch, which was very long, being
continually lengthened by the arrival of fresh
pilgrims, Jean went hastily to the foot of the great
rock on which the convent is built, and finding once
more the road which comes from Saint Nabor and
passes by Sainte Odile's well, he posted himself in a
thick part of the wood which overlooked a bend in
the road. At his feet was the narrow strip of downtrodden
earth, bare of grass and covered with pine
needles, and which seemed hanging in the air. Far
beyond that point the slope of the mountain became
so steep that he could see no farther. In clear
weather you could see to right and left two sunken
wooden buttresses, but now the curtain of white mist
hid everything—the abyss, the slopes, and the trees.
But the wind blew and moved the mist, whose thickness,
one could feel, varied from minute to minute.

It was two o'clock. In an hour the Easter bells
would ring. The people who wanted to hear them
could not now be far from the summit, and in the

123

great silence Jean heard, rising upwards from below,
voices blending round the bend of the wood. Then
a phrase whistled: "
Formez vos bataillons!
" warned
him that Alsatian students were near. Two young
men—he who had whistled overtaken by another—came
little by little out of the fog and went towards
the abbey.

Then a young couple passed, the wife dressed in
black, her square-cut bodice showing a white chemise,
and wearing a lace cap like a helmet on her head;
the man wore a flowered velvet waistcoat, a jacket
with a row of copper buttons, and a fur cap.

Weissenburg peasants thought Jean.

Then he saw florid women from Alsheim and
Heiligenstein pass, chattering, but not showing any
trace of Alsatian dress.

Among them was a woman from the Münster
valley, recognisable by her cap of dark stuff, bound
round her head like the handkerchief of the
southerners, and decorated in front with a red
rosette. Two minutes slipped by. A step was
heard through the fog, and a priest appeared—an
old, heavy man, who wiped his face as he walked.
Two children, very alert, doubtless the belated
children of one of the women who had already gone
by, overtook him, greeting him in Alsatian with the
words, "Praised be Jesus Christ, M. le curé!"

"For ever and ever!" answered the priest.

He did not know them; he only spoke to them to
answer the old and beautiful form of greeting. Jean,
seated near a pine-tree and half hidden, heard an old
man overtake the priest at the bend of the road and
say, "Praised be Jesus Christ!"

How many times must that greeting have echoed
through the vaults of the forest!

Jean looked before him as one in a dream, who
sees only vague figures without attaching any
meaning to them.

124

He stayed like that a short time. Then a murmur,
almost imperceptible, so faint as to pass almost
unheard, weaker than the twitter of a bird, was
borne up on the fog: "Hail, Mary, full of grace;
blessed art thou among women!" Another murmur
followed, and finished with "Holy Mary, Mother of
God, pray for us!" and an involuntary agitation, a
mysterious certainty, preceded the appearance of two
women.

They were both tall. The elder was an old
spinster of Alsheim, whose face was the colour of
the fog, and who lived in the shadow of the church,
which she decorated on feast-days. She looked
weary, but she smiled as she recited the rosary.
The younger walked on the right, at the edge of
the path, even with the slope, her proud head raised.
Her fair hair was like a beautiful piece of pine bark,
her body, robust and perfectly proportioned, stood
out completely from the pale screen of cloudy mist
which filled the bend of the road.

Jean did not move, nevertheless the younger
woman saw him, and turned her head towards him.
Odile smiled, and without interrupting her prayer,
her eyes, turned towards the summit of the mountain,
said:

"I will wait for you up there."

The two women did not slacken their steps. With
even steps, upright, moving slightly the rosaries
which they held in their hands by the swaying of
their bodies, they mounted upwards, and were hidden
in the shadow of the old wood. Jean let some
moments pass by and followed the same road. At
the turning, where the road becomes straight and
crosses the crest of the mountain to reach the
convent, he saw the two women again. They were
walking more quickly, glad to have arrived, their
sunshades open, for the mist, which had not dispersed,
was now warm, and there were splashes of

125

shadow at the foot of the trees. The sun was going
down towards the peaks of the Vosges and towards
the plains of France beyond.

The pilgrims who had arrived had already made
their pilgrimage to the shrine of Sainte Odile, and
were hastening to visit the places consecrated by
pious or profane tradition: Sainte Odile's well, St.
John's well, or by the pagan wall along the goat-path
to the Rock of Männelstein, from where there
is generally such a lovely view, to the tops of the
Bloss and the Elsberg, to the ruined castles which
lift their ancient towers among the pines—Andlau,
Spesburg, Landsberg, and others. Jean saw the two
women cross the courtyard and go towards the
chapel. He retraced his steps to the beginning of
the wind-swept avenue, along the old building, which
reminds one of the advance works of old forts, and
passes through a vaulted porch used as an entrance.

Ten minutes later Odile came out of the chapel
alone, and guessing that Jean Oberlé was waiting
for her elsewhere rather than in this courtyard too
full of onlookers, took the road leading to the forest.

She was dressed in the clothes she had worn on
Maundy Thursday, the same dark dress, but her hat
was very simple, very youthful, and suited her to
perfection: a straw, with a wide brim turned up on
one side, and trimmed with a twist of tulle. She
carried a summer jacket on her arm, and a sunshade.
Odile walked quickly, with her head slightly bent,
as those walk who are not interested in the road,
or who are either praying or dreaming. When she
came near Jean, who was on the right of the portico,
she looked up, and said without stopping:

"The woman who came with me is resting. Here
I am!"

"It is good of you to have trusted me!" said Jean.
"Come, Odile!"

He followed, close to her, the avenue planted with

126

sorry trees distorted by the winter winds. He was
so much affected by the realisation of his dream that
he could only think and speak of one thing: his
gratitude to Odile, who was absolutely silent, only
listening to what he did not say—and as full of
emotion as he was.

They left the road at the place where it begins to
slope downwards, and took a path through the forest
of lofty pines in serried ranks which leads round the
convent. There was no one there, and Jean saw that
Odile's eyes of the colour of ripe corn, eyes deep and
serious, were turned towards him. There was no
sound in the wood save that from the drops of
moisture falling from the leaves. They were quite
close to each other.

"I asked you to come," said Jean, "so that you
should decide what my life is to be. You were the
love of my early youth. I want you to be my love
always!"

Odile's look was far away, lost in the distance.
She trembled slightly, and said:

"Have you thought?"

"Of everything!"

"Even of that which may separate us?"

"What do you mean by that? What are you
afraid of? Of entering a disunited family?"

"No!"

"You would bring them together, I am sure of it.
You would be its joy and peace. What do you
fear—my father's or your father's opposition because
they are now enemies?"

"That could be got over," said the young girl.

"Then it is because your mother detests me," said
Jean hastily. "She does hate me, does she not?
The other day she was so stiff to me, so offensive."

The fair head made a sign of denial.

"She will be slower in believing in you than my
father was, slower than I was myself. But when

127

she sees that your education has not changed your
mind towards Alsace she will overcome her prejudices."

After a moment's silence Odile said:

"I do not think I am making any mistake. To-day's
difficulties can be brushed on one side by you
or by me, or by both of us. I am only afraid of
what I do not know, the least thing which to-morrow
might aggravate such a disturbed state——"

"I understand," said Jean, "you are afraid of my
father's ambition?"

"Perhaps!"

"We have already suffered much from that. But
he is my father. He is set on keeping me here; he
says it every day. When he knows that I have chosen
you, Odile, if he has personal projects which would
prevent our marriage, he will at least put them off.
Do not have any fear; we shall win!"

"We shall win!" she repeated.

"I am sure of it, Odile. You will make my life,
Odile, which will be difficult, perhaps impossible, if
you were not there. It was for you that I came
back to the country. If I tell you that I have
travelled much, and found no woman who had the
charm for me that you have, or who made the same
impression on me—how shall I tell you? The impression
of a mountain stream so fresh and deep!
Every time I think of my future marriage your
image comes before my eyes. I love you, Odile!"

He took Odile's hand, and she answered, lifting
her eyes to the light coming from above the trees.

"God is my witness that I love you, too!"

She thrilled with joy, and Jean felt her hand
tremble.

"Yes," said Jean; and he tried to look into her
eyes, which were still fixed on the distance.

"We shall overcome everything. We shall overcome
the numerous obstacles arising from this terrible
subject: that is all that is between us."

128

"Yes; it is the one and only question in this part
of the world."

"It poisons everything!"

She stopped, and turned her radiant face full of
love to him—of that beautiful and proud love which
he had longed to know and to inspire.

"Say rather that it makes everything greater.
Our quarrels here are not village quarrels—we are
either for or against a country. We are obliged to
have courage every day, to make enemies every day,
every day to break with old friends who would
willingly have remained faithful to us, but who are
not faithful to Alsace. No action of our lives is
indifferent; there is no action that is not an affirmation.
I assure you, Jean, there is nobleness in
that."

"That is true, Odile, my beloved."

They stopped to enjoy that delicious word to the
full. Their souls were in their eyes, and they looked
at each other tremblingly. In low tones, although
there were no onlookers other than the pines swayed
by the wind, they spoke of the future as of a battle
already begun.

"Lucienne will be on my side," said Jean. "I shall
entrust my secret to her when occasion occurs. She
will help me, and I count on her."

"I count on my father," said Odile; "for he is
already well disposed towards you. But take care
not to do anything that would annoy him. Do not
try to see me at Alsheim. Do not try to hurry on
the time."

"That glorious time when you will be mine!"

They smiled at each other for the first time.

"I love you so dearly," continued Jean, "that
I shall not ask you for the kiss that you would no
doubt give me—I have no right to it. We do not
entirely depend on ourselves, Odile. And then it
pleases me to show you how sacred you are to me.

129

Tell me at least that I shall take away with me
a little of your soul?"

The lips so near his murmured "Yes!" And
almost immediately:

"Do you hear down there? Is that the first Easter
bell?"

They turned together towards the side where the
wood sloped downwards.

"No; it must be the wind in the trees."

"Come," said she: "the bells are going to ring.
And if I were not seen up there when they rang, old
Rose would speak of it...."

Hardly saying a word, she led him to the base of
the rock. There they separated to go back to the
Abbey by two different paths.

"I shall find you again on the terrace," said Odile.

The daylight was growing blue in the hollows.
That was the hour when waiting for the night does
not seem long, and the morrow already dawns in the
dreaming mind.

In a few minutes Jean had crossed the yard,
followed the corridors of the convent, and opened a
door leading to the garden in a sharp angle at the
east of the buildings. There it was that all the
pilgrims to Sainte Odile met to see Alsace when the
weather was clear. A wall, high enough to lean on,
runs along the top of an enormous block of rock,
advancing like a spur above the forest. It overlooks
the pines which cover the slopes everywhere. From
the extreme point shut in, like the lantern of a lighthouse,
one can see to the right quite a group of
mountains, and in front and to the left the plain of
Alsace. At this moment the fog was divided into
two parts, for the sun was shining on the peaks of the
Vosges. All the cloudy mist which did not reach that
waving line of peaks, was grey and wan; but just
above, almost horizontal rays pierced the mist and
coloured it, giving to the second half of the landscape

130

a look of brightness like luminous foam. And this
separation showed with what quickness the mist came
up from the valley towards the departing sun. The
fleecy clouds intermingling, were wafted into the
illumined space, were irradiated, showing thus their
incessantly changing shapes, and the strength of the
motion impelling them, as if the light had summoned
their columns to greater heights.

There was at the entrance of this narrow place,
arranged for pilgrims and visitors, an old man
wearing the costume of the old Alsatians to the north
of Strasburg; near him the priest with grey curly
hair whom the children had greeted in the morning
on the slope of Sainte Odile; a step or two farther
on were the young Weissenburg peasants, and at
the narrowest spot, squeezed close together on the
wall, were the two students who might have been
taken for brothers on account of their protruding
lips and their beards divided in the middle, one fair,
the other chestnut coloured. Both were Alsatians.
They exchanged everyday remarks, as is usual
among people who do not know each other. When
they saw Jean Oberlé they turned round, and they
felt themselves suddenly united by a common bond of
race which becomes stronger in the face of a common
danger.

"Is he a German—that one there?" asked a
voice.

The old man who was near the priest cast a glance
in the direction of the garden and answered:

"No; he wears his moustache in the French fashion
and he looks like one of us."

"I saw him walking with Mademoiselle Odile
Bastian, of Alsheim," said the young woman.

The group was reassured, and more so when Jean
greeted the priest in Alsatian and asked:

"Are the bells of Alsace late?"

They all smiled, not because of what he had said,

131

but because they felt at home among themselves
without an inconvenient witness.

Odile came in her turn and leaned against a wall
on the right of the first group. Jean took up a
similar position on the other side of the group. They
were suffering from loving so much, from having said
it, and from only being sure of themselves.

The bells were not late. Their voices were encircled
and enclosed by the rising mists. Suddenly they
escaped from the cloudy masses, and it seemed as if
each separate morsel of fog burst like a bubble on
touching the wall and poured out on the summit of
the sacred mountain all the harmony of the pealing
bells. "Easter! Easter! The Lord is risen! He
has changed the world and delivered men! The
heavens are opened!" So sang the bells of Alsace.
They were ringing from the foot of the mountain,
and from the distance, and from far, far away, voices
of the little bells, and voices of the great bells of
cathedrals; voices which never ceased and from peal
to peal were prolonged in re-echoing reverberations;
voices that passed away lightly, intermittently, delicately,
like a shuttle in a loom; a prodigious choir,
whose singers were never visible to each other; cries
of joy from a whole population of churches, songs
of the spring eternal, which rose up from the
depths of the misty plain and mounted to the summit
of Sainte Odile to blend into one harmonious whole.

The grandeur of this concert of pealing bells
silenced the few folk gathered together up there.
The very air prayed. Souls thought of the risen
Christ. Several thought of Alsace.

"There is some blue sky," said a voice.

"Some blue up there," repeated a woman's voice,
as if in a dream.

They scarcely heard it, in the roar of sounds which
rose from the valley. Yet all eyes were raised at
once. They saw in the sky, amidst the masses of fog

132

fleeing before the assailing sun, blue depths opening
and opening with bewildering rapidity. And when
they again looked downwards they perceived that
the cloud of mist also was tearing itself to pieces on
the slopes. It was the clearing up. Parts of the
forest slipped, as it were, into the divisions made in
the moving fog; then others; then black crevasses,
the thickets, and rocks; then of a sudden the last
rags of mist, drawn, thin, contorted, lamentable, went
up in whirling masses, brushed against the terrace,
and disappeared above. And the plain of Alsace
appeared all blue and gold.

One of those who saw it cried out:

"How beautiful!"

All leaned forward to see in the opening of the
mountain the plain growing lighter and lighter as far
as eye could see.

All these Alsatian souls were touched. Three
hundred villages of their own country lay below them
scattered about amidst the young green of the cornfields.
They were sleeping to the sound of the bells.
Each was only a rose-red spot. The river, near the
horizon, showed like a bar of dusky silver. And
beyond rose stretches of country, whose shape was
vanishing rapidly in the fogs which still hung above
the Rhine. Quite near by, following the slope of the
fir plantations, one saw, on the contrary, the smallest
details of the forest of Sainte Odile. Several points
of dark green jutted out into the valley and mixed
with the pale green of the meadows. All was lit
up by reflection from a sky full of rays of light.
No bright spot attracted the eye. As the bells had
united their voices, so the varying shades of the
earth had melted into a harmonious unity. The old
Alsatian, who kept his place at the side of the priest,
stretched his arms, and said:

"I hear the cathedral bells."

He pointed, away in the distance over the flat

133

country, to the celebrated spire of Strasburg, which
looked like an amethyst the size of a thumbnail.
Now that they could see the rose-red of villages, they
imagined they could recognise the sound of the bells.

A voice said: "I recognise the sound of the bells
of the Abbey of Marmoutier. How well they
chime!"

"I," said another, "I hear the bells of Obernai!"

"And I the bells of Heiligenstein."

The peasant, who came from the neighbourhood of
Weissenburg, also said:

"We are too far off to hear what the bells of Saint
George of Haguenau are ringing. However, listen,
listen; there—now."

The old Alsatian repeated seriously:

"I hear the cathedral!" and he added: "Look up
there again!"

They could all see that the clouds had ascended to
the regions of the sunbeams. The cloud, shapeless
at the base of the mountain, had spread across the
sky, and was like sheaves of gladioli thrown above
the Vosges and the plain: some red, like blood,
some quite pale, and some like molten gold. And
all those witnesses looking up from between the
two abysses, their gaze having followed the long
light line, remarked that it lit up the earth with its
reflection, and that the distant houses of the capital
and the spire of the cathedral stood out in a tawny
light from the thickening shadow.

"That is like what I saw on the night of August
the 23rd, 1870," said the old Alsatian. "I was just
here——"

They, even the very young ones, had heard this
date frequently spoken of. Their looks were fixed
more steadily on the little spire, whence came still a
little shining light and the sound of the resurrection
bells.

"I was here with the women and girls from yonder

134

villages, who had come up here because the noise of
the cannons had redoubled. We heard the cannons
as we now hear the bells. The bombs burst like
rockets. Our women were weeping here where you
stand. That was the night when the library caught
fire, that the new church caught fire, and the picture
gallery, and ten houses in Broglie. Then a yellow-and-red
smoke rose, and the clouds looked like these
we now see. Strasburg was burning. They had
fired one hundred and ninety-three shells against the
city.

One of the students, the younger one, shook his
fist.

"Down with them!" muttered the other.

The peasant took his cap off and kept it under his
arm, without saying a word.

The bells were still ringing, but not so many of
them. They could no longer hear the bells of
Obernai, nor of Saint Nabor, nor some of the others
they thought they had heard. They were like lights
going out. Night was coming.

Jean saw that the two women were almost weeping,
and that every one was silent.

"Please say one prayer for Alsace," he said to the
priest, "while the bells are still ringing for the
resurrection."

"Right! that's right, my boy!" said the old
peasant standing by the priest; "you belong to the
country!"

The heavy, weary face of the priest brightened at
the same time. His voice, which was slightly broken,
was not steady. An old and enduring sorrow, yet
always new, spoke through his lips, and while they
were all looking, as he was himself, towards Strasburg,
the city which night was hiding, he prayed:

"My God, here, now we can see from your Sainte
Odile nearly all the beloved land, our towns, our
villages, and our fields. But some of our land lies

135

also on the other side of the mountains, and yet
that is also our country. You permitted us to be
separated. My heart breaks to think of it. For on
the other side of the mountains is the nation we love,
and which you still love. It is the oldest of the
Christian nations; it is the nearest to Godlike things.
It has more angels in its skies because it has more
churches and chapels on earth, more holy tombs to
defend, more sacred dust mixed with its fields, with
its grass, with the waters which permeate the land
and nourish it. Oh God, we have suffered in our
bodies, in our goods; we still suffer in our memories.
Nevertheless, make our memories last. Grant that
France also will not forget. Make her more worthy
to lead nations. Give her back her lost sister, who
may also return. Amen!"

"As the Easter bells return."

"Amen!" said the voices of two men.

"Amen! Amen!"

The others wept in silence. There was only the
hollow sound of one single bell in the cold air that
came up from the depths. The ringers had left the
towers, already lost in the shadow that covered the
plain.

Above the high platform in the garden the
darkened clouds, flying to the west, left a border of
purple on the crest of the mountains. Stars came
out, in the black depths of the night, as the first
primroses were coming out, at the same time under
the pines. Only three persons were left on the
terrace. The others had gone when the secret of
their Alsatian souls had been revealed.

The old priest, seeing before him two young people
close to each other, and Odile's head near Jean's
shoulder, asked:

"Betrothed?"

"Alas!" answered Jean. "Wish that it may
become true."

136

"I do wish it. What you just said is right. I
wish that you, who are young, may see Alsace once
more French."

He went away.

"Good-bye," said Odile quickly, "Good-bye, Jean!"

She held out her hand, and went away without
turning to look back. Jean remained near the
terrace wall.

The night birds—owls, sea-eagles, eagle-owls, and
horned owls—mingling their cries, flew from wood to
wood. For a quarter of an hour, the time of their
passage, which they made in sweeping flights, their
calls resounded over the mountain sides. Then complete
silence settled down. Peace arose with the
perfumes of the sleeping forests.

137

CHAPTER VIII

AT CAROLIS

At the beginning of the rue de Zurich, facing the
Quay des
Bateliers
, one of the relics of old Strasburg,
there is a narrow house, much lower than its neighbours,
with a roof of two stories like a Chinese
pagoda. The front, formerly adorned with the
pattern of its painted beams, is now covered with
whitewash, on which is this inscription:

"
JEAN, CALLED CAROLIS,
WEINSTUBE
."

This wine-shop, whose exterior has nothing about
it to arouse the curiosity of the passer-by, is not a
nondescript place, nor is it an ordinary public-house.
The place is historical. The inhabitants of Zurich
came here in 1576, or, at least, the best shots among
them, to take part in the grand shooting competition
to which Strasburg had summoned the Empire and
the confederated States. They had brought with
them a pot of boiled millet, and scarcely were they
out of the boat than they made the Strasburg people
understand that the pudding was still warm.

"We could easily come to your aid, neighbours,"
they said; "by the Rhine and the Ill, the distance
between our cities is very short." The word given in
1576 was kept in 1870, as is testified to by an
engraved inscription just near by on the Zurich

138

Fountain. At the moment when besieged Strasburg
was in the most distressed condition the people of
Zurich intervened, and obtained from General Werder
permission to allow the old men and children to leave
the city. This house was noted for something else—thanks
to the Southerner who in 1860 established a
shop there for wines of the South.

Jean, called Carolis, bore a remarkable resemblance
to Gambetta. He knew him, and copied his gestures
and his clothes, the cut of his beard, and the sound
of his voice. His trade was fairly flourishing before
the war, but he became prosperous in the years that
followed. And a certain number of German officers
got into the habit of coming there to drink the black
wines of Narbonne, Cette, and Montpellier.

One morning towards the end of April, Jean
Oberlé, who was going to see the Chief of the
Administration of Forests, whom he had long promised
to visit, was passing along the quay, when a woman
of about forty, clothed in black, evidently an Alsatian,
came out of the café, crossed the road, and, apologising,
said:

"Pardon me, monsieur, but will you kindly come
in? One of your friends is asking for you."

"Who is it?" asked Jean, astonished.

"The youngest officer there."

She pointed with her finger to the confused mass of
shadow moving under the lowered linen blind, and
which he saw to be the inside of the room with its
groups of customers.

Jean, after hesitating for a moment, followed her,
and was surprised—for not belonging to Strasburg,
he was ignorant of the reputation and also of the
customers of this wine-shop—at finding there six
officers, three of whom were Hussars, seated at tables
covered with red and blue check cloths, talking
loudly, smoking, and drinking Carolis wine.

The first glance he gave, on coming from the light

139

into the semi-darkness, showed him that the room
was small—there were only four tables—and decorated
with allegorical pictures in the German style; he saw
a monkey, a cat, a pack of cards, a packet of cigarettes,
but above all there was a semi-circular mirror filling
a recess in the left wall and round which hung framed
photographs of the present or past habitués of the
house. Jean looked again to see who could have
sent for him, when a very young cavalryman got up.
This simple movement displayed the beauty of his
slender form in its sky-blue tunic with gold lace. He
rose from the back of the room to the left. Near
him, and round the same table, a captain and a
commandant remained seated.

The three officers must have returned from a long
march; they were covered with dust, their foreheads
were wet with perspiration, their features were drawn,
and the veins stood out on their temples. The
youngest had even brought back from this country
ride a branch of hawthorn, which he had slipped
under his flat epaulet, on the side near the heart.

The Alsatian recognised Lieutenant Wilhelm von
Farnow, a Prussian, three years older than himself,
whom he had met before during his first year's law
course in Munich, where Farnow was then sub-lieutenant
in a regiment of Bavarian Uhlans. Since
then he had not seen him. He only knew that in
consequence of an altercation between Bavarian and
Prussian officers in the regimental casino, some of
the officers implicated had been removed, and that
his old comrade was among their number.

No; doubt was not possible. It was Farnow, with
the same elegant, haughty way of offering his hand,
the same fair, beardless face, too thick-set and too
flat, with thick lips, an impertinent little nose, slightly
turned up, and fine eyes of steel-blue—a hard blue
where dwelt the pride of youth, of command, of a
bold and disputatious temper. His body gave promise

140

of developing into that of a solid and massive
cuirassier later on. But at present he was still thin,
and so well-proportioned, so agile, so evidently inured
to warlike exercises, so vigorous, there was such
disciplined precision in all his movements, that de
Farnow, although he had not a handsome face, had
gained a reputation for good looks, so much so that
in Munich one would call him sometimes "Beauty"
Farnow, and sometimes "Death's Head" Farnow.
With reddish moustaches, bushy brows, and a helmet
accentuating the shadow over his eyes, he would have
been terrifying. But, though scarcely twenty-seven,
he gave the impression of a warlike being, violent,
conqueror of himself, disciplined even to his acquired
and perfectly polished manners.

Jean Oberlé remarked that when he rose Farnow
spoke to the commandant, his immediate neighbour,
a robust soldier with slow, sure eyes. He was explaining
something, and the other approved, with an
inclination of his head, at the moment when the
lieutenant made the introduction.

"Will the commandant permit me to present to
him my comrade, Jean Oberlé, son of the factory
owner of Alsheim?"

"Certainly, sir. An intelligent Alsatian—very well
known."

Jean's introduction to the captain, a man still
young, with straight features, evidently cultured,
and no less evidently of a haughty temper, led to
the same flattering expressions regarding the factory
owner at Alsheim: "Yes, truly Monsieur Oberlé is
well known—an enlightened mind. I have had the
pleasure of seeing him—kindly remember me to
him."

Jean felt humiliated by the marked attentions of
these two officers. He had the impression that he
was the object of exceptional attention, he, a civilian,
a citizen; he, an Alsatian; he, who from every point

141

of view should have been looked upon by these lofty
personages as their inferior. "What my father has
done then is of great importance," he thought, "that
they should requite him in this fashion. Neither his
fortune, nor his style of living, nor his conversation,
can justify this. He does not live at Strasburg, nor
has he filled any office."

A sign from the commandant almost at once put an
end to the awkward situation, and gave the young
men liberty to go and sit at the table farthest away
from the window at the back of the room.

"It is quite by chance that you meet me here,"
said Farnow, in a slightly sarcastic tone, which
revealed the pride of the Prussian lieutenant.

"My regiment is hardly ever here—it is mostly
infantry officers who come here.... I generally go
to the 'Germania'—but we have just been reconnoitring,
as you see, and my commandant was very
hot.... You will pardon me, my dear Oberlé, for
having sent for you."

"On the contrary, it was very friendly. You could
hardly leave your chiefs."

"And I wanted to renew my acquaintance with you.
I have not seen you for so long, not since Munich
days. You had just gone past the corner of the house
over there, when I said to the servant, 'That is one
of my friends! Run and fetch M. Oberlé here!'"

"And truly, you see me very happy, Farnow."

The two young men looked at each other with the
curiosity of two beings who try to fill in the unknown
years. "What sort of a life has he led? What does
he think of me? How far can I trust him?"

"I fancy," said Farnow, "that you have arrived
quite recently?"

"Just so; I came at the end of February."

"They told me that you were going to commence
your military service in October in the Hussars."

"That is true."

142

"Do you know, Oberlé, that I had the honour of
meeting your father in society last winter? I asked
to be introduced."

"Excuse me, I am still such a new-comer...."

Conversation languished at this moment at Carolis,
and Jean noticed that the two blue tunics had turned
towards him, and that the commandant and the
captain were both examining the face of the future
volunteer.

They finished drinking the wine like Bordeaux they
had ordered in a sealed bottle.

"I should much like to see more of you," said
Farnow, lowering his voice. "I hope we shall be
able to meet."

"Do you know Alsheim?"

"Yes; I've been through it several times during
manœuvres."

The lieutenant was visibly trying to find out how
far he could go.

He was in an annexed country; many incidents of
daily life had taught him that. He did not care about
renewing the experience. He was feeling his way.
Should he promise a call? He did not know yet.
And this uncertainty, so contrary to his energetic
nature; this caution, so wounding to his pride—made
him hold up his head as if he were going to pick up
a challenge.

Jean, on his side, was disturbed. This simple thing,
the receiving a former comrade, seemed to him now
a delicate problem to solve. Personally he should
have inclined towards the affirmative. But neither
Madame Oberlé nor the grandfather would admit
any exception to the rule so strictly kept up to
now—that no Germans, except quick and commonplace
business men, should be admitted to the house
of the old protesting deputy. They would never
consent. But it was hard for Jean to show himself
less tolerant in Strasburg than he had been in

143

Munich, and at the the first meeting on Alsatian
ground to offend the young officer who had come
to him with hand outstretched. He tried at least to
put a note of cordiality into his answer:

"I will come and see you, dear Farnow, with
pleasure."

The German understood, frowned, and was silent.
Evidently others had refused even to visit him. He
did not meet in Oberlé that systematic and complete
hostility. His anger did not last, or he did not show
it. He reached out his slender hand, the wrist of
which looked like a bundle of steel threads covered
with skin, and with the tips of his fingers he touched
the hilt of his sword, which had not left his side.

"I shall be charmed," he said at last.

He ordered a bottle of Burgundy, and having
filled Jean's glass and his own, drank.

"To your return to Alsheim!" he said.

Then, drinking it in a draught, he placed the glass
upon the table.

"I am really very pleased to see you again. I live
pretty well alone, and you know my tastes outside
my profession, which I adore, above which I place
nothing whatever, nothing if it be not God, who is
the great judge of it. I love hunting best—I think
man is made to move in large spaces, to strengthen
his power and his dominion over the beasts, when
he has not the occasion to do it over his kind.
For me there is no pleasure to equal it. Apropos of
this, it seems that M. Oberlé has been ousted from
his hunting rights?"

"Yes," said Jean; "he has given them up almost
entirely——"

"Would you like to have a turn at my place?
I have rented some shooting near Haguenau, half
wood and half plain; I have roebuck which come from
the forest—the ancient Sacred Forest; I have hares
and pheasants, and snipe at the time of passage; and

144

if you like glowworms, I have some who fly under
the pine-trees and shine like the lances of my
Hussars."

The conversation ran on for a while on this subject.
Then Farnow finished the bottle of Carolis wine
with Jean, and lifting the hawthorn which beflowered
his epaulet and letting it drop to the
ground, said:

"If you will allow me, Oberlé, I will go some way
with you. What direction do you take?"

"Towards the University!"

"That is my way."

The two young men got up together. They were
nearly of the same height and figure; both were of
an energetic type, although different in expression—Oberlé,
careful to relax all that was too serious in
his face when at rest; Farnow exaggerating the
harshness of his whole personality. The young
lieutenant drew down his tunic to take out the
creases, took from a chair his flat cap decorated in
front with a cockade of the Prussian colours, and
walking first with a studied stiffness, half turned
towards the table where the commandant and the
captain were sitting, saluted them with an almost
invisible and several times repeated inclination of
the body. The respectful good-fellowship of a short
time ago was not now in place. The two chiefs from
habit inspected this lieutenant leaving Carolis.
Gentlemen themselves, very jealous of the honour
of their corps, having learned by heart all the articles
of the code of the perfect officer, they interested
themselves in all that had to do with the conduct,
the attitude, the dress, and the speech of a subordinate,
who is the object of public criticism. The examination
must have been favourable to Farnow. With a
friendly and protective movement of his hand, the
commandant dismissed him.

As soon as they were in the street Farnow asked:

145

"Well, they were perfect, were they not?"

"Yes."

"How you say that? Did you not find them
kindly? You ought to see them in the service."

"On the contrary," interrupted Jean, "they were
too amiable. I see every day more and more that
my father must have humiliated himself very much
to be so honoured in high places. And that wounds
me, Farnow."

The other looked serious, and said:

"
Franzosenkopf!
What a strange character this
nation has—who cannot accept their position as the
conquered, and think themselves dishonoured if
Germans make advances to them!"

"It is because they do nothing gratuitously," said
Oberlé.

Farnow was not displeased at the word. It
seemed to him a kind of homage to the hard,
utilitarian temperamant of his race. Besides, the
young lieutenant would not enter into a discussion
where he knew that friendships ran the risk of being
spoilt. He greeted a young woman, who came
towards him, and followed her with his eyes.

"That is the wife of Captain von Holtzberg.
Pretty, isn't she?"

Then pointing to the left, beyond the bridge to
the quarters of the old city, illumined by the vaporous
light of this spring morning, he added, as if the two
thoughts were united naturally in his mind:

"I like this old-world Strasburg. How feudal
it is!"

Above the river, whose waters were soiled by
works and sewers, rose the long sloping roofs, with
their high dormer windows, the tiles of all shades of
red—the mediæval purple of Strasburg, mended,
patched, and spotted, and washed, violet in places,
nearly yellow in others adjoining, rose-colour on
certain slopes, orange-coloured in some lights,

146

royally beautiful everywhere and stretched out like
a marvellous Eastern carpet of soft faded silks
round the cathedral. The cathedral itself, built in
red stone, viewed from this point, seemed to have
been, and still to be, the pattern which had decided
the colour of all the rest; it was the ornament, the
glory, and the centre of all. A stork, with open
wings, cleaving the air with wide strokes, as an
oarsman cleaves water, his feet horizontally prolonging
his body and acting as rudder, his bill a
little raised like a prow, an heraldic bird, was flying
through the blue, faithful to Strasburg, like all its
ancient race, protected, sacred like the place, and
always returning to the same nests above the same
chimney stacks.

Jean and Farnow saw it inclining towards the
cathedral spire, and seen from behind, foreshortened,
it looked like some bird beating the air with its bow
of feathers, and then it disappeared.

"These are the inhabitants," said Farnow, "whom
neither the smoke of our factories, nor the tramways,
nor the railways, nor the new palaces, nor the new
order of things can astonish."

"They have always been German," said Jean with
a smile. "The storks have always worn your colours—white
belly, red bill, black wings."

"So they have," said the officer, laughing.

He went on his way along the quays, and almost
immediately stopped laughing. Before him, coming
from the direction of the new part of the town, an
artillery soldier was leading two horses, or rather he
was being led by them. He was drunk. Walking
between the two brown horses, holding the reins in
his raised hands, he went on stumbling, knocking
against the shoulder of one or the other of the beasts,
and to save himself from falling, dragged from time
to time at one of them, which resisted and moved
away.

147

"What is this?" growled Farnow—"a drunken
soldier at this time of day!"

"A little too much malt spirit," said Oberlé. "He
is not merry in drink."

Farnow did not answer. Frowning, he watched
the man who was approaching, and who was only
about ten yards away.

At this distance, according to regimental rules, the
man ought to have walked in step and turned his
head in the direction of his superior officer. Not only
had he forgotten all his instruction and continued to
roll painfully between the horses; but at the moment
when he had to pass Farnow he murmured something,
no doubt an insult.

That was too much. The lieutenant's shoulders
shook with anger for a moment, and then he marched
straight to the soldier, whose frightened horses backed.
The officer felt humiliated for Germany.

"Halt!" he cried. "Stand straight!"

The soldier looked at him, stupefied, made an effort,
and succeeded in standing still and nearly erect.

"Your name?"

The soldier told his name.

"You will have your punishment at the barracks,
you brute! But in expectation of better things, take
this on account, for dishonouring the uniform as you
have!"

Saying this, he stretched his right arm out at full
length, and with his gloved hand, hard as steel, he
hit the man on the face. The blood ran out at the
corner of his mouth; he squared his shoulders; he
drew up his arms as if about to box. The soldier
must have been terribly tempted to retaliate. Jean
saw the wandering eyes of the drunkard when he
was thus thrust backwards, turn right round in their
sockets with pain and rage. Then they looked down
on the pavement, overcome by a confused and terrifying
remembrance of the power of the officer.

148

"Now march!" cried Farnow. "And do not
stumble!"

He was in the middle of the quay—erect, booted, a
head higher than his victim, as it were surrounded
by sunlight, with flashing eyes, the lower lids and
the corners of his lips wrinkled by anger; and those
who called him "Death's Head" must have caught
a glimpse of him like that.

The loafers who had hurried up to witness the
scene and formed a circle, stood aside at the order
of the lieutenant, and let the soldier pass through,
who was trying not to pull the reins too hard. Then,
as a certain number of them remained gathered
together, either silent or merely muttering their
opinion, Farnow, turning on his heels and crossing
his arms, looked at them one after the other. The
little bank clerk went by first, adjusting his eyeglasses;
then the milk-woman with her copper pot
on her hip passed on by herself, shrugged her
shoulders, ogling Farnow; then the butcher who
had come from the neighbouring shop; then two
boatmen who tried to look as if they did not care,
although both had flushed faces; then the urchins
who at first wanted to cry, and who now nudged
each other and went off laughing. The officer drew
near to his companion, who had remained on the left
near the canal.

"I think you went a little too far," said Oberlé.
"What you have just done is forbidden by the
Emperor's express orders. You risk a reprimand."

"That is the only way to treat those brutes!"
said Farnow, his eyes still blazing. "Besides, believe
me, he has already passed on my blow to his horses,
and to-morrow he will have forgotten all about it."

The two young men walked side by side to the
University gardens, without speaking to each other,
thinking over what had just happened. Farnow put
on a new pair of gloves to replace the others, probably

149

soiled by the soldier's cheek. He bent towards
Jean, saying gravely and with evident conviction:

"You were very young when I met you, my dear
fellow. We shall have to tell each other a few things
before we shall know exactly our respective opinions
on many points.

"But I am astonished that you have not yet perceived,
you who have stayed so long in all the
German provinces, that we were born to conquer the
world, and that conquerors are never gentle men, nor
ever perfectly just."

He added, after a few steps:

"I should be vexed if I have hurt your feelings,
Oberlé; but I cannot hide from you that I do not
regret what I did. Only understand that behind my
anger there is discipline, the inviolable prestige and
dignity of the army of which I am a unit. Do not
report the incident to your people, dear fellow, without
also adding the excuse
for
it. That would mean
to betray a friend. Well, good-bye."

He held out his hand. His blue eyes lost for the
moment something of their haughty indifference.

"Good-bye, Oberlé! Here is the door of your Clerk
of the Forests."

150

CHAPTER IX

THE MEETING

Jean came back in fairly good time to the Strasburg
station and took the train to Obernai, where he had
left his bicycle. While going from Obernai to Alsheim
he saw in the meadows through which the Dachs ran,
near Bernhardsweiler, a second stork—motionless on
one leg.

This was the first thing he told Lucienne, whom he
met under the trees in the park. She was reading,
and wore a grey linen dress with lace on the bodice.
When she heard the noise of the bicycle on the
gravel she lifted her intelligent eyes, smiling.

"My dear, how I have missed you. What in the
world makes you go away so constantly?"

"I make discoveries, dear sister. First, I have seen
two storks, arriving on the sacred day—April 23—punctual
as lawyers."

A slight pout of her red lips showed that the news
did not interest her much.

"Then?"

"I spent three hours in the offices of the Forest
Conservators, where I learned that——"

"You can tell all that to father," she interrupted.
"I see so much wood here, living and dead, that I have
no wish to occupy my mind with it unnecessarily.
Tell me some Strasburg news, or about some costumes,
or some conversation you had with some one in
society."

151

"That is true," said the young man, laughing. "I
did meet some one."

"Interesting?"

"Yes; an old acquaintance of Munich, a lieutenant
in the Hussars."

"Lieutenant von Farnow?"

"Yes, the very man—Lieutenant Wilhelm von
Farnow, lieutenant in the 9th Rhenish Hussars.
What is the matter?"

They were halfway down the avenue, hidden by a
clump of shrubs. Lucienne, bold and provoking as
ever, crossed her arms and said, in a quieter tone of
voice:

"Only this—he loves me."

"
He?
"

"And I love him!"

Jean stepped away from his sister in order to see
her better.

"It is not possible!"

"And why not?"

"Why, Lucienne, because he is a German, an officer—a
Prussian!"

There was silence; the blow had struck home.
Jean, quite pale, went on:

"You must also know that he is a Protestant."

She flung her book on the seat and, holding up her
head, quivering all over at the protest:

"Do you imagine I have not thought it all over?
I know all you can possibly say. I know that the
people in the midst of whom we live in Alsace here,
intolerant and narrow-minded as they are, will not
hesitate to say what they think on the subject. Yes;
they will make a fuss, they will blame me and pity
me and try to make me give way. And you; are you
not beginning the game? But I warn you that
arguments are quite useless—all your arguments. I
love him. It is not to be done, it
is
done. I have
only one wish, and that is to know if you are on

152

my side or against me. For I shall not alter my
mind."

"Oh, my God! my God!" cried Jean, hiding his
face in his hands.

"I never thought it could hurt you so much. I do
not understand. Do you share their stupid hatred?
Tell me. I am putting a strong control on my feelings
that I may talk to you. Tell me then. Speak.
You are paler than I am—I, whom this alone
concerns."

She caught hold of his hands and uncovered his
face. And Jean gazed at her strangely for a moment
as do those whose look does not as yet correspond
with their thoughts.

Then he said:

"You are mistaken; we are both concerned,
Lucienne!"

"Why?"

"We are one against the other, because I, too,
must tell you that I love—I love Odile Bastian!"

She was terrified at what she foresaw in connection
with this name; she was touched at the same time
because the argument had reference to love, and was
a confidence. Her irritation passed at once. She
put her head on her brother's shoulder. The curls
of her fair hair intermixed with auburn lay ruffled
and disordered against Jean's neck.

"Poor, dear Jean," she murmured. "Fate pursues
us. Odile Bastian and the other. Two love
affairs which exclude each other! Oh! my poor
dear, it is the drama of our family perpetuating
itself through us!" She straightened herself, thinking
she heard a step, and taking her brother's arm
went on nervously: "We cannot talk here, but we
must talk about other than merely surface things.
If father suddenly came across us, or mamma, who
is working in the drawing-room at heaven knows
what everlasting piece of embroidery. Ah, my dear,

153

when I think that only a few steps away from her
we are exchanging such secrets as these, which she
little suspects! But first we must think of ourselves,
must we not? Ourselves...!" For a
moment she thought of returning to the house, and
of going up to her room with Jean. Then she
decided on a better place of refuge. "Come into
the fields, there no one will disturb us."

Arm-in-arm, hastening their steps, speaking to
each other in low tones and short sentences, they
went through the gate, passed the end of the enclosure,
and to the right of the road, which was
higher than the surrounding land; they went down
a sloping path, which could be seen like a grey
ribbon winding its seemingly endless way through
the young corn. Already each of them, after the
first moment of surprise, of dejection, and of real
pain caused by the thought of what the other would
suffer, had come back to thoughts of self.

"Perhaps we are wrong to worry ourselves," said
Lucienne, entering the path. "Is it certain that our
plans are irreconcilable?"

"Yes. Odile Bastian's mother will never agree
to her daughter becoming the sister-in-law of a
German officer."

"And how do you know that this officer would
not perhaps prefer marrying into a family a little
less behind the times than ours?" said Lucienne,
hurt. "Your plan may also injure mine."

"Pardon me; I know Farnow—nothing will stop
him."

"To tell the truth, I think so too!" said the young
girl, looking up, and blushing with pride.

"He is one of those who are never in the wrong."

"Exactly so."

"You share his ambitions."

"I flatter myself that I do."

"You can rest assured then: he will have no hesitation.

154

The scruples will come from the Bastian side,
who are the souls of honour...."

"Ah! if he heard you," said Lucienne, letting go
her brother's arm, "he would fight you."

"What would that prove?"

"That he felt your insult as I felt it myself, Jean.
For Lieutenant von Farnow is a man of honour!"

"Yes, in
his
way—which is not our way."

"Very good! Very noble!"

"Rather feudal, this nobility of theirs. They have
not had the time to have that of a later date. But
after all it does not matter. I am not in a mood for
discussion. I suffer too much. All I wish to say is
that when I ask for Odile's hand I shall be refused.
I foresee it, I am sure of it; and that von Farnow
will not understand why, and if he did understand
he would not withdraw, he would never think of
sacrificing himself. In speaking like this, I am not
slandering him. I simply understand him."

They walked on, enveloped in an atmosphere of
light and warmth, which they did not enjoy, between
long strips of young corn, smiling unnoticed around
them. In the plain, some labourers seeing them pass
side by side, walking together, envied them. Lucienne
could not deny that her brother's forebodings were
reasonable. Yes, it must be so, judging from what
she herself knew of Lieutenant von Farnow and the
Bastians. In any other circumstance she would have
pitied her brother, but personal interest spoke louder
than pity. She felt a kind of disturbed joy when
she heard Jean acknowledge his fears. She felt
encouraged
not
to be generous, because she felt he
was anxious. Not being able to pity him, she at any
rate drew near to him, and talked to him about
herself.

"If we had lived together longer, Jean," she said,
"you would have known my ideas on marriage, and
I should astonish you less to-day. I had made up my

155

mind to marry only a very rich man. I dislike the
fear of what to-morrow may bring; I want certainty
and to lead...."

"The conditions are fulfilled," said Jean, with
bitterness. "Farnow has a vast property in Silesia.
But at the same time he is also lieutenant in the
9th regiment of Rhenish Hussars!"

"Well!"

"Officer in an army against which your father has
fought, your uncle has fought, and all your relations,
every one old enough to carry arms."

"Quite right. And I would not have asked anything
better than to marry an Alsatian. Perhaps I
even wished to do so without saying anything about it.
But I did not find what I wished. Nearly all who
had name, fortune, or influence have chosen France;
that is to say, they all left Alsace after the war. They
called it patriotism. Truly, words can serve every
use. Who remain? You can easily count the young
people of Alsatian origin belonging to wealthy families,
and who could have aspired to the hand of Lucienne
Oberlé."

She went on more excitedly:

"But they did not ask for me; and they will not
ask for me, my dear! That is what you have never
understood. They kept away, they and their parents,
because father....

"They have put us and our family under an interdict.
I am, in consequence, one of those they do
not marry. Owing to their intolerance, the narrowness
of their conception of life, I am condemned by
them. They call me the 'beautiful Lucienne Oberlé,'
but none of those who like to look at me, and greet
me with affected respect would dare to defy his
people and make me his wife. I have not had to
choose; you cannot reproach me on that score. The
situation is such that, willing or not, I shall not be
asked in marriage by an Alsatian. It is not my fault.

156

I knew what I was doing when I accepted Lieutenant
von Farnow!"

"Accepted?"

"In the sense that I am bound—certainly. During
last autumn, but especially for the last four months,
Lieutenant von Farnow has paid me a great deal of
attention."

"Then it was he on horseback, there on the road,
the night I returned?"

"Yes."

"Was it he who recently came to visit the saw-mills
with another officer?"

"Yes; but I have met him mostly in society at
Strasburg, when father took me to balls and
dinners.—You know that mamma, because of her
poor health—but above all because of her hatred of
everything German—generally avoids accompanying
me. I met Lieutenant von Farnow constantly. He
had every chance of talking to me.

"At last, when he came here, just lately, he asked
father if I would allow him to pay me definite
attentions. And this very morning, after lunch, I
answered 'Yes.'"

"Then father consents?"

"Yes."

"The others?"

"Know nothing about it. And it will be terrible.
Think of it. My mother, my grandfather, Uncle
Ulrich! I hoped for your support, Jean, to help me
overcome all these difficulties, and to help me also
to heal all the wounds I am going to inflict. First of
all, von Farnow must be introduced to mamma, who
does not know him. Alsheim is quite impossible.
We have been thinking of a meeting at some mutual
friend's house in Strasburg. But if I have to consider
you as one more enemy, what good is there in
my telling you my plans?"

They stood still, Jean reflecting for a moment, as

157

he faced the plain, which unrolled its strips of barley,
and young corn, intermingling at the edges like the
flow and counterflow of running water. Then,
gathering his thoughts together and looking at
Lucienne, who was waiting for his words, with
raised face, suppliant, restless, and ardent.

"You cannot imagine how much I am suffering.
You have destroyed all my joy!"

"My dear, I did not know about your love!"

"And I—I have not the courage to destroy
yours...."

Lucienne threw her arms round his neck.

"How generous you are, Jean! How good you
are!"

He put her away from him, and said sadly:

"Not so generous as you imagine, Lucienne, for
that would be to show myself very weak. No; I do
not approve of your decision. I have no confidence
in your happiness...."

"But at least you will leave me free? You will
not go against me? You will help me against
mamma?"

"Yes, since you have gone so far, and since our
father has given his consent, and since our mother's
opposition might only cause still greater unhappiness...."

"You are right, Jean. Greater unhappiness, for
father told me that——"

"Yes, I guess. He told you that he would crush
all opposition, that he would leave our mother rather
than give in. That is all very likely. He would do
it. I shall not enter into any struggle with him.
Only, I keep my liberty of action with regard to
von Farnow."

"What do you mean by that?" she asked
quickly.

"I wish," Jean replied, in a tone of authority, in
which Lucienne felt her brother's invincible determination,

158

"I wish to let him know exactly what I
think. I shall find some means of having an
explanation with him. If he persists, after that, in
his desire to marry you, he will make no mistake, at
least as to the difference of feeling and ideas which
separate us."

"I do not mind that," answered Lucienne, reassured,
and she smiled, being certain that von
Farnow would stand the trial.

She turned towards Alsheim. A cry of victory
was on her lips, but she restrained it. For some
time she stood silent, breathing quickly, and seeking
with her eyes and mind what she could say so that
her happiness should not appear an insult to her
brother.

Then she shook her head.

"Poor house," she said. "Now that I am going to
leave it, it is becoming dear to me. I am persuaded
that later on, when life in the garrison takes me
away from Alsace, I shall have visions of Alsheim.
I shall see it in imagination, just as it stands there."

In the midst of its girdle of orchards were massed
together the red roofs of the village. And both
village and trees formed an island among the corn
and April clover. Little birds, gilded by the sunshine,
were flying over Alsheim. The house of the
Oberlés at this distance seemed only to be one of
many. There was so much sweetness in all things
that one might have imagined life itself sweet.

Lucienne gave herself up to this appreciation of
beauty, which only came to her as a consequence of
her thoughts of love. Again she heard her own
words, "I shall have visions of Alsheim just as it
stands there." Then the undulating line of the
Bastians' wood, which rose like a little blue cloud
beyond the farthest gardens, reminded her of Jean's
trouble. She only then realised that he had not
answered her. She was moved, not enough to ask

159

herself if she should renounce her happiness to make
Jean happy, but up to the point of regretting, with a
sort of tender violence, this conflict between their
loves. She would have liked to soothe the pain she
had caused, to comfort it with words, to put it to
rest, and not to feel it so close to her and so
alive.

"Jean, my brother Jean," she said, "I will requite
you for all you are doing for me by helping you, by
doing my very best for you. Who knows but by
working together we may not be able to solve the
problem?"

"No; it is beyond your power and mine."

"Odile loves you? Yes, of course she loves you.
Then you will be very strong."

Jean made a movement of weariness.

"Do not try, Lucienne. Let us go back."

"I beseech you. Tell me at least how you came
to love her? I can understand that. We said we
would tell each other more than the names. You
have only me to whom you can speak your mind
without danger."

She was making herself out to be humble. She
was even humiliated by her secret happiness. She
renewed her request, was affectionate, and found the
right words to describe Odile's stately beauty, and
Jean spoke.

He did it because his need to confide to some one
the hope which had been his—a hope which was still
struggling not to die. He told of the Easter vigil at
Sainte Odile and how he had met the young girl
on Maundy Thursday in the cherry avenue. From
that, each helping the other to recall happenings, to
fix dates, to find words, they went back into the past,
up to long-ago times when their parents were not at
variance, or at least when the children were ignorant
of their dissensions or did not perceive them, when
in the holidays Lucienne, Odile, and Jean might

160

believe that the two families, united in intimate
friendship, would continue to live as important land-owners,
respected and beloved by the village of
Alsheim.

Lucienne did not realise that in calling up these
pictures of the happy past she was not calming her
brother's mind. He may have found pleasure in
them for a moment, hoping to get away from the
present, but a comparison was immediately drawn,
and his revolt was only the more profound, arousing
all the powers of his being, against his father, against
his sister, against that false pity behind which
Lucienne's incapability of sacrifice was hidden. Soon
the young man gave up answering his sister. Alsheim
was getting nearer, and was now a long outline
broken here and there. In the calm evening the
Oberlés' house raised its protecting roof amid the
tops of the trees, still bare. When the park gates,
closed each day when the workmen left, were
opened for the two pedestrians, Jean slipped behind
Lucienne, and, making her go on, said, in very low,
ironical tones:

"Come, Baroness von Farnow, enter the house of
the old protesting deputy, Philippe Oberlé."

She was going to make a retort, but an energetic
footstep scrunched the gravel, a man turned into the
avenue round a gigantic clump of beeches, and a
resonant, imperious voice, which was singing in order
to appear the voice of a happy man without any
regrets, cried:

"There you are, my children! What a nice walk
you must have had! From the waterfall by the
works I saw you in the corn leaning towards each
other like lovers."

M. Joseph Oberlé questioned the faces of his
children, and saw that Lucienne at least was smiling.

"Did we have things to tell each other?" he went
on. "Great secrets, perhaps?"

161

Lucienne, embarrassed by the nearness of the lodge,
and still more so by the exasperation of her brother,
answered quickly:

"Yes; I have spoken to Jean. He has understood.
He will not oppose my wishes."

The father seized his son's hand. "I expected
nothing else from him. I thank you, Jean. I shall
not forget that."

In his left hand he took Lucienne's, and, like a
happy father between his two children, he crossed
the park by the long, winding carriage drive.

A woman behind the drawing-room window saw
them come, and her pleasure in looking at this scene
was not undiluted. She asked herself if the father
and children had united against her.

"You know, dear Jean," said the father, holding
up his head and, as it were, questioning the front of
the château. "You know that I wish to spare
susceptibilities and to prepare solutions, and not to
insist on them until I am forced to do so. We are
invited to the Brausigs'——"

"Ah! is it already settled?"

"Yes, to a dinner, to a fairly large evening party—not
too many people. I think that would be a very
good opportunity to present Lieutenant von Farnow
to your mother. I shall only speak of this to your
mother later on. And in order not to bias any of her
impressions—you know how timid she is—so that she
does not meet my look when she talks to this young
man, I shall refuse for myself—I shall confide
Lucienne's future to you. All my dream is to make
this dear one happy. Not a word to my father. He
will be the last to learn what does not really concern
him but secondarily."

The great empty space by the flight of steps had
not seen for a long time such a united group walk on
the well-rolled gravel.

In the drawing-room, keeping herself a little back,

162

trying to make her mind easy and not succeeding,
Madame Oberlé had left off working. The embroidery
was on the floor.

Jean was thinking.

"I shall thus assist at the interview, and I shall
take mamma there, who will suspect nothing. What
a part to play to avoid greater evils! Happily, she
will forgive me one day when she knows everything."

Late that night, kissing her son, Madame Oberlé
said:

"Your father insists upon my accepting the
Brausigs' invitation. Are you going, my darling?"

"Yes, mamma."

"Then I shall also go."

163

CHAPTER X

THE DINNER AT THE BRAUSIGS'

At seven o'clock the guests of the Geheimrath
Brausig were gathered together in the blue drawing-room—with
its plush and gilded wood—which that
official had taken with him to the different towns
he had lived in. The Geheimrath was a Saxon of
excellent education, and of amiable though somewhat
fawning manners. He seemed always to bend
in any direction in which he was touched. But the
frame-work was solid; and, on the contrary, he was
a man whose ideas were unchangeable. He was tall,
ruddy, nearly blind, and wore his hair long, and his
red beard streaked with white, he wore short. He
did not wear spectacles, because his eyes, of a pale
agate colour, were neither shortsighted nor longsighted,
but were worn out and almost dead. He
was a great talker. His speciality was to reconcile
the most opposite opinions. In his offices, in his
relations with his inferiors one saw the real basis of
his character. Herr Brausig had an Imperial spirit.
He never allowed private people to be in the right.
The words "Public interest" seemed to him to
answer all arguments. In the official world they
talked about raising him to the nobility. He repeated
this. His wife was fifty years old, had the remains
of beauty and an imposing figure; she had received
the officials of eight German towns before coming to

164

live in Strasburg. At her entertainments she gave
all her attention to supervising the servants, and
her impatience at the countless annoyances connected
with their service, which she tried to hide, did
not allow her to reply to her neighbours except in
sentences absolutely devoid of interest.

The guests formed a mixture of races and professions
which one would not so easily come across
in any other German town. There are so many
imported elements in the Strasburg of to-day! They
were fourteen in number, the dining-room could seat
sixteen with a little over two feet of table for each
person, such space being an essential in the eyes of
the Geheimrath. He had in his house, around him—and
he dominated them with his sad, insipid head—some
protégés, people recommended to him, or friends
gathered together from various parts of the empire:
two Prussian students from the University of Strasburg,
then two young Alsatian artists, two painters
who had been working for a year at the decoration
of a church; these were the unimportant guests, to
which we must add the two Oberlés, brother and
sister, and even the mother, who was looked upon in
the official world as a person of limited intellect.
The guests of note were Professor Knäpple, from
Mecklenburg, cultured and studious, whose erudition
consisted chiefly of minutiæ, and the author of an
excellent work on the socialism of Plato. He was the
husband of a pretty wife, round and pink, who seemed
fairer and pinker by the side of her dark husband,
with his black beard curling like an Assyrian's. The
Professor of Æsthetics, Baron von Fincken from
Baden—who shaved his cheeks and chin, so that the
scars gained in the duels of his student days might be
better seen, was of a slender, nervous build; his head
was of the energetic type, his nose was turned up
and showing the cartilage very plainly; ardent,
passionate, and very anti-French, and yet he looked

165

more like a Frenchman than any one present, except
Jean Oberlé. There was no Madame von Fincken.
But there was beautiful Madame Rosenblatt, the
woman who was more envied, sought after, looked up
to, than any other woman in the German society of
Strasburg, even in the military world, because of
her beauty and intelligence. She came from Rhenish
Prussia, as did also her husband, the great iron-master,
Karl Rosenblatt, multi-millionaire, a man of sanguine
temperament, and at the same time methodical and
silent, and one said that he was bold and cold and
calculating in business.

This party was like all the parties that the
Geheimrath gave; there was no homogeneity. The
official himself called that conciliating the different
elements of the country. He also spoke of the
"neutral ground" of his house and of the "open
tribunal," for each and every opinion. But many
Alsatians did not trust this eclecticism and this
liberty. Some maintained that Herr Brausig was
simply playing a part, and that whatever was said in
his house was always known in higher spheres.

Madame Oberlé and her children were the last to
arrive at the Geheimrath. The German guests
welcomed Lucienne, who was intimate with them
already. They were polite to the mother, because
they knew she only went into Government society
under constraint. Wilhelm von Farnow, introduced
by Madame Brausig, who alone knew about the
officer's plans, bowed ceremoniously to the mother
and the young girl, drew himself up erect, stood
stiffly, then returned at once to the group of men
standing near the mirror.

A servant announced that dinner was served.
There was a movement among the black coats, and
the guests entered the large room, decorated as at
the Oberlés' house with evident predilection. But the
taste was not the same. The vaulted bays with two

166

mullions, decorated with rose windows in the pointed
arch, and filled with stained-glass, of which at this
time only the lead-work was to be seen; the sideboards
with torso pillars with sculptured panels; the
wainscoting rising to the ceiling and ending in little
spires; the ceiling itself divided into numerous sunk
panels, and in the carving of which electric lamps
shone like fire blossoms: the whole decoration recalled
to mind Gothic art.

Jean, who came in one of the last in the procession
of diners, gave his arm to pretty Madame Knäpple,
who had eyes only for the wonderfully made and
equally wonderfully worn dress of Madame Rosenblatt.
Professor Knäpple's little wife thought she saw that
Jean Oberlé was noticing the same thing. So she said:

"The low neck is indecent. Don't you think so?"

"I find it irreproachable. I think that Madame
Rosenblatt must go to Paris for her dresses."

"Yes; you have guessed rightly," answered the
homely little woman. "When one has such a fortune
one has often odd fancies, and but little patriotism."

The beginning of the meal was rather silent. Little
by little the noise of different conversations rose.
They began to drink. M. Rosenblatt had large
bumpers of Rhine wine poured out for him. The two
students in spectacles came back to Wolxheim wine,
with as serious a mien as if it were some difficult
passage in the classics. The voices grew louder.
The servants' footsteps could no longer be heard on
the parquet floor. General conversation began as
the froth of intellects had been moved by the light
and the wine. Professor Knäpple, who had a quiet
voice, but a manner of pronouncing very clearly and
distinctly, was heard above the hum of conversation,
when he answered his neighbour, Madame Brausig:

"No; I do not understand that one should join the
strong because one is strong. I have always been
a liberal."

167

"You are alluding to the Transvaal perhaps," said
the Geheimrath opposite, with a loud laugh, pleased
at having guessed.

"Precisely, Herr Geheimrath. It is not political
greatness to crush small nations."

"You find that extraordinary?"

"No; very ordinary. But I do say there is nothing
to boast about in that."

"Have other nations acted differently?" asked
Baron von Fincken.

He turned up his insolent nose. No one carried on
the discussion, as if the argument were unanswerable.
And the wave of general talk rolled on, intermingling
and drowning the private conversations of which it
consisted.

Madame Rosenblatt's musical voice broke the hum
of talk. She was saying to little Madame Knäpple,
placed on the other side of the table:

"Yes, madame, I assure you that the question has
been discussed. Everything is possible, madame;
however, I should not have thought that the
Municipality of a German town could even discuss
such an idea."

"Not so devoid of sense; don't you think so,
Professor, you who lecture on æsthetics?"

Professor von Fincken, seated at the right hand of
the beautiful Madame Rosenblatt, turned towards her,
looked into the depths of her eyes, which remained
like an unrippled lake, and said:

"What is it about, madame?"

"I told Madame Knäpple that in the Municipal
Council the question had been raised of sending the
Gobelin Tapestries which the town possesses, to Paris
to be mended."

"That is right, madame, the noes have it."

"Why not to Berlin?" asked Madame Knäpple's
pretty red mouth. "Do they happen to work so
badly in Berlin?"

168

The Geheimrath found it time to "conciliate." "To
make Gobelin tapestry, without doubt, Madame Rosenblatt,
is right, and Paris is necessary; but to mend
them! I think—it seems to me—that can be done in
Germany."

"Send our tapestry to Paris!" expostulated
Madame Knäpple. "How do they know if they
would ever come back?"

"Oh!" one of the young painters at the end of the
table answered gravely. "Oh, madame!"

"How! Oh! You are an Alsatian, sir," said the
homely little woman, pricked by the interjection as
if it had been the point of a needle. "But we—we
have the right to be mistrustful."

She had gone too far. No one stood up for her
verdict—general conversation stopped, and was replaced
by flattering appreciations made by each guest
on some quails in aspic which had just been served.
Madame Knäpple herself came back to subjects with
which she was more familiar, for she but rarely took
any part in discussions when men were present. She
turned towards her neighbour, von Farnow, which
prevented her from seeing the elegant Madame
Rosenblatt, and Madame Rosenblatt's beautiful dress,
and the periwinkle-blue eyes of Madame Rosenblatt,
and she undertook to explain to the young man how
to do quails in aspic, and how to make "Cup" according
to her recipe. However, for the second time their
thoughts had been turned to the vanquished nation—and
this thought continued to disturb their minds
in a vague way, while champagne, German-labelled,
was sparkling in the glasses.

Madame Brausig had only exchanged very unmeaning
words with M. Rosenblatt, her neighbour
on the right, and with Professor Knäpple, her neighbour
on the left, who preferred talking to Madame
Rosenblatt, and Baron von Fincken, her
vis-à-vis
,
and sometimes with Jean Oberlé. It was she, however,

169

who started a fresh discussion, without wishing
to. And the conversation rose at once to a height
it had not yet reached. The councillor's wife was
speaking to M. Rosenblatt—looking all the time
angrily at a servant who had just knocked against
the chair of her most important guest, Madame
Rosenblatt; she was speaking of a marriage between
an Alsatian and a German from Hanover, the commandant
of the regiment of Foot Artillery No. 10.
The iron-master answered quite loudly, without
knowing that he was sitting beside the mother of
a young girl sought after by an officer:

"The children will be good Germans. Such
marriages are very rare, and I regret it, because
they add immensely to the Germanisation of this
obstinate country."

Baron von Fincken emptied his champagne glass
at a draught and, placing it on the table, said:

"All means are good, because the end is good."

"Certainly," said M. Rosenblatt.

Jean Oberlé was the best known of the three
Alsatians present, and the best qualified to make a
reply, and yet the most disqualified, it seemed to him,
to give his opinion, because of the discussions which
this question had caused in his own house. He saw
that Baron von Fincken had looked at him as he
spoke, that Herr Rosenblatt was staring at him,
that Professor Knäpple cast a glance at his left-hand
neighbour, that Rosenblatt smiled with the air
of one who would say "Is this little fellow capable of
defending his nation? Will he answer to the spur?
Let us see!"

The young man answered, choosing his adversary,
and, turning towards the Baron, "On the contrary,
I think that the Germanisation of Alsace is a bad
and clumsy action."

At the same time his face grew harder and the
green in his eyes vibrated, like the green of the

170

forests when the wind blows the leaves of the trees
the wrong way.

The Professor of Æsthetics looked like a man of
the sword.

"Why bad, if you please? Do you look upon the
conquest as unpleasant? This is the sequel of that?
Do you think so, really? But say so, then!"

In the silence of all present the answer of Jean
Oberlé fell clear and distinct.

"Yes."

"You dare, sir!"

"Allow me," said the Geheimrath Brausig, stretching
out his hand as if to bless them. "Here we are all
good Germans, my dear baron! You have no right
to suspect the patriotism of our young friend, who is
only speaking from a historical point of view!"

Madame Oberlé and Lucienne signed to Jean.

"Be quiet! be quiet!"

But Baron von Fincken saw nothing and heard
nothing. The bitter passion of which his face was
the symbol was let loose. He half rose, and leaning
forward, with his head over the table, he said:

"France is pretty! united! powerful and moral!"

Little Madame Knäpple went on:

"Above all, moral!"

Voices high, low, ironical, and irritated rang out
confusedly.

"Deceivers, the French! Look at their novels and
plays! France is decadent! A worn-out nation!
What will she do against fifty-five millions of
Germans?"

Jean let the avalanche pass; he looked now at
Fincken, who was gesticulating, now at von Farnow,
who was silent, with head held high and frowning
brows.

"I believe France is very much calumniated," he
said at last. "She may be governed badly. She may
be weakened by dissensions; but since you attack her,

171

I am delighted to tell you that I look upon her as
a very great nation. Even you yourselves have no
other opinion."

Veritable clamours arose. Ah! Oh! Indeed.

"Your very fury against her proves this. You
have conquered her, but you have not left off envying
her!"

"Do you read the commercial statistics, young
man?" asked the resolute voice of Herr Rosenblatt.

"Her merchant navy is in the sixth rank!"
whispered one of the students.

Professor Knäpple fixed his spectacles on his nose
and very clearly articulated the following proposition:

"What you say, my dear Oberlé, is true as regards
the past. Even to-day I think I can add, that if we
had France to ourselves she would rapidly become
a great country. We should know how to improve
her."

"I beg you," added von Fincken insolently, "not
to discuss an opinion which is not tenable."

"I beg you, in my turn," said Jean, "not to use in
discussion arguments which are not conclusive, and
do not really touch the question. One cannot judge
a country simply and solely by its commerce, its navy,
or its army."

"On what would you form your judgment then,
sir?"

"On the soul of the country, sir. France has hers;
that I know from history and from I know not what
filial instinct I feel within me; and I firmly believe
that there are many superior virtues, eminent qualities,
generosity, disinterestedness, love of justice, taste,
delicacy, and a certain flower of heroism, which are to
be found more often than elsewhere in the past and
in the present of this nation. I could give many
proofs of it. Even if she were as weak as you assert,
she holds treasures which are the honour of the
world, which must be torn from her before she merits

172

death, and by the side of these things the remainder
seems very small. Your Germanisation, sir, is only
destruction or diminution of those virtues or French
qualities in the Alsatian soul. And that is why I
maintain that it is bad!"

"Come now," said Fincken, "Alsace belongs
naturally to Germany; she has made her come back.
We make our repossession sure. Who would not
do as much?"

"France!" answered Oberlé; "and that is why we
love her. She might have taken the territory, but
she would not have done violence to the soul. We
belong to her by right of love."

The baron shrugged his shoulders.

"Go back then to her!"

Jean almost shouted, "Yes." The servants stopped
to listen, in passing round the sweets. He went on:

"I find your attempt bad in itself, because it is
a repression of consciences; but I also find that it is
clumsy, even from a German point of view."

"Charming," said the little falsetto of Madame
Knäpple. "You should have the interest to keep
what originality and independence remains to us. It
would be a useful example to Germany."

"Thanks," said a voice.

"And more and more useful," insisted the young
man. "I was educated in Germany and I am sure
of my contention. What struck me most, and shocked
me, is the want of personality in Germans, their
increasing forgetfulness of liberty, their effacement
before the power of——"

"Take care, young man!" interrupted the
Geheimrath quickly.

"I shall say before the power of Prussia, Geheimrath,
which devours consciences, and which allows
only three types of men to live, and these she has
moulded from childhood—taxpayers, officials, and
soldiers."

173

From the end of the table one of the students rose
from his chair:

"The Roman Empire did the same, and it was
the Roman Empire!"

A vibrating voice near him cried:

"Bravo!"

All the guests looked up. It was Wilhelm von
Farnow, who had said only this one word since the
beginning of the discussion. The violence of the
debate had irritated him like a personal provocation.
It had excited others. Herr Rosenblatt clenched his
fists. Professor Knäpple muttered stormy sentences
as he wiped his spectacles. His wife laughed
nervously.

Then the beautiful Madame Rosenblatt, letting her
pearl necklace run through her fingers, smiled, and
looking pleasantly at the Alsatian, said:

"M. Oberlé has at least the courage of his opinions.
No one could be more openly against us."

Jean felt far too irritated to answer pleasantly.
He looked intently at the faces of Fincken, Rosenblatt,
and Knäpple, at the student who was moving restlessly
near Lucienne, and then leaning slightly
towards Madame Rosenblatt, said:

"It is only through the women that the German
nation can acquire the refinement which is wanting,
madame. Germany has some accomplished women."

"Thank you for us!" answered three men's
voices.

Madame Knäpple, furious at the compliment paid
to Madame Rosenblatt, said:

"What is your scheme then, sir, for shaking off the
yoke of Germany?"

"I have none."

"Then what do you ask for?"

"Nothing, madame; I suffer."

It was one of the Alsatian artists, the painter with
the yellow beard, who looked like one of Giotto's

174

pupils, who continued the conversation, and all the
table turned towards him.

"I am not like M. Oberlé, who asks for nothing.
He has only just come into the country after a long
absence. If he had lived here some time, he would
come to a different conclusion. We Alsatians of the
new generation through our contact with three
hundred thousand Germans have had the difference
of our French culture from that of Germany conclusively
demonstrated. We prefer our own; that is
permitted? In exchange for the loyalty that we
have shown to Germany, the taxes we pay, the
military service we perform—we desire to remain
Alsatians. And you determinedly refuse to understand.
Our demand is that we should not be compelled
to submit to exceptional laws, to this sort of state of
siege which we have endured for thirty years. We
demand that we should not be treated and governed
as a country of the Empire—after the fashion of the
Cameroons, Togoland, and New Guinea, the Bismarck
Archipelago, or the Isles of Providence, but like a
European province of the German Empire. We
shall not be satisfied until that day comes when we
can feel we are in our own home here—Alsatians in
Alsace, as the Bavarians are Bavarians in Bavaria.
Whilst as things are, we are the conquered ones
waiting on the good pleasure of a master. That
is my demand!"

He spoke clearly, with apparent coldness, and his
golden beard looked like the point of an arrow. His
measured words succeeded in exciting their minds—and
one could foresee the angry answer when
Geheimrathin Brausig rose.

Her guests followed suit, and went into the blue
drawing-room.

"You were absurd! What were you thinking
about?" Lucienne asked in an undertone as she
passed Jean.

175

"Perhaps what you said was imprudent," added
Madame Oberlé, a moment after; "but you defended
Alsace well—and I approve of you."

The Geheimrath was already turning to all sides,
making use of the usual formula, which he murmured
into the ears of Fincken, von Farnow, of Rosenblatt
and Professor Knäpple, the two students, Jean, and
the two Alsatian artists:

"Do me the pleasure of following me to the smoking-room!"

The smoking-room was a second drawing-room,
separated from the first by plate-glass.

M. Brausig's guests were soon reunited there.
Cigars and beer were brought. Smoke spirals
went up, mingled together, and rose to the ceiling.
M. Rosenblatt became a centre of conversation. The
Professor Knäpple became another. The loud voices
seemed to be wrangling, but were only explaining
simple ideas with difficulty.

Alone, two men were talking of a serious subject
and making but little noise. They were Jean Oberlé
and von Farnow. Scarcely had the former lit his
cigar when von Farnow touched Jean's arm and said:

"I want to have a little conversation with you
apart."

To be more free, the young men seated themselves
near the monumental mantelpiece, facing the bay
which opened into the drawing-room, while the other
smokers grouped round M. Rosenblatt and Baron
von Fincken occupied the embrasure of the windows.

"You were violent to-night, my dear fellow," said
von Farnow, with the haughty politeness which he
often adopted; "I was tempted twenty times to answer
you, but I preferred waiting. Were you not aiming
at me a little?"

"Much of what I said was meant for you. I
wanted to tell you very clearly what I was and to
teach it to you before witnesses, so that it should be

176

clearly understood that if you persevere in your
projects, I have made no concessions to you, no
advances; that I have nothing whatever to do with
the marriage you are contemplating. I am not going
to oppose my father's wishes, but I will not have my
ideas confused with his."

"That is how I understood it. You have evidently
learned that I have met your sister in society and
that I love her?"

"Yes."

"Is that all you have to answer?"

A rush of blood suffused the German's cheeks.

"Explain yourself quickly!" he went on. "My
family is of the nobility; do you recognise that?"

"Yes."

"Do you recognise that it is an honour for a
woman to be sought by a German officer?"

"For any except an Alsatian woman. But although
you do not understand that feeling, we are not like
other people—we are the people of Alsace. I esteem
you very much, Farnow, but your marriage with my
sister will cruelly affect three persons among us—myself
first of all."

"How? I ask you!"

They were obliged to speak in an undertone and to
avoid any gestures, because of the presence of the
Geheimrath's guests at the farther end of the room,
who were observing the young men, and were trying
to interpret their attitudes. All their emotion
and their irritation was in their eyes and in the
whispering of words which must only be heard by
one person.

Through the sheet of plate-glass, Lucienne could
see von Farnow, and getting up and crossing the
drawing-room, or pretending to admire the basket
of flowers which stood out from the frame-work, she
looked inquiringly at the faces of the officer and of
her brother.

177

"You are a man of heart, von Farnow. Think what
our home in Alsheim will be when this fresh cause of
dissension is added to the others?"

"I shall go away," said the officer; "I can exchange
and leave Strasburg."

"The memory will remain with us. But that is
not all. And from now on there is my mother, who
will never consent...."

With a movement of his hand von Farnow showed
that he brushed aside that objection.

"There is my grandfather, whom Alsace once
elected to protest, and who cannot to-day give the
lie to all his past life."

"I owe nothing to M. Philippe Oberlé," interrupted
Farnow.

His voice became more imperious.

"I warn you that I never give up a resolution
once taken. When M. von Kassewitz, the prefect of
Strasburg, and the only near relation remaining to me,
returns from the holiday he is going to take in a few
days' time, he will go to Alsheim, to your house; he
will ask for the hand of Mlle. Lucienne Oberlé for his
nephew, and his request will be granted, because
Mlle. Lucienne Oberlé wishes to accept me, because
her father has already consented, and because I will
have it so—I, Wilhelm von Farnow!"

"It remains to be seen whether you have done
well...."

"According to my will: that is sufficient for me."

"How much pride there is in your love, Farnow!"

"It is in everything I do, Oberlé!"

"Do you think I am mistaken? My sister pleases
you because she is pretty?"

"Yes."

"Intelligent?"

"Yes."

"But also because she is an Alsatian girl! Your
pride has seen in her a victory to be gained. You

178

are not ignorant of the fact that the women of Alsace
are in the habit of refusing Germans. They are
queens not easily accessible to your amorous
ambitions, from the country girls, who at their
gatherings refuse to dance with the emigrants, up
to our sisters, who are not often seen in your
drawing-rooms or on your arms. In the various
regiments you will belong to you will boast that you
have won Lucienne Oberlé. It will even be a good
mark for you in high quarters? Will it not?"

"Perhaps," said Farnow with a sneer.

"Go on then, break, or finish breaking, three of
us!"

They were getting more and more irritated, each
trying to control himself.

The officer rose, threw away his cigar, and said
haughtily:

"We are civilised barbarians—that is understood,
less burdened than you with prejudices and pretensions
to justice. That is why we shall conquer
the world. But in the meantime, Oberlé, I am going
to join your mother and talk to her, as amiably as
an enemy possibly can. Will you accompany me?"

Jean Oberlé shook his head in the negative.

Farnow crossed the smoking-room, leaving Oberlé
there.

Lucienne was anxiously awaiting him in the drawing-room.
She saw him direct his steps towards Madame
Oberlé, and, forcing himself to smile, place a chair near
the arm-chair in which the fragile Alsatian lady in
black was sitting. At the same time the Geheimrath
called out, "Oberlé! You have smoked a cigar without
even drinking one glass of beer. But that is a
crime! Come. Professor Knäpple is explaining the
measures the Government is taking to prevent the
Russianising of the eastern provinces of Germany."

Late that night, a landau bore away to Alsheim

179

three travellers; it had fetched them from the station
at Molsheim.

The way there was a long one, and Lucienne
soon went to sleep in the carriage. Her mother, who
had hardly said anything up to then, bent towards
her son, and, pointing to the beautiful creature sound
asleep, asked him:

"You knew?"

"Yes."

"I guessed it. There was no need to tell me much.
I have seen her look at him. Oh, Jean, this trial that
I hoped to escape!—the fear of which has made me
accept so many, many things! I have only you left,
my Jean! But you remain to me!"

She kissed him fervently.

180

CHAPTER XI

IN SUSPENSE

As things do not usually happen as we foresee, the
visit of Herr von Kassewitz to Alsheim did not take
place on the date Farnow said it would. Towards
the end of June—at the moment when the prefect,
returned from taking the waters, was getting ready
to go to ask for Lucienne's hand, a telegram had
asked him to put off the visit. The condition of
M. Philippe Oberlé had suddenly become worse.

The old man, whom it was necessary to inform of
what was going on in the house, had just learned
the truth. His son had gone up one morning to the
sick man's room. "With circumlocution and in ways
that he took out of respect and consideration for
him, he let it be seen that Lucienne was not indifferent
to the advances of a cavalry officer belonging to a
high German family; he had said that the liking
was spontaneous; that he, Joseph Oberlé, in spite of
certain regrets, did not believe that he had the right
to thwart the freedom of his children, and that he
hoped that his father, in the interests of peace, would
be resigned.

"My father," he said, "you are not ignorant of
the fact that your opposition would be useless and
purely vexatious. You have a chance to give
Lucienne a great proof of your affection, as we
ourselves have given; do not repulse her."

181

The old man had asked in signs:

"And Monica; has she consented?"

M. Joseph Oberlé had been able to answer yes,
without telling a lie, for the poor woman, threatened
with a separation, had yielded once more. Then the
sick man put an end to his son's long monologue by
writing two words, which were his answer:

"Not I!"

The same evening, fever declared itself. It continued
the following day, and soon became so persistent
and weakening that the condition of the sick man
troubled the Oberlés.

From this day on, the health of M. Philippe Oberlé
became the topic of anxious inquiries, evening and
morning. They questioned Madame Monica or Jean,
whom he received whilst excluding the others.

"How is he? Is his strength returning? Has
he still all his wits about him—the full use of his
mental faculties?"

Each one was wondering what was happening up
above in the room where the old fighter, who had
half disappeared from the world of the living, still
governed his divided family, holding them all
dependent on him. They spoke of their uneasiness,
and under this name, which they rightly used, what
projects were hid, what different thoughts!

Jean himself awaited the issue of this crisis with
an impatience in which his affection for his grandfather
was not the only interest involved. Since the
explanation he had had with Lucienne, especially
since the party at the Geheimrath's, all intimacy
between brother and sister had ceased. Lucienne
was as amiable and just as officiously kind as she
could be, but Jean no longer responded to her
advances. When work kept him no longer at the
factories he fled from the house: sometimes to the
country, where the first hay harvest attracted all
the life from the Alsatian farms. Sometimes he would

182

go and talk to his neighbours the Ramspachers,
already his friends, when at nightfall they came
back from the plain; and there he was led on by
the hope that he should see the daughter of M. Bastian
walking along the path. But more often still he
went up to Heidenbruch. M. Ulrich had received
his nephew's confidences and a mission at the same
time. Jean had said to him:

"I have now no hope of winning Odile. My sister's
marriage will prevent mine. But in spite of that
I am bound to ask for the hand of her to whom I
have confessed my love. I wish to be certain of
what is already breaking my heart, although I am
only afraid of it. When M. Bastian has heard that
Lucienne is betrothed to Lieutenant von Farnow or
that she is going to be—and that will not be delayed
if grandfather gets better—you will go to M. Bastian.
You will speak to him on my behalf. He will answer
you, knowing fully all the facts; you will tell me
if he refuses, once for all, his daughter to the brother-in-law
of von Farnow; or if he insists on some time
of probation—I will accept it, no matter how long
it may be; or if he has the courage—in which I do
not believe—to pay no attention to the scandal which
my sister's marriage will cause."

M. Ulrich had promised.

Towards the middle of August the fever which
was wearing out M. Philippe Oberlé disappeared.
Contrary to the expectation of the doctor, his strength
returned very quickly. It was soon certain that the
robust constitution of the invalid had got the better
of the crisis. And the truce accorded by M. Joseph
Oberlé to his father had come to an end. The old
man, having recovered to that sad condition of a
sick man whom death does not desire, was going to
be treated like the others, and would not be spared.
There was no fresh scene between the sick man and
his son. All went on quietly. On the 22nd of

183

August, after dinner in the drawing-room, where
Victor had just brought the coffee, the factory owner
said to Madame Oberlé:

"My father is now convalescent. There is no
longer any reason to put off the visit of Herr von
Kassewitz. I give you notice, Monica, that it will
take place during the next few days. You would do
well to tell my father, since you alone go to him.
And it is necessary that everything should be done
in order, without anything like surprise or deception.
Is that your opinion?"

"You do not wish to put off this visit any longer?"

"No."

"Then I will tell him!"

Jean wrote the same evening to Heidenbruch, where
he was not able to go.

"My uncle, the visit is settled. My father makes
no mystery about it; not even before the servants.
He evidently wishes that the report of the marriage
should be spread abroad. As soon as you hear some
one from Alsheim get indignant or sad about us, go
and see, I implore you, if the dream that I dreamed
can still live on. You will tell M. Bastian that it is
the grandson of M. Philippe Oberlé who loves Odile."

184

CHAPTER XII

THE HOP-PICKING

At the foot of Sainte Odile, a little below the vineyards
in the deep earth formed by gravel and leaves fallen
from the mountain, M. Bastian and other land-owners
or farmers of Alsheim had planted hop-fields. Now
the time was come when the flower produces its
maximum of odorous pollen—a quickly passing hour
difficult to seize.

The hop-planters appeared frequently in the hopfields.
The brokers went through the villages. One
heard buyers and sellers discussing the various merits
of Wurtemburg hops and the Grand Duchy of Baden
hops, and of Bohemian and Alsatian hops. The
newspapers began to publish the first prices of the
most famous home-grown: Hallertan, Spalt, and
Wolnzach.

A Munich Jew had come to see M. Bastian on
Sunday August 26, and had said to him:

"Wurtemburg is promising: Baden will have fine
harvests: our own country of Spalt, in Bavaria, has
hops which are paying us one hundred and sixty
francs the fifty kilos, because they are rich hops—they
are as full of the yellow aromatic powder as a
grape of juice. Here you have been injured by the
drought. But I can offer you one hundred and
twenty francs on condition that you pick them at
once. They are ripe."

185

M. Bastian had given in, and had called together
his daily hop-pickers for August 28. That was also
the day when the Count von Kassewitz was to pay
his visit to M. Joseph Oberlé.

From dawn of a day already warmed by wafts of
hot air, women had set themselves to walk up what
is called "the heights of Alsheim," the region where
the cultivated land, hollowed like a bow, will bear
hops. Some hundreds of yards from the border of
the forest high poles in battle array bore up the
green tendrils. They looked like very pointed tents
of foliage, or belfries—for the millions of little cones,
formed of green scales sprinkled with pollen, swung
themselves from the extreme top to the ground like
bells whose ringer is the wind. All the inhabitants
know the event of the day—one picks hops for
M. Bastian. The master, up before dawn, was already
in the hop-field, examining each foot, calculating
the value of his crop, pressing and crushing in his
fingers one of the little muslin-like pine cones whose
perfume attracts the bees. At the back on the
stubble furrows are two narrow wagons, harnessed
to a horse, waiting for the harvest, and near them
was Ramspacher the farmer, his two sons Augustin
and François, and a farm servant. The women, on
the direct road leading up there, came up in irregular
bands, three in file, then five abreast, then one
following the others, the only one who was old.
Each one had put on a working dress of some thin
stuff, discoloured and the worse for wear, except,
however, the grocer's daughter, Ida, who wore a
nearly new dress, blue with white spots, and another
elegant girl from Alsheim, Juliette, a brunette, the
daughter of the sacristan, and she had a fashionable
bodice and a checked apron, pink and white. The
greater number were without hats, and had only
the shade of their hair, of every tint of fairness, to
preserve their complexions. They walked along

186

quietly and heavily. They were young and fresh.
They laughed. The farm boy mounted on a farm
horse, going to the fields, the reapers, encamped in a
corner, and the motionless man with the scythe in
the soft lucerne turned their heads, and their eyes
followed these women workers, whom one did not
generally see in the country: needlewomen, dressmakers,
apprentices, all going as if to a fête towards
the hop-field of M. Bastian. The vibration of words
they could not hear flew to them on the wind that
dried the dew. The weather was fair. Some old
people, the pickers of fallen fruit beneath the
scattered apple- and walnut-trees, rose from their
stooping posture, and blinked their eyes to see the
happy band of girls coming up the forest road.
These girls without baskets such as the bilberry
and whortleberry pickers, and raspberry gatherers
had to carry.

They went into the hop-field, which contained eight
rows of hops and disappeared as if in a gigantic
vineyard. M. Bastian directed the work, and pointed
out that they must begin with the part touching the
road. Then the old farmer, his two sons and farm
servant, seized each of them one of the poles, heavy
with the weight of harvest, the tendrils, the little
scaly bells, the leaves all trembled; and after the
women had knelt down and had cut the stalks even
with the ground, the loosened poles came out of the
earth and were lowered and despoiled of the climbing
plants they had carried.

Stalks, leaves, and flowers were thrown down and
placed in heaps—to be carried away by the wagons.
The workers did not wait to pick the hops which
they would gather at Alsheim in the farmyard in
the afternoon. But, already covered with yellow
powder and pieces of leaves, the men and women
were hurrying to strip the lowered poles. The hops
exhaled their bitter, healthy odour, and the humming

187

of the band of workers, like the noise of early
vintage, spread out over the immense stretch of
country, striped with meadows, stubble, and lucerne,
and the open and fertile Alsatian land which the
sun was beginning to warm.

This light, the repose of the night still neighbouring
the day, the full liberty which they did not enjoy
every day of the week, the instinctive coquetry
evoked by the presence of the men, even the desire
of being pleasant to M. Bastian, whom they knew to
be of a gay disposition, made these girls and children
who picked the hops joyful with a boisterous joy.
And one of the farm servants having called out
while his horses stopped to take breath: "Is no one
singing then?" the daughter of the sacristan,
Juliette, with the regular features and the beautiful
deep eyes under her well combed and nicely dressed
hair, answered:

"I know a lovely song."

As she answered she looked at the owner of the
property, who was smoking, seated on the first row
of stubble above the hop-field, and who was contemplating
with tenderness now his hops and now his
Alsace, where his mind always dwelt.

"If it is pretty; sing it," said the master. "Is it a
song that the police may hear?"

"Part of it."

"Then turn round to the forest side: the police
do not often go that way because they find nothing
to drink there."

The workers who were stooping and those who
were standing upright laughed silently because of
the detestation in which they held the gendarmes.
And the beautiful Juliette began to sing—of course
in Alsatian—one of those songs which poets compose
who do not care to sign their works, and who rhyme
in contraband.

The full, pure voice sang:

188

"I have cut the hops of Alsace—they have grown
on the soil we tilled—the green hops are certainly
ours—the red earth is also ours."

"Bravo!" said gravely M. Bastian's farmer. He
took his pipe from his mouth in order to hear
better.

"They have grown in the valley—in the valley
where every one has passed along, many sorts of
people, and the wind, and also anguish—we have
chosen our own friends.

"We will drink beer to the health of those who
please us. We will have no words on our lips—but
we will have words in our hearts—where no one can
efface them."

The heavy, solid heads, young and old, remained
motionless for a moment when Juliette had finished.
They waited for the remainder. The young girls
smiled because of the voice and because of life.
The eyes of M. Bastian and the Ramspachers shone
because of bygone days. The two sons had grown
grave. Juliette did not begin to sing again: there
was no more to follow.

"I think I know the miller who composed that
song," said M. Bastian. "Come, my friends, hurry
yourselves; there is the first cart starting for Alsheim.
All must be gathered and put in the drying-house
before night."

Everybody except that big young François, who
had to do his military service in November, and who
was driving the wagon, bent again over the hop
roots. But at the same moment, from the copse on
the border of the great forest, from among the shrubs
and the clematis, which made a silky fringe to the
mountain forests, a man's voice answered.

What was happening? Who had heard them?
They thought they knew the voice, which was strong
and unequal, worn, but with touches of a youthful
quality; and whisperings arose.

189

"It is he. He is not afraid!"

The voice answered, in the same rugged tongue:

"The black bow of the daughters of Alsace—has
bound my heart with sorrow—has bound my heart
with joy. It is a knot of love.

"The black bow of the daughters of Alsace—is a
bird with great wings. It can fly across the mountains—and
look over them.

"The black bow of the daughters of Alsace is a
cross of mourning which we carry in memory of all
those—whose soul was like our own soul."

The voice had been recognised. When it had
finished singing, the hop-pickers, men and women,
began to talk to M. Ulrich, who, barely tolerated in
Alsace, had nevertheless more freedom of language
than the Alsatians who were German subjects. The
noise of laughter and words exchanged grew louder
and louder in the hop-field, so the master withdrew.

M. Bastian, with his heavy, sure step, mounted to
the edge of the forest whence came the voice, and
plunged under the beeches. Some one had seen him
coming and waited for him. M. Ulrich Biehler,
seated on a rock starred with moss—bare headed,
weary with having walked in the sun—had hoped,
by singing, to make his old friend Xavier Bastian
climb up to him. He was not mistaken.

"I have a place for you here, hop-picker!" he
cried from afar, pointing to a large block of stone
which had rolled to the foot of the mountain, between
two trees, and on which he was seated.

Although they were friends, M. Ulrich and the
Mayor of Alsheim saw each other but seldom. There
was between them less intimacy than a community
of opinions and of aspirations and of memories. They
were chosen friends, and old Alsace counted them
among her faithful ones. That was enough to make
them feel the meeting was a happy one, and to make
the signal understood. M. Ulrich had said to himself

190

that M. Bastian having set the workers to work
would not be sorry to have a diversion. He had
sung in answer to Juliette's song, and M. Bastian
had come. Now the pale, fine face of the hermit of
Heidenbruch reflected a mixture of pleasure in
welcoming his friend and an anxiety difficult to
conceal.

"You still sing?" said M. Bastian, pressing M.
Ulrich's hand. "You hunt, you run about the hills!"

He sat down breathless on a stone, his feet in the
ferns, and looking towards the descending slopes
wooded with oaks and beeches and bushes.

"That only in appearance. I am a walker, a
forester, a wanderer. You, on the contrary, are the
least travelled of men. I visit—you cultivate: these
are at bottom two kinds of fidelities. Tell me, Xavier,
may I speak to you of something which I have very
much at heart?"

The heavy face trembled, the thick lips moved, and
one could see by the great change which took place
in M. Bastian's face how sensitive he was. As he
was of just as reticent a nature, he did not make any
reply. He waited.

"I am going to tell you about something which
touches me as nearly as if it were a personal matter.
He who begged me to see you is my dearest relative. I
take the direct method with you, Xavier. Have you
guessed that my nephew loves your daughter Odile?"

"Yes."

"Well?"

Suddenly these two, who had been gazing into the
distance for a while, looked at each other eye to eye,
and they were afraid, one because of the refusal he
read there—and the other because of the pain he was
going to give.

"No!" said the voice, grown harsh in order to
dominate its emotion, which would have made it
tremble. "I will not!"

191

"I expected that; but if I tell you that they love
each other?"

"That may be. I cannot!"

"You have some very serious reason then?"

"Yes."

"What is it?"

M. Bastian pointed through the trees to the house
of the Oberlés.

"To-day, in that house, they are expecting the
visit of the Prefect of Strasburg."

"I could not tell you, and I had to wait before
speaking about it till every one knew it."

"It is public property now. All the town of
Alsheim has been told by the servants. They even say
that M. von Kassewitz is coming to ask for the hand of
Lucienne for his nephew, Lieutenant von Farnow."

"I know it!"

"And you would have it so?"

"Yes!"

"That I should give my daughter to Jean Oberlé
so that she should have a father-in-law who will be a
governmental candidate in the coming elections and
a brother-in-law who is a Prussian officer?"

M. Ulrich kept calm under the indignant gaze of
M. Bastian and answered:

"Yes; these are terrible things for him, but it is
not Jean's fault. Where will you find a man more
worthy of you and of your daughter?"

"What is he doing to oppose this marriage? He
is here—his silence gives consent. He is weak."

M. Ulrich stopped him with a movement.

"No; he is strong!"

"Not like you—you who knew how to close your
house."

"My house belongs to me."

"And I have the right to say 'Not like me!' All
these young people accept things too easily, my
friend. I do not mix myself up with politics. I keep

192

silent. I plough my land. I am looked on with
suspicion by the peasants, who no doubt like me, but
who begin to find me 'compromising.' I am hated
by Germans of every kind and colour. But, as God
hears me, that only makes me drive my roots deeper
in, and I do not change. I will die with all my old
hatreds intact—do you understand—intact?"

His eyes had a gleam in them such as a sharpshooter
has when, with gun in hand, and sure that his
hand will not tremble, he covers his enemy.

"You stand for something in this generation,
Xavier; but you must not be unjust. This man
you refuse, because he is not like us, is not the less
valiant for that."

"That has to be seen."

"Has he not declared that he will not enter the
Government employ?"

"Because the country pleases him better—and my
daughter pleases him also!"

"No; firstly because he is Alsatian."

"Not like us, I will answer for that!"

"In a new way. They are obliged to live in the
midst of Germans. Their education is carried out in
German schools, and their way of loving France
leaves room for more honour and more strength of
mind than was necessary in our time. Think, it is
thirty years ago!"

"Alas!"

"They saw nothing of those times, they have only
a traditional love, or a love which is of the imagination,
or of family, and examples of forgetfulness are
frequent around them!"

"Jean has had, in truth, examples of that sort."

"That is why you ought to be more just to him.
Think that your daughter in marrying him will found
here an Alsatian family—very powerful, very wealthy.
The officer will not live in Alsheim, nor even long in
Alsace. He will soon be only a name."

193

M. Bastian placed his heavy hand on M. Ulrich's
shoulder, and spoke in a tone which did not allow the
discussion to be continued.

"Listen, my friend, I have only one word. It
cannot be, because I will not have that marriage:
because all those of my generation, dead and living,
would reproach me. And then, even if I yielded,
Ulrich, there is a will near me stronger than mine,
who will never say yes, do you understand, never!"

M. Bastian slipped down among the ferns, and
shrugging his shoulders, and shaking his head—like
some one who will hear no more—went downwards
to his day workers. When he had passed between
the rows of the cut hops and reprimanded each of
the workers, there was no more laughing, and the
girls of Alsheim, and the farmer's sons, and the
farmer himself, stooping under the burning sun, went
on in silence with their work, which had been so
joyously begun.

Already M. Ulrich was going up to his hermitage
on Sainte Odile, distressed, asking himself what serious
effect the refusal of M. Bastian was going to have on
Jean's destiny, and anxious to tell his nephew the
news. Without hoping, without believing that there
was any chance of it, he would try to make Odile's
father give way, and plans hummed round him, like
the gadflies in the pine woods, drunk with the sun,
and following the traveller in his lonely climb. The
streams were singing. There were flocks of thrushes,
harbingers crossing the ravines, darting through
the blue air to get to the vines and fruits of the
plain. It was in vain—he was utterly downcast.
He could think of nothing but of his nephew, so
badly rewarded for his return to Alsheim. Between
the trees and round the branches he gazed at the
house of the Oberlés.

Any one going into that house just then would
have found it extraordinarily quiet. Every one there

194

was suffering. M. Philippe Oberlé, as usual had
lunched in his room. Madame Oberlé, at the express
wish of her husband, had consented to come out of
her room when M. von Kassewitz should be announced.

"All the same, I repeat," she said, "that I shall not
go out of my way to entertain him. I will be there
because by your orders I am bound to receive this
person. But I shall not go beyond what is strictly
necessary."

"Right," said M. Oberlé, "Lucienne, Jean, and I
will talk to him. That will suffice."

And after his meal he had gone at once to his
workroom, at the end of the park. Jean, who had
shown no enthusiasm, had gone out, for his part,
promising to return before three o'clock. Lucienne
was alone in the big yellow drawing-room. Very
well dressed in a grey princess dress, which had for
its only ornament a belt buckle of two shades of
gold, like the decorations in the dining-room; she was
placing roses in crystal glasses and slender vases of
transparent porcelain, which contrasted well with the
hard, definite colour of the velvet furniture. Lucienne
had the collectedness of a gambler who sees a game
coming to an end, and knows she has won. She
had herself, in two recent soirées at Strasburg carried
the business through, which now wanted only the
signatures of the contracting parties; the official
candidature promised to M. Joseph Oberlé in the first
vacant district.

The visit of M. von Kassewitz was equivalent to
the signing of the treaty. The opposing parties held
their tongues, as Madame Oberlé held hers, or stood
aside in silent sulkiness, like the grandfather.
The young girl went from the mantelpiece to the
gilt console, surmounted by a mirror, in which she saw
herself reflected, and she thought the movement of
her lips very pretty when she made them say
"Monsieur the Prefect!" One thing irritated her, and

195

checked the pride she felt in her victory: the absolute
emptiness which was making itself felt around her.

Even the servants seemed to have made up their
minds not to be there when they were wanted. They
did not answer the bell. After lunch M. Joseph
Oberlé had been obliged to go into the servants' hall
to find his father's valet, that good-tempered big
Alsatian who looked upon himself as being at the
beck and call of every one.

"Victor, you will put on your livery to receive the
gentleman who will come about three o'clock!"

Victor had grown red and answered with difficulty:

"Yes, sir!"

"You must be careful to watch for the carriage,
and to be at the bottom of the steps——"

"Yes, sir."

Since this promise had been given, which no doubt
went very much against Victor's feelings—he had
hid himself, and only came at the third or fourth
call, quite flustered and pretending that he had not
heard.

The Prefect of Strasburg is coming. These words
which Lucienne had spoken, Madame Oberlé thought
over shut up in her room. They weighed, like a
storm cloud, on the mind of the old protesting
representative of Alsace—that old forester, Philippe
Oberlé, who had given orders that he was to be left
alone; they agitated the nervous fingers of M. Joseph
Oberlé, who was writing in his room at the saw mills,
and he left off writing in order to listen; they rang
sadly, like the passing bell of something noble in
Jean's heart taking refuge with the Bastians' farmer.
They were the theme—the
leitmotiv
which recurred
in twenty different ways, in the animated and sarcastic
conversation of the hop-pickers.

For these women and girls of the farm, and the
day labourers who had worked in the morning in the
hop-field, had assembled, since the mid-day meal in

196

the narrow, long yard of the Ramspachers' farm.
Seated on chairs or stools, each one having on their
right a hamper or a basket and on their left a heap
of hops, they picked off the flowers and threw away
the stripped stalks. They formed two lines—one
along the stable walls and the other the length of the
house. This made an avenue of fair heads and bodies
in movement among the piles of leaves, which
stretched from one woman to another and bound
them together as it were with a garland. At the
end, the cart door opened wide on to the square of
the town of Alsheim, and allowed the gables of
several houses situated opposite to be seen—with their
wooden balconies and the flat tiles of their roofings.
By this road every half hour fresh loads of hops
arrived drawn by one of the farm horses. Old
Ramspacher, the farmer, was at his post, in the
enormous barn in front of the dwelling-house, and
before which sat the first pickers, at work on the
little hop cones.

In this building, whose vast roof was supported
by a wall on one side, on the other by Vosges pines,
the greater part of the work of the farm was done,
and much wealth was stored here. Here they trod
the grapes; in the autumn and winter months they
threshed corn. They kept all the implements of
labour in the corner—the covered carts, planks and
building materials, empty barrels, and a little hay.
There were also many great wooden cases piled up,
tiers of screens, on which they put the hops to dry
every year. The farmer never allowed others to
do this delicate work. So he was at his place, in
front of the drying-room, where the first shelves
were already full, and standing on a ladder he spread
equal layers of the gathered hops, which his sons
brought him in hampers.

The heat of the afternoon, at the end of August,
the odour of crushed leaves and flowers, which clung

197

to their hands intoxicated the women slightly. The
laughter rose louder than in the hop-fields in the
morning, and questions were asked and remarks made
which called forth twenty answers. Sometimes it was
the work which furnished a pretext for this fusillade
of words. Sometimes it was a neighbour passing
across the square all white with dust and sunshine;
but mostly the talk was about two things: the visit
of the Prefect and the probable marriage of Lucienne.

The beautiful Juliette, the sacristan's daughter, had
begun the conversation saying:

"I tell you Victor told it to the mason's son: the
Prefect is to arrive in half an hour. Do you think I
shall move when he comes?"

"He would see a very pretty girl," said Augustine
Ramspacher, lifting up two hampers of hops. "It is
only the ugly ones who will let themselves be seen."

Ida, who had lifted up her blue-and-white-spotted
dress, and then Octavie the cow-woman, who wore her
hair plaited and rolled like a golden halo round her
head, and Reine the daughter of the poor tailor, and
others answered together laughing:

"I shall not be seen then. Nor I, nor I!"

And an old woman's voice, the only old woman
among them, muttered:

"I know I am as poor as Peter and Paul, but I
would rather that he went to other folk's houses than
to mine—the Prefect!"

"Certainly."

They were all speaking freely. Words re-echoed
from the walls and were lost amid bursts of laughter
and the rustling of the broken and crushed leaves.
In the barn in the half light, seated on a pile of
beams, his chin in his hands, there was a witness who
heard, and that witness was Jean Oberlé. But the
inhabitants of Alsheim began to know the young
man, who had lived among them for five months.
They knew he was a good Alsatian. On the present

198

occasion they guessed that Jean had taken refuge
there with the Bastians' tenant farmer because he
disapproved the ambition to which his father was
sacrificing so many things and so many persons.
He had come in, under the pretext of resting and
taking shelter from the sun; in reality because the
triumphant presence of Lucienne was torture to him.
And yet he knew nothing of the conversation which
his uncle had had in the morning with M. Bastian.
The thought of Odile returned to his unhappy mind
and he drove it out that he might remain master of
himself, for soon he would require all his powers of
judgment and all his strength. At other moments
he gazed vaguely at the hop-pickers and tried to
interest himself in their work and their talk; often
he thought he heard the sound of a carriage, and half
rising, he remembered the promise he had made, to
be at home when M. von Kassewitz arrived.

Juliette's voice rose in decidedly spirited tones.

"What does this Prefect of Strasburg want to
come to Alsheim for? We get on so well without
the Germans."

"They have sworn to make themselves hated,"
quickly added the farmer's elder son, who was giving
out the hops to the women who had no more. "It
seems that they are prohibiting the speaking of
French as much as they possibly can."

"A proof—my cousin, François Joseph Steiger,"
said little Reine, the tailor's daughter. "A gendarme
said he had heard him shout 'Vive la France!' in the
inn. Those were, I believe, the only French words
my cousin knew. That was enough—my cousin got
two months in prison."

"Your cousin called out more! But at
Alberschweiler

they have forbidden a singing society to
execute anything in the French tongue."

"And the French conjurer who came the other day
to Strasburg? Do you know? It was in the newspaper.

199

They let him pay the tax, hire the hall,
print his advertisements, and then they said: 'You
will do it in German, my good friend—or you will
go!'"

"What happened to M. Haas, the house-painter, is
much worse."

"What then?"

"He knew that he could not paint an inscription
in French on a shop any more. M. Haas would never—I
know it—have painted a stroke of a brush in
contravention of the law. But he thought he could
at least put a coat of varnish on the sign he was
painting, where he had painted a long time ago the
word '
Chemiserie
.' They made him appear and
threatened to take proceedings against him, because
he was preserving the inscription with his varnish.
Why, that was last October!"

"Oh, oh, would not M. Hamm be pleased if the rain,
the wind, and the thunder threw down the sign of
the inn here, which is called: 'Le Pigeon blanc' as
happened to 'La Cigogne.'"

It was old Josephine the bilberry-picker who said
to the farmer's wife, who at this moment appeared
on the threshold of her house:

"Sad Alsace! How gay she was when we were
young! Wasn't she, Madame Ramspacher?"

"Yes. Now—for nothing—evictions, lawsuits, and
prison! The police everywhere."

"You had better keep silence!" said Ramspacher
in a reproachful tone.

The younger son Francis took his mother's
side.

"There are no traitors here. And then, how can
one keep silence? They are too hard. That is why
so many young men emigrate!"

From his corner in the shadow, Jean looked at
these young girls who were listening—with flashing
eyes, some motionless and erect, others continuing to

200

bend and rise over their work of stripping the hop-plants.

"Work then—instead of so much chattering!" said
the master's voice.

"One hundred and seventy unsubdued, and condemned
by the tribunal at Saverne, in a single day,
last January," said Juliette with a laugh that shook
her hair. "One hundred and seventy!"

Francis, the great careless boy, who was close by
Jean Oberlé at this moment, turned a basketful of
hops on the shelf, and bending towards him said:

"It is at Grand Fontaine that one can easily get
over the frontier," he said in low tones. "The best
crossing, Monsieur Oberlé, is between Grande Fontaine
and Les Minières. The frontier is opposite, like a
spur. That is the nearest part, but one has to take
care of the Forest Guard and the Custom officials.
Often they stop people to ask where they are going."

Jean trembled. What did that mean? He began:

"Why do you speak to...?"

But the young peasant had turned away, and was
going on with his work. Doubtless he had spoken
for himself. He had trusted his plan to his melancholy
and silent countryman, whom he would amuse,
astonish, or sympathise with.

But Jean had been touched by this confidence.

A clear voice called out:

"There is the carriage coming into the town. It
is going to pass M. Bastian's avenue!"

All the hop-pickers raised their heads. Little
Franzele was standing up near the pillar which kept
the door open—leaning the top of her body over the
wall, her curly hair blown by the wind. She was
looking to the right, whence came the sound of
wheels. In the yard the women had stopped working.
She murmured:

"The Prefect, there he is—he is going to pass."

The farmer, drawn from his work by the women's

201

sudden silence as much as by the child's voice, turned
towards the yard where the hop-pickers were listening
motionless to the noise of the wheels and the horses
coming nearer. He commanded:

"Shut the cart-door, Franzele!"

He added, muttering:

"I will not let him see how it is done here—in my
place!"

The little girl pushed-to one of the sides of the
door, then curious, having stuck her head out again:

"Oh, how funny. Well, he cannot say that he
saw many people. They have not disturbed themselves
much on his account! There are only the
German women of course. They are all there near
'la Cigogne.'"

"Will you shut that door?" replied the farmer
angrily.

This time he was obeyed. The second side of the
door shut quickly against the first. The twenty
persons present heard the noise of the carriage
rolling in the silence of the town of Alsheim. There
were eyes in all the shadowy corners behind the
windows—but no one went outside their doors, and
in the gardens the men who were digging the borders
seemed so entirely absorbed in their work as to have
heard nothing.

When the carriage was about fifty yards past the
farm, their imaginations were full of what it would
be like at the Oberlés' farther on at the other end of
the village, and taking up a handful of hop-stalks,
the women and girls asked each other curiously what
the son of M. Oberlé was going to do—and they
looked stealthily towards the barn. He was no longer
there.

He had risen, that he might not break his word,
and having run all the way, and pale in spite of his
having run, he arrived at the gate of the kitchen
garden at the very moment when the Prefect's

202

carriage, on the other side of the demesne, was
passing through the park gates.

All the household was ready. Lucienne and Madame
Oberlé were seated near the mantelpiece. They did
not speak to each other. The factory owner, who
had returned from his office half-an-hour ago, had
put on the coat he wore to go to Strasburg, and a
white waistcoat—with his arms behind his back he
watched the carriage coming round the lawn.

The programme was carried out according to the
plans arranged by him. The official personage who
was just entering the grounds was bringing to
M. Oberlé the assurance of German favour. For a
moment of inflated pride which thrilled him M. Oberlé
saw in imagination the palace of the Reichstag.

"Monica," he said, turning round as breathless as
after a long walk, "has your son returned?"

Seated before him in the yellow chair near the
fireplace, looking very thin, her features drawn with
emotion, Madame Oberlé answered:

"He will be here because he said so!"

"The fact that he is not here is more certain still.
And Count Kassewitz is coming—and Victor? I
suppose he is at the steps to show him in, as I told
him?"

"I suppose so."

M. Joseph Oberlé, furious at the constraint of his
wife—at her disapproval, which he encountered even
in this submission, crossed the room and pulled the
old bell rope violently, and opening the door which
led to the hall saw that Victor was not in his
place.

He had to draw back, for the sound of footsteps
coming up were mingled with the sound of the bell.

M. Joseph Oberlé placed himself near the fireplace
facing the door—near his wife. Footsteps sounded
on the gravel, on the granite of the steps. However,
some one had come in answer to the bell.

203

The door was pushed open the next moment and
the Oberlés perceived at the same time that the old
cook Salomé, white as wax, her mouth set, was
opening the door without saying a word, and M. von
Kassewitz close behind her was coming in.

He was very tall, very broad shouldered, and clad in
a tight-fitting frock-coat. His face was composed of
two incongruous elements, a round bulging forehead,
round cheeks, a round nose, then standing straight out
from the skin in stiff locks, eyebrows, moustache, and
short, pointed beard. This face of a German soldier
composed of points and arches was animated by two
piercing lively eyes, which ought to have been blue—for
his hair was yellow—but which never showed
clearly through the shadow of the spreading eyebrows,
and because of the man's habit of screwing up his
eyelids. His hair, sparse on the top, was brushed up
well from the occiput to just above the ears.

M. Joseph Oberlé met him and spoke in German.

"M. Prefect, we are very greatly honoured by this
visit. Really to have taken this trouble!"

The official took the hand that M. Oberlé held out,
and pressed it. But he did not look at him and he
did not stop. His steps sounded heavily on the thick
drawing-room carpet. He was looking at the thin
apparition in mourning near the fireplace. And the
enormous man bowed several times very stiffly.

"The Count von Kassewitz," said M. Oberlé—for
the Prefect had never been introduced to the mistress
of the house.

She made a slight movement of the head and said
nothing. M. von Kassewitz drew himself up, waited
a second, then playing his part and affecting good
humour, which perhaps he did not feel, he greeted
Lucienne, who had blushed, and was smiling.

"I remember having seen Mademoiselle at His
Excellency the Statthalter's," he said. "And truly
Strasburg is some distance from Alsheim. But I am

204

of the opinion that there are some wonders which are
better worth the journey than the ruins in the Vosges,
M. Oberlé."

He laughed with a satisfied air, and sat on the
yellow couch with his back to the light, facing the
fireplace. Then turning to the factory owner, who
was seated near him he asked:

"Is your son away?"

M. Oberlé had been listening anxiously for a minute.
He was able to say:

"Here he is."

The young man came in. The first person he saw
was his mother. That made him hesitate. His eyes,
young and impressionable, gave a nervous twitch as
if they were hurt. Quickly he turned to the sofa,
took the hand which the visitor offered him, and
gravely but less embarrassed than his father, and
with greater coolness he said in French:

"I have just been for a walk. I had to run not to
be late, for I promised my father I would be here
when you came."

"You are too kind," said the official, laughing.
"We speak German with your father, but I am able
to carry on a conversation in another tongue besides
our national language."

He went on in French, laying stress on the first
syllables of the words.

"I admired your park, Monsieur Oberlé, and even
all the little country of Alsheim. It is very pretty.
You are surrounded, I believe, by a refractory
population—almost invisible; in any case, just now
as I came through the village I hardly saw a living
soul."

"They are in the fields," said Madame Oberlé.

"Who is the Mayor, then?"

"M. Bastian."

"I remember them: a family very much behind the
times."

205

His look was questioning, and he moved his heavy
head towards the two women and Jean. Three
answers came at once.

"Behind the times, yes," said Lucienne—"they
are, but such good people."

"They are simply old-fashioned folk," said Madame
Oberlé.

Jean said:

"Above all very worthy."

"Yes, I know what that means."

The Prefect made an evasive gesture.

"Well, provided they go straight."

The father saved the situation.

"We have but few interesting things to show you,
but perhaps you would like to see my works? They
are full and animated, I assure you. There are one
hundred workmen, and machines at work—pines sixty
feet long under the branches, are reduced in three
minutes to planks, or cut up as rafters. Would you
care to see them?"

"Yes, certainly."

The conversation, thus turned in another direction
at once became less constrained. The origin of the
Oberlés' works, the Vosges woods, the comparison between
the German manner of felling, by the Government,
and the French system, by which the owners
of a portion of a forest may fell the trees themselves
under the supervision of the foresters—all these
questions gave each a chance to speak. Lucienne
became lively, Madame Oberlé, questioned by her
husband, answered. Jean also spoke. The functionary
congratulated himself on having come.

When her father made a sign, Lucienne rose, to
ring for the footman and to ask that some refreshment
might be served. But she had not time to make a
single step.

The door opened, and Victor, the servant who had
not been at his post a short time ago, appeared, very

206

red, very embarrassed, and lowering his eyes. On
his left arm, holding himself as erect as possible, was
the grandfather, M. Philippe Oberlé.

The five persons talking were all standing. The
servant stopped at the door and withdrew. The old
man came in alone, leaning on his stick. M. Philippe
Oberlé had put on his best clothes belonging to the
time when he was in good health. He wore, unbuttoned,
the frock-coat which was still decorated by
the ribbon of the Legion of Honour. Intense feeling
had transfigured him. One would have said that he
was twenty years younger. He came forward taking
short steps—his body bent a little forward, but his
head held stiffly erect, and he looked at one man
only, the German official standing by the side of the
couch. His heavy jaw trembled and moved convulsively
as if he were articulating words they could not
hear.

Was M. Joseph Oberlé mistaken, or did he wish to
put him on the wrong scent? He turned to where
M. von Kassewitz was standing, astonished and on his
guard, and said:

"My father has surprised us by coming down. I
never expected he would take part in this."

The eyes of the old deputy, rigid under their heavy
lids, did not cease looking at the German, who
kept his countenance and remained silent. When
M. Philippe Oberlé was three feet from M. von Kassewitz
he stopped. With his left hand, which was free,
he then drew his slate from the pocket of his frock-coat,
and held it out to the Count von Kassewitz: on
it two lines were written. The Count bent forward
and then drew himself up haughtily.

"Sir!"

Already M. Joseph Oberlé had seized the thin sheet
of slate, and read these words, traced with remarkable
decision:

"I am in my own house, sir!"

207

The eyes of the old Alsatian added:

"Leave my house!" and they were no longer
looking down, nor did they leave the enemy.

"This is too much!" said M. Joseph Oberlé.
"Father, how could you come downstairs to insult
my guests? You will excuse him, sir; my father is
old, over-excited, a little touched by age."

"If you were younger, sir," said M. von Kassewitz
in his turn, "we should not stop at this. You will
do well to remember that you are also in my home, in
Germany, on German territory, and that it is not
well even at your age to insult authority."

"Father," said Madame Oberlé, hastening to the
old man to support him, "I beg of you—you are
doing harm to yourself—this emotion is too much
for you."

An extraordinary thing happened. M. Philippe
Oberlé, in his violent anger, had found strength
to stand upright. He appeared gigantic. He was
as tall as M. von Kassewitz. The veins on his temples
swelled—the blood was in his cheeks, and his eyes
were living once more. And at the same time the
half-dead body was trembling and using up in involuntary
movements its fragile and factitious life.
He signed to Madame Oberlé to stand aside, and not
to hold him up.

Lucienne, grown pale, shrugged her shoulders and
went towards M. von Kassewitz.

"It is only an act in one of our family tragedies,
monsieur. Do not take any notice of it and come to
the works with us. Let me pass, grandfather."

The Count took no notice, and she passed out
between M. Philippe Oberlé and the functionary
who said:

"You are not responsible, mademoiselle, for the
insult that has been offered to me. I understand the
situation—I understand."

His voice came with difficulty from his contracted

208

throat. Furious—half a head taller than any one
there except M. Philippe Oberlé—M. von Kassewitz
turned on his heel and went towards the door.

"Come, I pray you," said M. Joseph Oberlé,
standing aside to let the Prefect pass.

Lucienne was already outside. Madame Oberlé, as
ill from emotion as the old man, who refused her
assistance, feeling her tears choke her, ran into the
hall and up to her room, where she burst into sobs.

In the drawing-room Jean was alone with the old
chief, who had just driven out the stranger. He
drew near and said:

"Grandfather, what have you done?"

He wanted to say: It is a terrible insult. My
father will never forgive it. The family is completely
broken up. He would have said all that. But he
raised his eyes to the old fighter, so near the end,
still showing fight. He saw now that the grandfather
was gazing fixedly at him; that his anger had reached
its height; that his chest was moving violently; that
the face grimaced and twisted. And suddenly, in the
yellow drawing-room, an extraordinary voice, a hoarse
voice, powerful and husky, cried out in a kind of
nervous gallop:

"Go away! Go away! Go away! Go away!"

The voice rose to a piercing note. Then it broke,
and with his mouth still open, the old man reeled
and fell on the floor. The voice had sounded to the
inmost recesses of the house. This voice that no
one ever heard now, Madame Oberlé had recognised
it, and through the open door of her room she had
been able to catch the words. It was only a cry of
rage and suffering, or the contrary to M. Joseph
Oberlé, when the terrible sound of the words, which
could not be distinguished or guessed at, reached
him down two-thirds of the garden path. He had
turned for a moment, with a frown—while the
foremen and German workmen of the factory greeted

209

M. von Kassewitz with their cheers—then he went on
towards them.

Madame Oberlé was the first to run to the drawing-room,
then Victor, then old Salome, as white as a
sheet, crying with uplifted hands:

"Was not that M. Philippe I heard?"

Then the coachman and the gardener ran in,
hesitating to come forward but curious to see this
distressing scene. They found Jean and his mother
kneeling near M. Philippe Oberlé, who was breathing
with difficulty, and was in a state of complete prostration.
His effort, his emotion, and his indignation
had used up the strength of the old man. They
raised him up, and sat him in a chair, and each one
tried to revive him. For a quarter of an hour there
was going and coming between the first floor and the
dining-room. They fetched vinegar, salts, and ether.

"I was afraid that master would have an attack;
he has been beside himself all the morning. Ah,
there he is moving his eyes a little. His hands are
not so cold.

Across the park there came a cry of "Long live the
Prefect!" It entered the drawing-room wafted on
the warm breeze, where such words had never been
heard before. M. Philippe Oberlé did not seem to
hear them. But after some minutes he made a sign
that he wished to be taken to his room.

Some one came up the steps quickly, and before
coming in asked:

"What, again! What are those cries? Ah! my
father!"

He changed his tone and said:

"I thought it was you, Monica—that you had a
nervous attack. But then who screamed like that?"

"He!"

"He?" said M. Oberlé; "that is not possible!"

He did not dare to ask the question again. His
father, now standing, supported by Jean and by his

210

servant, trembling and wavering, moved across the
room.

"Jean," said Madame Oberlé, "see to everything.
Do not leave your grandfather; I am coming up."

Her husband had kept her back. She wished to
get Jean away from this. As soon as she was alone
with M. Oberlé on the staircase they heard the noise
of footsteps and the rustling of materials, and voices
saying:

"Hold him up—take care in turning."

"What did he call out?" asked M. Oberlé.

"He called out: 'Go away! Go away!' Those are
words that he often uses, you know."

"The only ones he had at his disposal to show his
hatred. Did he say nothing else?"

"No. I came down at once and I found him on the
floor. Jean was near him."

"Happily M. von Kassewitz did not witness this
second act. The first was enough. In truth, the
whole household was leagued together to make this
visit—such an honour for us—an occasion of offence
and scandal: my father; Victor, who was not ashamed
to be an accomplice of the delirious old man; Jean,
who was impertinent; you——"

"I did not think you could have had to complain
of me!"

"Of you the very first! It is you who are the soul
of this resistance, which I
will
overcome. I shall
overcome it! I answer for that."

"My poor friend," she said, clasping her hands;
"you are still set on that!"

"Exactly."

"You cannot overcome everything, alas!"

"That is what we are going to see."

Madame Oberlé did not answer and went upstairs
quickly. A new anxiety, stronger than the fear of
her husband's threats, tortured her now.

"What did my father-in-law wish to say?" she

211

asked herself. "The old man is not delirious. He
remembers; he foresees; he watches over the house;
he always thinks things out carefully. If only
Jean did not understand it as I understand it!"

At the top of the stairs she met her son, who was
coming out of the grandfather's room.

"Well?"

"Nothing serious, I hope—he is better—he wishes
to be alone."

"And you?" questioned the mother, taking her
son's hand, and leading him towards the room he
used. "And you?"

"How? I?"

When he had shut the door behind her, she placed
herself before him, and her face quite white in the
light of the window, her eyes fixed on the eyes of her
child:

"You quite understood—did you not—what grandfather
wished to say?"

"Yes."

She tried to smile, and it was heart-breaking to see
this effort of a tortured soul.

"Yes. He cried: 'Go away!' It is a word he
often used to say to strangers. He was addressing
M. von Kassewitz. You do not think so?"

Jean shook his head.

"But, my darling, he could not 'address others so!'"

"Pardon; he meant it for me."

"You are mad! You are the best friends in the
world, you and your grandfather."

"Just so."

"He did not wish to turn you out of the room?"

"No."

"Then?"

"He was ordering me to leave the house."

"Jean!"

"And for all that, the poor man was delighted to
see me come back to it."

212

Jean would not look at his mother now, because
tears had gushed from Madame Oberlé's eyes, because
she had come close to him, because she had taken
his hands.

"No, Jean, no; he could not have meant that, I
assure you; you do not understand. In any case,
you will not do it! Say that you will never do it."

She waited for the answer, which did not come.

"Jean, for pity's sake answer me! Promise me
that you will not leave us! Oh! what would the
house be without my son now? I have only you—you
do not think I am miserable enough then? Jean,
look at me!"

He could not wholly resist her. She saw the eyes
of her son looking at her tenderly.

"I love you with all my heart," said Jean.

"I know it; but do not go away!"

"I pity you and respect you."

"Do not go away!"

And as he said no more she moved away.

"You will promise nothing. You are hard—you
also are like——"

She was going to say "Like your father."

Jean thought: "I can give her some weeks of
peace; I owe them to her." And trying to smile in
his turn said:

"I promise you, mamma, to be at St. Nicholas's
Barracks on October 1st—I promise you. Are you
pleased?"

She shook her head. But he, kissing her on the
brow, not wishing to say anything more, left her in
haste.

The town of Alsheim was occupying itself with the
scene which had taken place at M. Oberlé's. Through
the torrid evening heat, amidst the fertile dust of the
cut wheat, of the pollen of flowers, of dried moss

213

which was blown from one field to another, the men
came home on foot; the children and young people
came on horseback, and the tails of the horses were
gold, or silver, or black, or fire-coloured in the
burning light which the setting sun cast over the
shoulder of the Vosges. Women were waiting for
their husbands on the thresholds, and when they drew
near, went to meet them in their haste to spread such
important news.

"You do not know what has happened at the
works. They will speak about it for a long time!
It seems that old M. Philippe found his voice in his
anger, and that he drove the Prussian out!"

Many of the peasants said:

"You will speak of that at home, wife, when the
door is shut!"

Many remarked with anxiety the agitation of their
neighbours, and said:

"This will end in a visit from the gendarmes!"

At M. Bastian's farm the women and young
girls were finishing their hop-picking. They were
chattering, still laughing, or anxious, according to
their age. The farmer had forbidden them to reopen
the door looking on to the village street. He
went on, always prudent in spite of his seeming
joviality, to spread out the baskets of hop flowers,
shining with fresh pollen. The oxen and the horses,
passing near the yard, breathed in the air and stretched
their necks.

And one at a time the women got up, shook their
aprons, and weary, stretched their youthful arms,
yawning at the freshness of the cool puffs of air which
came over the roof, then started on their more or less
distant way to home and supper.

At the Oberlés' house the dinner-bell rang. The
meal was the shortest and the least gay that the
wainscoting and delicately tinted paintings had ever
witnessed.

214

Very few words were exchanged.

Lucienne was thinking of the new difficulty in the
way of her projected marriage and of the violent
irritation of M. von Kassewitz; Jean, of the hell that
this house of the family had become; M. Oberlé, of
his ambitions probably ruined; Madame Monica, of
the possible departure of her son. Towards the end
of dinner, at the moment when the servant was about
to withdraw, M. Oberlé began to say, as if he were
continuing a conversation:

"I am not accustomed, you know, my dear, to give
in to violence: it exasperates me, that is all. I am
then resolved to do two things—first to build another
house in the timber-yard, where I shall be in my
own home, then to hasten on Lucienne's marriage
with Lieutenant von Farnow. Neither you nor my
father nor any one can stop me. And I have just
written to him about it."

M. Oberlé looked at each of them—his wife, son,
and daughter—with the same expression of defiance.
He added:

"These young people must be allowed to see each
other and to talk to each other freely, betrothed as
they are."

"Oh," said Madame Oberlé, "such things——"

"They are so!" he answered, "by my will, and
dating from this evening. Nothing will alter it,
nothing. I cannot let them meet here, unfortunately.
My father would plan some fresh scandal—or you,"
and he pointed to his son; "or you," and he pointed
to his wife.

"You are mistaken," said Madame Oberlé. "I
suffer cruelly on account of this arrangement, but I
shall make no scandal which will nullify what you
have decided upon."

"Then," said M. Oberlé, "you have the chance to
prove your words. I was not going to ask you to do
anything, and I had decided to take Lucienne to

215

Strasburg to the house of a third person, who would
have let them meet in her drawing-room."

"I have never deserved that."

"Will you then agree to accompany your daughter?"

She thought for a moment, shut her eyes, and
said:

"Certainly."

There was a look of surprise in her husband's eyes,
and in Jean's, and also in Lucienne's.

"I shall be delighted; for my arrangement did not
quite suit my fancy. It is more natural that you
should take your daughter. But what rendezvous
do you intend to choose?"

Madame Monica answered:

"My house at Obernai."

A movement of stupefaction made the father
and son both straighten themselves. The house at
Obernai? The home of the Biehlers? The son at
least understood the sacrifice which the mother was
making, and he rose and kissed her tenderly.

M. Oberlé himself said:

"That is right, Monica—very right. And when
will it be convenient to you?"

"Just the time to let M. de Farnow know about it.
You will fix the day and the hour—write to him when
he answers you."

Lucienne, in spite of her want of tenderness, drew
closer to her mother that evening. In the little
drawing-room, where she worked at crochet for two
hours, she sat near Madame Oberlé, and with her
watchful eyes she followed, or tried to follow, the
thoughts on the lined face so mobile and still so
expressive. But often one can only partly read what
is passing in a mind. Neither Lucienne nor Jean
guessed the reason which had so quickly prompted
Madame Oberlé's act of self-sacrifice.

216

CHAPTER XIII

THE RAMPARTS OF OBERNAI

Ten days later, Lucienne and her mother had just
entered the family house where Madame Oberlé had
spent all her childhood, the home of the Biehlers,
which lifted its three stories of windows with little
green panes, and its fortified gable above the
ramparts of Obernai, between two houses of the
sixteenth century—just like it.

Madame Oberlé had gone upstairs, saying to the
caretaker:

"You will receive a gentleman presently who will
ask for me."

In the large room on the first floor which she
entered, one of the few rooms which were still
furnished, she had seen her parents live and die; the
walnut-wood bed, the brown porcelain stove, the
chairs covered with woollen velvet which repeated
on every seat and every back the same basket of
flowers, the crucifix framed under raised glass, the
two views of Italy brought back from a journey in
1837, all remained in the same places and in the
same order as in the old days. Instinctively in
crossing the threshold she sought the holy water
stoup hanging near the lintel, where the old people,
when they went into the room, moistened their fingers
as on the threshold of a holy abode.

The two women went towards the window. Madame

217

Oberlé wore the same black dress she had put on to
receive the Prefect of Strasburg. Lucienne had put
on a large brimmed hat of grey straw, trimmed with
feathers of the same shade, as if to cover her fair hair
with a veil of shadow. Her mother thought her
beautiful—and did not say so. She would have
hastened to say so if the betrothed had not been he
whom they expected, and if the sight of the house,
and the memory of the good Alsatian folk who had
lived in it, had not made the pain she already felt
greater.

She leant against the windows and looked down
into the garden full of box-trees clipped into rounded
shapes, and flower borders outlined by box, and the
winding, narrow paths where she had played, grown
up, and dreamed. Beyond the garden there was a
walk made on the town ramparts, and between the
chestnuts planted there one could see the blue plain.

Lucienne, who had not spoken since the arrival at
Obernai, guessing that she would have disturbed a
being who was asking herself whether she could
continue and complete her sacrifice, came quite close
to her mother, and with that intelligence which always
took everyone's fancy the first time they heard it,
but less the second time:

"You must suffer, mamma," she said. "With your
ideas, what you are doing is almost heroic!"

The mother did not look up, but her eyelids fluttered
more, and quickly.

"You are doing it as a wifely duty, and because of
that I admire you. I do not believe I could do what
you are doing—give up my individuality to such an
extent."

She did not think she was being cruel.

"And you wish to be married?" asked the mother,
raising her head quickly.

"Why, yes; but we do not now look upon marriage
quite as you do."

218

The mother saw from Lucienne's smile that she
would be contending with a fixed idea, and she felt
that the hour for discussion was badly chosen. She
kept silence.

"I am grateful to you," continued the young girl.
Then after a moment of hesitation:

"Nevertheless, you had another reason besides
obeying my father when you agreed to come here—here
to receive M. von Farnow."

She let her eyes wander round the room, and
brought them back to the woman with smooth hair—that
worn-out and suffering woman—who was her
mother. There was no hesitation.

"Yes," she said.

"I was sure of it. Can you tell me what it is?"

"Presently."

"Before M. von Farnow?"

"Yes."

Keen annoyance changed the expression of
Lucienne's face; it grew hard.

"Although we do not agree with each other very
well, surely you are not capable of trying to turn
my betrothed against me?"

Tears appeared in the corners of Madame Oberlé's
eyelids.

"Oh Lucienne!"

"No, I do not believe it. It is something important?"

"Yes."

"Does it concern me?"

"No; not you."

The young girl opened her mouth to continue, then
listened, became a little pale, and turned completely
towards the door, while her mother turned only half-round
in the same direction. Some one was coming
upstairs. Wilhelm von Farnow, preceded by the
caretaker, who accompanied him only as far as the
landing, saw Madame Oberlé through the opening of

219

the door, and as if on a military parade, he drew himself
up and crossed the room quickly, and bowed his
haughty head first to the mother, then to the young
girl.

He was extremely well dressed in civilian clothes.
His face was drawn and pallid with emotion. He
said gravely in French:

"I thank you, madame!"

Then he looked at Lucienne, and in his unsmiling
blue eyes there was a gleam of proud joy.

The young girl smiled.

Madame Oberlé felt a shudder of aversion, which
she tried to repress. She looked straight into the
steel-blue eyes of Wilhelm von Farnow, who stood
motionless in the same attitude he would have taken
under arms and before some great chief.

"You must not thank me. I play no part in what
is happening. My husband and my daughter have
decided everything."

He bowed again.

"If I were free I should refuse your race, your
religion, your army—which are not mine. You see
I speak to you frankly. I am determined to tell you
that you owe me nothing, but also that I harbour no
unjust animosity against you. I even believe that
you are a very good soldier and an estimable man.
I am so convinced of it that I am going to confide to
you an anxiety which tortures me."

She hesitated a moment and continued:

"We had at Alsheim a terrible scene when Count
Kassewitz came to the house."

"Count Kassewitz told me about it, madame. He
even advised me to give up the idea of marrying
your daughter. But I shall not do that. To make
me give her up nothing short of——"

He began to laugh—

"Nothing short of an order from the Emperor
would make me! I am a good German, as you say.

220

I do not easily give up what I have won. And Count
Kassewitz is only my uncle."

"What you do not know is that my father-in-law,
for the first time for many, many years, in his
exasperation, in the excess of his grief, has spoken.
He cried out to Jean: 'Go away! Go away!' I
heard the words. I ran quickly. Well, sir, what
moved me most was not seeing M. Philippe Oberlé
senseless, stretched upon the floor; it was my son's
expression, and it is my conviction that at that
moment he resolved to obey and to leave Alsace."

"Oh," said Farnow, "that would be bad."

He cast a glance at the fair Lucienne, and saw that
she was shaking her blond head in sign of denial.

"Yes, bad," continued the mother without understanding
in what sense Farnow used the word.
"What an old age for me in my divided house—without
my daughter, whom you are going to take
away; without my son, who will have gone away.
You are astonished, perhaps, that I should tell you an
anxiety of this sort?"

He made a gesture which might mean anything.

"It is because," the mother continued more quickly,
"I have no one to advise me; no help to hope for—under
the circumstances. Understand clearly. To
whom shall I go? To my husband? He would be
furious? He would start to work and we should find
that by his influence Jean would be incorporated in
a German regiment in a week's time—away in the
north or the east. My brother? He would rather
insist on my son leaving Alsace. You see, monsieur,
you are the only one who can do anything."

"What exactly?"

"But much. Jean has promised me that he will
join the regiment. You can arrange that he shall be
received and welcomed, and not discouraged. You
can assure him protection, society, comrades—you
have known him a long time. You can prevent his

221

giving way to melancholy ideas, and stop him if he
were again tempted to carry out such a plan."

The lieutenant, much disturbed, frowned, and the
expression of his face changed at the last words.
Then he said:

"Up to the first of October you have your son's
promise—after that I will look after him."

Then speaking to himself, and again occupied with
an idea, which he did not express entirely:

"Yes," he said, "very bad—it must not be."

Lucienne heard it.

"So much the worse," said she. "I betray my
brother's secret, but he will forgive me when he
knows that I betrayed him to calm mamma. You
can be easy, mamma, Jean will not leave Alsace."

"Because?"

"He loves."

"Where then?"

"At Alsheim!"

"Whom?"

"Odile Bastian."

Madame Oberlé asked absolutely amazed:

"Is it true?"

"As true as we are here. He told me everything."

The mother closed her eyes, and, choking with
halting breath:

"God be praised. A little hope rises in my heart.
Let me cry—indeed I must!"

She pointed to the room, which was also open on
the other side of the landing and was lighted by a
large bay window, through which a tree could be
seen.

Farnow bowed, showing Lucienne that he was
following her.

And the girl moved on ahead, passing through the
room where her ancestors had loved Alsace so much.

Madame Oberlé turned away; sitting near the
window she leaned her head against the panes where

222

as a child she had seen the sleet and the ice form
into ferns, and the sun, and the rain, and the vibrating
airs of summer-time, and all the land of Alsace.

"Odile Bastian! Odile!" repeated the poor woman.
The bright face, the smile, the dresses of the young
girl, the corner of Alsheim where she lived—a whole
poem of beauty and moral health rose in the mother's
mind; and with an effort she held to it jealously, in
order to forget the other love-affair on account of
which she had come here.

"Why did not Jean confide in me?" she thought.
"This is a kind of compensation for the other. It
reassures me. Jean will not leave us, since the
strongest of ties binds him to the country. Perhaps
we shall succeed in overcoming my husband's
obstinacy. I will make him see that the sacrifice we
are making, Jean and I, in accepting this German——"

Meanwhile laughter came from the next room,
unfurnished except for the two chairs on which
Lucienne and Farnow were sitting. Lucienne, with
an elbow on the balustrade of the open window, the
lieutenant a little behind gazing at her, and speaking
with an extraordinary fervour; sometimes there was
laughter. This laughter hurt Madame Oberlé, but she
did not turn round. She still saw in the changing
blue of the Alsatian fields the consoling image evoked
by Lucienne.

Wilhelm von Farnow was speaking during this
time, and was using to the best advantage this hour,
which he knew would be short, in which he was
permitted to learn to know Lucienne. She was
listening to him as if dreaming, looking out across
the roofs, but really attentive, and accentuating her
answers with a smile and a little grimace. The
German said:

"You are a glorious conquest. You will be a
queen among the officers of my regiment, and already
there is a woman of French family, but born in

223

Austria, and she is ugly. There is an Italian, and
some Germans, and some Englishwomen. You unite
in yourself all their separate gifts—beauty, wit,
brilliancy, German culture, and French spontaneity.
As soon as we are married I shall present you in the
highest German society. How did you develop in
Alsheim?"

Her nature was still proud rather than tender, and
these flatteries pleased her.

At this hour, profiting by the absence of M. Joseph
Oberlé at Barr, M. Ulrich had gone up to see his
nephew Jean. The days were drawing near when
the young man would go to the barracks. It was
necessary to tell him about the unsuccessful meeting
with Odile Bastian's father. M. Ulrich, after having
hesitated a long time, finding it harder to destroy
young love than to start for a war, went to see his
nephew and told him everything.

They talked for an hour, or rather the uncle talked
in monologue, and tried to console Jean, who had let
him see his grief, and had wept bitterly.

"Weep, my dear boy," said the uncle. "At this
moment your mother is assisting at the first interview
between Lucienne and the other. I confess I do not
understand her. Weep, but don't let yourself be cast
down. To-morrow you must be brave. Think, in
three weeks you will be in the barracks. They must
not see you crying. Well, the year will soon pass,
and you will come back to us—and who knows?"

Jean passed his hand over his eyes and said
resolutely:

"No, uncle."

"Why not?"

At the same place where in the preceding winter
the two men had talked so joyously of the future,
they were once more seated at the two ends of the
sofa.

224

Outside, daylight was fading away and the air
was warm. M. Ulrich found suddenly on Jean's
sorrowful face the energetic expression which had
so forcibly struck him on the former occasion, and
had so delighted him. The Vosges-coloured eyes,
with brows close together, were full of changing
gleams of light, and yet the eyes were steady.

"No," said Jean; "it is necessary that you should
know—you and one other to whom I will tell it. I
shall not do my military service here."

"Where will you do it?"

"In France."

"How can you say that? Are you serious?"

"As serious as it is possible to be."

"And you go away at once?"

"No; after I have joined the corps."

M. Ulrich lifted his hands:

"But you are mad. It will be the most difficult
and most dangerous thing to do. You are mad!"

He began to walk up and down the room—from
the window to the wall. His emotion found vent in
emphatic gestures, but he took care to speak gently
for fear of being heard by the people of the house.

"Why after? For, after all, that is the first thing
that comes into my mind in face of such an idea, and
why?"

"I had intended to go away before joining the
regiment," said the young man quietly. "But
mamma guessed at something. She made me swear
that I would join. So I shall join. Do not try to
dissuade me. It is unreasonable, but I promised."

M. Ulrich shrugged his shoulders.

"Yes; the question of time is a serious point, but
it is not only that. The serious thing is the resolution.
Who made you take it? Is it because your grandfather
called out 'Go away!' that you have decided
to go?"

"No; he thought as I think, that is all."

225

"Is it the refusal of my friend Bastian which
decided you?"

"Not more than the other. If he had said yes I
should have had to tell him what I have told you
this evening—I will live neither in Germany nor in
Alsace."

"Then your sister's marriage?"

"Yes; that blow alone would have been enough
to drive me away. What would my life be like at
Alsheim now? Have you thought about that?"

"Be careful, Jean. You forsake your post as an
Alsatian!"

"No; I can do nothing for Alsace! I could never
gain the confidence of Alsatians now: with my father
compromised, and my sister married to a Prussian."

"They will say you deserted!"

"Let them come to tell me so then, when I shall be
serving with my regiment in France!"

"And your mother—you are going to leave your
mother alone here?"

"That is the great objection, after all, the only
great one, for the present, but my mother cannot
ask me to let my life be sacrificed and made useless
as hers has been. Her next feeling later on will be
one of approval, because I have freed myself from
the intolerable yoke which has lain so heavily on
her. Yes, she will forgive me. And then——"

Jean pointed to the jagged green mountains.

"And then, there is dear France, as you say. It is
she who attracts me. It is she who spoke to me
first!"

"You child!" cried M. Ulrich.

He placed himself before the young man, who
remained seated, and who was almost smiling.

"A nation must be fine indeed who, after thirty
years, can evoke such a love as yours! Where are
the people one would regret in the same way? Oh!
blessed race which speaks again in you!"

226

He stopped a moment.

"However, I cannot leave you in ignorance of the
kind of difficulties and disillusions you are going to
encounter. It is my duty. Jean, my Jean, when you
have passed the frontier and claimed the qualification
of Frenchman according to the law, and finished your
year's military service.—What will you do?"

"I shall always be able to earn my bread."

"Do not count too much on that. Do not think
that the French will welcome you with favour
because you are Alsatian. They have perhaps forgotten
that we——In any case, they are like those
who owe a very old pension. Do not imagine that
they will help you over there more than any one
else."

His nephew interrupted him:

"My mind is made up—whatever happens. Do not
speak to me about it any more, will you?"

Then Uncle Ulrich—who was caressing his grey,
pointed beard as if to get out his words spoken
against the dear land, words that were coming out
with such difficulty—was silent, and looked at his
nephew a long time with his smile of complicity,
which grew and spread. And he finished by saying:

"Now that I have done my duty and have not
succeeded, I have the right to acknowledge, Jean,
that sometimes I had this same idea. What would
you say if I followed you to France?"

"You?"

"Not immediately. The only interest I had in living
here was in seeing you growing up and continuing
the tradition. That is all shattered. Do you know
what will be one of the best means of insuring yourself
against a cold welcome?"

Jean was too agitated by the gravity of the
immediate resolution to take up time in talking
about future plans.

"Listen, Uncle Ulrich, in a few days I shall want

227

you. I have told you about my decision precisely
that you might help me."

He rose, went towards the library, which was by
the entrance-door, took a staff officer's map and came,
unfolding it, towards the sofa.

"Sit down again by me, uncle, and let us do some
geography together!"

He spread on his knees the map of the frontier of
Lower Alsace.

"I have made up my mind to go this way," he
said. "There will be a few inquiries to be made."

Uncle Ulrich nodded his head in sign of approval,
interested as if it were some plan for a hunt, or an
approaching battle.

"Good place," he said, "Grande Fontaine, les
Minières. It seems to me that that is the nearest
frontier line to Strasburg. Who told you this?"

"François Ramspacher's second son."

"You can rely on it. You will take the train."

"Yes."

"Where to?"

"As far as Schirmeck, I think."

"No; that is too near the frontier, and it is too
important a station. In your place I should get out
at the station before that, at Russ Hersbach."

"Good! There I take a carriage ordered beforehand—I
go to Grande Fontaine—I dash into the
forest."

"We dash, you mean?"

"Are you coming?"

The two men looked at each other, proud of each
other.

"Really," said M. Ulrich, "this astonishes you?
It is my trade. Pathfinder that I am, I am going
first to reconnoitre the land, then when I shall have
done the wood so thoroughly that I can find my way
through it even by night, I will tell you if the plan is
a good one, and at the hour agreed upon you will

228

find me there. Be careful to dress like a tourist: soft
hat, gaiters, not an ounce of baggage."

"Quite so."

M. Ulrich again scrutinised this handsome Jean
who was leaving for ever the land of the Oberlés, the
Biehlers, and all their ancestors.

All the same, how sad it is, in spite of the joy of the
danger.

"Bah!" said Jean, trying to laugh, "I shall see
the Rhine at both ends—there where it is free."

M. Ulrich embraced him.

"Courage, my boy, we shall meet soon. Take care
not to let any one guess your plan. Who is it you
are going to tell?"

"M. Bastian."

The uncle approved, and already on the threshold,
pointing to the next room which M. Philippe Oberlé
never left now:

"The poor man! There is more honour in his half
of a human personality than in all the others together.
Good-bye, Jean!"

Some hours passed and Jean went to the office of
the works as usual. But his mind was so distracted
that work was impossible. The employees who wished
to speak to him noticed it. One of the foremen could
not help saying to the clerks in the writing department,
Germans like himself:

"The German cavalry is making ravages here: the
master looks half mad."

The same patriotic feeling made them all laugh
silently.

Then the dinner bell rang. Jean dreaded meeting
his mother and Lucienne. Lucienne held her brother
back as she was entering the dining-room, and in the
half-light tenderly embraced him, holding him closely
to her. Like most engaged people, it was probably

229

a little of the other she was embracing without
knowing it. However, the thought at least was for
Jean. She murmured:

"I saw him at Obernai for a long time. He pleases
me very much, because he is proud, like me. He has
promised me to protect you in the regiment. But do
not let us speak of him at dinner. It will be better
not to. Mamma has been very kind—the poor thing
touched me. She can do no more. Jean, I was
obliged to reassure her by telling her your secret, and
I told her that you will not leave Alsace, because you
love Odile. Will you forgive me?"

She took her brother's arm, and leaving the hall
went into the dining-room, where M. and Madame
Oberlé were seated already—silent.

"My poor dear, in this house every joy is paid
for by the sorrow of others. Look! I alone am
happy!"

The dinner was very short. M. Oberlé immediately
after led his daughter into the billiard-room because
he wanted to question her. The mother remained a
moment at the table near her son, who was now her
neighbour. As soon as she was alone with him, the
constraint fell like a veil from her face. The mother
turned towards her child, admired him, smiled at him,
and said in the confidential tone she knew so well
how to use:

"I can do no more, my dear. I am completely
done up and must go to bed. But I will confess that
amidst my suffering a while ago I had one joy.
Imagine that till just then I believed most firmly that
you were going to leave us."

Jean started.

"I do not believe it now; do not be afraid! I am
reassured. Your sister has told me in secret that
I shall have some day a little Alsatian for a daughter-in-law.
That will do me so much good. I understand
that you could not tell me anything yet, while so

230

much has been happening. And then it is still new—isn't
it? Why are you trembling like that? I tell
you, Jean, that I ask nothing from you now, and
that I have entirely lost my fears—I love you so
much."

She also embraced Jean. She also pressed him to
her breast. But she had no tenderness in her soul
except that which she was expressing.

She remembered the child in the cradle, nights and
days of long ago, anxieties, dreams, precautions, and
prayers of which he had been the object, and she
thought:

"All that is nothing compared with what I would
always do for him!"

"When she had disappeared, and he had heard the
noise she made opening the invalid grandfather's
door, to whom she never missed wishing good night,
Jean rose and went out. He went through the fields
to the trees which surrounded the Bastians' house,
went into the park and, hidden there, remained some
time watching the light which filtered through the
shutters of the large drawing-room. Voices spoke,
now one, now another. He recognised the tone but
could not distinguish the words. There were pauses
between the slowly spoken words, and Jean imagined
that they were sad. The temptation came to him to
go round those few yards of frontage and enter
the drawing-room boldly. He thought: "Now that
I have decided to live out of Alsace; now that
they have refused me because of my father's attitude
and because of Lucienne's marriage, I have no longer
the right to question Odile. I shall go away without
knowing if she also suffers as I suffer. But can I
not see her in her own home for the last time, in the
intimacy of the lamplight which brings the three of
them together? I will not write to her. I will not
try to speak to her, but I must see her; I shall
carry away a last look of her—a last remembrance,

231

and she will guess that at least I am deserving of
pity."

He hesitated however. This evening he felt too
unhappy and too weak. From now to the first of
October, would he not have the time to return? A
step came from the garden side. Jean looked again
at the thin blade of light which escaped from the
room where Odile was sitting, and cut the night
in two; and he withdrew.

232

CHAPTER XIV

THE LAST EVENING

The last evening had come. Jean was to take at
Obernai a night train for Strasburg, so as to be in
the barracks of St. Nicholas the next morning at
seven o'clock, the regulation hour. His uniform,
ordered of a Strasburg tailor, as was usual for the
one-year service men, was waiting for him, blue and
yellow, folded on two chairs, in the room which a
month ago Madame Oberlé had taken, facing the
barracks of St. Nicholas, about the middle of the rue
des Balayeurs. After dinner he said to his mother:
"Let me go out alone, so that I can say good-bye to
the Alsheim country I shall not see again for a long
time."

She smiled. M. Joseph Oberlé answered:

"My dear fellow, you will not see me again; I have
bills falling due to-morrow, and I must work in my
office. And besides, I do not care about useless sentiment.
Well, perhaps you will not find it easy to get
leave before two months. I dare say not, but that
will only make you the better pleased to come home.
Come! Good-bye."

More affectionately than he would have believed
it possible he embraced him, and with a word from
Lucienne in her clear, young voice, "Soon," he went
out.

The night air was laden with moisture to a remarkable

233

degree: not a cloud. A crescent moon, stars in
thousands; but between heaven and earth a veil of mist
was spread which allowed the light to penetrate, but
dispersed it in such a manner that there was no object
really in shadow, and none which showed brightly.
Everything was bathed in a pearly atmosphere. It
was warm to breathe. "How sweet my Alsace is!"
said Jean, when he had opened the door of the
kitchen garden, and found himself behind the village
houses, facing the plain, on which the moonlight was
sleeping, blotted here and there with the shadows of
an apple-tree or a walnut. An immense languor
escaped from the soil, into which the first rains of
autumn had sunk. The perfumes of stubble and
ploughed land mixed with the odours from all kinds
of vegetation come to their fullness of growth and
aroma. The mountain was sending out gently to the
valley the odour of pine pollen on the breeze, and
the mint and the dying strawberries and bilberries,
and its juniper berries crushed by the feet of passers-by
and flocks. Jean breathed in the odour of Alsace;
he thought he could recognise the exquisite perfume
of that little mountain which is near Colmar, called
Florimont, where the dittany grows, and he thought,
"It is the last time. Never again! Never again!"

There were no glittering points of light on the
roofs; he followed the line of them on the left of the
path: they seemed to have joined fraternal hands
round the church, and under each Jean could picture
a face known and friendly. Such were his thoughts
for a while as he walked on. But as soon as he saw,
grey in the middle of the fields, the big clump of
trees which hid M. Bastian's house, every other
thought fled. Arrived at the farm where the younger
son had said to him, "It is by Grande Fontaine that
you must cross the frontier," he went into the cherry
avenue, and he still remembered and found the white
gate. No one was passing. Besides, what did it

234

matter? Jean opened the lattice gate, went in, and
walked on the grass border, even with the great
trees, to the window of the drawing-room, which was
lighted, then going round the house, came to the door
which opened on the side opposite the village of
Alsheim.

He waited an instant, went into the vestibule, and
opened the door of the large room where the Bastian
family sat every evening. They were all there in the
light of the lamps, just as Jean had imagined. The
father was reading the paper. The two women on
the other side of the brown table laden with white
linen unfolded, were embroidering with initials the
towels which were going into the Bastian linen
press. The door had opened with no other noise
than that of the pad brushing against the parquet.
However, all was so calm round the dwelling and in
the room, that they turned their eyes to see who was
coming in. There was a moment of uncertainty for
M. Bastian, and hesitation for Jean. He had fixed his
gaze first of all on Odile. He had seen how she also
had suffered, and that she was the first, the only one
who recognised him, and how she grew pale, and that
in her anguish, her raised hand, her breath, her glance,
were arrested. The linen Odile was sewing slipped
from her hands without her being able to make the
slightest movement to lift it up.

It was perhaps by this sign that M. Bastian
recognised the visitor. Emotion seized him immediately.

"What?" he asked gently, "is it you, Jean? No
one showed you in. What have you come for?"

He slowly put his paper down on the table without
ceasing to scrutinise the young man who was standing
in the shadow, on the same spot, a step or two
from the door.

"I have come to say good-bye," said Jean.

But his voice was so full of pain that M. Bastian

235

understood something unknown, tragic, had entered
his house. He rose, saying, "Why, yes, to-morrow
will be the first of October. You are going to the
barracks, my poor boy. No doubt you wish to speak
to me?"

Already M. Bastian had advanced, had held out his
hand, and the young man, drawing him back into the
darkest corner of the room, had answered in a very
low voice, his eyes looking into the eyes of Odile's
father. Madame Bastian gazed into the shadow,
where they made an indistinct group.

"I am leaving," Jean murmured, "and I shall
never come back, M. Bastian; that is why I took the
liberty of coming."

He felt the rough hand of the Alsatian tremble.
There was an exchange of secret and rapid dialogue
between the men, while the two anxious women rose
from their chairs, and with their hands leaning on
the table, bent forward.

"What do you say? You will come back in a year?"

"No, I am going to join the regiment because I
promised to. But I shall leave it."

"You will leave it?"

"The day after to-morrow."

"Where are you going?"

"To France!"

"For ever?"

"Yes."

The old Alsatian turned aside for a moment. "Talk
on, you women, talk on; we have business to
discuss."

They moved away, whilst he, breathless as though
with running, cried: "Be careful what you do; be
prudent; don't let yourself be caught."

He placed both hands on Jean's shoulders. "I must
stay: that's my way, you see, of loving Alsace; there
is no better. I live here, and here I die. But for
you, my boy, things are different, I understand—don't

236

let the women guess; it's too serious. Does any one
know at your home?"

"No."

"Keep your secret," and then, lowering his voice,
"You wanted to see her once more. I don't blame
you, since you will never meet again."

Jean nodded as though to say "Yes, I had to see
her once more."

"Look at her a minute, and then go. Stay where
you are—look over my shoulder."

Over M. Bastian's shoulder Jean could see that
the troubled look in Odile's eyes had grown to terror.
She met his gaze fearlessly; she had no thought but
for the dialogue which she could not hear, the mystery
in which she felt she had some part, and her
face betrayed her anguish.

"What are they saying? Is it bad news again?
Is it better? No; not better, they are not both
looking my way."

Her mother was still paler than her daughter.

"Farewell, my boy," said M. Bastian in low tones.
"I loved you.... I could not act differently ...
but I think highly of you; I will remember you."

Overcome by emotion, the old Alsatian silently
pressed Jean's hand and let it fall. As to Jean,
trembling and dazed, he walked to the door, looking
back for the last time. He was going then—in one
minute he would be gone, never to return to Alsheim.

"Au revoir, madame," he said.

He would have liked to say au revoir to Odile, but
sobs prevented the words.

He gained the shadow of the corridor; they heard
him hurrying away.

"What does it mean?" demanded Madame Bastian.
"Xavier, you are hiding something from us."

The old Alsatian sobbed aloud; he threw precaution
to the winds—she had guessed.

"Odile," she cried, "run and say good-bye to him."

237

Odile was already across the room; she caught Jean
up at the corner.

"I beg of you to tell me why you are so miserable,"
she cried.

He turned, determined to be silent, to keep his vow.
She was quite close to him; he opened his arms; she
threw herself into them.

"Oh God," she cried, "you are leaving; I know
it—you are going."

He kissed her hair tenderly, a lifelong farewell,
turned the corner, and fled from her.

238

CHAPTER XV

JOINING THE REGIMENT

At a quarter to seven, Jean Oberlé, wearing a jacket
and round cap, walked by the stable of the old French
barracks of St. Nicholas, built on the site of a convent,
now called by the Germans "Nikolaus Kaserne."
He reached the iron gate, saluted the officer, exchanged
a few words with him, and advanced towards a
group of about a dozen young men, volunteers for
a year's service, who were standing at the end of
the courtyard, under the clock. Cavalry men in
undress—light blue tunic with yellow braid, black
trousers, and flat caps—moved here and there over
vast, level, dusty grounds. A detachment of cavalry,
lance at shoulder, had taken up their station to the
left by one of the stables, waiting their officer's
command to take the road.

"Herr Sergeant," said Jean, approaching the non-commissioned
officer, carefully dressed, but of vulgar
appearance, who, with a protecting and pretentious
manner, was waiting for him by the group of volunteers.
"I am one of the volunteers for the year."

The sergeant, who had very long black moustaches,
which he never ceased twirling between the thumb
and first finger, asked his christian and surname,
and compared them with the names and surnames on
the list he held in his hand.

239

Meanwhile, secretly intimidated by the supposed
wealth of those he received, eager to please them,
but anxious lest they should discover it, the sergeant
looked the volunteer up and down, as though seeking
some physical defect, anything in fact which might
make this Alsatian civilian ridiculous in the eyes of
a non-commissioned officer.

"Join the others," he said, when his examination
was finished.

The others were for the most part Germans, who,
judging by the different types, had come from all
parts of the Empire. They had dressed carefully,
so as to show their comrades, volunteers like themselves,
and the soldiers in the barracks, that in civil
life they were men who belonged to wealthy families.

They wore patent leather shoes, kid gloves, yellow
or tan, elegant ties, valuable neck-pins. Each man
introduced himself to his future comrades. "Allow
me to introduce myself: my name is Furbach, my
name is Blossmann." Jean knew none of them. He
merely bowed without giving his name. What did
it matter to him who was to be their comrade for
this one day only?

He took his place to the left of the group, his mind
far away from the St. Nicholas barrack, while the
whispered question, "Who is he—an Alsatian?"
went the round of his comrades.

The easy-going smiled amiably, others put themselves
on the defensive, and with the rivalry of racial
instinct, drew themselves up and fixed their hard blue
eyes upon the new-comer with an unflinching stare.

Two other volunteers arrived, and the sergeant,
as the clock struck, preceded the fifteen young men
up the staircase, and marshalled them into a room on
the second floor, where the medical examination was
to take place. At eight o'clock the volunteers were
again in the courtyard, no longer grouped as the fancy
took them, but drawn up in two files, the sergeant in

240

attendance. They were awaiting the colonel. Jean's
neighbour was a tall, beardless youth, son of a manufacturer
of Fribourg, with bright eyes, and smooth
cheeks, which bore, however, two scars, one near the
nose, and one under the right eye, souvenirs of his
duels as a student. Seeing Jean Oberlé's dreamy, reserved
look, he put it down to timidity caused by his
new surroundings, and took upon himself the office
of guide.

Whilst the Alsatian, his arms behind his back, his
pale, strong face turned to the gate, watched the
people of Strasburg crossing the street in the October
sun, his companion endeavoured to arouse his interest
in the inhabitants of the barracks.

"You were wrong not to do as I did: I got introductions
to several officers, and even know several of
the chief quartermasters. There, do you see the

wachtmeister
coming out of the stable; that's Stubel,
hard drinker, great eater, good sort; that other one
who is watching us from the end of the courtyard,
the man with a little red moustache, do you see?
That's Gottfried Hamm—a bad sort."

"You know him?"

"Yes."

"Attention!" called the sergeant. "Eyes right!",
He himself marched ten quick steps forward, halted
with head erect, his arms hanging straight at each
side, his left hand gripping his sabre below the
guard. He had caught sight of an officer advancing
towards them with deliberate step, wrapped in his
grey cloak, the mere sight of whom had scattered
some twenty hussars, who had been leaning against
the walls sunning themselves. The colonel stopped
before the first file of young men, the hope of the
German reserve army. He was sanguine, bustling,
and energetic, a very good cavalry-man, broad-shouldered,
with thin legs, hair almost black, and
eyes fierce in the interests of the service.

241

"These, Colonel," said the sergeant, "are the
volunteers for a year's service."

The colonel frowned immediately, and fixing his
eyes on each of these young men in turn, said
severely:

"You are privileged. You are dispensed from
more than a year's service. Be worthy of it. Be
an example to the soldiers; remember that you will
be their chiefs later. No breaking of rules, no
larking, no wearing of civilian dress. I shall punish
severely."

He asked for the list of volunteers. Seeing Jean's
name he mentally connected it with Lieutenant von
Farnow's.

"Volunteer Oberlé," he called out.

Oberlé stepped out of the ranks. Without relaxing
the severity of his expression, the colonel fixed his
eyes for a few moments on the young man's face,
thinking to himself that here was the brother of the
Lucienne Oberlé whose hand he had allowed Lieutenant
Farnow to ask in marriage.

"That's right," he said; and saluting rapidly he
walked away, his grey cloak swelling with the north
wind.

As he disappeared, a lieutenant in the 1st regiment,
adjutant-major of the Rhenish Hussars, a well-made,
distinguished-looking man, bearing himself in
the correct military style, a perfect man of the world,
came towards the group of volunteers, and read an
order assigning to each one his appointed place in
such and such a company and squadron. Jean was
to join the 3rd company of the 2nd squadron.

"No luck," murmured his neighbour: "that's Gottfried
Hamm's company."

Henceforward the fifteen volunteers were part of
the army; each one had his allotted place in that
well-disciplined multitude, their responsible chiefs,
the right to demand a uniform from such and such a

242

depot, a horse from such and such a stable. To this
they now turned their attention. Jean and his
chance companion, son of a librarian of Leipzig,
made their way to the top floor of the barrack,
entered the clothing-stores and received their uniforms,
leaving behind various articles, such as cavalry
cloaks and pairs of boots, which the
kammer-sergeant

was pleased to accept for himself as a token of
welcome, or undertook to remit to certain non-commissioned
officers of the company. It was a
long business, and did not finish till past ten. Then
there was a visit to the principal brusher's room,
where there was the little wardrobe of white
wood, used henceforth in common by the volunteer
and the soldier; and there was still the visit to the
stable sergeant, whose duty it was to assign to each
his horse and second brusher; then another to the
regimental tailor; it was past midday when Jean
was able to leave the barracks and lunch hastily.

For this first day the volunteers were dispensed
from returning to barracks at one o'clock. It was
only after the horses had been groomed that they
made their appearance simultaneously as arranged
between themselves, radiant in their shining new
uniforms, before the curious gaze of the cavalry,
and the jealous scrutiny of the non-commissioned
officers who examined, as they passed, the cut and
quality of their uniforms, the style of their collars
and braid, the lustre of their shining boots. Among
the young men there was only one who remained a
stranger to the self-complacency of the others. He
was thinking of a telegram which he should have
received by now, of which the terms of the pre-arranged
code floated before his eyes all the afternoon.
This was his only thought. Anxiety at not
hearing news of his uncle Ulrich's departure, nervousness
mixed with a certain defiance which, in anticipation
of the morrow, he mentally hurled at the

243

authority to which he at present bowed, prevented
the young man from feeling fatigue. It was half-past
eight before the exercises for man and horse
were concluded, and then some of the volunteers
were so tired that they sought their beds, supperless.
Jean did likewise, but for a different reason. He
went at once to the Rue des Balayeurs.

The landlady met him at the door:

"There is a telegram for you, M. Oberlé."

Jean went to his room, lit a candle, and read the
unsigned telegram awaiting him:

"All is well."

This meant that all was ready for next day, that
M. Ulrich had made all necessary preparations. The
dice were cast; on the 2nd October, in a few hours,
Jean would leave the barracks of Alsace. Although
he never hesitated for a moment, yet, upon reading
the words which settled his fate, the young man
was overcome by emotion. The reality of separation
entered his soul more bitterly, and being physically
weary, he wept.

He had thrown himself on his bed fully dressed,
his face buried in his pillow; he thought of all his
friends who remained behind in Alsace, whilst he
was an exile for ever; he could hear their exclamations
of pity or indignation when the news reached Alsheim;
he saw the girl he loved, the radiant Odile of Easter
Eve, become the despairing woman who had clung to
him in the moment of farewell, guessing all, yet
begging for an answer he could not give. All this
was necessary, irreparable. The night passed slowly.
Silence reigned in the streets. Jean realised that he
would soon need all his moral energy, and endeavoured
to lay aside vain visions and regrets, repeating to
himself over and over again the plans settled between
himself and his uncle at their last interview, which
he was to carry out in every detail to-day.

Yes, to-day, for the neighbouring cocks were

244

beginning to crow. It was not possible to leave by
an early train. The rendezvous at the barracks was
fixed for four o'clock, while the first train for
Schirmeck left Strasburg at 5.48; he would not
reach Russ-Hersbach until after seven, and to take
it was a great risk. The absence of a volunteer
would be noticed in less than three hours, and the
alarm given. Uncle Ulrich and Jean had come to the
conclusion that the most sure means of crossing
the frontier without arousing suspicion was to take
the train which left Strasburg at 12.10 a.m., that is to
say, whilst the volunteers were at lunch.

"I have been over the ground to make sure," said
M. Ulrich: "I am sure of my calculations. You will
reach Russ-Hersbach at twenty-one minutes past one,
a trap will take us to Schirmeck in a quarter of an
hour. We turn to the right and reach Grande Fontaine
half an hour later. There we leave the trap, and,
thanks to our good legs, we can reach French ground
by two forty-five or fifty. There I leave you and
return."

It was important to catch the 12.10 train, which
would be an easy matter, as the volunteers were
usually free by eleven.

Jean fell asleep at last, but not for long. Before
four in the morning he was again at the barracks.

The short repose he had taken had restored his
strength of will. Like most energetic people, Jean
was nervous beforehand, but when the moment of
action came difficulties vanished. While the horses
were being groomed, and during the exercises, which
lasted till close on eleven, he was perfectly calm.
His attitude was even less reserved and detached
than on the previous day, and his Saxon comrade
remarked upon it.

"Already at home?" he inquired.

Jean smiled. He looked upon buildings, officers,
and soldiers, all the pomp of the German army, with

245

the same feelings as a school-boy set at liberty looks
on the professors and pupils of his college. He
already felt detached from his surroundings, and
observed with a certain amused curiosity the scenes
he would never see again.

About eleven he saw at the head of a detachment
of Hussars, Lieutenant Farnow ride into the barracks,
superb in his youth and military splendour. The
horses were splashed with mud from their ride, and
the men, tired out, only awaited the signal to halt,
that they might curse the day's exercises. Not in the
least weary, Farnow rode into the courtyard with as
much pleasure as though he had been invited to a
hunting party, and was expecting the signal to start.
"There's my sister's future husband," thought Jean;
"we shall never see one another again, and if war
breaks out, he is my enemy."

He saw the vision of a tall cavalry chief, charging
across a dusty plain, rising in his stirrups, nostrils
distended, shouting out orders. Farnow, not suspecting
the distraction he was causing the young
volunteer, just let his blue eyes linger a minute on
the latter's face. He moved off, followed by his men,
to the farther side of the courtyard. A brief word
of command was heard, then the clashing of arms,
and silence. The exercises were prolonged another
half hour, to satisfy the instructor's zeal. At half-past
eleven Jean was rushing up the staircase,
knowing that there was barely time to catch the
train, when one of the men of his company called
out:

"There's no time to go out; we have a review at
midday: it's the captain's orders."

Jean continued on up the stairs, not paying the
slightest attention to this obstacle raised at the last
minute. His mind was made up. He was going to
leave. He would meet his uncle at Russ-Hersbach,
who would be waiting there with a carriage. Jean's

246

one thought was to reach the station. He changed
hurriedly, and mixing with a group of men belonging
to other companies, and who had no reason to remain
in barracks, he had no difficulty in getting away.
When he was in the street, some yards away from the
guard-house, on the pavement of the rue des Balayeurs
he began to run. The clock stood at seventeen
minutes to twelve. Was there time to run the three
hundred yards which lay between him and his apartments,
change into civilian dress and catch the 12.10?
It was some distance to the station. On the other
hand there was great risk in attempting to cross
the frontier in uniform. While he was running
Jean thought it would be simple to change in the
train or at Russ-Hersbach. Entering the hall, he
called breathlessly to his landlady:

"I am in a great hurry. Will you call a cab? I
will be down in a minute."

Three minutes later he ran down carrying a bag
into which he had thrown his civilian clothes, which
he had left ready on his bed. He jumped into the
cab, giving as address, "Rue de la Mésange," but at
the next corner he called out: "Drive with all speed
to the station, coachman."

He reached the station a minute before the time,
got his ticket for Russ-Hersbach, and jumped into a
first-class compartment, which contained two other
passengers. A minute later the train had entered
the tunnel under the fortifications, reappeared, and
steamed away to the west, across the plains of
Alsace.

At the same moment the captain, who was holding
the review in the courtyard, caught sight of one of
the volunteers attached to his company, and turning
to the
wachtmeister
said: "Where is the other?"

"I have not seen him, Captain," Hamm replied,
and turning to the young Saxon, Oberlé's comrade:
"Do you know where he is?"

247

"He went out after the exercises, sir, and has not
returned."

"I won't punish him this time," growled the
captain; "no doubt he misunderstood, but speak to
him in my name when he returns, Hamm; don't
forget."

There was no immediate alarm, but when the men
again assembled at one o'clock for the grooming of
the horses, which went on every afternoon from one
to two o'clock, Jean's absence could not fail to be
noticed. The whole length of the wall outside the
stables, horses tethered to iron rings were being
brushed down by men, amongst whom were the
volunteers receiving a lesson in the art. The
sergeants looked on nonchalantly when the
wachtmeister

of the 3rd Company came out of his office,
and made his way to the south side of the court,
where Oberlé should have been. He bit his red
moustache as his eyes wandered up and down the
ranks.

"Oberlé has not come back?" he asked. The same
man as before replied:

"When he left the barracks he ran towards his
apartments."

"Did you see him in the mess-room?"

"He did not lunch with us."

"That'll do," said the
wachtmeister
.

Hamm turned away briskly. The expression of
his face and eyes showed that he considered the
situation serious. Serious for Oberlé, but equally
serious for himself. Neither the captain nor the lieutenant
was in barracks at the moment. If there
was trouble the captain would not fail to ask why he
had not been warned. Hamm crossed the courtyard,
thinking over what he ought to do, and recalling a
remark of the brigadier of Obernai. When Gottfried
was at Obernai a fortnight before, he had said to
him: "You are going to have Oberlé's son in your

248

regiment. Keep an eye on him. I shall be surprised
if he does not create some disturbance. He is the
counterpart of his grandfather, a madman who hates
Germans, and who is quite capable of any folly."

But before taking zealous action it was necessary
to know some details. This was easy: the rue des
Balayeurs faced the gateway. Hamm brushed his
blue tunic with his hand, left the barracks, and made
his way to a large house on the left with green
shutters.

"Left in a cab, before midday, carrying a bag,"
was the answer Jean's landlady gave him.

"What address did he give?"

"Rue de la Mésange."

"Any number?"

"I don't know; anyway I heard none."

Hamm's suspicions became more definite. The

wachtmeister
no longer hesitated. He hastened to
the captain's quarters in the Herderstrasse.

The captain was out.

Disappointed and warm from his sharp walk, Hamm
took a short cut to the barracks, through the University
gardens. He suddenly remembered that close
by in the rue Grandidier, lived Lieutenant Farnow.
It is true the lieutenant did not belong to the 2nd
squadron, but Hamm knew of his engagement. It
had been talked of among the officers. He made his
way to the superb stone house and mounted to the
first floor.

"The lieutenant is dressing," replied the orderly to
his question.

Von Farnow in shirt and trousers was dressing
before paying certain calls, and going to the officers'
casino. In trousers and shirt he was leaning over his
toilet-table with its bevelled glass, washing his face.
The room was perfumed with eau-de-cologne, brushes
and manicure set were strewn round him. He turned
as the door opened, his face all wet.

249

"What is the matter, Hamm?" he cried, seizing a
towel.

"I took upon myself to call upon you, lieutenant,
as the captain is not there, and Oberlé——"

"Oberlé? What has he done?" Farnow interrupted
nervously.

"He has not put in an appearance since half-past
eleven this morning."

Farnow, who was drying his face, threw down the
towel violently on the table, and approached the
non-commissioned officer. He remembered Madame
Oberlé's fears. "He thinks as I do," thought Hamm.

"Has not come back? Have you been to the rue
des Balayeurs?"

"Yes, lieutenant; he left the house in a cab at ten
minutes to twelve."

The young lieutenant felt as though death's icy
hand was on his heart. He closed his eyes for a
moment, and with a violent effort regained his composure.

"There is only one thing to do, Hamm," he said.
He was deadly pale, but not a muscle of his face
quivered. "You must warn your captain, and he will
do what is prescribed in such cases."

Farnow turned calmly, and looked at the ornamental
clock on his desk.

"One-forty—you must be quick."

The
wachtmeister
saluted and withdrew.

The lieutenant ran to the adjoining study, and
asked to be connected with the Strasburg station.
Ten minutes later the telephone bell rang, and he
learnt that a volunteer of the 9th Hussars, in uniform,
had reached the station at the last moment with a
valise portmanteau and taken a first-class ticket to
Russ-Hersbach.

"It's impossible," exclaimed Farnow, throwing himself
on to the sofa; "there must be some mistake
Russ-Hersbach is almost on the frontier. Jean would

250

not desert—he is in love; he must be at Alsheim—he
must at least have wanted to see Odile again. I must
find out."

"Hermann," he called, rapping with his knuckles
on the mahogany table.

The orderly, a stolid German, opened the door.

"Saddle my horse and yours immediately."

Farnow was soon ready; he hastened downstairs,
found the horses waiting, crossed Strasburg, and
once past the fortifications, spurred his horse to a
sharp trot.

As he neared Alsheim, Jean's desertion seemed to
him more credible. Every detail of his conversation
with Madame Oberlé came back to him, and other
reasons as well for believing the calamity against
which his imperious will was fighting desperately.
"He does not understand Germany; he was glorying
in it at Councillor Brausig's. And then his disunited
family—a disunion increased by my engagement.
But then he is himself engaged, or almost;
and characters like his, French characters, must be
dominated by love. No; I shall find him there—or
have news of him."

It was warm; the long dusty road stretched from
village to village, without shade, a thin line between
the fields, now bare of their crops. The sky hung
over them like brass, on the horizon banks of motionless
clouds rose above the Vosges, throwing out rays
of light. The horses, covered with sweat, continued
to gallop. Under the scattered walnut-trees, among
the stubble, children raised their switches and shouted
as the riders passed them.

"Is the lieutenant crazy?" thought Hermann; "he
is going faster and faster."

Farnow's anguish increased as he drew nearer his
destination. "If I do not find him," he murmured,
"supposing he has——"

Obernai was passed on the right. A sign-post at

251

the cross roads pointed to Alsheim, and soon the
blue roof of the Oberlés' house appeared among the
green.

"Lucienne, Lucienne, Lucienne!"

The house seemed to slumber in the heavy heat of
the autumn day, the silence being broken only by a
feeble, monotonous voice. Seated near grandfather
Oberlé's chair, in the room which the invalid could
never hope to leave, Madame Oberlé was reading
aloud the
Journal d'Alsace
, which the postman had
just delivered.

Through the open window her voice could be
heard murmuring as though engaged in the rhythmic
recital of the rosary. In the billiard-room above,
that which was still called Jean's room, M. Joseph
Oberlé was dozing behind the curtain, on his knees
lay several letters, and a copy of the
Strasburger Post
.
At the end of the room Lucienne could be seen writing
at a Louis XVI. desk.

"Monsieur? Monsieur Oberlé?"

Joseph Oberlé jumped up and threw open the door,
which was ajar, meeting the concierge running towards
him.

"Why do you call me; you know I don't like——"

He remained speaking with the man for a minute,
and returned smiling.

"My Lucienne, Herr von Farnow is waiting for
you at the park gate."

She rose, blushing.

"Why doesn't he come in?"

"It appears that he is on horseback, and in a great
hurry. Perhaps he dares not. Go and fetch him,
my darling; tell him from me that there shall be
no disturbance, that I will prevent any further
scenes."

With a gesture he implied that he would bolt all
the doors sooner, especially that of the room whence
came the monotonous voice reading the paper.

252

She looked in the glass, arranging her hair. He
repeated:

"Run, my treasure; he is asking for you. If you
don't return quickly I'll come for you."

She nodded, and ran down the steps two at a time.
She walked rapidly down the avenue, happy, yet
troubled, her mouth slightly open, her eyes seeking
Farnow.

At the end of the avenue she caught sight of the
two steaming horses on the road held by the orderly,
and almost at the same moment the lieutenant came
towards her.

Farnow's usually pale face was flushed, his expression
troubled; he hastened, but with no sign of joy,
towards Lucienne, who came half running to meet
him, trying to laugh.

"How are you, Wilhelm? What a nice surprise!"

The lieutenant raised his hat, but made no reply.
He took her hand, and drew her aside; he did not
raise it to his lips; no accustomed words of admiration
came from him; his eyes were hard and feverish,
and he drew her near the wood-yard close by.

Lucienne continued to smile bravely, though her
heart was heavy with painful dread.

"Where are you taking me? Who is this churlish
friend, who won't even say good day? You, so
particular——"

"Come, we shan't be seen here," he said; he drew
her behind a pile of wood into a kind of retreat
formed by three unequal piles of planks. Farnow
dropped Lucienne's hand.

"Is Jean here? Be careful; is he at Alsheim?"

His eyes expressed his anguish, his manner an
imperious will struggling against calamity.

"No; he is not here," replied Lucienne simply.

"You expect him, then?"

"No."

"Then we are lost, mademoiselle, lost!"

253

"Mademoiselle?"

"Yes; if he is not here he has deserted."

"Ah!" The young girl recoiled, supporting herself
against the wood, her eyes haggard, her arms
outstretched.

"Deserted? Lost? Can't you see that you are
killing me with such words? Do you really mean
Jean? Deserted! Are you sure?"

"Since he is not here, I am convinced of it. He
took a ticket for Russ-Hersbach—do you understand,
Russ-Hersbach? He must be across the frontier. He
left Strasburg more than three hours ago." He
laughed harshly, angrily, beside himself with misery.

"Don't you remember? He swore to your mother
he would go to the barracks. He did go. To-day
the time for his promise expired, and he deserted.
And now...."

"Yes ... now?"

Lucienne asked no proof. She believed it. Her
bosom heaved; she let go her hold on the wood, and
joined her hands beseechingly. She was obliged to
repeat her question; Farnow stood motionless, grief-stricken.
"What shall you do now, Wilhelm?"

Farnow drew himself up in his dusty uniform; his
brow was contracted.

"I must leave you," he said in a low voice."

"Leave me, because my brother has deserted?"

"Yes."

"But this is madness!"

"It is my duty as a soldier."

"Then you do not love me?"

"Love you. Ah!... But honour forbids me to
marry you. I cannot become the brother-in-law of a
deserter. I am an officer, a von Farnow!"

"Well, cease to be an officer and continue to love
me," cried Lucienne, holding out her arms to the rigid
figure in blue. "Wilhelm, true honour consists in
loving me, Lucienne Oberlé, in keeping the promise

254

you made me! Leave my brother to go his own way,
but don't spoil our two lives."

Farnow could scarcely speak; the veins of his neck
were swollen with his efforts for self-control.

"There is worse to come," he said at last, "you
must know the truth, Lucienne. I must denounce
him."

"Denounce him? Jean? You cannot. I forbid
you!" cried Lucienne with a gesture of horror.

"I must do so. Military law compels me to do so."

"It is not true!—it is too cruel."

"I will prove it to you. Hermann!"

Hermann came forward in amazement.

"Listen. What is the article of the law relating
to any person who has knowledge of a plan of
desertion?"

The soldier collected his thoughts, and recited:

"Any one who shall have credible knowledge of a
plan of desertion, when there is still time to frustrate
it, and who does not give information thereof to his
superiors, is liable to be imprisoned for ten months,
and during war for three years."

"Quick! To horse!" cried Farnow. "We must
start.

"Farewell, Lucienne."

She ran forward and seized his arm.

"No, no, you must not go; I shall not let you."

He gazed a moment on her tear-stained face, where
ardent love and sorrow were mingled.

"You must not go! Do you hear?" she repeated.

Farnow lifted her from the ground, pressed her
against his breast and kissed her passionately. By
the despairing violence of his kiss, Lucienne realised
it was indeed farewell.

He put her from him brusquely, ran to the gate,
leapt to the saddle, and galloped away in the direction
of Obernai.

255

CHAPTER XVI

IN THE FOREST OF THE MINIÈRES

Night was falling, but Jean was still on German
soil. He was sleeping, worn out with fatigue; he lay
stretched upon a bed of moss and fir cones, while
M. Ulrich watched, on the look out for fresh danger,
still trembling from the danger he had just escaped.
The two men had crept into a space between two
stacks of branches left by the wood-cutters, who had
been thinning the fir-tree plantation. The branches,
still green, stretched from one stack to the other,
making their hiding-place more secure. A storm of
wind blew across the mountain, but otherwise no
sound could be heard upon the heights.

Two hours must have passed since Jean and his
uncle had taken refuge in their hiding-place.

When the train reached Russ-Hersbach, M. Ulrich
had at once seen and said that the moment for Jean
to change his uniform had passed. Even such a
little thing as that would have excited too much
attention in that frontier province, peopled by visible
and invisible watchers, where the stones listen and
the fir-trees are spies. He threw the valise to the
coachman of the landau engaged three days previously
at Schirmeck.

"Here's some useless luggage," he cried, "fortunately
it's not heavy. Drive quickly, coachman."

The carriage crossed the poverty-stricken village,

256

reached the town of Schirmeck, and quitting there
the principal valley turned to the right into the
narrow winding valley leading to Grande Fontaine.
No suspicious glances followed the travellers, but
witnesses of their passing increased. And this was
serious. Although Jean was sitting with his back to
the driver, partially hidden by the blinds and partially
by the cloak which M. Ulrich had thrown over him,
yet there was no doubt the uniform of the 9th Hussars
had been seen by two gendarmes in the streets of
Schirmeck, by workmen on the road, and by the
douanier who was smoking and had continued to
smoke his pipe so tranquilly, sitting under the trees
on the left of the first bridge by which one entered
Grande Fontaine.

Every moment M. Ulrich thought, "Now the alarm
will be given! Perhaps it has been already, and
one of the state's innumerable agents will come up,
question us, and insist upon our following them whatever
we may say."

He did not tell Jean of his anxiety, and the young
man, excited by the spirit of adventure, was quite
different to the Jean of yesterday.

In spite of the steepness and stoniness of the path
by the mountain stream, the horses made good
headway, and soon the houses of Grande Fontaine
came into sight. The beech-wood of Donon, all
velvety and golden and crowned with firs, rose in
front of them. At 2.15 the carriage stopped in the
middle of the village, in a kind of sloping square,
where a spring of water flows into a huge stone
trough. The travellers got out, for here the carriage
road ended.

"Wait for us at the inn of Rémy Naeger," said
M. Ulrich; "we will go for a walk, and return in
an hour. Drink a bottle of Molsheim wine at my
expense, and give the horse a double portion of
oats."

257

M. Ulrich and Jean, leaving on the right the path
which mounts to Donon, immediately took the path
to the left, a narrow road with houses, gardens, and
hedges on either side, which connects Grande Fontaine
with the last village of the upper valley, that of
the Minières.

They had scarcely gone two hundred yards when
they caught sight of the keeper of Mathiskop coming
out of his house, in his green uniform and
Tyrolese hat, descending towards them. Seeing that
the man would be obliged to pass them on the road
M. Ulrich was afraid.

"There is a uniform, Jean, which I don't care to
meet at present. Let us go by the forest."

The forest was on the left. They were the fir
woods of Mathiskop, and farther on those of the Corbeille,
thickly wooded slopes rising higher and higher,
where a hiding-place would be easy to discover.
Jean and his uncle jumped the hedge, crossed some
yards of meadow, and entered the shadow of the fir
wood. It was none too soon; the military authorities
had given the alarm; warning had been telephoned
to all the different posts to keep a look out for the
deserter Oberlé. The keeper they had seen had not
yet received the warning, and passed out of sight,
but M. Ulrich, by means of his old field-glass of Jena
days, could see that there was excitement in the
usually quiet valley, where a number of douaniers
and gendarmes could be seen hurrying about. They
also hurried to the Mathiskop forest, and the chase
commenced.

M. Ulrich and Jean were not captured, but they
had been sighted; they were tracked from wood
to wood for more than an hour, and were prevented
from reaching the frontier, to do which they
would have been compelled to cross the open valley.
M. Ulrich had the happy idea of climbing to the top
of a stack of wood and letting himself down into the

258

opening between two stacks, Jean followed his example.
This had been their salvation, the gendarmes
beat about the wood for some time, and then made
off in the direction of Glacimont.

Night was falling, and Jean slept. Banks of clouds
rose before the wind, and hastened the darkness. A
flight of crows crossed their hiding-place, brushing
the tree tops. The flapping of their wings woke
M. Ulrich from the reverie into which he had fallen
while contemplating his nephew dressed in the uniform
of a German soldier, lying stretched on Alsatian soil.
He rose and gingerly climbed to the top of the stack.

"Well, uncle," asked Jean, waking up, "what do
you see?"

"Nothing, no gendarme's helmet, no douanier's
cap," whispered M. Ulrich. "I think they have lost
the scent; but with such persons one cannot be sure."

"And the valley of the Minières?"

"Appears to be deserted, my friend. No one on
the roads, no one in the fields. The keeper himself
must have gone home to supper—there is smoke
coming from his chimney. How do you feel, boy—valiant?"

"If we are pursued, you'll soon see."

"I don't think we shall be. But the hour has come,
my boy."

He added after a short interval, whilst he pretended
to listen: "Come up whilst we lay some plan of
campaign."

"You see below the village of the Minières?" asked
M. Ulrich, as Jean's head appeared above the branches
and turned towards the west.

"Yes."

"In spite of the mist and the darkness, can you
make out that on the other side the mountain is
covered partly with fir- and partly with beech-trees?"

"I guess it."

"We are going to make a half circle to avoid the

259

gardens and fields of the Minières, and when we are
just opposite that spot, you will only have to descend
two hundred yards and you will be in France."

Jean made no answer.

"That's the spot I marked out for you. See that
you recognise it. Over there round Raon-sur-Plaine,
the Germans have kept all the forests for themselves;
the barren lands they have left to France. On the
opposite side, facing us, there is an extensive strip of
meadow land which is French territory. I even saw
a deserted farmhouse, abandoned before the war,
I suppose. I'll go first."

"Excuse me, I'll go first."

"No; I assure you, my boy, that the danger is
equally great behind. I must be guide. I go first;
we'll avoid the pathways, and I will lead you carefully
to a point where you have only one thing to do:
go straight ahead and cross a road, then a few yards
of underwood, and beyond is French soil."

M. Ulrich embraced Jean silently and quickly; he
did not wish to lose control of himself, when all
depended on calmness.

"Come," he said.

They commenced the descent under cover of the tall
fir-trees which commenced just there. The slope was
strewn with obstacles, against which Jean or his
uncle frequently stumbled, moss-covered stones, fallen
and rotten trunks, broken branches, like claws
stretched out in the darkness to bar the way. Every
moment M. Ulrich stopped to listen and would
frequently look round, to make sure that Jean's tall
form was close behind him—it was too dark to see his
face.

"They'll be checkmated, uncle," whispered Jean.

"Not too fast, my Jean; we are not yet safe."

Still under cover, the fugitives reached the meadows
of the Minières, and began to ascend the mountain
opposite, but without quitting cover.

260

When M. Ulrich reached the summit he stopped
and sniffed the wind, which blew more freely through
the young trees.

"Do you smell the air of France?" he murmured,
in spite of the danger of talking.

A plain stretched in front of them, but was invisible;
they could distinguish the trees, which seemed like
stationary smoke below, and above were the scurrying
clouds. M. Ulrich cautiously began the descent,
listening eagerly. An owl flew by. They had to
make their way a short distance through a prickly
undergrowth which clung to their clothes.

Suddenly a voice in the forest called:

"Halt!"

M. Ulrich stooped, his hand on Jean's shoulder.

"Don't move," he whispered quickly. "I'll call
them off, by turning towards the Minières. As soon
as they follow me, get up, run off, cross the road and
then the little coppice—it's a straight line in front of
you. Adieu."

He rose up, took a few steps cautiously, and then
made off quickly through the woods.

"
Halt! Halt!
"

A report rang out, and as the noise died away
under the branches M. Ulrich's voice, already some
distance off, called:

"Missed."

At the same moment Jean Oberlé made a rush for
the frontier. Head lowered, seeing nothing, his
elbows squared, his chest lashed by the branches, he
ran with all his might. He passed within a few
inches of a man lying in ambush. The branches
were pushed aside, a whistle was blown, Jean redoubled
his efforts. He reached the road unawares;
another report rang out on the edge of the wood.
Jean rolled over on the edge of the copse. Cries
arose:

"Here he is! Here he is! Come."

261

Jean jumped up instantly and dived into the wood.
He thought he had stumbled over a rut. He leapt
into the copse. But his legs shook under him. He
felt with anguish a growing faintness overcoming
him. The cries of his pursuers rang in his ears,
everything swam before his eyes. He came upon an
open space, felt the fresh wind on his face and lost
consciousness.

Late at night he came to his senses. A storm was
raging over the forest; he saw that he was lying on a
bed of green boughs, in an empty room of the disused
farm, lit by a small lantern. A man was bending
over him. Jean realised that it was a French keeper.
His first sensation of fear was dissipated by the man's
welcome smile.

"Were other shots fired?" he inquired.

"No, no others."

"So much the better; then Uncle Ulrich is safe—he
accompanied me to the frontier. I was in the
army, but I have come to be a soldier in our own
land."

Jean saw that his tunic had been taken off and
that there was blood on his shirt. It hurt him to
breathe.

"What's wrong with me?" he asked.

"You were hit in the shoulder," said the man, who
would have wept if he had not been too ashamed to
do so. "It'll heal; fortunately, my comrade and I
were making our rounds when you stumbled into
the field. The doctor will be here at break of day—don't
be alarmed, my comrade has gone to fetch him.
Who are you?"

Half conscious, Jean Oberlé replied: "Alsace——"
but he could scarcely speak.

Rain was falling heavily; it hammered upon roof
and doors, upon the trees and rocks surrounding the
house. The tops of the trees shook and twisted in

262

the storm like seaweed tossed upon the bosom of the
ocean. The murmur of a million voices rose in
harmony over the mountains, and thundered upon
the night.

The wounded man listened—in his weakened state
what did he hear? He smiled:

"It is France," he murmured; "she sings to me,"
and he fell back with closed eyes awaiting the
dawn.

Printed by Hazell, Watson & Viney, Ld., London and Aylesbury, England.

End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Children of Alsace, by René Bazin

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHILDREN OF ALSACE ***

***** This file should be named 34957-h.htm or 34957-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/9/5/34957/

Produced by Hélène de Mink and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.

*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).

Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License.  You must require such a user to return or
destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.

Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.

Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate

Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.