The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Bail Jumper, by Robert J. C. Stead

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

Title: The Bail Jumper

Author: Robert J. C. Stead

Release Date: April 14, 2011 [EBook #35836]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BAIL JUMPER ***

Produced by Roger Frank and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdpcanada.net

THE BAIL JUMPER

THE BAIL JUMPER

BY

ROBERT J. C. STEAD

LONDON

T. FISHER UNWIN

ADELPHI—TERRACE

First published in
1914.

[
All rights reserved.
]

CONTENTS

CHAPTER I—A FRIEND AND AN ENEMY

CHAPTER II—SECRETS OF SUCCESS

CHAPTER III—TWO ON THE TRAIL

CHAPTER IV—CROTTON’S CROSSING

CHAPTER V—UNDER SUSPICION

CHAPTER VI—THE ARM OF THE LAW

CHAPTER VII—ONLY A BARNARDO BOY

CHAPTER VIII—A MYSTERIOUS ACQUAINTANCE

CHAPTER IX—A FUGITIVE

CHAPTER X—PLAYING THE GAME

CHAPTER XI—A FRIEND IN NEED

CHAPTER XII—LOVE—OR LAW?

CHAPTER XIII—GROPING

CHAPTER XIV—THE SACRIFICE OF SILENCE

CHAPTER XV—STILL PLAYING THE GAME

CHAPTER XVI—KIT MCKAY

CHAPTER XVII—THE HOMESTEAD LINE

CHAPTER XVIII—RIGHT ABOUT FACE!

CHAPTER XIX—THE LIGHT AT LAST

THE BAIL JUMPER

CHAPTER I—A FRIEND AND AN ENEMY

“We have felt the cold of winter—cursed by those who know it not—

We have braved the blizzard’s vengeance, dared its most deceptive plot;

We have learned that hardy races grow from hardy circumstance,

And we face a dozen dangers to attend a country dance;

Though our means are nothing lavish we have always time for play,

And our social life commences at the closing of the day;

We have time for thought and culture, time for friendliness and friend,

And we catch a broader vision as our aspirations blend.”

Prairie Born.

The short winter day was at an end. The
gloom of five-o’clock twilight gathered about the
frost-shrouded team and the farm sleigh which
crunched complainingly behind. For twenty
miles the team had plodded, steadily, laboriously—their
great heads undulating with their gait,
through the snow-blocked roads. The two fur-clad
men had long ago dropped all attempt at
conversation, and an occasional swing of their
arms, in an effort to revive the chilled circulation,
was the only evidence that the vital spark still
burned in their deep-bosomed bodies.

Suddenly a shape loomed through the grey
mist of the night. The horses lurched back upon
the double trees, their trace-chains clattering
with the slack. The shape took form; a frightened
team were seen plunging in the deep snow by the
roadside; the vehicles interlocked.

“What d’ye mean by crowdin’ me off the road
like that?” cried an angry voice, as a man’s
form rose in the opposing cutter.

“I didn’t crowd you off,” returned the driver
of the sleigh. “It was your own reckless speed
that got you into trouble. See, man, your nigh
horse is down; I’m thinkin’ he needs your
attention more than me.”

“But it’s you will have it first,” came the
savage reply, as the speaker sprang from the
cutter on to the side of the sleigh. But almost
before he landed a great bear-like arm shot out,
and the assailant would have fallen in a crumpled
mass beside his struggling horses, had not the
same arm jerked him forward into the sleigh.

In the deep gloom the two men thrust their
faces close, then drew suddenly back.

“And what way is this to greet a neighbour on
the public road, Hiram Riles?” demanded the
driver of the sleigh. “Ye’ll have strange tales
for the wife to-night, I’m thinkin’, by the breath
o’ you. Away home with ye, and mind the road.
It’s no fit night for a man in your shape, Hiram.”

The other murmured thickly, “I’m all right,”
but showed no further belligerent tendencies;
and when the team had been extricated from their
entanglement and set upon the road again, the
two old-timers parted in their opposite directions.

“It’s a sore temptin’ o’ Providence for a man
to venture on the country roads a winter’s night
without all his senses, Raymond,” said the elder
man, as they drove on. “See ye’re no guilty of
it. There’s many a tragedy blamed to the
climate that’s begun in the gin-shop.”

Already the town lights were peering mistily
through the haze, and in a few minutes the sleigh
drew up at the door of Gardiner’s general store.
The two men got out and lifted a trunk to the
sidewalk, when the elder resumed his seat in the
sleigh.

“Hadn’t you better put in the team and stay
all night, father? The horses are dog-tired, and
it’ll be better driving in the morning.”

“No, Raymond. I’ll push back as far as
Mathesons’, and spend the night there. I’m no
hand for stayin’ in town. I’ll be leavin’ now,
and mind, boy, we’re expectin’ you to make
good.”

The two men grasped hands in a moment’s
clasp; the next, sleigh and driver had disappeared
in the night.

The young man stood on the sidewalk, in the
momentary irresolution of the stranger. He had
been in Plainville before, and knew Mr. Gardiner
by sight; but then, he met him as a customer,
and now it was to be as employee. Overcoming
his bashfulness, he pushed open the store door and
entered. The white glare of the gasoline lights
revealed a boy of twenty-one, sturdy and well
set up, although of somewhat smaller stature
than the average in the country; with clean,
weather-beaten face and eyes accustomed to look
squarely before them. The nose rose strong
and resolute from the cheeks, but in the quiet
mouth there was a lurking sadness suggestive of
melancholy.

Raymond Burton unbuttoned his coat and
threw back the collar, when a cheery voice said,
“Hello, Burton, you got in? Hardly expected
you to-night, the roads are so full. Throw off
your coat and warm yourself, and then go up to
Mrs. Goode’s boarding-house and make yourself
at home. I have arranged accommodation for
you there. She is one of our best customers, and
she runs a good house.”

There was nothing stand-offish about Gardiner.
He met his employees on a basis of friendship and
equality, and had a ready way with him that was
continually swelling his list of customers, notwithstanding
the competition of the Sempter
Trading Co., the oldest and strongest mercantile
firm in the town. Indeed, Gardiner was little
more than a boy himself, who, a few years before,
had come up from one of the Eastern Provinces
to engage in business in the West.

Gardiner walked around to the boarding-house
with Burton, after giving a boy a quarter to
deliver the trunk. Mrs. Goode, herself, answered
the bell. She was a sprightly, motherly woman,
with a quick step, a ready tongue, and a hearty
laugh; hair that hinted of fifty, but a smile that
said she was twenty-five; and, withal, not
entirely blind to her own accomplishments.

“This is my new clerk, Mr. Burton, Mrs.
Goode,” said Gardiner. “I brought him here
because I knew the house you run. He has
driven most of the day, and just needs one of
your hot suppers to make him feel the luck he has
in being one of Mrs. Goode’s boarders.”

“Well, I do give a good supper, if I say it
myself,” said Mrs. Goode. “No hungry people
in my house, if I know it. But you want to go
to your room. Alice, show Mr. Butler to room
sixteen. Sweet sixteen, I call it, and I always
save it for the young men,” she added, with a
coquettish glance at her new customer.

Alice Goode, aged eighteen, emerged from the
dining-room, and Burton having been introduced,
as “Mr. Garden’s new clerk,” she demurely led
the young man upstairs. “I hope you will like
your room,” she said, and, the business obligations
of the situation discharged, continued, “Do you
dance?”

“Why, a little,” Burton admitted. “But I
never learned, properly. Just country dances,
you know.”

“Gee, that’s all is any good, anyway. None
of your city camel-strides for me, but a good
turkey-in-the-straw alamen-lefter an’ you can
count me in every trip. There’s a hop on at
Grant’s to-night. Going?”

“I’m afraid I haven’t an invitation, and I
don’t even know the people.”

“That don’t matter. There’ll be some loads
goin’ out from town, an’ you better just roll into
one of them. It’s about five miles, an’ the ride
will be dandy. Besides, Grant’s are the best
there is, an’ you’ll be as welcome as a rich sinner
in church. The hoe-down is in honour of their
niece, who has come out from the East, an’s
goin’ to live with them. They say she’s pretty
an’ a swell singer. It’ll be quite a show-ring
affair, I expect, but all to the good.”

“Al-i-c-e!” cried her mother. “Set them
good silver knives an’ forks, cause Mr. Burtle’s
here, an’ get a two-step on yuh now or never a
foot will yuh go to the dance to-night.”

Alice disappeared, and Burton was left to examine
his quarters. They were small and cheaply
furnished, but comfortable enough. “At any
rate,” he soliloquised, “I shall not be very lonely,
if Miss Alice is a sample of Plainville society.”

The smell from Mrs. Goode’s supper table justified
that lady’s high opinion of it. When Burton
came in he was introduced to each boarder in
turn. There were two lady school-teachers, two
bank clerks, a couple of store employees, a young
lawyer, and several who might be termed “not
classified.” A spirit of good fellowship prevailed,
and Burton was surprised at the point to which
banter was carried. Alice waited on the table,
while Mrs. Goode presided in the kitchen. Mr.
Goode, a tall, cadaverous man, moved shyly about
the house, in which he occupied a minor position.
It was understood that Mrs. Goode held him in
much disfavour on account of his emaciated
appearance, which she felt to be a reflection upon
her boarding-house.

“How can I expect to prosper when I have a
walkin’ sign-post like that?” she lamented to her
neighbour, Mrs. O’Brien.

“Fade him on breakfast food with a little ‘barm’
in til’t,” was that honest woman’s advice.

After supper Burton was reading in his room,
when a knock came at the door, and Gardiner
burst in.

“Say, Burton, come with me to the dance at
Grant’s to-night,” said the visitor. “I’m driving
out in my cutter, and I want company. They’re
O.K. people, and there’s a new-comer out there
we all want to see. As for an invitation—well,
I have instructions to see that all the desirables
are asked, and I figure you in that bunch. Come
along. The sooner you get acquainted here the
better, both for yourself and from a business
point of view.”

Burton surmised that the “business point of
view” had a good deal to do with most of
Gardiner’s attitudes, but he was glad enough to
accept the invitation. The drive, in a top cutter,
behind a spirited team, was so different from the
dreary monotony of the afternoon that Raymond
could scarce believe it was the same country.
There were many rigs on the road, but the trail
was banked so high (for in prairie countries the
winter roads rise high above the surrounding
snow) that it was impossible to pass, and before
reaching Grant’s the scattered rigs had gathered
into a long procession.

The Grant boys, George and Harry, were at the
stable with lanterns, and hurried about, exchanging
greetings while they wrestled with
frozen tugs, and directed drivers blinking in the
light. The young ladies became the charge of
Susy Grant, who bundled them in at the front door
of the house, while her brothers herded the swains
into the kitchen, for be it known, that while
women may be ushered into parlour or bedroom,
the kitchen is the proper reception place for men.
There they sit on stools and wood-boxes, or crowd
into corners, exchanging anecdotes or revelling in
amusement furnished by the wits of the countryside.
Burton was introduced by his employer to
a few of the men and boys nearest by, but none
Waited for an introduction when there was occasion
to speak. They were a mixed company,
some from the town, and others from the country
district in which the Grant homestead lay, but all
were acquainted and most were friends. Presently
the door opened and a new-comer ambled
in; a strange human contrivance, half man, half
boy, who tripped over his long coat on the doorstep
and projected himself in a heap in the midst
of the laughing crowd.

“Hello, London, what flew up an’ hit you?”
said one, as the boy scrambled clumsily to his
feet. “Been to town on your way over?”

“Hit’s my bloomin’ coat,” explained London.
“Hi fall w’en hever Hi try to stand hup.”

“Take it ’hoff,’” shouted the crowd, as London
proceeded to remove his outer garments. This
operation revealed the fact that London, as the
Barnardo lad was popularly called, although a boy
in stature, aspired to the wearing of man’s clothes,
with the result that his trousers were turned up
almost to his knees and his coat hung down
below them, the two extremes meeting, as it were,
about a foot from the floor. His commodious
boots had been recently blacked, and a heavy
brass chain stretched from pocket to pocket of
his vest; but, most glorious of all, was the bright
red tie speared with a pin in the form of a horseshoe
and intended, doubtless, to indicate that its
wearer was a sport of the first blood.

“How did you get away to-night, London?
Couldn’t Riles find anything for you to do?”

“’E could. ’E’ll find work for them as
comes to ’is funeral. But ’e’s comin’ ’imself,
an’ has Hi was specially named in Missus Grant’s
hinvitation”—this with an air of profound
importance—“’e could ’ardly ’elp letting me
come, ’specially has Hi said Hi would burn down
the ’ouse hif they came with-hout me.”

“Good boy, London,” was the comment.
“That’s the way to bring him to time.”

“Hi drownded a pig hin the well one day ’e
went to town an’ wouldn’t take me,” said London,
proudly. “Hand another time——”

What happened another time was never made
public, for at that moment Big Jack McTavish,
official caller-off and master of ceremonies at
every dance in the Plainville district for a dozen
years, strode into the dining-room and shouted,
“Partners for the Circashyun Circle.”

The men from the kitchen swarmed into the
dining-room and parlour, which had been cleared
of carpets and furniture. The piano stood in the
hall, where it was presided over by Miss Green,
the school-teacher; on a chair alongside sat old
Dave Cottrell, the fiddler, who had spent the
sixty-odd years of his life in struggle to draw the
maddening music from his violin, and had
succeeded in that, and in nothing else; along the
stairs, and in the bedrooms above, were crowded
the girls and young women. This was partners’
dance, and in a few moments the floor was
crowded. Then the music struck up and the
feet kept time, and the dance had started. In
the intricacies of the Circassian Circle every
couple is made to dance with every other couple,
so that all have a chance to exchange greetings
before the first set is over, and it affords as
appropriate an opening selection as Old Hundred
at morning service. Before Big Jack’s ample
hands came together as a signal that the first
dance was ended the last atom of reserve had
been swept away, and everybody was in tune to
make a night of it. Gardiner danced with every
lady in the room, from Alice Goode to little Miss
Green, who was persuaded to leave the piano for
just one set, and even London found young women
who did not scorn his clumsy advances. The
dances were quadrilles, lancers, schottisches and
reels, with an occasional waltz or two-step just to
indicate that if they did not give city dances the
place of prominence it was through choice, not
ignorance.

Among the ladies was one whom Burton knew
to be the guest of honour, even before he was
told; a young woman his own age, or older,
dressed in a creamy white, with a single real rose
in her hair. Her dark, full eye-lashes, the finely
shaped nose and ears, the firm but sympathetic
mouth, electrically responsive to every wave of
emotion of her alert brain, were not lost upon the
country youth. There were many graceful
dancers, many radiant, happy-faced girls, but
hers was a grace distinct from theirs and a
happiness more subtle, more delightful, more
pervading. The little tricks of speech which
distinguish between the intelligent and the well-educated;
the little delicate courtesies which
distinguish between the well-meaning and the
well-bred; the inborn and self-effacing refinement
which is the touchstone of true culture—these
were evidenced in every word, every motion,
every gesture. Burton forgot about dancing,
forgot that he was expected to dance, as he drank
in a music unheard by the less discerning ears
about him, and revelled in an intoxication not of
wine. It was not until Gardiner came to his
corner and, with a friendly slap, said, “Burton,
old man, get up and dance. What are you
moping for?” that he was recalled to his surroundings.

“I’m not moping; just dreaming,” he said,
springing to his feet.

“Never dream while you are awake; it doesn’t
pay. There’s Alice Goode; she has glanced
your way a dozen times—and there’s worse girls
than Alice.”

Burton took the hint, and in a few moments
was threading his way through the meshes of a
quadrille amid the pepsin aroma of the sweet
Alice. He discharged his obligation with credit,
thanked his partner courteously, and retired into
his corner until supper was called at midnight.

Mrs. Grant supervised the work in the kitchen,
while willing, although not always skilful, hands
assisted in the distribution of the refreshments.
This was the stage of the evening’s entertainment
at which the social spirit flowed highest; men
and women, boys and girls, sat or stood about
in disorganised groups, eating sandwiches, cake
and pie, and consuming great cups of hot coffee,
the while sharpening their wits at each other’s
expense and joining as heartily in the laugh when
it happened to be at their own.

A middle-aged gentleman whose appearance
stirred some old memory in Burton, seeing the
young man seated a little by himself, came over
and engaged in conversation.

“If my old eyes do not deceive me, you are a
son of John Burton’s,” said he.

“I am Raymond Burton. And you—surely I
should remember you?”

“Man, man, I know your father like my own
brother. Sure you’ve heard him speak of Dick
Matheson? We shantied together on the Muddywaski,
and a better man than John Burton never
rode a log in the Ottaway country, which is sayin’
a good deal. I do not see you dancin’ much.
I’m thinkin’ you will have your father’s quiet
way; like a sleepy kitty, he was, when left alone,
but a roarin’ lion when put to the bit. But times
are changed, and men win more now with soft
speech than we did with hard knuckles. And
whichever the game, a Burton should be to the
fore. Grant,” he said, addressing the head of
the house, as he was about to pass, “this is
Raymond Burton. I knew his father on the
Muddywaski.” To honest Dick Matheson no
further credentials seemed necessary.

“Glad to meet you,” said Mr. Grant, cordially.
“Have you been introduced to my niece? Dear
me, I’m afraid the reception committee are too
busy with the sandwiches. Myrtle, just a
moment,” as the young lady emerged from an
eddy of humanity, “let me present Mr. Burton.
Mr. Burton—Miss Vane,” and the two elder
gentlemen allowed themselves to be swept into
the vortex of the crowd.

Miss Vane took Burton’s hand in a friendly
grip—a grip that was not afraid to speak of the
soul behind it. “I am a stranger here, and I
meet so many people, but I shall remember you,”
she said in quiet, musical tones, in such striking
contrast, Burton thought, to the strident country
voices about him.

“I am a stranger too,” the young man answered
for want of a better thing to say.

“Then we at least have something in common,”
said Miss Vane, and it occurred to Raymond that
he had said the best thing possible.

In a moment the young lady was claimed by
other guests. But Burton was satisfied.

When supper was over and the conversation
began to lag, some one suggested that Miss Vane
should sing. The proposal was received with
applause.

“If it will give you any pleasure,” said the
young lady. Miss Green resumed her seat at the
piano, and in a few moments human tones such
as never before had been heard in Plainville
district filled the sturdy house from kitchen to
attic. Deep, melting, melodious tones—the
cultured expression of the greatest musical
instrument God Himself could devise—the human
voice! To what degrading uses it is so often
put! She sang, not the popular airs of the day,
nor classical selections beyond the ken of her
audience, however dear to herself, but the old
Scotch songs which are strong enough to force a
way to the roughest intellect, yet fine enough to
stir the slightest chord in the galaxy of human
accomplishment; deep enough to send men
raging to battle and gentle enough to croon little
children to sleep. As she wandered on and on,
through the heroic, the pathetic, the tenderly
sentimental, the dancers sat in the rapture of a
spell as new to them as the angel chorus to the
shepherds of Palestine, and when at last the low
voice poured forth the sanctified lament of “The
Land o’ the Leal,” Big Jack’s wife went sobbing
to the kitchen, and Mrs. Grant slipped a motherly
arm around little Mrs. Dale, whose misty eyes were
seeing a year-old mound and a little white slab
that stared stolidly through the snow:

“Our bonnie bairn’s there, Jean,

She was baith gude and fair, Jean,

And oh, we grudged her sair,

Tae the Land o’ the Leal.”

Even London forgot to dangle his watch-chain,
and his employer, Riles, who had sold his soul to
Mammon twenty years ago, laughed quietly at
the tear on the boy’s cheek.

When the singer had finished, and the spell was
broken by the commonplace talk which someone
always finds necessary to introduce on such
occasions, Dick Matheson got up and said, “We
have all listened to Miss Vane with great delight,
and feel that she is no longer a stranger among us.
But we have another stranger here to-night, and
it is but fair that we should hear him too. Burton,
let’s hear from you. Your father could sing
‘The Death of Jimmie Whalen’ with any man
in the shanties. I knew his father on the Muddywaski,”
he explained.

Burton blushed and made excuses, but a
popular suggestion in such a company is tantamount
to a command. Surrendering to the
inevitable, he arose, saying, “I do not sing at all,
but I will repeat some verses, if you insist.”

“We insist,” came the chorus, and, when
silence was secured, he began in a strong, human
voice, lacking the finish of culture, but vibrant
with sympathy with the spirit of the poem:

“This is the ship of pearl, which, poets feign,

Sails the unshadowed main—

The venturous bark that flings

On the sweet summer wind its purpled wings

In gulfs enchanted, where the siren sings——”

He had not repeated four lines until he discovered
that he had made a mistake. The soul
may respond to music it cannot comprehend, as a
rusty wire may thrill with vibrations from the
throat of a Melba, but the mind of man makes no
answer to poetry beyond its grasp. Burton was
forcing himself against an immovable resistance;
projecting a thought, live, warm, charged with
the germs of a million inspirations, against a
stone wall of mental vacuity. And yet he was
sustained, as in an electric coil a single wire
thinner than a human hair may support the
current that flashes on two oceans at once, and
he proceeded. In the second stanza his eyes met
Miss Vane’s, and heaven was opened before him.
She understood! Her mind was pacing the
“caves of thought” with his; her mentality was
producing the current that he transformed into
speech. He remembered the advice of a great
orator—“Speak to one soul in your audience,
and forget all others,” and he obeyed. Not again
did he look at Miss Vane; he dared not double-circuit
the delicate current that carried him on,
but he poured forth the solemn cadences of
Holmes’ great poem with a fire and enthusiasm
that commanded the attention of the company
until, focusing his energy in the last stanza,
the walls trembled with the vibrations of his
intensity:

“Build thee more stately mansions, O my soul,

As the swift seasons roll;

Leave thy low-vaulted past!

Let each new temple, nobler than the last,

Shut thee from heaven with a dome more vast,

Till thou at length art free,

Leaving thine outgrown shell by life’s unresting sea.”

There was a clapping of hands, which Burton
knew to be a courtesy rather than a compliment,
and Susy Grant went so far as to say that it was a
very nice piece. Matheson justified all by
repeating that he “knew his father on the Muddywaski,”
but the young man cared not what they
said or thought. For a dozen years he had spent
the long winter evenings on the farm in reading
and self-culture, thereby opening to himself a
door through which none of these could follow.
None—save one. And she had followed. She
understood!

The dancing was then revived, more vigorously,
if possible, than in the earlier part of the evening.
Burton noticed that Gardiner twice engaged Miss
Vane as his partner, but himself did not dare
claim so great a boon. He was but a country
boy, and Gardiner was a town man, a business
man, and—his employer.

Before the dance broke up a laugh was caused
by the discovery of London in the kitchen, deep
amid the sandwiches and pie.

“You must be hungry, London,” said one
of the young men, as a group gathered round
him.

“You bet Hi ham,” answered the lad, unabashed.
“Hi ’aven’t ’ad wot you’d call a decent
meal hin a month.”

“Fill your pockets, then; there’s lots there,”
was the good advice given, which London proceeded
to take.

At the back of the group was a coarse, animal-looking
man, with heavy, scowling features and
an eye whose natural repulsiveness was heightened
by a deep scar along the brow, which caused the
livid eye-lids to loop outward as they approached
the nose. He noted the incident, and as he heard
the conversation a look of malignant hate deepened
in the glaring eyes, and the mouth twitched in a
brutal lust for revenge. It was Riles.

At last it was time to go home, and the gathering
broke up. Gardiner lingered a moment with
Miss Vane, and Burton proceeded to the stable.
On the way he passed near by the Grant summer-house,
now little more than a great mound of snow.
Through his fur covering he fancied he heard a
strange noise; he turned down the collar, and
listened. Unmistakable sounds of violence, of
muffled cursing, of hard, short breathing, came
from beyond the summer-house. Burton ran in
that direction, and the gibbous moon which now
shone dimly through the scattering clouds revealed
a form in the snow and another above kicking
viciously, endeavouring to sink the heavy boots
in the face of the fallen man. As the victim
threw up his arms to protect his face he received
the blows in the chest, driving the breath from
his lungs in great gasps. Burton, seeing how
desperate was the situation, rushed upon the
assailant, and, crossing his arms about the other’s
neck, gripped his throat in a strangle-hold that
sent him to his knees in a moment. Every
effort to break loose was vain; the vital supply
of air was shut off, and in a few seconds the big
frame rolled helplessly in Burton’s arms. The
muscles relaxed, the head fell back, the face
turned up to the pale light of the moon, and the
eyes, glaring and misshapen, glared into his. It
was Riles.

London, seeing help at hand, sent up a lusty
shriek, and in a few minutes a big crowd had
gathered about the combatants. Gardiner
hurried to Burton’s side and whispered, “Let
him go, that’s not what I hired you for.” Burton
released his grip and Riles fell in the snow, London
sending up a fresh series of shrieks when he saw
his oppressor again at liberty. The big man soon
recovered himself and scrambled to his feet, and
the crowd rapidly dispersed. But before Riles
went he found occasion to hiss in Burton’s ear,
“You got the drop on me that time, young
meddler, but I’ll square it with ye yet, if I do
murder for it.”

Burton laughed, but the words left an unpleasant
taste.

CHAPTER II—SECRETS OF SUCCESS

“I envy no man what he fairly wins;

In life’s hard battle each must fight his fight;

But some, methinks, are honoured for their sins,

And some ignored because they do the right;

Some seem to find their fortune ready-made,

And others miss it, howsoe’er desired—

The man’s a fool who thinks that he can grade

Society by what it has acquired:

The noblest souls are often least renowned;

In humble homes God’s greatest men are found.”

Prairie Born.

A month’s experience in the general store
business brought much new light to Burton. He
had imagined that a man who stood behind the
counter, wearing good clothes, talking pleasantly
to ladies and joking with men, commencing work
at eight in the morning and quitting, well, he
didn’t just know when—such a man surely was a
favoured individual. He had contrasted a business
career with life on the farm: Up at five;
breakfast by lamplight; cows and horses to care
for in evil-smelling stables; innumerable chores
before the day’s work was properly begun; then
the long, heavy labour, in crackling frosts, in suns
that burned the flesh like a searing iron, in
miserable, damp, murkiness; in dust laden winds
that filled the eyes and choked the lungs, in all
the numberless vagaries of climate; the coarse
clothing demanded by such a vocation; the plain
fare and simple home comforts; and then, tired
to the point of exhaustion, bed, which was alike
the end of one day’s labours and the starting
point of another round of continuous toil, irksome
and often ill-requited. Such comparisons had,
to some extent, influenced his decision to seek
his future in a life of commercial activity; and,
while he had not admitted any regret, there now
were nights when he felt that a good day’s labour
in the harvest field or on the plough would be a
welcome and refreshing diversion. He had not
guessed that a business career demanded so much
physical energy; it was a new discovery to him
that the closing of a difficult sale was more
exhausting than forking to the top of a stack.
Nevertheless, he had set his hand to the plough,
and he was determined to finish the furrow, and
the very knowledge that physical energy played
so great a part in the commercial battle of the
age came to him as an encouragement and a fresh
hope. But where bodily strength and a fair
degree of intelligence might, unaided, win success
in agricultural pursuits, he had discovered that
another element was absolutely essential in the
business world. It was tact. No energy was
sufficiently indomitable, no brain sufficiently farseeing
and alert, to win success in the surroundings
in which he now found himself without the
magic touchstone of tact. Energy, intelligence,
and tact; these three, but the greatest of these
is tact.

It was in the middle of winter, the dull season
after the Christmas trade, and before the spring
activity begins, and Gardiner had allowed a
higher priced clerk to go, believing that he could
handle all the business with the assistance of
Burton. This, although it entailed more work,
was to the young man’s advantage, as it brought
him into close and almost constant contact with
his employer, and forced him to attempt many
things that he would otherwise have left to more
experienced hands. Already he found it unnecessary
to summon Gardiner when a lady
asked for three-quarters of a yard of velvet, cut
on the bias; could discuss the merits of Dongola
and calf with the assurance of an expert, and tell
at a glance whether goods would “wash.” But
there were other things he found more difficult
to learn.

Mrs. Mandle was in search of cotton—good,
strong cotton, not too dear. Burton showed her
an eight-cent web which he thought conformed
to her specifications. After a lengthy examination,
the good lady admitted that it satisfied her
in some ways, but not in others. “The price is
about what I wanted,” she said, “but the quality
is very poor.”

“Indeed, we have sold a great deal of that
cotton, and it seems to give good satisfaction.”

“Oh, so it might, for some work, but it hardly
suits me. I guess I will just step around to the
Sempter Trading Company and see what they
can let me have.”

“Well, look at this,” said Burton, producing
another web.

“Yes, that’s about what I wanted. And what
will the price on that be?”

“Ten cents.”

“Ten cents! What a dreadful price for a
piece of cotton. My, everything is getting so
dear, I can’t see what we farmers are comin’ to.
Mrs. Winters sent to Winnipeg for hers, and you
ought to see it—the very loveliest cotton, and
only six and a half cents, and a box of slate
pencils thrown in for the children. No, dear me,
I couldn’t pay such a price as that. I might, yes,
I would be willing to pay eight cents for it, the
same as the other, now, an’ you’re makin’ a good
profit on it at that.”

“I am sorry, Madam,” said Burton, trying not
to be annoyed at her attempt to take charge of
the firm’s business, “but our prices are as close as
we find it possible to handle the goods, especially
on staples like cotton. That is a really good
article; may I cut off the amount you require?”

“Yes, at eight cents——”

Burton returned his scissors to his pocket, and
the lady started for the door, when Gardiner, who
had finished with his customer and stood listening
to the dialogue, called her back.

“Don’t be in a hurry, Mrs. Mandle,” he said,
in a winning voice that appealed to the lady’s
instinct for flattery, “there is a web here that
Mr. Burton didn’t know about, and perhaps it
will suit you.”

Gardiner went behind the counter and pulled
out the very eight-cent piece that had been
already shown.

“Now here is a ten-cent line that I can
recommend to you,” he said, leaning well across
the counter and speaking in a confidential voice.
Burton was about to point out his mistake, when
something in the eye of his employer warned him
that the transaction had been taken out of his
hands. “This is a regular ten-cent line, and
extra value at that, but I got something a little
special on it by taking an unusual quantity from
the factory at one time. Of course, we generally
figure when we get a snap on a purchase that at
least part of the bargain should be ours, but with
an old and valued customer like you hard and
fast rules don’t always apply. It’s something I
really should not do, but under the circumstances
I will let you have anything up to twenty yards
off this web for eight cents.”

Mrs. Mandle beamed with pleasure. “That’s
like you, Mr. Gardiner, I always find that I can
deal with you. Not that I have anything against
this young man——” she continued, as though
anxious not to place Burton in an unfavourable
light.

“Oh, that’s all right,” laughed Gardiner.
“Mr. Burton has general instructions applying
to our regular customers, but when he knows you
better he will meet your requirements as well as
I do, I am sure. Now shall it be twenty yards?”

“I only wanted twelve,” Mrs. Mandle confessed,
“but since it is what you might call a bit of a
bargain, I believe I will just take the twenty.”

Gardiner smiled genially and measured off the
cloth, but Burton observed that as he did so he
had a crook in each thumb, which allowed about
a half an inch of over-lap on each yard measured.
Mrs. Mandle paid for her purchase, and left with
a smile to Gardiner and a friendly nod to Burton,
and said she would probably be in in a few days
with a case of eggs and some other produce.

“Bring them right in here, Mrs. Mandle,” said
Gardiner, as he closed the door after her. Coming
back to the counter, he said to Burton, half-apologetically,
“I forgot to tell you, Burton, to
put up all prices on Mrs. Mandle. She is one of
those dear souls who, as a matter of principle,
will never buy unless they think they are getting
some concession in price. It’s a simple matter
to raise the price and drop it again, and it pleases
them.”

Burton flushed a little. He had been brought
up to believe that strict honesty was the best
policy, and it seemed to him that the very
foundations of his conception of business success
were being swept away. These great merchant
princes, who were lauded in the papers and
welcomed in the most distinguished circles, were
they men of high standards and noble principles,
or were they consummate liars and cheats?

“I do not mean to question your methods,” he
said, at length, “but—is it, such a transaction as
that, I mean, exactly honest?”

If he expected Gardiner to be angry at his
frankness his fear was soon dispelled.

“Why not?” laughed his employer. “The
cotton is ours; we can sell it for what we like,
can’t we? If we ask fifty cents for it that’s our
business, or if we choose to give it away, that’s
our business. These people who are always
trying to beat us down really don’t mean any
harm, and we don’t do them any harm. We just
make them happy. Take Mrs. Mandle, for instance.
She thinks she saved forty cents, and
that thought will lighten her troubles for a week.
As a matter of fact, she bought eight yards more
than she needed, but no doubt it will come handy
sometime.”

“I think I would give a real cut, if I pretended
to,” persisted Burton.

“You can’t afford to. See, that ten-cent
cotton costs me six and three-quarter cents. You
may think I could sell at eight and get out on it.
I can’t. Let me explain my position, so you will
understand it better. Last year I sold thirty-seven
thousand dollars worth of goods. My net
profits were four thousand five hundred dollars, or
just about thirteen per cent. Now, no matter
what an article may cost me, if I give fifteen per
cent. off the established selling price, I am losing
money. Isn’t that clear? And as some people
have the bargain mania, we have to give them
fictitious bargains, just as the doctor prescribes
fictitious drugs for patients who think they can’t
get well unless they take something.”

Burton said no more, but he was not convinced.

A few days later a customer asked for a pound
of fifty-cent black bulk tea. Burton found the
fifty-cent bin empty. “I’m sorry,” said he,
“but we appear to be out of the fifty-cent line.
How would this suit?” and he was about to
offer another brand when Gardiner, who had
overheard the remark, called across the store,
“That’s fifty-cent tea in the left-hand bin.”

Now the left-hand bin contained thirty-five
cent tea, and Burton knew it.

To refuse to fill the order from the bin indicated
would amount to resigning his position, yet he
was determined not to take advantage of any
customer. For a moment he hesitated. Then
he weighed the tea out of the thirty-five cent bin,
but he gave the customer a pound and seven
ounces.

Under the grocery counter were a number of
swinging standards on which sugar and salt
barrels were swung in and out as desired. The
reserve supply was kept in a warehouse at the
back, and on a quiet day it occurred to Burton
to bring in a number of barrels and fill all the
standards. Gardiner observed him and suggested
that the barrels should be left outside until needed.
Burton answered that he thought it would be an
advantage to have them in; besides, it was damp
in the shed, and the sugar showed some disposition
to cake, while the salt became very
hard.

“Yes,” admitted Gardiner, “but it will weigh
two per cent. more as it is than after it stands in
here for a week, and we handle sugar on less than
five per cent.”

In selling a gallon of coal oil Burton discovered
that the oil pump brought rather less than a
gallon at a stroke. He reported the matter,
thinking the pump needed repairing.

“How much do you estimate it is running
short?” asked his employer.

“About five per cent.”

“That’s too bad. It should be ten.”

“But surely you don’t mean to short-measure
our customers? When we sell a gallon, we sell
a gallon, do we not?”

“Theoretically, yes. But some things do not
work out in practice quite the same as in theory.
Look here, Burton,” and Gardiner’s voice took
on a serious tone, “I have sold coal oil for ten
years, for myself and others, and in all that time
I have never opened a barrel that gave the
merchant full measure. If he gets off with a ten
per cent. loss he can consider himself lucky. I
have seen barrels that were quite empty, yet we
had to pay for full measurement. It’s all very
well to have principles and theories, but what
are you to do when you are face to face with such
conditions?”

“Raise the price until it will show a profit, but
give full measurement.”

Gardiner laughed. “You wouldn’t sell a
barrel in a year,” he said. “The public would
refuse to pay your price. They would rather be
cheated, and not know it, than pay an honest
price, and know it. The public bring these things
upon themselves. They place a premium upon
dishonesty. They will actually coax a man to
lie to them. Tell a man, or better still, a woman,
that you are selling a two dollar article for a
dollar, and she will fight her way to the counter;
but tell her the truth, that you are selling an
article worth a dollar for a dollar, and she will
pass your store in search of a merchant who has
fictions more to her liking. If the public want
us to play fair, why do they refuse to set the
example, or at least show some appreciation of
fair treatment? They are never tired of telling
of the dishonesty of their merchants; I could
relate deeds of trickery resorted to by customers
which make the devices we practise look like the
harmless sport of little children. But, to return
to the subject, we could adulterate the coal oil
and give them full measurement, if that would
please you better.”

“But isn’t adulteration against the law?”

“So are turkey raffles.”

Burton winced. He had attended one of these
country gatherings the previous evening, and
come home considerably lighter in pocket although
without any feathered trophies.

“I do not mean to be personal,” Gardiner said,
kindly enough. “I merely want to show that,
after all, the law takes very little notice of the man
who steals in a gentlemanly way. Robbery is
an art, and it is the crude thief that gets into
trouble.”

“Speaking of adulteration reminds me of one
of my employers, who was a druggist as well as
a general store keeper. He was an honest, well-intended
fellow, but he didn’t propose to let any
one get very much the better of him. Now it
happened that the rural municipality required a
thousand ounces of strychnine, put up in half-ounce
bottles, for gopher poison. The drug at
that time was worth fifty-eight cents an ounce
wholesale, and when the council came to the boss
for his price he quoted seventy-five cents, which
was not unreasonable, seeing that he had to
furnish the bottles and labels and do the bottling—not
a job to be desired. But these councillors,
being anxious to safeguard the interests of their
good friends the ratepayers, and incidentally
give a lesson in good bargaining, sent to the
city for prices. When they came back and told
the boss they could get their supply for sixty
cents I expected he would tell them to go
and get it, and to make certain other calls while
they were about it, but he just laughed and
said if the city firm could do it for that he
guessed he could, and he took the order.
And he cleared three hundred dollars on that
transaction.”

“How could that be possible, if the strychnine
cost him fifty-eight cents, and he sold for sixty?”
queried Burton.

“Because Epsom salts cost him four cents a
pound and the gophers never knew the difference.”

Both men laughed, and at that moment the
store door opened, and a farmer, furred and frost
covered, struggled in with a case of eggs.

“Where will you have the eggs, Mr. Gardiner?”
he called, kicking the door shut with his heel.

“Just set the case down, Mr. Mandle, we will
attend to them,” but the obliging Mr. Mandle
insisted on carrying it to the rear of the store.

“The missus will be in in a minute, an’ fight
it out with ye,” announced Mr. Mandle. “She
got off at the post-office. She’s wantin’ a bit
coat, an’ she’s been writin’ to the city for prices,
an’ I’m thinkin’ she’s expectin’ an answer to-day.
But just let me have half a pound of MacDonald
chewin’ an’ she can do as she likes with the
rest.”

In a few minutes Mrs. Mandle appeared, and
was promptly taken in hand by Gardiner. The
selling of the coat was, as he expected, a difficult
matter, but she was finally persuaded that a
regular $24.50 coat at $20 was good buying.
The price-tag, which Gardiner had deftly slipped
off the coat before showing it, was marked $18.

“I suppose it isn’t necessary to ask you,”
said the merchant, after the purchases had been
wrapped up, “but, just to assure ourselves,
those eggs are all quite fresh, aren’t they?”

“Fresh? My goodness, there isn’t one of
them ten days old. Our hens are laying wonderful
for this time of the year.”

“That’s what comes of understanding poultry,”
remarked Gardiner. But as soon as his customer
was gone he told Burton to take the eggs down to
the cellar and candle them.

“She sold me a six-pound block of ice in a
tub of butter once, and I’ve watched her ever
since,” he explained.

When Burton had finished his task he reported.

“Two dozen and a half bad, and six dozen
short. There were two layers without any eggs
in them.”

Gardiner made a rapid calculation. “Eight-and-a-half
times thirty—is two-fifty-five. And
I did her two dollars on the coat. There’s fifty-five
cents coming to me yet.”

“What shall I do with the bad eggs, Mr.
Gardiner?” asked the clerk.

“Put them under the counter and sell them to
the restaurants,” were the instructions.

“That last barrel of vinegar seems to be very
strong,” remarked Gardiner one day.

“I should say it is,” Burton agreed. “I
took down a quart for Mrs. Goode yesterday,
and she said it was the strongest she had ever
bought since she came West.”

No more was said on the subject, but in the
afternoon Burton, who was standing at the front
of the store dreamily surveying the wintry landscape,
saw his employer tip the vinegar barrel
on end, knock out the faucet, substitute a funnel,
and pour in two pails of water. At that moment
the merry sound of sleigh bells was heard, and a
cutter and dashing team swung down the street.
Burton caught a hurried glimpse as they passed.
It was Mr. Grant and Miss Vane.

And then, by some strange law of telepathy or
suggestion, the words went throbbing through
his brain:

“Build thee more stately mansions, O my soul,

As the swift seasons roll——”

The door opened, and with a smothered
execration the young man turned to wait on a
lady who was quite sure that in the city three
spools were sold for ten cents.

CHAPTER III—TWO ON THE TRAIL

“We have felt the April breezes warm along the plashy plains;

We have mind-marked to the cadence of the falling April rains;

We have heard the crash of water where the snow-fed rivers run,

Seen a thousand silver lakelets lying shining in the sun;

We have known the resurrection of the Springtime in the land,

Heard the voice of Nature calling and the words of her command,

Felt the thrill of Springtime twilight and the vague, unfashioned thought

That the season’s birthday musters from the hopes we had forgot.”

Prairie Born.

“Plainville has a sure-enough singer at
last,” declared Alice Goode to her mother the
morning after the Grant party.

“That’ll be the new-comer at Grand’s,” said
Mrs. Goode, who had a talent, amounting almost
to genius, for mispronouncing proper names.

“You’re on,” Alice agreed. “I don’t claim to
be much of a judge of warbles, but I like her
samples.”

“You’ll be gettin’ her into the choir, for the
Grands are Presbyterians. You want to speak
to the minister about her, Alice.”

“Sure I do, but it means war with Mrs. Fairley.
She’s led the choir so long and so far she’s sure
to flare up at the prospect of a real singer breakin’
in. But I don’t care. She only keeps me because
she knows I can’t sing either. Here’s where the
fat goes into the fire.”

Alice went to the telephone and called up the
Rev. Andrew Guthrie.

“Hello—that you, Mr. Guthrie?—hello—Alice
Goode speaking—yes—say, you ought to been
at Grant’s dance last night—what’s that?—Oh,
that don’t matter—Me?—well, I just went on
church business, rustlin’ new chickens for your
flock, an’ I caught one, a lulu—Mr. Grant’s niece,
an’ she can sing some. Say, Mr. Guthrie, you
get after her to join the choir, before the Methodists
get busy.... No, don’t leave it to Mrs.
Fairley, she’s too jealous. Just get her to sing
with us once, an’ Mrs. Fairley can come in or
stay out, as the weather suits her.... Perhaps,
but she’s an old crank, anyway. She spoils the
effect of the sermons, an’ that ain’t fair to you,
Mr. Guthrie. That’s why I go to dances instead
of prayer-meeting.... That’s right, drive out and
see her. She’ll change the look of those empty
pews, or I’m no guesser.”

Whether it was due to the doubtful compliments
of this conversation or the unquestionable
sincerity which prompted Alice Goode’s suggestion
may never be known, but the fact is that the
Reverend Mr. Guthrie called that afternoon on
Mrs. Fairley, and deftly announced that a friend
of the Grants’ was staying with them, and, he
understood, would be willing to take advantage
of the facilities afforded by the choir. Now,
Mrs. Fairley, good woman, never attended
anything so worldly as a dance, and supposed that
the recruit was some country girl anxious for a
chance to be seen by the congregation. She had
no objection to an additional worshipper in the
choir—the meanest service of the Lord must not
be despised, Mr. Guthrie—so long as she proved
bidable, Mr. Guthrie, and did not spoil the effect
of those who could sing. Armed with this
authority from the autocrat of the choir, Mr.
Guthrie hitched up horse and cutter and drove
to the Grant homestead. It was a place where
he always found a warm welcome, and he would
gladly have called oftener, had it not been for
the jealousy of some of his parishioners who
objected when he failed to visit them, and gave
him little courtesy when he did. He remained to
tea, and, indeed, long after, and when at last he
drove home it was with feelings of mingled
gratification and mistrust.

“Well, Mary,” he announced, as his wife helped
to remove his great-coat, “I have found an
addition for our choir. But I rather suspect that
she will soon be the choir, and the present members
will constitute the addition. Mrs. Fairley made
two conditions; that the new-comer should not
spoil the music, and should be amenable to those
in authority, meaning herself. Both these conditions
I will guarantee, but there are cases when
authority forsakes officials and returns to its
original source—the people. And when the
congregation have heard Miss Vane sing, they
will insist on a change in the leadership of the
choir.”

“Oh, it may not be so bad as that,” said his
wife, always eager to smooth the difficulties from
the path of her over-worked and under-paid
husband.

“So good as that, you mean,” exclaimed
Andrew Guthrie, exultantly.

The next Sunday saw a new face in the choir,
and the expectant glances of the congregation
indicated that a large percentage of Mr. Guthrie’s
flock had not attained to the godliness of Mrs.
Fairley, who eschewed dances.

The opening hymn was announced, and before
three bars were sung a buzz of excitement was
electrifying the congregation. At the end of the
first line Mrs. Fairley stopped and looked straight
at Miss Vane. For ten years, whenever Mrs.
Fairley stopped singing, the music stopped, and
so accustomed had the organist become to this
understanding, that she expected always to double
back when the familiar voice was no longer heard.
But this morning a new precedent was established.
Mrs. Fairley stopped, but the music went on.
The new singer sang on, quite unconscious of the
epoch-making nature of her hardihood. For one
full line Mrs. Fairley remained silent, and in that
brief space of time she surrendered for ever the
leadership of the choir of Plainville Presbyterian
church.

After the service Mrs. Fairley went to the
minister. Her chagrin was apparent, and it was
evident that she blamed him for no small share of
her undoing.

“I think it was quite unnecessary to bring that
young woman into the choir,” she said. “We
were getting along very well, and the music was
all that Plainville desired.”

“No one, surely, will complain of the music,”
said Mr. Guthrie, very mildly, “but if this young
woman wishes to take part in the singing, how
shall we despise even the meanest service of the
Lord? And how shall we avoid accepting that
service? We must not ask her to remain away,
and we cannot ask her not to sing when we
rise to worship Him with psalms and hymns.
It is, therefore, merely a question of whether
she shall sing in the choir or in the congregation.”

This view of the situation was a bomb-shell to
Mrs. Fairley. If Miss Vane’s presence in the
choir was aggravating, in the congregation it
would become demoralising. As argument failed
her she answered, hotly:

“Well, if the people don’t want my singing,
they won’t have to listen to it.”

“Oh, I wouldn’t say that,” said Mr. Guthrie.
“We must all give what service we can——”

But Mrs. Fairley had flounced down the aisle
and out of the church.

So it came about that Miss Vane was officially
declared leader of the choir. Her position
necessitated her coming to town twice on Sundays
and once during the week, and although her
cousins were always glad enough to drive her in,
it was observed that Mr. Gardiner frequently
relieved them of the duty.

Burton, also, was afforded the opportunity of
meeting Miss Vane at church, and occasionally
waiting on her in the store, but their acquaintance
developed slowly. He found himself while in her
presence hampered by a self-consciousness amounting
to bashfulness. Thus, while they frequently
met at the rink, he had never asked her to skate.
He wondered whether she thought of him at all.

And so the winter wore on, and at length the
spring was in the land. For five months the wind
had studiously avoided the south-west, but now
it fell into that favoured quarter, and the snow
shrank before its balmy breath. The sun beat
down with June brilliancy; the creeks and ponds
filled with blue snow-water; the life that had
lain dormant since November stirred itself in sod,
and flower, and leaf. In the town the period of
depression was followed by one of great activity;
every merchant, implement dealer, and tradesman
was working under high pressure to keep up with
the demands of his customers. Gardiner’s store
shared in the general prosperity; in fact, as the
proprietor thought, they were receiving rather
more than their share. This meant busy days
for Burton and his employer, but both were eager
for work, and from week to week Gardiner postponed
his intention of engaging another clerk.
He was well satisfied with Burton, and had freely
congratulated himself upon securing for a moderate
wage a young man of so much value to his store.
But circumstances were already in the mould
which were destined to alter his opinion.

On an evening late in May, Gardiner left the
store early, saying his horse needed exercise, and
as the day’s work was practically over he would
go out for a drive. Burton remained to tidy the
store and lock up, but he noticed that Gardiner’s
horse took the well-known road to Grants’.

As he was sweeping behind the counter a young
woman entered the store, and Burton, looking up,
was surprised to see Miss Vane.

“I hope I am not too late, Mr. Burton. I have
had a number of errands to do for Aunty, and it
always takes longer than one expects. I wonder
if you will let me have this small bill of groceries?”

“You are not too late; you are just in time,”
assured Burton, who felt that the moment was the
most opportune of the whole day.

He quickly filled the order, and said, “If you
will tell me where your buggy is, Miss Vane, I
will take your packages around and put them
in it.”

“Oh, I have no buggy this time, I’m walking.”

“Walking! You surely do not intend to walk
home with all these parcels?”

“They are not heavy, and besides, I am to walk
only as far as Mrs. Delt’s. Harry will meet me
there later in the evening. They are very busy
on the farm at present, and I told them it was
quite unnecessary to drive me to town.”

Burton wrestled with his thoughts. Here,
surely, was an opportunity to offer a service which
could be construed only as a business courtesy.

“If you can wait until I close the store—it will
be only a minute—I should be very glad to carry
your parcels.”

“Oh, that is too much—I could not expect you
to do that.”

“It is not too much—unless you say it is.”

Miss Vane laughed. Hers was a quiet, mirthful
laugh, like a vocal smile.

“If your offer is made as a kindness to me, I
cannot accept it; if it is your own desire, I cannot
refuse.”

“It is my desire,” said Burton. There was
no other answer, although he felt that the reply
shattered his theory about a business courtesy.

Soon they were walking gaily along the road
leading out of the village. This ran by the amusement
grounds, where the young men of the town
were gathering for an evening’s baseball practice.
Burton and his companion were not unnoticed.

The talk was of the commonplace: the weather,
the seeding, the life of town and country; Burton
careful, discriminating in his speech; Miss Vane
frank, impetuous, but correct. They had almost
reached Delt’s when the young woman, placing
her fingers to her throat, uttered a cry of dismay.

“I believe I’ve lost my brooch,” she explained,
in answer to Burton’s anxious inquiry. “It was
a gift from Brother Harry, and——”

She found no words to express her emotion,
which Burton knew to be greater than she cared
to admit.

“I don’t think you need worry,” the young
man said. “The sun is just setting, and we still
have an hour of fair light. I noticed the brooch
when we left the store, so it must be on the road.
I will hurry back and find it.”

“We will,” she corrected.

Burton set the packages down a little way from
the road, and the two hurried back through the
gathering twilight, keeping a keen look-out as
they walked. It was not until they were almost
at the recreation grounds that a faint glint in
the dust attracted Burton’s eye. He lifted the
precious trifle and restored it to the delighted
owner, whose profuse thanks called forth blushes
that might be seen even in the dusk which was
now silently enwrapping all the familiar objects
of the prairie and roadside. Retracing their
steps they walked more slowly; it became quite
dark, but a mild wind blew from the south-west,
and there was just enough eeriness in the situation
to suggest the necessity of a man’s protection.
Finally they arrived at Delt’s gate, where Harry
Grant and young Mrs. Delt were awaiting Miss
Vane with growing anxiety.

A horse and buggy swung past them as they
left the main road, and Harry Grant called out:

“Ah, here you are at last! And who is this?
Why, I declare, if it isn’t our friend Burton. That
accounts for the delay. ‘In the spring a young
man’s fancy,’ you know.”

Gardiner, returning from his fruitless drive to
the Grants’ home, heard the words and recognized
the voice.

And they troubled his sleep that night, and for
many nights to come.

CHAPTER IV—CROTTON’S CROSSING

“We have heard the cattle lowing in the silent summer nights;

We have smelt the smudge-fire fragrance—we have seen the smudge-fire lights—

We have heard the wild duck grumbling to his mate along the bank;

Heard the thirsty horses snorting in the stream from which they drank;

Heard the voice of Youth and Laughter in the long slow-gloaming night;

Seen the arched electric splendour of the Great North’s livid light;

Read the reason of existence—felt the touch that was divine—

And in eyes that glowed responsive saw the end of God’s design.”

Prairie Born.

“Why don’t you come out and see us sometime,
Burton?”

It was Harry Grant speaking at the door of
the store one evening early in June.

“I should like to very much,” was the reply,
“but you see I am busy all day.”

“But not all night, surely. Come, you are
ready to close up now, and I am just going home.
I guess I’ll have to come back later in the night
for the vet.; he’s out of town at present. Hustle
round now, and lock ’er up, and I’ll be here in a
few minutes with the team.”

“But I need a shave, and I’m just in my
working garb.”

“Nonsense; we’re farmers at our house.”

“Not all of you,” said Burton, and was
suddenly astonished at his own temerity.

“Oh, that’s how the land lies,” said Harry,
looking quizzically at the other. “Well, if I
had any ambitions in which a young lady figured,
which, by the way, doesn’t seem to be in my line,
I’d rather let her see me in my working clothes
than not at all. Besides, you are taking her at
the same disadvantage. Now, hustle; I’ll be
back in ten minutes.”

As they drove out along the country road
Harry remarked, as though the thought had
just occurred to him—

“Ever been out to Crotton’s Crossing?”

“No, I haven’t, though a quiet day there is
one of the treats I promise myself. Let’s see;
it’s about ten miles from here, isn’t it?”

“Twelve, and as fine a drive on a June Sunday
as you could think about. Myrtle has been
coaxing me for a month to take her out, but when
a fellow pegs along all week on the farm he likes
to lay up on Sundays.”

This was rather unlike Harry, for it was well
known that twelve hours a day on the land were
not enough to keep him off the baseball diamond
in the evening.

Burton made some remark about his old
opinions of farm-work, and how life in a store had
led him to revise them, and was about to dismiss
the subject from his mind when Harry, avoiding
his eye with a bashfulness usually foreign to his
nature, said:

“Well, haven’t you got a thought?”

“Nothing to speak of,” his friend admitted.
“What would you like me to think?”

“See here,” said the other, “must I force an
idea into your head with these horny hands?
You’re bright enough on some subjects but
denser than hotel coffee on others. In brief:
You want to spend a day at the crossing; so
does my cousin. Now do you see light?”

“Do you mean that I should ask her to go with
me?” said Burton, almost overwhelmed with the
possibility.

“Oh no, not that you should. There’s nothing
compulsory about it, and if you don’t take her, no
doubt some one else will. It’s my guess that
Gardiner wouldn’t need a second hint. But it’s
your privilege to invite her. The worst she
can do is refuse. And she won’t do the worst,
either.”

“But the choir?”

“Oh, fight that out with her; I’m not her
guardian.”

They drove in silence for some distance, their
thoughts accompanied by the rhythmic cadence of
the jangling trace-chains. The sun was an hour
from the setting, and the golden glow of its
oblique rays across the prairies and over the fast-greening
wheatfields shed an amber radiance that
danced along the trail. The shouts of men at
their evening’s amusement, the lowing of cattle,
the occasional bark of a dog, the far off drumming
of prairie chicken, came through the quiet stillness
of the air. When at last Burton spoke it was
in a confidential note he had never used since he
had helped lay his mother in the hillside.

“Harry,” he said, “men don’t often talk of
these things, but you’ve guessed my great desire.
I know I am foolish; it’s unreasonable of me to
entertain such ambitions, but our great hopes,
like our great sorrows, come to us unbidden. I
cannot help what I feel, but I hope I can help
what I do. I appreciate beyond expression the
words you have said to me, with all that they
imply, but would it be fair, if, indeed, it were not
presumptuous, for one like me—I mean a boy,
for I am nothing more, on a small wage, and with
no other means of support—would it be fair that
I should meddle in what every one will say are
much more appropriate arrangements?”

“You are referring to Gardiner,” said Harry.
“And in the first place, I want you to know that
every one will not say that that would be a more
appropriate arrangement. It may be true that
you are young, that you have your own way to
make in the world, but all that is in your favour.
You are well educated; better than most town
boys, for you have learned to spend your idle
hours to advantage, which they, as a rule, do
not; you have a good constitution and a clear
conscience, and the girl who isn’t willing to face
the battle of life with a companion so equipped
isn’t worthy to be his wife. In this country
women do not marry men who have achieved
distinction; in almost every case where wealth
or honour come, they come after marriage. If
you think my cousin isn’t wise enough to know
that in the battle of life as it must be waged in
this great new country a man’s mental and
physical equipment count for more than any
cash capital, you do her intelligence a grave
injustice. But I want to warn you that I am not
speaking for her; I have not been given, and I
have not asked, her confidence in these matters.
But I know Gardiner well, and I know you a
little, and I have my cousin’s happiness sufficiently
at heart to say what I have said.”

This was a remarkable speech for the young
farmer, who usually disposed of a subject in a
sentence, and Burton felt that it was, indeed, a
great compliment to him. He knew that Harry
had spoken in all sincerity; had opened a corner
of his heart to one who was little more than a
stranger, and he resolved to follow the cue he had
been given.

Mrs. Grant, Susy Grant, and Miss Vane were in
the garden as the young men drove up. They
greeted Burton cordially, and as Harry went to
look after his team entertained their visitor with
a walk through the garden and a discussion of the
various flowers in which Mrs. Grant so much
delighted. Presently, however, the elder lady
felt the night air becoming chill, and, reminding
Susy that the separator would be ready to wash,
entered the house, accompanied by her daughter.

“Oh, you haven’t seen my pony, have you,
Mr. Burton?” said Miss Vane. “He’s the dearest
little fellow. Uncle gave him to me because he
said he couldn’t have me walking to town and
getting home at midnight, although when he
knew I had your protection he admitted that
altered the circumstances. I keep him in the
pasture—the pony, you know. Shall we walk
over and see him? Then you can lead him home,
and I will ride.”

Nothing pleased the young man better, and in a
few minutes they were tripping along the well-beaten
cowpath that led into the pasture.
Night was setting in, and when they reached
the stream, girded with dense willows, it was
quite dark. The pony was not easily found,
and several times they approached cattle in mistake;
but at length Miss Vane’s call brought
his answering whinny, as he came running to her,
through the bushes.

“Now sir, I shall ride you home,” she said,
rubbing her pet’s nose, “and Mr. Burton will lead
you. This is Mr. Burton, Frisky.”

“But you have no saddle,” said Burton.

“Surely I am westernised enough to ride without
a saddle by this time,” said the young woman,
“especially as the gait is not to exceed a walk.
But I am afraid I shall have to have some assistance
before we can start.”

She stood with her right arm over the pony’s
back. In the darkness he seemed unusually
tall.

For a lady in an ordinary habit to mount a horse,
especially without the assistance of a saddle, is
a feat of some difficulty, as Burton discovered
before it was accomplished. As they journeyed
slowly back to the farmhouse the young man
inquired if Miss Vane had ever been to Crotton’s
Crossing.

“No, indeed, and they say it is one of the
most delightful drives. I have been at Harry a
dozen times to take me, but he always has some
excuse, and George—well, I must admit that
George seems to be more interested in our friend
Miss Green than in his little orphan cousin.”

“I was wondering,” said Burton, mustering
all his resolution for the task, “if you would
accept an invitation to drive there with me next
Sunday?”

“One can never tell,” said the young woman
demurely.

“Tell what?” asked Burton, a little piqued
at the irrelevance of the remark.

“What one will do under certain circumstances,
until the circumstances occur.”

“By which you mean?”

“Well, if I must be blunt, Mr. Burton, I cannot
tell you whether I would accept such an invitation
until I receive it.”

“Oh, I beg your pardon,” said Raymond, and
both laughed. “Miss Vane, will you honour me
with your company to Crotton’s Crossing on
Sunday?”

“Rather formal, but strictly correct,” commented
Miss Vane. “But there is the choir——”

“Ah, yes, I had thought of that.”

“And what solution had you discovered?”

“Not any, I fear.”

“Under those circumstances it seems I will not
be able——”

“Of course,” Burton admitted, “they can’t
get along without you in the choir.”

“Do you think so? Well, that is too bad,
because next Sunday—they’ll have to.”

Sunday dawned, cloudless and warm. The
rainy season had not set in in earnest, and,
although farmers complained, the liverymen
were well pleased that the roads were conducive
to pleasure drives. A light wind blew from the
south-east, just fresh enough to keep the air in
motion, as at 9 a.m. Burton drove out of town
with as good an equipage as the place afforded.
The fields wore a heavy coat of dark green grain,
waving in the breeze like ripples on a pond; the
mirthsome gophers frolicked on the road, and
clear-voiced barnyard fowl rent the air with their
morning dissertations. As Burton drove up to
the Grant farmhouse he was met by Harry and
George; the former in his working clothes, but
his brother dressed in his Sunday best.

“Wish I could get the fever too,” lamented
Harry. “Here’s George with a special engagement
at church, and Susy tidying up for a caller,
and pretty cousin Myrtle putting the final tiffics
on her fascination, while I come down to the
prosaic business of running milk through the
separator. But mind you, Burton, a word of
warning. They say the road to a popular resort
is paved with good intentions. There’s many
in this district will aver the road to Crotton’s
Crossing is paved with broken hearts.”

“Don’t pay any attention to him, Ray,” called
Susy Grant from the verandah. Susy never
troubled to “mister” her male acquaintances
after the second meeting. “Harry’d be only
too glad to take your drive himself if Myrtle was
somebody else’s cousin.”

“And he’d be no man if he wouldn’t,” declared
George. “Hang it, I’m kind o’ sorry I’m barred,
myself.”

“Don’t say that,” said Harry. “Many a
good wife has graduated from pedagogy.”

This allusion to Miss Green had the effect of
silencing the younger brother, and in a moment
Miss Vane appeared. She wore a dress of creamy
white, such as on the night Raymond had first
seen her. From the toes of her little kid shoes to
the tip of her modest hat she was white, absolutely
white, save where one large red rose
nestled in the hat’s protecting shelter, and an
historic brooch gleamed at her half-exposed
throat. Her dark, waving hair, the wonderfully
deep, lustrous eyes, the electrically sensitive
mouth, the superb lines of her chin and neck,
the whole supported by a figure chaste, symmetrical
and beautiful, asked no grander setting
than the emblem of purity she wore. Burton
had thought her beautiful on the night he first
met her, but he told himself it was her mentality
that had so irresistibly attracted his, and as
their acquaintance had ripened his delight had
been in her alert intellect, her glorious voice, her
easy grace of manner, gesture, and speech; but
this morning he saw in her a ravishment of
personal, physical beauty such as he thought had
never before been vested in woman. The joy he
felt in her mere presence, which had been to him
a delightful and inexplicable mystery, was
revealed in an instant as though a great cloud had
been swept away. He recognised the magnet
and the steel, wedded in an affinity defying every
analysis of man, but everlasting and indissoluble
as the eternal hills. In one brief glance the great
light and the great responsibility had burst upon
him, and his heart swelled and throbbed in a panic
of prayer that he might be able to keep his secret.

“I bet you have forgotten something,” cried
Mrs. Grant, to her niece, as Burton tightened the
reins.

“I never bet,” laughed Miss Vane, “but
Mr. Burton will defend my memory.”

“In that case, I bet she didn’t,” declared
Burton, gallantly.

“Well, here is the proof,” said Mrs. Grant,
advancing with a well laden basket.

“It isn’t mine,” said Miss Vane. “I don’t
know anything about it.”

“But it’s yours, just the same. It’s well you
have an aunty to think about you, dearie. You
are so excited over your drive with Mr. Burton
that you would let the poor boy starve for his
trouble.”

For a moment the young woman looked aghast.
“Oh, Aunty, you darling,” she cried, as the
basket was tucked in the back of the buggy,
“and you with so much other work. You should
have told me to do it.”

“Hush, hush, child. You may please the
young gentleman’s eyes best, but I’m thinkin’
your old aunty still knows the short cut to a
man’s heart.”

In the pioneer days the Poplar river had
presented a serious obstacle to traffic in the spring
and early summer freshets, until old Simon
Crotton had squatted on the bank and constructed
a passable ford. Simon had a team of
shaganappies whose only virtue seemed to be
that they were proof against every form of abuse,
and when the settler, with his wagonload of rude
implements or household effects, became entangled
in the river, old Simon, if not too
thoroughly intoxicated, could be depended upon
to lend the assistance of himself and team,
receiving therefore such dole as the settler could
afford or his generosity prompted. A fine steel
bridge now spanned the river at the spot, and
Simon Crotton had long ago been gathered to his
fathers, but the place retained the name of
Crotton’s Crossing and will probably so be known
until the end of time. In such humble ways do
common men leave their indelible impress upon
a new country.

The road from Grant’s to the crossing lay
through a well-settled farming district where
almost every acre except the road allowances had
come under the plough. At one time the country
had been partly covered with shrub, and willows
and poplars still grew along the road, affording
cover for prairie chickens and resting roosts for
their relentless enemy, the hawk. The air was
laden with the smell of wild flowers, of bursting
buds, of fragrant red willows and balm-of-Gileads.
For a mile or two there was little conversation;
Burton knew not what to say, and Miss Vane was
so enwrapped in the beauty of the country, so
thrilled with its glorious air, so inspired with its
immensity, that she seemed to have almost forgotten
her companion’s presence. At last, as they
crested a hill, and a vista of long, narrow road,
of neat, quadrangular farms, of comfortable
homes, of pastures fencing sleek, drowsy cattle
and horses turned out for their Sunday holiday,
with a white church and school-house by the road,
opened before them, she turned to Burton with
a strange mildness in her eyes, and exclaimed,
“And still people with means at their command,
who are in a measure the masters of their destiny,
live in the cities!”

“Then you prefer the country?”

“Prefer! How is any other choice possible?
What great thing has ever been that could not be
traced to the land?”

“Yet our great men go to the cities, and these
men you see about you, these farmers, every one
of them laments his lot. They feel that the hands
of all mankind are against them.”

“The same spirit prevails in the city, especially
among the labouring classes. They think how
fortunate they would be if they were wringing
their living from the soil, instead of in the service
of what they call capital.”

“But the intellectual advantages of the
city?”

“Ah, there you have it. And yet, although
you have had no college education, no free
lectures, no public night schools, no young men’s
clubs, I venture to think you are better prepared
for the battle of life than many of those whom,
you imagine, are more fortunately situated.”

The words recalled Harry Grant’s statement,
and Burton did not pursue the subject.

It was mid-day when they wound down the
steep banks of the Poplar river to the broad, elm-studded
parkland below. Burton swung the
team to the left, and they plunged into the recesses
of the forest along an old and little used trail,
which presently brought them to the edge of the
water. Here they unhitched and Burton tied
the horses where they could find a little grass,
while Miss Vane spread the contents of the lunch
basket on a rug beside the water. The long
drive in the bright morning sunshine had whetted
their appetites, but no sauce of hunger was
necessary to give flavour to Mrs. Grant’s chicken
sandwiches and currant jelly, with a thermos
bottle of hot coffee. After the luncheon they
gathered up the fragments, and climbing gingerly
down to the stones which studded the shallow
water, washed their hands in the stream that
rippled by their feet. Then they picked their
way across the river on the stones, for the water
was low, and found a path leading through
enchanted corridors fenced with great elms, and
so they delved into the fastness of the wood.
Finally, tired with their explorations, they
recrossed the stream, startling a lazy fish that lay,
head against the current, in the shelter of a stone,
and found a great flat rock that overlooked the
water. Here they sat, gazing down into its
silvery depths, while the ripple of the running
water caricatured their reflections. The faces
below them were one moment long and sober,
the next broad and merry, and then, by a
little freak of the current, suddenly blended
into one.

Both laughed. “The water is teasing,” said
Miss Vane.

Burton sat in a great happiness of body and
soul.

Aloud he repeated in a gentle undertone,

“And here and there a foamy flake,

Upon me as I travel;

With many a silvery waterbreak,

Above the golden gravel.

“I steal by lawns and grassy plots,

I slide by hazel covers;

I move the sweet forget-me-nots

That grow for happy lovers.”

He stopped short, half ashamed; the poet had
tricked him into a word he had not meant to use.

The hours fled faster than they knew, and it
was not until the setting sun burst in great
golden bars between the trunks of the stately
elms that they realized it was growing late.

“We must go,” said Miss Vane. “’Twill be
dark before we can reach home. And yet I am
loath to leave a scene of so much happiness.”

“The day will be a mile-post in my memory,”
said Raymond. “It has been to me a season of
delight. But how could it be otherwise with
such companionship?”

It was his first attempt at a compliment.

“Please do not speak to me in that way,” said
Miss Vane, and there was a ring, not so much of
anger as of pain, in her voice.

Burton was crushed. He had understood that
compliments were always acceptable to a woman.

“Listen,” she continued, with a sudden deep
kindliness in her voice, “I would not have you
misunderstand me. My environment has, all my
life, been very different from yours. I was brought
up in the city, in an atmosphere of refinement and,
if not luxury, at least moderate wealth. My
associations were among what were called the
best circles in the city. I met many men,
handsome, wealthy, clever men, and I will not
pretend that I did not know their attitude
toward me. But I found that these men, although
they could discuss affairs of government, of
finance, of literature and art, in the frankest
manner among themselves, could not address to
me the commonest remark without wrapping it
in a compliment. To a man they would speak as
an equal, a rational being, but a woman must be
flattered and cajoled. They say the way to a
man’s heart is through his stomach, which I do
not believe; but still more foolish is the idea, held
by most men, that the way to a woman’s heart is
through her vanity. Whoever adopts such an
attitude toward a woman, every compliment from
his lips is an insult. We women may be frail, and
foolish, and unreasonable, but surely, surely we
deserve the truth. And this morning, when I said
I loved the country, it was, most of all, for its
sincerity. I have sometimes thought I could,
perhaps, love a man, if I found one who was not
a liar.”

The hard word came out with a crash; the
wonderful, electric mouth closed in a firmness that
might have led men to battle, the deep eyes lit
up with a blaze that was not from the setting sun.

Burton mumbled an apology. “But I meant
what I said, Miss Vane!”

She looked fairly in his eyes.

“I believe you,” she said, simply.

It was late when Burton reached town. It
was Sunday night, and the business section was
in darkness. Miss Vane had given him some
letters to post and, as he passed the store, it
occurred to him to go in and get the necessary
stamps, which would save him a special trip to the
post-office in the morning. The firm’s supply of
stamps was kept in the cash drawer in the safe,
and Burton, having his keys with him, entered.
Striking a match he groped his way to the little
office at the back of the store where, by the light
of more matches, he opened the combination,
known to only himself and Gardiner, and took
out the necessary stamps, which he would replace
from his own in the morning. Then he locked
the safe and, seeing an unfinished book lying above
it, slipped it under his arm and left the store.
The door fastened with a spring lock, although a
key was necessary to open it; he drew it to, and
as he did so he fancied he heard a footstep. The
thought gave him no uneasiness and he started
blithely down the street, still revelling in the
delights of the happiest day his life had known.
The little lecture he had received from Miss Vane
had only the effect of deepening his attachment
for her, and he was beginning to think, or at least
to hope, that she returned some measure of his
regard. He properly concluded that she would
not have spoken so frankly to one in whom she
felt no interest.

Suddenly a dark object flew by his face, and
a moment later a beer bottle crashed in a thousand
pieces on the brick wall at his side.

Burton turned quickly, but the streets were in
darkness; he could see nothing. He ran in the
direction from which the missile appeared to have
been thrown, but his search was fruitless. As he
continued his walk home he turned the strange
occurrence over in his mind; it seemed unreal,
like a bad dream. He began to doubt whether
it had actually occurred, or was it some insane
freak of imagination? He resolved to say
nothing of the incident; it might have been
accidental, which seemed incredible, or the
attack might have been meant for someone else,
which was much more likely. But if it were
possible that he had secret enemies, he would
prepare himself to deal with future emergencies.
If his assailant were a man he would meet him as
a man, with the weapons his Creator gave him;
but if a sneak and an assassin he must take other
measures. He would buy a revolver in the
morning.

CHAPTER V—UNDER SUSPICION

“‘Thou shalt not steal,’ the Law declares, and the sinner must pay the price,

For the world abhors the petty thief who falls to the common vice,

But the rich and the good and the powerful may steal—if they do it well—

And the world sends them to heaven, but it sends the poor—to hell!”

The Empire Builders.

The absence of Miss Vane from church on the
Sunday reported in our last chapter was noted
by every member of the congregation. None of
the Grants were in, which deepened the mystery,
and although he might have telephoned the Grant
homestead and learned the cause of her absence,
it occurred to Gardiner that his horse needed
exercise, and he drove out early in the afternoon
to investigate the situation for himself. He
trusted that Miss Vane was not ill, and he anticipated
with some pleasure an invitation to remain
to tea. As a matter of fact the invitation was
given, but Gardiner did not remain. The
discovery that Miss Vane had gone to spend the day,
the whole day, with Burton in the woods, and
alone; that she had ignored her official position
in the choir to do so, and, most of all, that she
had given him no hint or inkling of her intention,
was, to say the least, disconcerting. He had
been surprised to find her walking with his clerk
on the country road, and after dark, but the
explanation he had afterwards learned had
quieted his mind on that score, and he felt that
his suit, although as yet he had not announced
it as such, was progressing favourably. It seemed
preposterous that he and his clerk should be rivals
for the affection of the same woman, but still
more amazing that the clerk’s rivalry should be
encouraged. Burton was but a boy, only twenty-one,
with no experience of life save what he had
learned on his father’s farm, and without means
of support except the twelve dollars a week he
drew from his employer. It was true that
Burton was one of those quiet, thoughtful
fellows who are seldom sought by ladies for
flirtations, but are always in demand as husbands;
it was true that Burton’s book learning far
exceeded his own, that the young man read
poetry while he might be playing pool, and could
quote the masters by the page, but that was a
sign of weakness rather than strength. But as
for Gardiner, he reflected with some satisfaction
that he too was still a young man, just thirty-two,
and therefore a much more desirable age for the
consideration of Miss Vane, who could not be
less than twenty-three; he had an established
business and an ample income, judged by the
standards of a country town; he was in appearance
not the inferior of Burton, and he fancied
that his popularity among his acquaintances was
at least as great. After all, Burton was nothing
but what he had made him; he had opened up
this life before the young man, and he could also
close it; on a week’s notice even the slender
support of twelve dollars could be withdrawn.
The thought afforded a ray of pleasure, but it
was for the moment only; his own good sense
told him that from a business point of view he
could not afford to do without his clerk, whom
he considered better than many much higher-paid
salesmen; moreover, he had little doubt
that a rival firm would be very glad to find a
position for Burton, probably at an advance of
salary.

Taking the question in all its aspects it was one
that demanded deep consideration, and Gardiner
spent the afternoon by himself.

In addition to the duties of the general store,
Gardiner had the business and responsibilities of
cashing wheat tickets for one of the grain companies
operating elevators in Plainville. This is
a branch of trade usually left with the banks, but
as these institutions at Plainville had seen fit to
impose a small charge for their services, the grain
firms, in their anxiety to avoid bankruptcy, had
arranged with different merchants to do the work
gratis. Although Gardiner received no pay
directly for his work in this connection, it was
considered some advantage to do the business.
The company at Winnipeg was notified by wire
or mail as money was needed, and the desired
currency came promptly by express. When the
wheat season was at its height the amount sent
was often as high as five thousand dollars at a time,
and this comfortable sum frequently happened,
about the fourth of the month, to be a godsend to
the merchant who did not have to account for it
until the end of the week. Moreover, as farmers
had to come into the store to cash their tickets,
the merchants knew when they had a considerable
sum of money in their possession, and could force
sales accordingly; or, if the customer was slow to
pay, and already in debt, an excellent opportunity
was afforded for collecting the account. Taking
these things into consideration Gardiner felt
that the benefits derived from cashing wheat
tickets were sufficient to justify him in undertaking
the responsibility and labour the service
entailed.

During the summer deliveries of wheat are
usually slow, but farmers frequently over-estimate
the amount they will require for seed, and the
wealthier ones also make a point of carrying some
of their wheat in their granaries until summer to
take advantage of the artificial prices which are
invariably effected by speculative manipulating
after the cereal is supposed to have passed out of
the hands of the producers. As seeding was now
finished deliveries were freshening, and a package
of “wheat money” containing two thousand
dollars in ten dollar bank bills had been received
on Saturday evening by express and, the banks
being closed, was left in Gardiner’s safe over
Sunday.

Monday morning, although the unpleasant
event of the previous night seemed to Burton
more than ever to be an unreal remembrance, he
resolved to carry out his intention. He knew
that the action was one his father would hardly
commend; his father had old-fashioned Ontario
ideas about carrying revolvers; but the situation
was unusual, and he felt justified in taking such
measures as he could for his own protection.
Accordingly, on his way to the store he stopped
at a hardware, and spent some time selecting a
modest weapon which he felt could be depended
upon in case of emergency. He pretended to the
clerk that he wanted to try his marksmanship on
the gophers; secured a box of cartridges, and put
the loaded weapon in his pocket.

As he neared Gardiner’s store he felt in his
pockets for his keys. They were gone! He
hesitated a moment, and recalled having used
them the night before; then, seeing the door was
opened, he entered.

Gardiner was in the office at the back of the
store.

“Burton, come here, please,” he called. His
voice seemed strained and hollow, and as Burton’s
eyes accustomed themselves to the store’s comparative
darkness after the bright light outside,
he saw that his employer’s face was as colourless
as death.

“Why, what is the matter? Are you unwell?”
cried Burton in alarm.

Gardiner steadied himself against a chair, and
after one or two attempts to speak whispered
hoarsely, “The package is gone.”

“Gone!” cried Burton, and would have walked
to the safe, but Gardiner stopped him.

“Just a minute,” he said, having somewhat
recovered his composure; “I want to ask you a
question or two.”

Burton stopped and faced his employer unflinchingly.

“Have you missed anything this morning?”

“Why, no.”

“Think again.”

Burton hesitated. “Oh, yes,” he said at
length, “I did. When I came to the door I
couldn’t find my keys.”

“Do you identify those?” asked Gardiner,
holding up a ring having several keys attached.

“They are mine. Where did you get them?”

“
In the safe!
”

“Impossible!”

“Unfortunately not. They hung in the lock
of the cash compartment. Burton, whoever took
that money used those keys!”

The young man looked at his employer as
though his eyes would pierce him through.
“Gardiner,” he said, in a hard, cold voice
that seemed to be coming from the depths of
some terrible emotion, “do you accuse me of
this?”

It was the first time he had ever omitted the
mister in addressing his employer. He was
speaking now as man to man.

“No,” said Gardiner. “I accuse you of
nothing. Even if I had the positive evidence
before my eyes I could not believe you guilty.
But the situation is baffling, and I am afraid—I
am afraid suspicion will be directed toward you.
Let me give you the facts as I have found them
and as I, of course, will be obliged to report them
to the police. When I came down to the store
this morning my first thought was for that
package. I came at once to the safe. Before it
were lying a number of half-burnt matches. This
aroused my fears, and I tried the door. It was
locked. I operated the combination, and it
opened. Inside, this bunch of keys hung in the
lock, but the cash drawer was locked. I turned
the key and opened it. The package was gone.
Nothing else was disturbed, but another burnt
match lay in the cash box. Whoever opened that
safe knew the combination. Whoever opened that
safe had the key of the cash drawer. Burton,
you and I are the only men in God’s world
who know that combination and have the
keys.”

Burton listened to this recital with growing
dismay. If he had deliberately set about to put
his feet in a trap he did not see how he could have
done it more effectively. He realised the great
weight of circumstantial evidence that was piling
up against him, and in his heart he felt that
Gardiner was not to be blamed for his suspicions.
The incident of the smashing beer bottle again
flew through his memory, recalling also his fancy
that he heard a stealthy step, but what would
such trifling and unsupported tales as these
avail?

“At least I can explain about the keys,” he
said at last. “I came into the store as I was
going home last night about midnight, and I
opened the safe——”

“You admit you were in the safe last
night!” shouted Gardiner, in a passion of
excitement.

“No, I do not admit it; I declare it. If you
are determined to condemn me unheard, on the
strength of evidence which is at best only circumstantial,
I have nothing more to say. I
suppose it is unnecessary for me to go through
the formality of tendering my resignation?”

“Do not take that view of it. The shock has
unnerved me and excited you; we must not do
anything hastily. Notwithstanding the evidence,
I believe in your innocence. To prove that I
mean what I say, I will add that your resignation
is not demanded, and, if tendered, will not be
accepted. I shall, as you know, be obliged to
report the facts as I have found them, but something
new may develop, and in the meantime I
ask you to go on with your work in the store
as if nothing had happened. Furthermore, I
apologise to you for my momentary distrust. I—I
was rather upset, you know.”

Burton stood for a few moments undecided. A
great darkness had arisen out of his cloudless
sky of yesterday. For the present, at least,
there seemed no course but to continue his service
in the store, and trust that time would reveal
the true solution of the robbery.

“It is very decent of you, Mr. Gardiner, to
speak as you have. And as, if I were to leave
your employ under the present circumstances, it
might be construed unjustly toward both of us,
I shall remain.”

The news of the theft from Gardiner’s safe
quickly spread through the little town of Plainville.
The first impulse of the citizens was to
attribute the crime to bad men from “the other
side,” who had chosen Saturday night for the
theft, trusting to their thirty-six hours’ start to
place them at a safe distance from the scene of
their operations. But as it became known that
no violence had been used, that the safe had been
opened and re-locked, and that the contents and
location of the package were secrets known to
only Gardiner and Burton, the wise ones shook
their heads and murmured something about the
folly of placing young men in positions of great
temptation. And when it leaked out that
Burton’s keys had been found in the safe the
street-corner clubs located the criminal without
further difficulty.

The Attorney-General’s department was at once
communicated with, and the local constable, Bill
Hagan, was instructed to take preliminary steps
pending the arrival of an officer from the city.
Hagan was a harmless but inefficient individual,
whose chief qualifications for his position lay in
his ability to avoid trouble and vote right at
election time. He made a minute examination
of the safe, and announced that he had discovered
a clue. Great excitement prevailed as to the
nature of the discovery, but Bill’s lips were
sealed. Previous attacks of this nature had been
relieved by means of liberal applications of
stimulants, and presently the constable found
himself the centre of a circle of depositors who
instituted a run on their favourite bank—the
hotel bar. This unsealed Bill’s lips, but only for
entrance; so far from revealing his discovery
he presently forgot all about it, and his convivial
friends were left with a haunting suspicion that
the clue had been a ruse which had accomplished
its purpose.

The following day, however, the officer from
the city appeared on the scene. He was a man
of large stature and swarthy appearance, but with
an excessive colouring of his facial eminence which
indicated that he too was a regular patron of the
financial institution which absorbed most of Bill
Hagan’s income. Officer Elton, after a conference
with his subordinate, visited Gardiner’s store,
and heard from the lips of the merchant a detailed
account of such facts as had come to light concerning
the crime.

Burton was waiting on a lady customer while
his employer and the two policemen discussed
the affair in the office; presently they came out,
and Elton, indicating Burton, said in a voice that
could be heard through the store—

“So this is the young man you speak of, who
alone beside yourself knows the combination of
the safe? Well, my young friend, you’ve got
yourself into a fine mess this time.”

Burton flushed. His father’s shanty-man
blood surged in his veins.

“If you are here to solve this mystery, go
ahead and unearth the facts, and no one will
welcome the truth more than I; but if you are
come to throw insults at innocent people, I
would enjoy your company for about two minutes
on the street.”

“Not so fast, not so fast, my young blood,”
said Elton. “It would be more to the point if you
made a clear breast of this matter. Just hand
over that money intact and I have no doubt
your employer will be disposed to take a lenient
view of the case, and it need not come before the
courts at all. I think I can promise you that
much. I have some influence with the department,”
he added, pompously, looking about on
the crowd of curiosity seekers who had gathered
in the store.

“I have nothing to confess,” said Burton,
hotly. “I know nothing, absolutely nothing,
of what became of that package.”

“You’ll have a job making a jury believe that,
and if you turn down the fair offer I made you,
I will just place you under arrest.”

“By whose authority?”

“By whose authority? By MY authority!”

“Your authority carries no weight with me,”
said Burton. “It may be as fictitious as the
courtesy of the police.”

“Well then, look at that,” said Elton, leaning
forward and exposing a police button.

“That proves nothing. You may have stolen
it. Produce your papers.”

Burton’s anger had risen to a pitch where,
although he appeared outwardly calm, every fibre
of his being was charged with wild, rioting
emotion. The disgrace of suspicion was keen
enough, but the crude, brutal manner of the
arrest, and Elton’s apparent delight in the humiliation
he was inflicting, were unbearable. He
rightly guessed that the officer had no warrant,
but was trying to carry matters with a high
hand to impress his personal importance on
the simple country folk about him, and he determined
that the glory should not be all on one side.

“You say I stole it!” cried Elton, white with
rage. “I’ll put you in irons for this.”

Burton stood behind the grocery counter, a
short counter, about ten feet long. The store was
now filled with excited onlookers, who, however,
kept a little distance from the storm centre.

“Come out from behind that counter!”
thundered Elton.

“Come in and bring me out,” challenged
Burton. “The people want to see you do it.”

This direct appeal to Elton’s weakness for self-aggrandisement
decided the officer.

“Hagan, go in at that end,” he commanded,
with the air of a general mustering his legions.
“We’ll show this young blackleg where he gets
off.”

Hagan, with some trepidation, entered the
passage behind the counter and the grocery
shelves at one end; Elton forced his way in at
the other. Taking in the situation at a glance,
Burton caught up a weight off the scales and
threw it at the head of the hesitating Hagan;
that gentleman, in his eagerness to avoid the
missile, slipped on the oily floor and sprawled
behind the counter. Burton turned his attention
to Elton, who was now upon him; he feinted a
blow at the officer’s face, which caused him to
throw up his guard, but instead of striking he
seized his adversary by the collar and administered
a quick jerk forward which landed the policeman
full-length flat on the hapless Hagan. A roar of
delight greeted Burton’s achievement, for, despite
the weight of circumstantial evidence, many of
the townspeople, and especially the young men,
believed him innocent; and all were delighted to
see this indignity heaped upon a bombastic bully
who on several previous occasions had rendered
himself obnoxious to the people of Plainville by
his brutal arrogance. The weight of the law lay
heavily upon Hagan, but the onlookers showed
no disposition to lighten the burden, and the two
men were left to extricate themselves from their
narrow quarters as best they could. Elton,
being on top, was first to get free, and as he
emerged from behind the counter a great cheer
broke from the lips of the now thoroughly
delighted spectators. But if Elton was angry
before, the jeers and laughter, with the knowledge
that his dignity had suffered an irreparable
collapse, filled him with maniacal fury. Seeing
Burton standing in the middle of the floor he
rushed toward him with a roar of imprecations,
and the crowd quickly shifted to allow room for
action. But in his rage Elton failed to benefit
from the lesson he had so recently experienced;
he guarded his face from the threatened blow,
only to be again seized by the collar and flung
headlong on the floor with a violence that left
him momentarily stunned. He rose slowly, but
the shock had sobered him; he waited until his
half-dazed eyes had properly located Burton;
then, with the quickness of a cat he threw his
hand to his hip and covered the lad with a
revolver. Then, for the first time, came to
Burton the realization that he too was armed;
but while he feared no man with Nature’s weapons
he was no expert with pistols, and he had sense
enough to realise that a fight under such conditions
would be suicide. Elton advanced slowly,
gloating over the revenge that was now within
his grasp, but suddenly his feet shot from under
him and he again collapsed on the floor, the
revolver flying from his grasp as he fell. Two
great hands closed about his throat; his nerveless
jaw fell against the puffy wrinkles of his neck,
and when he looked up it was into the face of
old Dick Matheson, who had wandered in to see
the cause of the excitement. Few who knew the
mild-mannered farmer deemed him capable of
such anger, nor of the vivid flow of sulphuric
adjectives which he poured upon the now
thoroughly cowed officer.

“Start a rough-house in Plainville, would you?
Pull a revolver on this boy? Show these people
how much of a fool can sometimes buy himself into
a government salary? You, an officer of the law,
attempting an unlawful act, and thoroughly
trounced by a boy for doing it.” He emphasized
every sentence with a vicious shake of the helpless
head. “Burton would have submitted in a
minute to a properly qualified officer. But for
you—bah! You are an insult to every honest
officer, a stench in the nostrils of Plainville, and
if you are within the boundaries of this town in
thirty minutes the vigilance committee will call
on you.” So saying he started to drag his prisoner
to the door; willing hands crowded around with
assistance, and this victim of a little brief authority
was dumped unceremoniously into the street.

Elton gathered himself up and without a
word started to walk to the railway station.
“Now, get!” was Old Dick’s last advice to him.
Then turning to the crowd the farmer explained
it all, half-apologetically, with the remark, “You
see, I knew his father on the Muddywaski.”

CHAPTER VI—THE ARM OF THE LAW

“All things are in the Beginning,

All things are to the End,

Though few may know the secret,

And none may comprehend;

And some must paint in error.

And some must paint aright;

For some paint in the shadow,

And some paint in the light.”

The Empire Builders.

If there was one thing upon which the people
of Plainville prided themselves it was their law-abiding
disposition. This is an attribute of
Canadians generally, and, it may be said, particularly
of the Canadians of the prairie provinces.
That the dweller in the land of the maple should
possess a reverence for law which does not
distinguish any other nationality of the Western
Hemisphere is not so much a matter of constitutional
difference, or of the law itself; the secret
lies in the manner in which the law has been
administered and enforced, and in the fortunate
circumstance that Canada has, as a rule, been
able to secure the services of intelligent and
incorruptible officers. The tact, consideration
and efficiency of the police have won for them the
appreciation and support of the masses, and the
remarkable security of life and property prevailing
throughout the vast and sparsely settled
country is due more to the incorruptible service,
gentlemanly bearing and unquestioned personal
bravery of her police than to all the rifles in her
armouries.

But of recent years the police had fallen,
comparatively, into disrepute. The mounted
police had been withdrawn, and the local officers
were selected more with a view to rewarding
past political services, and furnishing a retainer
for services yet to be performed, than from any
consideration of mental or physical efficiency.
This fact was undermining the public loyalty to
the police, and the crowd who discussed Burton’s
attempted arrest as they waited at the post
office for their mail were obviously in sympathy
with the young man.

“I’m in favour of the law, an’ of the law bein’
carried out,” said Big Jack McTavish, “but when
my hired man thinks he’s more important about
the farm than I am, I gen’rally manage pretty
soon to make a change. An’ that seems to be
about the attitood of these here policemen like
we have now-a-days. We hire ’em, an’ give ’em
a job an’ a clean soot, an’ they ain’t got the
crease outa their pants before they get the idea
we was just created for their convenyunce.”

“Taint just the police,” said Tim O’Brien;
“it’s the whole joodishary. Where do they get
the judges, will you tell me that? Lawyers,
bedad, an’ no recoord uv their conversion,
nayther.”

“Wheest, man,” said Big Jack. “Don’t ye
know that’s contempt of coort? You can
criticise ev’ry public official from the pound-keeper
to the king, but your thoughts about the
joodishary must be kept to yourself. That’s
because this is a free country. All the same, Tim,
I don’t know that the contempt gets any less by
bein’ bottled up.”

Tim removed his pipe preparatory to a more
lengthy speech.

“Oi mind when Ould Dave Cottrell was up
before the beak, which in them days was Noah
Chapman, fer shootin’ a dog o’ Mrs. Mandle’s.
The dog had worried Ould Dave’s sheep, and one
day, d’ye moind, the ould fellow up an’ shot him.
Av coorse, the decision was against Dave, an’ as
he pays his fine he up an’ says, ‘That’s what comes
uv bein’ tried by a relative uv the deceased,’ says
he.

“‘Oi fine ye foive dollars for contimpt uv
coort,’ says ould Chapman, just loike the Czar
sintencing a gineral to be shot, he says, ‘an’
what’s more, ye’ll pay it afore ye go out.’

“Ould Dave looked at him a minute, and thin
he pulled out tin dollars an’ handed it to him,
solemn as if he was gettin’ married.

“‘Kape the change,’ says ould Dave.”

There was a general laugh at this recountal
of old Dave’s wit, when one of the crowd mentioned
that a “policeman-lookin’” fellow had got
off the train and gone up to Gardiner’s.

“That’ll be another come out to round up
young Burton,” said Big Jack. “It’s a pity
they wouldn’t send the whole force an’ be done
with it.”

“There’ll be no need of any more,” said
another. “Burton will come round quiet enough
this time. That fellow yesterday just rubbed on
a raw spot on his nerves, and he got what was
comin’ to him.”

It proved to be as the last speaker had
predicted. Upon the failure of Elton to land his
man it dawned upon those in authority that it
might be as well to send someone a little more
familiar with the game, and Officer Macdonald
was placed on the case. Upon his arrival at
the store he had a long talk with Gardiner, and
finally Burton was called into the private office.
He recounted briefly the facts of the case as far
as he knew them.

“The situation is most unfortunate, Burton,”
said Macdonald. “It is not for me to judge you,
nor even to imply that you have guilty knowledge
of this matter. However, as you understand,
I am sent here to unravel this case if
possible, and I must act on the evidence at hand.
Further evidence may develop at a later date
and entirely change the aspect of the affair, but
at present I must act upon the information
available, and I feel that that information
demands that a warrant for your arrest be issued
and you placed in custody.”

“The warrant is unnecessary,” said Burton,
“except as a matter of formality. I am ready
to go with you.”

“Hang it, Gardiner, I hate to do this thing,”
said Macdonald. “I’ve been hunting criminals
for twenty years, and my judgment fails me if
we have the right one this time.”

“It is certainly very baffling,” Gardiner
replied. “As I have told him different times, I
am convinced that Burton is innocent, but, as you
say, the evidence just now points rather strongly
against him. It is a difficult situation all
round.”

“Burton,” said the officer, “there is no use of
you and me walking down the street together.
People in these little towns are so fond of a scene,
and I like to disappoint them. Mr. Sempter,
I believe, is a magistrate; you might go down to
his office and await me there. I will be responsible
for you until after your preliminary trial,
and then no doubt you can arrange bail.”

“I will be pleased to go bail for you,” interrupted
Gardiner. “Telephone me when you
reach that stage and I will fix it up for Mr.
Sempter.”

The consideration, and the contrast in treatment,
brought the tears to the boy’s eyes. “It
is very good of you—both of you,” he stammered.
“I only hope that in the end you may know
your confidence was not misplaced.”

The preliminary hearing before a magistrate
was held the following day, and the little courtroom
was crowded to the doors. No new evidence,
at first, was adduced. Gardiner told about
leaving the package in the safe, and finding it
gone on Monday morning. The finding of
Burton’s keys in the lock of the cash drawer
seemed the most damaging evidence offered by
the prosecution. No witnesses were called for
the defence, but Burton on his own behalf
explained that he had gone to the cash drawer
late Sunday night for stamps to mail some letters,
and knew nothing more of the matter. The
magistrate was about concluding that there was
not sufficient evidence to warrant holding the
accused, when a new and rather unwilling witness
was introduced. It was Billy Haynes, hardware
clerk.

“What do you know of this case, Mr. Haynes?”
asked the magistrate.

“Nothing,” answered the young man.

“Nothing!” exclaimed the magistrate. “Then
why are you here?”

“Indeed, and it’s not my wish that brings me
here, sir, and I really know nothing about the
case, but I was foolish enough to say down town
that Burton had bought a revolver from me
Monday morning. He said he thought he would
shoot gophers with it.”

“What have you to say about this?” said Mr.
Sempter, addressing Burton. “The purchase of a
revolver is not in itself an offence, but, in conjunction
with the evidence we already have, it does
not improve the appearance of your case. Can
you state any logical reason why you should go
to a hardware store the first thing Monday morning—the
first thing after this robbery appears to
have been committed—and buy a revolver?”

“I fear my reason will hardly seem logical,”
said Burton, “but after I left the store Sunday
night a bottle flew by my head and smashed
against the wall. I tried to find my assailant,
but it was very dark, and I could see no one. I
felt that I was likely to be the object of attack
from unknown sources, and I made up my mind
to buy a revolver.”

The magistrate looked the young man over for
a full minute. “I am sorry for your sake that
this last evidence came in,” he said at length.
“Of course, your explanation of the purchase of
the revolver may be quite correct, but it is a little
hard to believe that a young man like you, who
appears to be quite popular in the town”—there
was a murmur of approval and a nodding of heads
among the young men in the crowd—“I say it is
a little hard to believe that anyone is lying in
wait for you with murderous intent. In view of
this new development and the mystery of the
whole matter, I feel that I must let this case go
before a judge. You will be required to appear
at the fall assizes to answer to the charge of
stealing a package said to contain two thousand
dollars from the safe of Alfred Gardiner. You
should have little difficulty in obtaining bail, and
I will be glad to give you what assistance I can in
that connection.”

Burton heard the words as though he were
already under sentence, but he recognised the
spirit of fairness that prompted Mr. Sempter,
and he could only say, “Thank you, sir.”

Gardiner had pressed up to the magistrate’s
desk. “Let me go bail,” he said. “I will answer
for Burton’s appearance at the proper time.”

“It can no doubt be arranged,” answered Mr.
Sempter. “In fact, I am so confident that your
bail will be accepted that I will take it upon
myself to place the young man at liberty at once,
on his parole to appear again when required.
You promise that, Burton?”

“I do,” the lad answered, and was immediately
released from custody.

The first who spoke to him as he was about to
leave the building was Billy Haynes, the hardware
clerk.

“Gee, Burt, old man, I’m sorry I got you
into that mess. That’s what comes of blatting
things in a two-by-four burg like this. If I’d
kept my trap shut this whole thing would have
fallen through. Old man Sempter was just
ready to turn you loose with a clean sheet. Of
course you know I don’t believe a word of it—that
is, that you had anything to do with this affair.
Whoever threw that beer bottle knows more
about it than any of us. You ain’t sore at me,
Burt, are you?”

“No, I’m not sore. On the whole, it seems
better that the matter should go before a judge
and be settled for ever. If Mr. Sempter had
turned me loose, as you say, the robbery would
have remained as much a mystery as before, and
some people would always have thought me
guilty. I can’t see how it is to be accomplished,
but I hope and trust that the real facts will come
to light before fall.”

“Sure they will,” said Billy. “Everybody
believes in you. Look at Gardiner there, stepping
right up to go your bail. There’s a score of others
would do the same, but it was mighty white of
him.” In fact, Gardiner’s magnanimity was the
principal topic of discussion by the crowd which
now stood in groups about the courtroom floor.

At the door Burton was met by Harry Grant,
who shook his arm as though he intended to
acquire that member.

“Easy, Harry,” Raymond cried. “Goodness,
spare the arm. They may give me hard labour,
and then I’ll need it. One would think I had
just been acquitted, instead of sent down for
trial.”

“So you are acquitted—acquitted with honour,”
exclaimed his friend. “When a magistrate
accepts parole on his own responsibility, and the
aggrieved party offers bail for the accused, a man’s
innocence is as good as established. But say,
Burton, why didn’t you tell about that bottle
incident before? That’s the only clue to the
whole affair. The finding of the keys was nothing.
I know about the letters and I know some one
who would have got up in court and sworn to
your errand, if you had given her a chance. Why
didn’t you?”

“Harry, your cousin’s name must not be
connected with this affair. It is good of you—and
her—to suggest it, but she really must have
nothing to do with it.”

“When you know my cousin better you’ll
handle that word ‘must’ with more care, young
man. She’s not one of those girls who can be ‘musted’
into silence when a friend’s reputation is
at stake. Before the trial comes off she’ll cut
a big figure in this case, or I’m not Harry Grant.
By the way, when are you coming out to see us
again?”

“Not until this thing is cleared up, and I am
either proved innocent or—pshaw, can’t you see
that it is out of the question at present?”

“No, I can’t, and if you don’t come willingly
I’ll bring in one of the plough teams and ‘snake’
you out,” laughed Harry, as they parted at the
corner. “So long. I’ll see you at the store one
of these days.”

Burton went back to his work in the store
with a heart lighter than he could have thought
possible. He was under the shadow of a crime,
but in the hour of adversity he was beginning
to discover the worth of a few true friends.
Gardiner’s action in guaranteeing his bail had
gone far toward removing the sting of the suspicion
with which he felt his employer had
regarded him the morning after the robbery.
Harry Grant’s old time friendliness seemed
intensified by the circumstances, and Billy Haynes’
sincere regret for his share in the affair also
helped to lighten the load. But most of all, and
most significant of all, was the fact that Miss
Vane was prepared to stand by him; nay, that
she would
insist
on standing by him, even to the
length of testifying, if necessary, in his defence.
A great pride filled his heart as he thought of it,
and with the pride came the determination that
come what would he would fight the fight through
to a finish. He was convinced that there was
not sufficient evidence to convict him, but he
would be satisfied with no negative results. He
must be exonerated; his reputation must emerge
without a stain. And then, perhaps—

That night on his way to supper he passed
Riles, who came reeling out of a bar-room, and
the leer on the farmer’s face was not a good
thing to see. “And so, young meddler,” he
hissed, “you are buying revolvers now, but I
guess you’ll soon be where you won’t meddle in
decent folks’ affairs again for awhile, eh?”

CHAPTER VII—ONLY A BARNARDO BOY

“They’ll abuse him as a youngster, they will mock him as a man,

They’ll make his life a thorny path in every way they can,

Till he curses his existence and the day that it began,

And he wishes he was rotting in the sod.”

The Empire Builders.

Hiram Riles and his wife lived on a farm about
two miles from the Grant homestead. They had
come out from the East in the early days, when
Riles was a strong, sinewy fellow to whom money-getting
had not yet become a mania, and his wife
still retained some of the roses and some of the
sentiment of youth. But it’s a hardy rose that
survives twenty years of pioneer life, and it’s a
deep-rooted sentiment that can weather prosperity
unelevated by culture and unsweetened by self-sacrifice.
And in the Riles’ home culture had come
to be a thing misunderstood, and self-sacrifice a
thing unknown. There was only one end in life—to
make money; and there was only one way this
could be done—by labour which amounted to
slavery, and stinginess which amounted to theft.
Nothing which could not be expressed in dollars
and cents had any value to Riles; no doctrine
but mammon-worship had any part in his creed.

The years had dragged on and he had prospered
after the standard of the world, gaining money
and losing everything that money cannot buy.
Quarter section had been added to quarter
section, bought when land was cheap and paid
for by dint of untiring labour and at the sacrifice
of physical comforts and mental advantages
which Riles considered of no moment. But as,
labouring from dawn to dusk, he added quarter
to quarter, the time came when even his dauntless
energy could not keep up with the growth of the
farm. True, his wife helped him to the limit of
her strength, driving the plough and the binder,
stooking in the fields, or, drenched to the waist,
working in the garden on days when the rain
prevented harvesting, and milking her dozen
cows after the neighbours were in bed. She was
a model wife, as Riles admitted, but even in the
admission he took rather more credit to himself
for selecting and “breaking her in” than he
allowed to her for her strength and industry. But
when their combined efforts could no longer
furnish the labour needed on the farm, Riles
found it necessary to get a hired man. It took
him months to make up his mind that the expenditure
was unavoidable, but at length he drove
to town and announced to a group of idle men that
he was looking for a good strong man, not afraid
of work, and would pay twenty dollars a month,
board and keep.

Riles honestly believed that as soon as he made
this offer all the idle men in the town would crowd
around him competing for the position, and he
was not prepared for the indifference with which
they regarded it.

“Well, who wants it?” he demanded. “Speak
up quick, I got no time to lose. I’ve a field of
oats there waitin’ stookin’, and if you fellows
don’t want the job there’s lots that does. Who’s
comin’?”

Nobody moved, and at last one of the men said,
“I guess you better try somewhere else, Mr.
Riles. Everybody here seems to know you.”

“They do, hey? And what of it? Ain’t I
good? Don’t I pay my bills? Just yuh walk
down to the bank and ask ’em if Hiram Riles
ever turned down a bill he owed, and I guess you’ll
find——”

“I wasn’t thinking about the bills,” the man
replied. “You pay them because you have to.
You’re worth it, and you can’t get out of it. But
you’re as much a slave-driver as ever cracked a
whip over a nigger in a cotton field. Nobody ’at
knows you’ll work for you. You better get a
green Englishman—some poor fool that doesn’t
know any more than be a victim for a blood-sucker
of your class.”

With an oath Riles jumped from his buckboard
and struck a savage blow at the frank labourer,
but years of hardship in the fields had taken
greater toll than he guessed. The fist he aimed
at the face of his critic cut a circle in thin air as a
sledge-hammer blow caught Riles under the jaw
and he fell with tremendous force against a hub
of the buckboard. When he staggered to his feet
the flesh of his forehead was cut in two and the
eyes lobed forward as though they would fall out.

Riles had the wound dressed by a doctor and
met the evening train, where he engaged a
harvester just out from Ontario. They drove
home through the darkness, the hired man so
tired with three days and nights of bumping in a
slat-seated colonist car that he would have fallen
out of the buckboard had Riles not held him in.
When the horses were stabled the new comer was
shown to his bedroom, which was reached by
climbing up steps nailed to the studs of the shanty
where Riles and his wife lived. In the loft
was a little window looking out of a gable, a
straw mattress covered with two discarded horse-blankets
lay in a corner, and a kitchen chair,
from which the back had been broken, completed
the furniture of the little room. It was, however,
also used as a store-house for old clothes and for
drying vegetables, and the mice scampered in
great excitement at the approach of the lantern.

Long before daylight Riles wakened the hired
man by thumping the wall with a stick of firewood.
“Come, yuh barnyard savage,” he said,
in his playful humour, “roll out. Do yuh think
I’m goin’ to pay yuh twenty dollars a month to

sleep
? Get down here an’ get at those oats, an’
be quick about it, or I’ll fire yuh before noon.”

The sleepy harvester crawled out of the musty
blankets, drew on his clothes, and opened his
suit-case. From a jumble of socks and underwear
he drew a revolver and a murderous-looking
knife. Slinging the suit-case by a strap
over his shoulder, with the knife between his
teeth, the revolver in one hand and the lantern
in the other, he made the precipitous descent
into the kitchen.

“What in thunder does this mean?” demanded
the astonished Riles, as he caught sight of the
animated arsenal.

“I’m going after those oats,” the man replied,
in a hoarse whisper. “They’re wild oats, ain’t
they?”

“No, they’re not wild oats, my smart young
fellow. They’re tame oats, if yuh know the
difference.”

“Then if they’re tame oats,” said the other,
in a wheedling tone, “if they’re tame oats, don’t
you think, Mr. Riles, if we were careful, we might
manage to sneak up on them in daylight?”
And before the astonished Riles could find an
answer the hired man continued, “Ta, ta, Mr.
Riles. Much obliged for the night’s lodging.
Hope you catch the oats,” and had swung out
into the darkness to find his way back to
town.

His first experience with hired men was rather
disconcerting, but out of it dawned an important
light. The illumination came upon Riles as he
stooked the oats himself that forenoon. After
dinner he drove back to town and called casually
upon Bill Perkins, the lawyer. It was no part
of Riles’ policy to encourage any such useless
class as lawyers or doctors by paying a fee, but
he usually succeeded in getting the desired
information in process of conversation, and
without appearing to have sought it. He had
already benefited several times by advice given
by Perkins in this way, and the lawyer had determined
to be even with him.

Perkins was busy with a transfer of land when
Riles dropped in, and for a few minutes the conversation
was of crops and harvest and the weather.
Skilfully enough the farmer introduced the subject
of hired help, lamenting how difficult it was to
get good men and how the hired men now-a-days
took all the profit from the farm and left the
owner with the expense, in all of which Perkins
concurred. As he was about to leave the office
Riles remarked—

“Oh, by the way, I guess there’ll be a job fer
one o’ yuh fellows one o’ these days. I heard this
mornin’ of a hired man quittin’ work before the
month was up, and the farmer wouldn’t pay him,
an he’s goin’ to have the law on him. How’ll a
case o’ that kind come out, do yuh think?”

“If the servant left without due provocation
before the period of his employment had expired,
he will have difficulty in collecting his wages.”

“I was thinkin’ so, Mr. Perkins. Well, it’s a
fine afternoon, an’ I must be gettin’ back.”

“Just a minute, Mr. Riles,” the lawyer called,
as his client was stepping out of the office.
“There is a small fee for the information just
given you. Five dollars, please.”

“Five devils!” shouted Mr. Riles. “You
go to ——. I beg yer pardon, Mr. Perkins. I
didn’t mean to be so out-spoken, but yer little
joke kinda took me by surprise. Ha! ha! a
very good one, too. There’s no bein’ even with a
lawyer.”

“It’s no joke, Mr. Riles. You’ve been
sponging your legal advice around this office long
enough. To-day you will pay for it or I will
collect it at court.”

“I’ll pay it, will I? I’ll see yuh in hell first,”
said the farmer, now thoroughly beside himself.

“Very well,” said Perkins. “There’ll be no
trouble here. But if it isn’t paid by Saturday
night you know what will happen.”

Riles started down town in a rage, and Perkins
reached for his telephone.

“Mr. Bradshaw? Hello, Bradshaw, this is
Perkins speaking. Just had a visit from Riles—sponging
advice as usual. Socked him a fiver
and threatened if he didn’t come through by
Saturday night I’d have him up. He’s mad
enough to eat the town, but he’ll likely be round
to you. Fix him plenty.... That’s right,
George, go to it.” Mr. Perkins set down his
telephone, sat back in his chair, and indulged in
one of the few hearty smiles to which he found
occasion to treat himself.

Meanwhile Riles, stampeding down town,
reached the door of Bradshaw’s office. Bradshaw
stood on the step drinking in the afternoon
autumn sunshine. The warm rays rested
graciously on his slightly bald cranium.

“Good-day, Mr. Riles. How is it you’re not
cutting to-day?”

Riles collected himself, and forced a smile.
“A little business in town, Mr. Bradshaw. I’ve
just been in talkin’ with that measly opposition
o’ yours, and what d’ye s’pose the cur
did?”

“Who, Perkins? Oh, you can never tell what
he’ll do. I gave it up long ago.”

“Well, sir, we was just talkin’ about things in
general an’ I told him likely there’d be a case
one of these days about a man quittin’ before
his time was up, an’ I asked him how’d it likely
come out. He said the quitter would lose, an’
yuh can eat me, Bradshaw, if he didn’t try to
charge me five dollars fer it, and threatened soot
if I didn’t pay by Saturday night.”

Bradshaw laughed. “You can never be up
to Perkins,” he said. “But I must say it serves
you right for going to him at all. Why didn’t
you come to me in the first place?”

“That’s what I will do next time, you may be
sure. But he can’t collect that five, can he,
George?”

“I’m afraid he can, Hiram. Yes, I rather think
you’d better settle with him.”

“Well, it’s a strange law. Lawyers get everything
their own way.”

“Once in awhile it happens that way,” Mr.
Bradshaw agreed. “And when you’re settling
anyway there will be a ten-spot coming to
me.”

“To you? For what?”

“Legal advice,” answered Mr. Bradshaw,
placing his thumbs in the upper pockets of his
vest with an air of great complacency. “Haven’t
I just told you you’d have to pay it?”

Riles was so dumbfounded that he pulled out
ten dollars, threw it at the smiling lawyer, and
proceeded down street without a word.

But having paid fifteen dollars for legal advice
Riles was too shrewd a business man not to profit
by it. That night he engaged another “barnyard
savage,” being careful to hire him for a month.
The man worked for four days and quit. Riles
refused to pay him any wages, and hired another
stranger on the same terms. In this way he
was able to get through the fall without any direct
outlay for help.

But the system was not very satisfactory. Too
much time was lost hunting for new men, and the
labourers always quit before they got into Riles’
way of managing the farm. The suggestion of
the man who knocked him into the wheel of the
buckboard stayed with him almost as tenaciously
as the scar he then received. “Hire a green
Englishman—some poor fool that doesn’t know
any more than be a victim of a blood-sucker of
your class.” Of course the words were rather
strong—even Riles objected to them—but the
sentiment was all right. Besides, it was doing
the Englishman a good turn. It brought him
away from a congested country and gave him an
insight into life in a new land. With industry
and application even an Englishman might
become—
might become
—as prosperous and successful
a farmer as he himself! There was something
for a young man to look forward to!

A good scheme had been worked by one or
two of Riles’s neighbours. These men—transplanted
Englishmen themselves—who, to tell the
truth, had made a very indifferent success of
agriculture, had hit upon the idea of giving
instruction to young Englishmen of good family
in the art of farming as it is practised in the
Canadian West. They had no difficulty in
finding fond fathers who, for reasons that need
not be entered into here, were anxious that their
sons should have a “colonial” experience, and
were willing to pay from fifty to two hundred
pounds a head per year (according to the state
of the paternal exchequer and the desirability of
the exodus) for the board, lodging and instruction
of their sons in the “colony.” Of course it never
occurred to these worthy parents that there are
state-controlled institutions for giving just the
instruction needed, where their sons would be
brought in contact with the best influences in the
land. Even had they known of these institutions
they would probably have preferred to place their
young hopefuls with some old acquaintance
whose Munchausian reports of his success in
Canada were accepted as gospel, but whose real
accomplishments consisted mainly in supporting
the brewery and dodging the bailiff—two occupations
which usually go hand in hand.

But Riles was not of the blood. He knew no
one in England, and one or two advances which he
made to the English neighbours mentioned with
a view to “getting in on a good thing” were met
with a coldness which amounted to a rebuff.
There remained only one thing to be done—adopt
a Barnardo boy. Riles would have much
preferred a grown-up man, but on consultation
with some of the neighbours who had adopted
these boys he was assured that they could be
depended upon to do as much work as a man,
and were more easily controlled. Twenty years
ago the latter consideration would not have
appealed to Riles, but he recalled the incident
where he received his scar, and he knew enough
about Englishmen to know that if they excelled
in anything it was in their ability to protect
themselves from physical damage, and incidentally
to administer a thrashing to their assailants.
On the whole, perhaps a boy would suit his
purpose better.

Before being entrusted with the foster-parentage
of an English orphan, Riles found that he must
have his application supported by the recommendation
of two reputable citizens and a
resident clergyman. He at once appealed to
his neighbour, David Grant, than whom there
was no more respected farmer in the community.
He hardly was prepared for Mr. Grant’s
frankness.

“No, Hiram, I can’t sign that paper. If one
of my boys, ten or twelve years old, were to be
left an orphan, I wouldn’t want him to come under
your influence for the next five years of his life.
You’re a good farmer, Riles, but being a good
farmer is one thing, and being a good father’s
another. A great many people in this country
seem to think it more important that a man
should be able to break in a colt than bring up a
boy.”

“Oh, well,” Riles answered, good naturedly
enough, “if it was yer son of course it ’ud be
different. They’ve always had a good home,
better’n most boys, I’m thinkin’. But these
English brats, herded out of the streets an’
turned loose in this country to live or die—it’s a
charity for anyone to take them in. They don’t
know nothin’, an’ never will, but eat an’ sleep
an’ lie an’ steal when they get a chance. They’ve
got to be broke in severe, an’ I reckon Hiram
Riles can do it ’s well as the next one. ’Course,
if yuh’ve got conscientious objections,” continued
Riles, the habitual sneer creeping back
into his disfigured face, “I won’t press you to sign
the paper.”

“After a speech like that I think you had better
not,” said Grant, quietly, but there was a significance
in his voice that did not appear on the
surface.

Nothing daunted, Riles called on his two
English neighbours who were giving instruction
in agriculture at so much per head. They
signed his recommendation without question. A
clergyman who had never been in Riles’ home,
who had never met Mrs. Riles, who knew nothing
of their style of living, put his name to the paper,
as he did so speaking some cheap platitudes about
the privilege of giving a Christian home to “one
of these little ones.”

And so it came about that Wilfred Vickery,
already introduced to the reader as “London,”
became the bond-servant of Hiram Riles and his
wife, Eliza Riles.

For a week or so the little orphan boy found
everything so strange and unreal that he went
around as one in a trance. Pure English was
difficult enough for him, but the slangy colloquialism
of the Riles’ home was almost unintelligible.
Half the time he did not know what
they said to him, but stared in a vacant, meaningless
way which they ascribed to downright
stupidity. When he spoke they mocked his
language, although using an equally corrupted
tongue themselves. For a few weeks, while under
the direct care of responsible officers of the Home,
the little fellow had experienced a kindness and
a personal interest which had begun to unfold
before him a life of which he had never dreamed.
He had been taught to sing a few hymns, he had
been taught to utter a simple prayer, he had been
taught that there is a great Father to whom every
child is dearer than to even the kindest earthly
father. He had never known what an earthly
father was, but in the new, great land to which
they were going he should soon know—he should
find that for every little child in all God’s world
some heart beats with the joy of a father’s love,
some bosom swells with the wealth of a mother’s
devotion. He had been taught these things, and
some glimpse of that great real world which lies
just beyond the realm of the intellect had come
to his poor dwarfed soul and fired his spirit with
the unutterable yearning that no man has ever
answered in terms of time and sense. He had
learned that life is not merely a battle to fill the
belly, that the earth is not only for fighting and
swearing in, that Love is a
real
thing, more
powerful than hate. The slumbering germ of
his spiritual life, deafened by a decade of London’s
roar, had been wakened by a brief contact with
kindness, and in the birth of imagination the world
had taken on a new interest and a new possibility.
All these hidden emotions, touched to
sudden life, were clamouring for expression, for
utterance, when he had come—to this.

The boy’s disillusionment was terrible and
complete. They thought him stupid, but he
found the guise of stupidity serve his purpose
well, and he was more cunning than they. He
stole to fill his stomach; he lied to cover his theft.
He shirked his labour whenever he could; he
destroyed property whenever he dared. When
they cuffed him he cursed them; when they
swore at him he swore back, and he had the advantage
of vocabulary. When they made him milk
cows he would pour the milk on the ground and
say the cow kicked it; when he was old enough to
drive a team he would let it run away whenever
opportunity offered. He was to have been sent to
school, but he went only on those rare occasions
when nothing could be found for him to do on
the farm, but he was compelled to write periodical
letters to the Home saying how happy he was and
how kind Mr. and Mrs. Riles were to him. He was
held up as an object of contempt before neighbours
and strangers; he was the butt of their
coarse humour and the victim of their bullying
authority.

The kind officers of the Home had taught him
a little prayer, and told him never to forget the
good people who were to be his foster-parents in
the new land. And every night as he crawled
to his musty mattress and blankets in the mouse-chamber
already described he would kneel by the
broken chair and repeat:

“Jesus, tender shepherd, hear me,

Bless Thy little lamb to-night,

Through the darkness be Thou near me.

Keep me safe till morning’s light.

God bless Mr. and Mrs. Riles and make me a good boy, for Jesus’ sake, Amen.”

He had repeated this prayer nightly for months.
One night he had difficulty getting the calves into
their pen; they would run every direction
except the way he would have them go. He
still had his cows to milk, his pigs to feed, his
wood and water to carry in, but the calves
refused to be housed. When he had them
almost in they broke away, and raced into the
darkness of the pasture field, jumping and frisking
in appreciation of the joke. He ran after them
as fast as his tired little legs would take him,
sobbing and swearing as he ran, but without
success. They could not be found in the darkness,
and as he came back, defeated and utterly
played out, he met Riles, who had just returned
from town and was none the better for his potations.
Without a word the ruffian knocked the
boy down with a swinging blow on the face, and
kicked him almost into insensibility. As he
crawled to bed that night, stiff, bruised and
battered, he knelt before his broken chair and
repeated his nightly prayer. When he came to
the words “God bless Mr. and Mrs. Riles” he
stopped. The significance of the words dawned
upon him in a way he had never quite understood.
He was only a little boy, against whom
environment and ancestry seemed to have conspired,
but he was no hypocrite. He was praying for a
man he hated, and the words stuck in his teeth.
For a long time he remained there on his knees,
looking at the misty light in the half-blackened
lantern, and thinking, thinking. He was fighting
one of those great fights which come earlier in
boyhood than we sometimes think, and which
decide in large measure the whole course of after
life.

Finally his jaws closed with a snap. “Damn
Mr. Riles,” he said, and climbed into bed.

CHAPTER VIII—A MYSTERIOUS ACQUAINTANCE

“There are times when most folks figure that their life has been a blank;

You may be a homeless hobo or director of a bank,

But the thought will catch you nappin’—catch you sometime unawares—

That your life has been a failure, and that no one really cares.”

Prairie Born.

As the spring lengthened into summer the
business in Gardiner’s store increased. The
wheat had stooled well, and a couple of showers
early in May had relieved the drought that
threatens before the thunder-storms of June and
July set in. The country was glorious in its
verdure of growing crops and green pastures,
ponds of bright water not yet tinged with the
murkiness of vegetation, and little streams
murmuring through the night on their easy
descent to the lower levels. Everything pointed
to a prosperous season, and the farmers, who,
with Western optimism, always buy on the
prospects of the future, were patronising the
local merchants liberally. Gardiner and Burton
had so far been able to keep up with the rush,
but when George Graves arrived on the afternoon
train in search of a position in a store, and showed
Gardiner his references, he was promptly engaged.

From the first Graves showed an interest in
Burton amounting to an attachment. He tried
to get rooms at Mrs. Goode’s in order that they
might be near each other, but the landlady too
was enjoying a prosperous season, and was
unable to accommodate him.

“No, Mr. Grain, my house is quite plumb full,
more’s the pity, an’ I’m thinkin’ o’ you when I
say it. It don’t take folks long to find where
they can get a good meal, an’ there ain’t a boarder
at my table but speaks for himself. William!”—this
in response to her husband’s footsteps in
the hall—“William, go down and get the mail.
I’m looking for a letter from the new girl.” Mrs.
Goode considered her inferior half a poor advertisement,
and generally contrived to keep him out of
the way when customers were in prospect.

“No, Mr. Grange,” she continued, “the work
has got so heavy, what with all home cookin’ and
sweepin’ the upstairs every day, for if there’s one
thing I says a young man wants it’s a clean room
and a good meal that’s cooked all through, an’
what with it all I’m getting a new girl, all the way
from Torontuh, an’ it’ll be doublin’ up as it is
when she gets here, an’ two sleepin’ in the parlour
already.”

Graves’ disappointment was so evident that Mrs.
Goode was touched by the implied compliment,
and ventured to suggest, “Maybe Mr. Burtle
would share with you.”

This seemed a solution, but Burton was one of
those young men who enjoy their own company
too much to forfeit it altogether, and although
sorry to refuse he could not be persuaded to let
the new clerk room with him. Graves, however,
took no umbrage at Burton’s refusal; on the
contrary, he seemed to seek the boy’s companionship
more than ever, and they soon found they
had many interests in common and proved to be
congenial associates.

But in Burton’s eyes, at least, the arrival of the
new clerk was much eclipsed by the arrival of the
new “girl” for Mrs. Goode’s boarding-house.
Polly Lester was a lithe, dark young thing, with
black eyes accustomed to sleep dreamily through
ordinary experiences, but they glowed like a
flame-shot thundercloud when aroused. Her
hair, black and luxuriant, her well-cut nose, thin
but sensitive lips, and chin that sat in a square,
feminine defiance made her a girl to demand a
second glance. The neck sloped gently into the
fold of her dress, clasped with a modest black
ornament at the throat, and when she spoke it
was in a voice low and vibrant, suggestive of
moonlight walks and confidences whispered in a
friendly ear. Her step was quiet, almost stealthy,
but every poise from the ankle to the chin spoke
courage and self-reliance. A strange girl, this, to
leave a city and seek a menial position in a
country boarding-house. She was a girl to direct,
to command, to engineer, and to execute; but
here she waited on tables, made beds and swept
floors. When she looked at Burton, before she
had so much as spoken his name, he felt himself
under the witching power of those eyes—eyes
that looked into him so calmly, but yet with such
irresistible attraction.

One night, a few days after Polly Lester’s
arrival at Plainville, Burton closed the store and
walked down to the little stream which the
country people dignified with the name of river.
It was late in June, and heavy rains had swollen
the creek until it slipped by in rapid, muddy
silence. Through the clear evening air came the
sound of the baseballers practising for the great
tournament on Dominion Day, now almost at
hand; although a mile away he heard the bass
voice of the umpire calling balls and strikes, and
the cheers of the townspeople who sat about the
diamond when one of the boys made a hit or a
sensational catch or contributed to a double play.
And although he could not hear them he knew
that in another part of the town eight young men
and women were flushed and laughing in the
height of their excitement over a close fought
game of tennis, while on a score of verandahs
little groups lounged after the heat of the day
and speculated on the outcome of “The First,”
or sipped ice cream and nibbled cake. A muskrat
across the stream sat on the muddy bank and
shot occasional cheeky glances at the intruder; a
bird in the willow overhead twittered snatches
of her evening lullaby. The very air was vital
and vitalising, the lungs leaped in response to the
optimistic oxygen. It was a good world—for
some. But to Burton it was a hard world, and it
was growing harder. He was under the shadow
of a crime, and it seemed the shadow would darken
into a cloud that should blight his whole life.
Time was passing on, and nothing had occurred
to relieve him of the weight of suspicion which had
fallen upon him. He would have to face it out,
he would probably be acquitted, but simply for
lack of evidence. His wages were small; under the
circumstances he could ask no more; indeed, he
felt under an obligation to Gardiner for retaining
him in his employ at all. He had had a conference
with his father, and the memory did not
reassure him. His father had made it plain that
even he was reserving judgment. A good lawyer
would be engaged and every chance given the
lad to prove his innocence, but if he failed! Then
there was Miss Vane. He had met her once or
twice in the store since the robbery, and she had
spoken to him as though nothing had happened.
Indeed, he even thought there was a soft tenderness
in her words which he had not detected
before, but whether of love or pity, how should he
discern? In any case he could say nothing, do
nothing, hope nothing until this ordeal was over.
And what could he hope then? What dared he
hope? It was folly, folly! He should love her
always; he should paint her always in the portrait
gallery of his soul as he had seen her that exquisite
morning, ages ago, creamy white, from the tip
of her shoes to the tip of her hat, save where the
rose nestled in her hair and a little brooch glowed
against the pink-veined ermine of her throat. Ah,
that glimpse that comes but once, that treasure to
be hoarded for ever in the chambers of the mind,
where no minions of the law could find it, where no
judge and jury could wrest it away, where even
life and death could not lay tax, that was his, his
for ever, for ever.... And as his eyes moistened
with the joy of that great revelation a vision rose
from the mist, dimly and undefined at first, but
gradually revealing itself as clear as if cut from
a block of granite—a vision of raven hair and eyes
with the slumbering glow of the pent-up heavens.
Burton gazed as though at an apparition, and the
fine features of Polly Lester stood reflected in the
mirror of his brain. At first the truth numbed
him, but presently he had grasped it at its real
value. The polygamous instinct of the human
mind crushed in with a cruel shattering of ideals;
his soul was running riot with a chaos of overturned
emotions.

He sprang to his feet. “My God,” he cried,
“and must I lose this too? Can I not guard
even the treasures of my own heart?”

“You are agitated, Mr. Burton,” said a low
voice at his side. “Have you been seeing visions—in
the water?”

He turned and looked in the face of Polly
Lester.

“Not visions,” he managed to say, “but
reflections.”

“Reflections should not disturb you, Raymond”—she
used his first name as though she
had been his mother—“but you are straining your
nervous system to the breaking point. Here is
a dry log—shall we sit down?”

She led him to the log and seated herself beside
him. The sun was setting after the long midsummer
day, and the smooth, muddy water
took on a surface of quicksilver. Their faces
looked back at them out of the stream, and up
from the young man’s memory rushed a similar
scene, staged at Crotton’s Crossing. And just as
the thought struck home, by a trick of the waving
water the faces blended into one!

“You wonder that I, who have known you a
week, should follow you here, do you not?” she
was saying. “I should have stayed behind, I
should have let you learn my secret for yourself.
It is woman’s lot to carry her secret in her heart,
guarded as a precious thing, until the object of
that secret pries it forth. But I am not a woman,
as other women are. I defy traditions; I defy
conventions. I claim the right God gave me to
live my life as I will, where I will, how I will,
with whom I will. When first I looked into
you—when first your eyes met mine, I knew—what
you knew. Why should we deceive ourselves?
Why should we mock our own
destinies?”

“You speak strangely,” said Burton. “I—I
do not understand.”

“Why do you lie to me, Raymond?” she
asked, still in that low voice, deep and vibrant,
but without a suggestion of anger. “Why do
you seek to conceal—that which we both know?”

“You are a strange woman. I do not understand
you.”

“Oh, that is different. Of course you do not
understand me. Nobody does. I am so different.
Instead of pretending I don’t care for you, instead
of pretending I don’t know that you care for me,
I admit it all. I am frank. I am truthful. I
am, as you say, a strange woman.”

“What are you doing in Plainville?” the young
man demanded. “Why do you work for Mrs.
Goode, sweeping her boarders’ rooms—a menial
servant, a—a chambermaid?”

“Fie on you, sir!” she cried, but there was a
playful note in her voice. “All honest work is
honourable. There is nothing menial—except
being menial.”

“But you—you don’t need to do this. You are
educated. Your speech proclaims it. I have seen
your handwriting; it is that of a business woman.
You have appearance. You have presence. You
don’t need to do this work. Why do you do it?”

“Why should I answer that question?” she
parried.

“I don’t know. I suppose there is no reason.
But you said you—you loved me——”

“I didn’t.”

“You let me know it.”

“You divined it. You found it out yourself.
That saves me. If I had told you I would be a
shameless woman, but if you find it out my
honour is unscathed. Such are the decrees of
convention.”

“At any rate, now you have admitted it. Will
you answer my question. Why are you in Plainville?”

“Do you admit as much? You are interested
in me. Do yourself the justice to believe that I
am interested in you.”

“Admit that I love you? Yes, I believe I
do.”

The sun was down. Dusk was settling over
the plain. The water ran black before them.
They sat for some time, gazing into its smooth
depths. At last she broke the silence.

“Do you know, Mr. Burton, you are rather
undemonstrative in your declaration of love.”
There was a sly, fascinating banter in her voice.

Burton made no answer. He saw a figure in
white, and heard a voice saying, “I have sometimes
thought I could, perhaps, love a man, if I
found one who was not a liar.” And he was
wondering, weighing these two women, each so
powerful in her personality, although differing
so much in manner of expressing it. Miss Vane
he understood, or at least thought he did, but
this girl was something so altogether different.
He knew that most men, and all women, would
question her motives; he would be sincere with
her. At least he would not be a liar, active or
passive.

“Perhaps I admitted more than I really meant,”
he ventured, at length.

“More than was true?”

“Yes, more than was quite true.”

“Then you love another. It is that love that
has made you honest with me. I congratulate
her. Tell me about her.”

“You take rejection easily.”

“Silly boy! A woman is never rejected while
she lives. Is she pretty?”

“Yes, as pretty as you.”

“How nice! And good?”

“Yes, better than you.”

“Now I
am
interested. How quickly you
learn to be honest! I am hunting the world for
a man who isn’t a liar.”

The similarity of the expression was not lost
on Burton, but his companion continued:

“And you are going to be——”

“No.”

“No? Why?”

“You know my trouble, don’t you—Polly?”

“I have heard of it. But I believe nothing.
Does she?”

“No, I am convinced she is as true as steel.
But while this cloud is over me I can say nothing—I
can do nothing.”

“But it will soon be gone. Your trial will
come in the fall. All the boarders say you can’t
be convicted. You will be free.”

“Yes, free, with this stain of infamy upon me.
Free to go West, to lose myself in the great new
country, to forget my past—if I can. But free
to marry her—never!”

“You mean that the real culprit must be
found. There must be a positive verdict, not a
negative one?”

“That’s it. The criminal must be run to
earth. The money must be discovered, if
possible.”

It was quite dark. Night blanketted the
prairies, and night on the prairies is always cold.
Miss Lester shivered. Silently her form nestled
into the arms of Burton. A hand fell against his,
and he shook as though struck by an electric
current. She raised her face to his, her warm
breath flooded his cheeks and eyes and stole into
his nostrils and his lungs.

“Raymond dear,” she whispered. “You are
carrying too much alone. You will break down.
I can help you. Will you let me? Will you—do
you trust me?”

And in a voice so low that she caught it by
instinct rather than hearing he answered, “I do.”

“Then tell me—all.”

“All?”

“Yes, tell me who took the money, and why,
and where to find it, and I pledge you my word—my
honour—that you shall walk out of court not
only free, but justified. Remember, you trust
me. You say you trust me—you do trust me.”
She raised her hand and held the spread fingers,
pointed, towards his temples, her eyes were
within a palm’s width of his. “Remember,
you trust me, Raymond, you trust me. This log
shall rise in witness against you before I do. You
trust me—tell me—ALL.”

With a curse he threw her from him. “This,
then, is your love, your honour, your—your
perfidy. God judge between me and you this
night!”

CHAPTER IX—A FUGITIVE

“Ever the sun sets in the west;

Yellow and gold;

Ever a face to a window prest;

Can it behold,

Large in the lens of the dying light,

Wandering boy, in joy or plight,

Trudging sturdily into the night,

Fearless and bold?”

The Empire Builders.

Dominion Day was the big day of the year at
Plainville. Then the baseball teams from all the
towns around gathered in the Agricultural
Grounds for the final contest of the season, as the
approach of haying time would soon give the
young men other outlets for their energy. Baseball
was the great game of the district, but in
order to afford some variety of attraction there
would also be a football match between the
English and Canadian born—an event usually
marked with much friendly enthusiasm. The
Englishmen had been schooled in the rudiments
of the game on the playgrounds of the motherland,
but years behind the plough or in the harvest field
had left the flesh strangely unequal to the spirit.
The Canadians, on the other hand, knew less of
the game but trusted more to the pioneer qualities
of force and endurance, although George Grant
said his chief difficulty was in dodging the h’s
dropped by his opponents. Then there were
pony races, usually won by some unheralded farm
plug, to the disgust of the “sports”; a tug-of-war,
married men against single, in which the
benedicts, thanks to avoirdupois, were invariably
victorious, while the Plainville brass band discoursed
uncertain music to the appreciative
throng.

But it is not with the celebration of Dominion
Day that you and I are concerned, much as we
should enjoy an afternoon with the husky young
athletes of the prairie. Other events, essential to
the progress of our story, were under way, and
demand our attention.

By common consent the Plainville stores
remained open on Dominion Day until eleven in
the forenoon, when they closed to enable the
proprietors and their staffs to enjoy the day’s
celebration. It had been a busy forenoon, and
Burton was hurriedly sweeping up behind the
grocery counter after the blinds had been drawn,
when Graves approached and leaned over the
counter, watching him. Burton was conscious of
the eyes upon him, and at length looked up. It
was evident his fellow employee had something
on his mind.

“I want to say that I have a rather disagreeable
piece of information for you, Burton,” said
Graves, after a moment’s hesitation. “Did you
ever wonder why I came out here and took this job
with Gardiner?”

“No, I can’t say that I did,” the other replied.
“I supposed you were looking for employment
and this was the first thing to turn up. But
there has been nothing disagreeable to me about it.”

“Unfortunately there will be, shortly, and I
assure you the whole thing, as it is turning out, is
little to my liking. Burton, you’re not suspicious
enough for a criminal career. Do I look like a
store clerk?”

There was a touch of sarcasm in the last two
words which did not escape his hearer, but the
reference to a criminal career had cut much
deeper.

“What do you mean?” he demanded. “What
right have you to speak to me in this way?”

“Now don’t get angry,” said Graves. “You
lost your temper here once before, and while
I don’t say I blame you, the rough-house with
Elton didn’t improve your case any. Fact is,
if you can’t see it for yourself, that I’m not here
to sell goods, but to
watch you
!”

“Watch me?” exclaimed Burton, straightening
up and taking in the other man at a glance as
though measuring him physically. “Then you’re
a——”

“A detective. Yes.”

“Well, what have you found? Can you add
anything to a bunch of keys and a suspicion?”

“I haven’t found much yet, but I expect to
shortly. That’s why I wanted to speak to you
now. I have a warrant to search your room and
personal belongings, and I propose to do so to-day.
It’s altogether unprofessional in me to tip you off,
but, hang it, I like you, Burton, and if there’s any
changes you want to make down there slip away
and get them done, and I won’t be down for half-an-hour.”

“Changes? What changes should I want to
make? Your words are an insult, Graves, and
if it were not for your evident sincerity I’d start
making the changes right here and now. No,
I want no changes! Bring all the world along,
and let them see me searched in public.”

“You carry it with a high hand, my young
friend,” said Graves. “However, I can do no
more than warn you. Shall we go now? There
should be at least one other present.”

“Mr. Gardiner has just gone down to Goode’s
with some butter. We will detain him as a
witness, if you think it necessary,” was Burton’s
reply; “come, I am ready.”

The two young men walked down the street,
thronged with buggies, wagons and automobiles,
until they reached Mrs. Goode’s boarding-house.
At the door they met Gardiner.

“Mr. Gardiner, will you do me a favour? I
find that I have been working alongside of a
detective, instead of a store clerk, as I imagined.
He has a warrant to search my room. Will
you come along, as a witness?”

“Why, yes, if you ask me to. This is a surprise
for me. Graves, you need not report for
work to-morrow morning.”

The three went up to room sixteen. As they
were about to enter Polly Lester came out. “I
was just finishing tidying up,” she explained to
Mr. Gardiner. Since the night at the river
Burton had not spoken to her nor recognised her
existence.

The detective began with Burton’s clothes.
He searched all the pockets and felt the fabric
generally to ascertain if anything might be quilted
into it. Then he examined the bed, feeling the
pillows and mattress very carefully. Then the
washstand and bureau received attention, but
without revealing anything of moment.

“There is only the trunk left,” said Graves.
“Will you let me have the key?”

“Go ahead; it isn’t locked,” Burton returned.
“I wish you joy of all you find.”

Each article in the trunk was lifted out and set
on the bed, carefully. Graves was at least a
thorough workman. At last there were only a
few items in the bottom of the trunk, and Gardiner
was about congratulating Burton, when
the detective cried, “Hello, what have we
here?”

Both spectators rushed to his side. At the
very bottom of the trunk lay a large envelope,
on which two large wax seals were visible.

“That looks like it,” said Gardiner, in a tense
voice. “Dig it out.”

The package was produced and held before
Burton. The young man was too astonished
for speech.

“Well, what have you to say about it?”
said Graves, at last.

“It is the stolen package,” said Burton, with a
dry sob. “But how it got there God only
knows.” He put his hand to his head; he
looked around as one dazed, bewildered; his
eye fell on the crack of the door, and through that
crack he caught the gleam of another eye, blue-black
as a hail-cloud on a summer night. He
gasped, and would have rushed for the door, but
Graves detained him.

“There’s no hurry, Burton,” he explained.
“Perhaps you will see your way to make a clear
breast of this business. If Mr. Gardiner gets his
money back I think he might be big-hearted
enough to withdraw the charge, although you
have no right to expect such treatment from him,
after betraying his trust in this way, and then
trying to brazen it out as you have done. Of
course, it’s a criminal charge, and out of Gardiner’s
hands, but there’s more ways of killing a dog
than choking it with butter. I have something
to do with the Department, and I promise you
that if you come out and clean this thing up and
express your regret there’ll be no true bill found
against you. The money is all there, isn’t it?”

“I don’t know. I didn’t know any of it was
there. I——”

Gardiner picked up the package and turned it
over in his hands; suddenly it almost dropped
from his fingers. “This package has been
opened,” he said to Graves.

The detective took it and withdrew the bills.
They were bright, new ten dollar bank notes.
He counted them.

“Well, I congratulate you, Gardiner. The
package has been opened, but only one bill is
gone. And the serial letter and number compare
with the memo, furnished us by the bank. You
have your money back, practically complete.
What am I to do with this man?”

“Let him go. Burton, I’m sorry,” said
Gardiner.

“No, I won’t let him go,” said Graves. “He
has refused a fair chance of liberty; now he must
take the consequences. I advise you, Gardiner,
to withdraw your bail. One of these days this
fine fellow will be across the line.”

“Leave that to me,” said Gardiner, shortly.

Within an hour the finding of the stolen money
in Burton’s trunk was a general topic in the town;
by evening it was common knowledge among all
the crowd assembled for the sports.

Burton went straight to the store and locked
himself in. Neither the streets nor the grounds
were any place for him that day. Presently
Gardiner let himself in and discovered the young
man in the office.

“Burton,” he said, speaking with some difficulty,
“this is a bad mess. There was every
reason to expect your acquittal until this turned
up. Now—well, now you’re in for it.”

The young man sat with his face between his
hands, and made no reply.

At length Gardiner continued. “I hate to
think you guilty, Burton, I really do, for your
own sake, and for your father’s, and for your—friends!
But what else can I think? And if I,
who have stood by you, protesting you innocent,
all along, must admit your guilt, what will the
people in the town and country, who are only
too glad to believe evil, think of you? You will
be a marked man, and an avoided man. I don’t
like to say it, but it is quite impossible for me
to keep you any longer in my employ. The
fact is, Burton, you’re up against it. I don’t
want to see you go to jail, but if you come to
trial that’s what’s going to happen. If you take
my advice you’ll get out while the coast is
clear.”

“But you are my bondsman! You will have
to forfeit the bail!”

“I know. But I am willing to do that, to
see you safe at liberty. I may lose the bail,
but I have the money back, so I’m really nothing
more out. You can get across the line to-night,
and work west or south or east. The world is
big, and if you straighten up you will soon find
chances of useful life. If you go to jail your life
is ruined, but if you take my advice you may still
be a credit to yourself.”

“They’ll follow me,” the young man moaned.
“They’ll get me anywhere.”

“No, they won’t. If you were a murderer, or
a criminal of that sort, public opinion would keep
them after you, but a case of this kind is really a
private matter after all, and will soon be forgotten.
Have you money?”

“A little.”

Gardiner took a roll from his pocket. “There
is a hundred dollars,” he said. “That should
see you out of harm’s way.”

“I can’t take it, Mr. Gardiner; I really can’t.
You have done too much for me already.”

“Take it as a loan, then.... Well, think it
over. I’ll leave it here in the till, and if you’re
as wise as I take you to be, both you and the
money will be missing to-night. Good-bye,
Burton,” he said, but without offering to shake
hands. “I have to drive out to Grant’s.”

There was a significance in the last remark that
did not escape Burton. As he sat in the dimly
lighted office in the dark, empty, silent store, the
ruins of his life came crashing down upon him.
He tried to think calmly, to collect his thoughts,
but his mind was a chaos of emotions. Out of
the maze of perplexities, complete mysteries and
half known truths more baffling still, a few
characters, a few incidents, gradually distinguished
themselves. The night at Grant’s, the singer, and
his recital, spoken to an audience but aimed at
one soul; the sacramental day at Crotton’s
Crossing, again in memory he rehearsed it; he
recalled the great stone, he saw the faces blend
in the smiling water, and the solemn red sun look
through the serried bars—! Ah, the bars!
Prophetic vision which he had left unread!
Bars, bars between him and the sunlight! Yes,
bars, and cold, wet stone walls. They stared at
him now, they glared at him, wet and shiny, out
of the dark corners. They circled him, they
compassed him, they crowded him. Bars, and
stones, and water! They would strip him of the
dress of civilization and clothe him in the garb of
infamy. They would feed his body with prison
fare, but his soul they would leave to shrivel and
starve. However innocent he might go in, only
a criminal could he come out. There was something
worse than being a fugitive. Better to
defy the law and the officers of the law than to let
them thrust him into the criminal mill. Gardiner
was right. He would fly. The world was large,
there still was a chance for him, he would learn
to live—and forget.

A mental numbness followed the strain of these
thoughts; he did not sleep, but he lost consciousness
of time. When he came to himself it was
quite dark, and he was hungry. He groped his
way through the store and found some cheese and
biscuits, which he thrust into his pocket. Then
he remembered the money Gardiner had left,
but as he reached to take it from the drawer his
hand paused, irresolute. Surely Gardiner had
done enough for him; Gardiner, who had gone his
bond and then urged him to fly. He turned
away, the money untouched.

Burton let himself out by a side door; the outer
air was strangely hot and oppressive. He heard
many voices, and a babel of strange, confused
sounds; horses being hurried into shafts, automobiles
whirring along the streets. He made his
way to a lane, and a large drop of rain spat on
his face. His eyes were as yet unaccustomed to
distant objects, but he turned to the west and
beheld the heavens a-seethe with lightning—not
a vivid glare that blinds the beholder, but a
bright silvery flush playing like the aurora
behind a mass of dark-blue cloud. Burton knew
the country well enough to read the menace at a
glance; the heavy blue-black cloud riding ahead
of the storm never hunts except for big game.
The air was oppressively still, but shortly it would
be torn with the violence of the tornado; the
half-obscured lightning, now playing all the
way from the horizon to the zenith, would break
in jagged, white-hot thunder bolts through the
uneven atmosphere, and at its heels would come
the deluge of rain and, perhaps, hail. It was not
an uncommon scene; once or twice a season these
terrifying storms were to be expected, and
farmer and merchant alike watched anxiously
for the straight, misty, greyish cloud and listened
for the accompanying rumble of the dreaded
hail.

But to the fugitive the threatened storm meant
nothing. The warfare of the elements could
tear no deeper than the warfare of his own soul;
the fire-edged death from heaven would furnish
honourable end to a discouraging struggle.
Avoiding the main roads, he made his way into
the country, but on every trail were rigs driving
by at high speed. The drivers and occupants
were much too concerned with the problem of
getting home dry and safe to pay attention to
pedestrians on the road, and he walked on
mechanically, confident that none recognised
him and that none cared.

The early darkness closed down quickly; the
great cloud in advance of the storm, rolling in
the heavens like a mighty fish, had swept far to
the eastward; the lightning now played in
dazzling flashes from cloud to cloud and from
cloud to earth, its zig-zag course marking the
rarer atmospheres, and accompanied by a growing,
growling chorus of thunder as the menagerie of the
skies roared and crackled on the crest of the
storm. The blinding light left the eyes useless
in the dark, and it was with difficulty Burton
followed the trail.

Presently the rain came on. Swept by a mighty
wind that overturned more than one top buggy
that night, a few great, scattered drops dashed
against the ground, then the wind subsided and
was followed by a sudden stillness so intense it
could be felt. But it was for an instant; a
great rift of lightning shook the clouds asunder
and their pent-up load of moisture poured out
upon the earth. In a moment Burton was
drenched to the skin; the prairie roads were
running in water; and as he floundered on a cold
wind struck him that brought a shiver, not for
himself, but for the farmers whose fortunes were
all on the growing fields. Then the thought came
to him that if he should be caught unprotected
in the hail he would be killed. He had faced the
lightning without fear, but the prospect of being
gradually pummelled to death was not inviting,
and he began to look about for some place of
shelter. It was not until now that he realised
he had paid no attention to the course he took,
and although most of the country was familiar to
him in daylight he had no idea where he was.
To his great relief a warm breeze sprung up,
which indicated that the hail strip was narrow and
had probably chosen another course, and he
struggled on through mud and water hoping
that every flash of lightning would reveal some
place of shelter. But the country seemed
strangely desolate, and the night must have been
half spent before he caught an instant’s glance of a
building. He pressed toward it, and another
flash revealed a deserted log hut which he now
recalled as being only a few miles from town and
but a short way from the main road that led to
Grant’s. The windows were gone and the door
was off its hinges, but it would at least be better
than outside, and he hurried toward it. As he
did so through the darkness he fancied he saw a
gleam of light in the deserted building. It was
not lightning, and yet he could have sworn it
was no trick of the imagination or the nerves.
As he drew nearer he saw it again—a dull flicker
lighting up the square framed by the empty
window. Stealthily he approached the building.

CHAPTER X—PLAYING THE GAME

“Hear ye a little lesson—can ye the truth divine?

Milk ye may mix with water, and water will mix with wine;

Mix as ye may on your prairies, mix in your hope and toil,

But know in all your mixing that water won’t mix with oil!”

The Empire Builders.

With only one run to the good, Harry Grant
in the pitcher’s box, the bases full and nobody
out, the finish of the ninth inning in the last game
of the Dominion Day tournament looked gloomy
enough for Plainville. The sun was gilding the
crest of a great cloud which was already casting
its shadow over the prairie, the air was close and
hot, the band had long since exhausted their
repertoire, and its members, big-lipped from
their day’s exertions, gazed dry-throated at the
tragedy on the diamond; the Plainville backers,
who all day long had placed their two to one on
the home team, were stamping up and down
behind the ropes that winged the grounds,
chewing their cigars and swearing vaguely. The
“rooting” was over; there is a point beyond which
no loyalty can “root”; the situation was too
dramatic for speech. Even the supporters of the
opposing team were too excited to hollo, they
had holloed all day against discouraging odds,
and now, when a little lung power might well
have been brought to the support of their favourites,
they found themselves voiceless from sheer
exhaustion and surprise.

In a buggy facing the grounds from the right
fielder’s corner sat Gardiner and Miss Vane. The
bright face and the electric mouth seemed intent
upon the game before them, but in the eyes was
a hollow look that might have told any keen
observer the brain was wandering in far fields.

“It’s bad,” said Gardiner. “The worst
possible. He can never climb out of that hole.”

“At any rate he will try,” said the girl, absently.
“You think he will run away?”

Gardiner turned and looked at his companion
quizzically. She gave a little start and a flush
stole through the deep ivory of her cheeks and
forehead. “I—I beg your pardon,” she stammered.
“I was thinking.”

“You are thinking too much. If I had known
it would spoil your day’s enjoyment I would not
have told you.”

“How could you think otherwise? You know
he was, that is, he is, our friend.”

“Just a friend—is that all?” Gardiner pressed
the question.

“Oh, look, that is two strikes. Harry is
keeping his head. Let us watch the game,” and
Miss Vane seemed lost in the scene before her.

The ropes along the wings stretched and
swung with the mass of humanity leaning over
them; in the grand-stand every eye was on the
pitcher, as tense as though life itself depended
upon the delivery of the next ball.

Harry saw one crooked finger below his catcher’s
mitt, and prepared a hot in-shoot. An out and a
drop were responsible for the batter’s two previous
abortive swats, and this change should fool him.
A right hand batter seldom looks for an in-shoot
with the bases full; the chance of a walk is so
big it frightens most pitchers, but Harry’s catcher
had decided on heroic measures.

The base runner from third led up. Standing
on his right foot, an inch outside the pitcher’s box,
Harry feinted at third and drove the adventurous
runner back; the next instant he was back in
the box and had delivered the ball to the
batter.

But his caution was his undoing. He purposely
threw a little wide, to avoid the possibility of
striking the batter. Six feet from the base the
ball broke and cut straight for the centre of the
plate. It was only a fraction of an instant, but in
that fraction the batter swung and caught it a
straight drive over second. A yell broke from
his sympathisers as he dashed for first.

Billy Haynes, the hardware clerk, was holding
down second. Billy was long and agile and a
rapid thinker. He had the two first requisites
of a baseballer—a quick eye and a quick brain.
As he saw the hot shot coming four feet above his
head he sprang two steps backward, jumped,
and brought it to earth, dropping it as he fell.
The next instant he had one hand on his base and
the other on the ball, and almost before the
umpire could detect the play he had thrown,
not to home, but first. For an instant the third
base runner hesitated, fearing a caught fly, and
that instant cost his side the game. He fully
expected Haynes would play home, and hesitated
again; when he saw the ball delivered to first he
dashed forward, but he was too late. The sphere
seemed hardly to stop at first at all; it simply
changed its course there and shot home, beating
the runner to the plate by a good two feet. The
game was over. Plainville had won. It was
the only triple play seen on that diamond for
many a day, and the crowd went wild with
enthusiasm. Billy Haynes was borne aloft by
his admirers, and the other participants in the
play were thumped and shaken by the hero-hungry
mob. By dint of much profanity the
band leader was able to muster two cornets, a
trombone and a base drum to play the National
Anthem as the crowd hurried from the grounds.
It would soon be closing time at the village bars,
and there were many thirsts to liquidate.

But even as they walked the short distance
from the grounds to the town the minds of the
visitors were turned to another matter. The sun
was obscured, and up from the west a great mass
of cloud heaved higher and higher. The old-timers
needed no second glance; a Dominion
Day storm was considered as much a matter of
course as the baseball tournament and the football
game between English and Canadians, and young
men and old hurried to the livery stables and the
stock-yards, where their horses were tied, in an
endeavour to get home before the weather
broke.

Gardiner drove up town for a waterproof, and
by the time he and Miss Vane were at last on the
road to the Grant homestead it had grown quite
dark. It was the eastern girl’s first experience
with a severe electric storm on the prairie;
several thunder showers had swept by during
June, but nothing so terrifying as this. The
lightning became more and more vivid, and after
every flash the horse would pause, uncertain of
his footing in the darkness. Then the distant
growl of the thunder added its accompaniment,
steadily growing in volume and intensity.
Gardiner was not an expert horseman and had
some difficulty in keeping the animal on the
road. The poor creature had little relish for the
trip and would have much preferred to hurry back
to his stable in town.

Suddenly a terrific squall of wind burst upon
them, and before Gardiner had time to square the
horse up to it it had tipped the buggy and whipped
the reins from his hand. The animal, terrified by
the storm, staggering over one shaft, and feeling
all control removed, dashed in a panic across the
prairie. Presently the rig struck a post, the shafts
were torn free, and the horse disappeared in the
darkness.

Gardiner extricated himself from the wreckage.
“Are you hurt, Miss Vane?” he asked, anxiously.

“No, I think not,” said the girl, as she dragged
herself free. “Oh!” A smothered cry escaped
her lips.

“You are hurt,” said Gardiner, as he raised
her in his arms. “You are hurt. Tell me.
Let me help you.”

The gale had swept by, and the air was very
still and warm.

“No, I am not hurt—much,” she answered.
“But we cannot stay here. It will rain soon,
and the lightning is—” She closed her eyes.
”Can’t we go somewhere? Can’t we walk
home?”

“I am afraid we must try,” said her companion.
“Or I might go back to town for another rig?”

“No, we will walk home. We must be more
than half way. Let me see—what direction is
that?”

“South, I think.”

“No, it must be west. Surely it is west?”

“Let us follow the fence; it must lead somewhere.”

At that moment a tongue of fire came leaping
along the upper wire of the fence. Both
drew back, as though to dodge the electric
current.

“The further from the fence the better,” said
Gardiner. “There is no place so dangerous in a
thunderstorm. Let us keep to the middle of the
roadway.”

They moved to the right, but at the first step a
groan escaped the girl’s lips. “My ankle,” she
moaned. “I—I must have hurt it.”

Gardiner stood irresolute. “Can you lean on
it at all?” he asked.

She placed her weight gently upon the ankle,
but a flash of lightning revealed a wince of pain
across her face.

“I must carry you somewhere,” said Gardiner.
“We cannot stay here. The rain is coming on,
and perhaps hail with it. We shall be drenched,
at least.”

“I think I can walk if you will help,” she
ventured bravely. “Stand here, to the right.
Let me rest my arm on your shoulder.”

He obeyed. Resting her right hand on his
left shoulder she limped painfully a short
distance through the darkness. The rain began
to fall in great scattered drops, then a vicious
rent of lightning seemed to shake the whole
heavens, and it fell in floods.

They had worked their painful way about fifty
yards. The road was now running in water, and
the slippery mud made walking still more difficult.
One little shoe drew off and was lost. At every
flash they took their bearings for a few feet
further, but it became more and more evident
they would be unable to reach shelter.

“You must leave me,” she said at last, shouting
in his ear to make herself heard. “I cannot
go much further. You can find your way to
town, or perhaps to a neighbour’s, and get another
buggy. I will stay here.”

“Then I will stay with you,” her companion
answered. “I cannot leave you alone on the
prairie in such a night. Besides, I don’t know
where we are. I would never find my way back.
We must—hello, what is that?”

“What? I saw nothing.”

“Look this way.” He pointed through the
darkness. “Watch for the next flash.”

They had not long to wait. In a moment
another bolt lit up the prairie in all directions.

“It is a building—an old house, I think,” she
said. “I can walk that far. It will be better
than the prairie.”

With much effort they dragged their way
toward the building. It proved to be a little
log structure, built by a homesteader in the early
days. The windows were gone and the door was
off its hinges, but inside was comparatively dry.
In an inner pocket Gardiner found some matches
that gave promise of a light. He struck one; it
flared for an instant and was whipped out by
the breeze. But it had revealed a partition
running through the middle of the building.
They groped their way around it and found a
more protected corner. Here he struck another
match. It burned steadily, disclosing a little,
low room, papered with heavy building paper.
Against the logs of the outer wall tar paper had
been nailed, but years of damp and wind had
loosened this pioneer protection, and the paper
now hung in long shreds or curled in uncertain
rolls about the bottom of the walls. The floor was
decayed and broken through in several places,
as though cattle had walked on the rotten boards,
and from the sod roof the water trickled in little
streamlets.

With a sigh of relief Miss Vane seated herself
in a corner. “This is better than outside at
least,” she said.

“Yes, indeed,” Gardiner agreed. “By means
of this tar paper and some of these broken boards
we will start a fire. We can surely find water
enough to hold it in check.”

In a few minutes he had a little fire burning.
Part of a broken crock was found, and with this
filled with water he stood guard over man’s best
servant.

As the fire flickered up its light fell on the face
of the girl, pale and drawn with pain. The young
man looked at her helplessly, and then ventured,
“You are suffering, Miss Vane. I wonder if you
would let me be surgeon?”

“Yes,” she answered, simply.

He removed the shoe. The buckles were
cutting into the flesh.

“No bones broken, I think,” he said, after
a brief survey, “but a bad sprain.”

With the scissors which every store clerk carries
he cut away the foot of the stocking. The ankle
was badly swollen and discoloured.

Gardiner removed his coat and deftly cut the
lining out of it. This he cut into strips, and,
dipping the strips in water, bandaged the
injured member. Presently the inflammation was
somewhat relieved and the pain became more
bearable.

“You are very good,” the girl whispered. “I
feel better now.”

“I am glad of that,” he answered. “The
accident is most regrettable, and the fault is all
mine.”

“Not at all. It was an accident, and an
accident is not a fault.”

“Do you believe that these accidents are preordained—that
they are part of some great
scheme of management, that we but vaguely
recognise?”

“I don’t know. I suppose there is a purpose
to all things—even to this sprained ankle.” She
smiled faintly. “If there is no purpose in little
things there can be no purpose in life, as life is
made up of little things.”

He seized at her answer. “And what purpose,
can you guess, lay behind this mishap?”

“A warning, no doubt, in future to be home
before dark,” she answered, with a return of her
natural spirit. “And I shall have such splendid
hair after this rain-water bath.”

The little fire flickered and shifted with every
gust of wind that stole into even this protected
corner. The rain fell in torrents on the sod roof
and washed down the log walls of the hut. The
lightning was incessant, the thunder terrific, and
as they spoke the trumpetings of heaven often
choked the words in their mouths.

“No,” said Gardiner at length, “there was a
deeper purpose in your misfortune. It seems too
bad to profit by it, but don’t you know—can’t you
see, Miss Vane, that I have wanted so long an
opportunity to talk with you alone?”

She drew up slightly in the corner where she
sat, but did not speak.

“You must know that I have sought your
company—your company, and none but yours—since
the night I first saw you. My interest—my
attention—must have told you long ago—that
which I would speak to you in words to-night.”

He was standing, gazing at her across the fire.
For months he had rehearsed his declaration, and
he felt that he had made a good start. She had
not stopped him, and he was encouraged.

“I am very tired,” she murmured.

“As you said a little while ago, surely there
must be a purpose in all things,” he continued.
“Surely it was such a purpose that brought you
to Plainville, and permitted me to know the
charm of your personality—the sweet delight of
your companionship. Miss Vane—Myrtle—I love
you—have loved you since first my eyes fell on
your fair face—shall love you always. May I
hope?”

She looked up; in her eyes was a strange gleam
that sent the young man’s pulses throbbing.
Had he known her better he would have read a
different meaning in that deep light.

She waited until the echoes of a crack of thunder
died away, and then asked, very quietly, “Is it
quite fair to press your question after all that
has happened to-day?”

For the moment he was taken back. “Of course,
you know, I don’t mean to take any advantage,”
he stammered. “Certainly you are suffering,
and I must wait your answer until you can think
it over calmly. Is it very painful?”

“Oh, the ankle? I wasn’t thinking about it.”

“What then?”

“What, you ask? Oh, cannot you see,
either? Must I tell you in so many words?”

“Burton!” he exclaimed. “It is of him you
are thinking?”

“How could I forget—so soon? You said he
would fly—even now he is probably a fugitive
from jus—from the law.... It is a fitting night
for such a tragedy in his life. And still, black as
it all looks, I cannot think but he is more sinned
against than sinning.”

“Your loyalty does you credit. Burton is
fortunate in having such a friend.” Under the
soft voice there was just the suggestion of a
sneer.

“Nevertheless,” she said, ignoring his remark,
“Burton will come back to trial, if indeed he ever
leaves. His innocence will yet be established.”

“Your faith is equal to your loyalty,” he
answered. “I wish I could have the same confidence.
Indeed, I did believe in him until this
latest development, but now—one must believe
his eyes,” he said, with a shrug of the shoulders.
“I suppose I shall lose the amount of his bail, but
I forfeit it gladly for the sake of his liberty.
I count such losses nothing, if only I may hope to
gain—what I have asked to-night.”

“I cannot answer you now. You have been
too good to me, and to my friend, to be denied
without at least the courtesy of consideration.”

“Your words carry little encouragement.
Listen. While I do not press for an answer, surely
I may state my case. I can offer you much that
appeals to every woman. I am not rich, but I
have a profitable business. No woman in Plainville
will be better provided for. In a few years
I hope to have saved enough to enter business
in a larger centre, and introduce you to circles
where your personality will command the admiration
it deserves. As for this boy——”

She made a gesture of dissent. “Your argument
makes no appeal to me, Mr. Gardiner.
A profitable business is a small thing to offer for
a woman’s affections. You undervalue the prize
you seek. And if social status were a consideration
to me——” She left the sentence unfinished,
but Gardiner thought he understood.

“Forgive me if I have seemed to place too
much stress on material things. I merely wish
to satisfy you that my declaration—my love—is
reasonable, and that I am in a position to carry
it out to its logical conclusion. Now, tell me I
may hope?”

“Hark! What was that?” she whispered, her
face tense with excitement. “Surely I heard a
sound?”

“It is nothing. The thunder, or the wind, or
the rain. On such a night the air is full of sound.”

“But this was different; a real sound, a
human

sound. I was sure I heard it.”

“Your nerves are playing tricks on you to-night,
Miss Vane. I assure you there was no
sound but the elements. Compose yourself, and
tell me I may hope.”

“I can tell you nothing now.”

“Then to-morrow?”

“No, not to-morrow.”

“When then? Set a limit to my uncertainty.”

“Not until after the trial.”

“Burton’s trial. If he should be acquitted?”

“You will know your answer.”

“And if convicted?”

“Then I will take time. Oh, please don’t
force me to be unkind. I cannot give myself—you
would not take the gift—without love. I
must analyse my own heart, and I cannot do that
while this cloud hangs over—us. When it has
dispersed, or settled, I will know.”

He took her hand in his and raised it to his
lips. “You are kind,” he said, “and fair.”

CHAPTER XI—A FRIEND IN NEED

“Oh, I take ’em from the counter, the factory, the mine,

They are rough-and-ready rascals till I lick ’em into line;

They are coming, coming, coming, from the land of Who-Knows-Where,

Black and white and many-tinted, brown and yellow, dark and fair;

They are coming from the valley, from the prairie, from the hill,

They are coming from the ‘May I?’ to the country of ‘I will!’

And for some the smart of failure, and for some Achievement’s crown,

As I roll ’em out Canadians—all but the yellow and brown.”

The Empire Builders.

Burton looked cautiously through the window.
A little fire was burning on the wet floor, and
between him and the fire stood Gardiner, facing
the corner in which Miss Vane sat, pale and
troubled. With a gasp he sank to the earth.
What tragedy was this, enacted before his eyes?
Why were these two here, in such a place, at such
a time? Could not revengeful Providence spare
him even this? Why had he been led through
that howling night to this spot, to this scene, of
all the places on the great prairie?

His first impulse was to rush in, throttle
Gardiner, and escort Miss Vane home. He stole
back to the window with this determination in
his heart, but a second look at the girl made him
pause. Whatever the explanation of her presence
here she was evidently not a prisoner. She was
talking with Gardiner, talking in a low voice
which he could not hear for the din of the night.
But there was no anger in her eyes, rather a deep
sorrow, and the sympathetic quiver of her lip,
which passed across it even more quickly than
the uncertain flicker of the fire, brought a lump
to the boy’s throat and banished every thought
of forcible intrusion. After all, Gardiner had
been a good friend to him. Had he withdrawn
his bond after the discovery of the money, as
most men would, Burton at this moment would
not have been at liberty. And, while he could
not understand their presence here at such a time
and in such a manner, it might be that after all
a satisfactory explanation could be given. Certainly
he could not improve the situation by
intruding.

They were talking earnestly, in short, tense
sentences. Then Miss Vane spoke at a little
greater length, kindly, as he thought, as one
may do who does not wish to wound a friend, and
Gardiner took her hand in his and raised it to his
lips.

Burton waited for nothing more. He drew
away from the window as quietly as he had come
and started his tramp through mud and water
back to town. He had now one thought only,
to get away, to escape, to forget Plainville and
Plainville people for ever. The last thin, silvery,
cord, stronger in its slender weave than any cable
of steel, which had bound him to the place was
broken, snapped at the distant end. It still
wound round his heart and would deepen and
tighten there forever, but its other anchorage
was gone. The pain was there but the restraint
was removed; Plainville was now less to him
than any town of the great new West. And to
that great new country he would take himself, as
quickly and as cunningly as he knew. They
would think he had crossed the line, that
would be the natural conclusion; instead, he
would beat his way into one of the new provinces
and lose himself in the desolation
of a homestead far from the furthest edge of
civilisation.

Burton thought these things out as he tramped
the muddy road, guided by the incessant lightning
which still played in the heavens, although the
force of the storm had passed to the eastward.
The revival of a purpose was as a rudder to his
life; again he threw back his shoulders and
drank in the night air, purified and vitalized by
the hundred million volts of electricity shot
through it in the last few hours. He was tired
and wet, but his mind had been revived from its
stupor, and he tasted the strange delight of the
hunted man—the joy of matching his wit against
the united wit of society and the machinery of
government. As the fox who eludes the hounds
may well be conceived to glory among his fellows
over his accomplishment, so hunted man glories
in his ability to outwit his pursuers, and in
addition can take the heroic attitude of the one
against the million.

As he approached the town he left the main
road and swung down toward the river, where
was a water-tank beside the railway bridge. It
was the custom of the west-bound freights to take
water at this tank, and he trusted to a happy
chance that such a train might come along before
daylight.

As though to encourage him in his new resolve
he had scarcely reached the tank when he heard
the whistle of an approaching train. He walked
back along the track, keeping well into the shadow
of the cut-bank. The engines on that division
did not use electric lights, and he had little fear
of being seen by the crew as they swept past.

The train pulled up slowly, the engineer having
allowed for a wet rail and shut off steam well
down the line. He slid a little past the tank
on his first stop and was obliged to back up a
rail-length; meanwhile Burton had located a
car with a threshing separator and engine on it,
and had little difficulty in getting on board while
the tender was receiving water. Feeling cautiously
about the separator, he soon found an open trap-door
with a space inside large enough to accommodate
him, and here he concealed himself. It was
dry in there, and the night was still warm with
lightning; he huddled himself up and almost
before the train was in motion had fallen asleep.

When he awoke he was sore in every joint,
and at first he stared in bewilderment at the
slats and pulleys about him. But he soon
recalled that he was a fugitive, a hunted man,
a man who dared not travel under the name his
mother gave him, and the thought brought less
enthusiasm than he had felt the night before.
He was conscious, also, of hunger, and feeling
in his pockets found some broken biscuits and a
few crumbs of cheese. These he ate eagerly and
settled back again to wait for the train to resume
its journey.

As time wore on and the train did not start
the boy became impatient, and at last ventured
to look out. The car on which he had concealed
himself stood alone, on a side track at a flag
station where it had been set off in the early
morning. He was not more than forty miles
from Plainville, and in a country where he might
easily be identified. He saw a farm house about
half-a-mile away, and as the sun was approaching
the zenith he doubted not that inside were a
pot of boiling potatoes and a roast of beef, with
the best the good wife’s garden could produce.
He had only a few cents in his pocket, but a
good muscle in his arm, and was not afraid to
work for a meal, but he feared to reveal himself
lest it might later lead to his identification. After
thinking it over he decided to remain in his hiding
place until dark, when he would steal to the
farmer’s garden and ward off starvation with
his vegetables.

He had settled back to put in the time as best
he could when another thought occurred to him.
This threshing outfit had evidently been consigned
to some farmer of the district, and was
likely to be unloaded that very day. True, it
was a little early in the season for threshing mills,
but the companies were anxious to get as many
as possible placed before the real rush of harvest
was upon them, and there was no reason to
suppose that this car would be taken any further
until unloaded. And, if he should be found
concealed in the separator, then explanations

would
be required.

Having turned this matter over in his mind
for a short time he let himself out by the trap-door
as stealthily as possible, although quite
sure that there could be no one within half-a-mile;
sprang to the ground on the side of the
car furthest from the farmer’s house, and presently
commenced to walk unconcernedly across the
prairie to the north-west. The country was not
closely settled, and he soon ventured to follow
a trail leading away from the railroad. The
walking was not bad here, as the district seemed
to have been out of the direct path of the storm,
and he soon found himself swinging along the
road at a good rate. He knew that ten or twelve
miles to the northward was another line of railway,
and it occurred to him that it would be good
policy to walk across and divert his patronage
to the other company. It would at least make
him less easily followed.

The sun was high and the day was warm, and
white, blocky clouds floated in the sky like icebergs
in a sea of blue. The gophers played along
the trail, and, far above, a hawk, pinioned on
motionless wings, spied the plain for the more
unwary. The memory of the night before, of
the experience of the past thirty-six hours, hid
itself behind a mist of unreality; but there was
a vacant soreness, a sensation of pain as from
some deep wound now healing, a pain so keen
that it was part pleasure. A frost-bite and a
burn are similar in their nature and their effect,
and there is a point at which joy can scarce be
distinguished from pain. A sense of loss may in
itself become an asset; adversity and rejection,
instead of crushing some men down, force them
forward and upward. Such a spirit was Burton’s;
as he walked along the prairie trail a resolution
took shape in his heart that he yet would show
“them”—meaning his little world—the stuff of
which he was made.

His reverie was broken by a blast of a horn
which caused him to jump clear of the roadway.
Looking hurriedly around, he saw behind him an
automobile with only the driver on board, and
the broad smile on the latter’s face indicated his
amusement at the young man’s nervousness.
Burton’s first thought was that he had been
followed; that his bail had been withdrawn,
and he would be taken back and thrown into
jail. But there was no menace in the kindly eye of
the automobilist, as he brought his car to a stop.

“Jump in,” he called, “we are going the same
way, let us travel together.”

Burton found no excuse for refusal, and obeyed.

In a moment the car was again in motion, but
the driver, a man of fifty or thereabouts, found
time to catechize his guest.

“Going far?” he demanded.

“Yes, quite a distance.”

“Live hereabouts?”

“No, down the line.”

“Perhaps you know me. I am Doctor Millar.”

“Why, yes!” exclaimed Burton, looking him
in the face for the first time. “I have often
heard my father speak of you.”

“Yes?” said the doctor. “And what is your
name?”

“Raymond Burton.” The words were out
before, with a gasp of surprise, he realised that
he had revealed his identity. But it was now too
late to recall them, he must face it through.

“Not a son of John Burton’s, of Plainville?”
asked the doctor, a new interest leaping into his
eyes.

“The same—the only son.”

“Well, well. I knew John Burton when I was
a shanty doctor on the Ottawa, and have known
him ever since. In the earlier days here, when
doctor’s drives were longer than they are now,
and we didn’t ride on rubber either, I have been
at his house more than once—but you won’t
remember. But—let me see—I hope you won’t
think me too personal—I am your father’s
friend—you had some—some misunderstanding,
did you not? The papers get things so wrong,
but——”

There was something in the man’s manner, in
his frank, open face and clear, genial eyes that
commanded Burton’s confidence. He resolved
to make a clean breast of it.

“Yes, I’m in trouble,” he admitted. “A
package of two thousand dollars disappeared
from my employer’s safe, and I was suspected. I
was committed for trial although the evidence
against me was very vague. But detectives
were put on my trail, and the money was found
in my trunk. How it got there you know as well
as I, Doctor. But it swept my feet from under
me, and now I am beating my way west. I hope
to lose my old life entirely, and make a fresh
start where this shadow will not follow me.”

The doctor drove furiously for a full mile.
Then he slowed up.

“Its pretty hard to lose one’s old life,” said he.
“You will find acquaintances wherever you go, just
as you found me. But there must be an explanation
to this thing. You must have enemies?”

“No, at least, only one, and he’s a farmer
living out of town, with no means of doing me
this injury.”

“You can never tell. I’d have him shadowed,
if I were you. You are sure there is no one
else?”

As though it had risen before him at that
moment, Burton saw a black, keen eye through
the crack of a door, but he answered, “No, there
is no one else.”

They were now nearing a town on the other
line of railway, where Dr. Millar lived.

“Come right in with me,” said the doctor.
“We will go right to my house and have dinner,
and then we will diagnose your case further.”

Burton gladly agreed, and when dinner was
over Dr. Millar took him into his consultation
room.

“The first thing I do with a patient, especially
a country patient”—his eye twinkled—“is give
him a bath. We will start at the beginning.
Step into the bathroom here and slip your clothes
out to me. They may need some attention, too.”

Burton did as he was bidden, and the refreshing
delight of a good bath went far to restore his
confidence in himself.

“I’ll take my clothes now, if they’re ready for
me,” he called to the doctor.

A bundle of clothes was slipped in through the
door. Burton opened them out and saw at a
glance that they were not his. The suit, although
of no better quality, was dry and pressed, and
there were clean shirt, underwear and hose.
Even a clean collar and tie had not been overlooked.

“These are not my clothes,” he called. “You
have made a mistake.”

“They are what the doctor ordered,” came
the answer, with a laugh, “and you put them
right on, or stay where you are.”

There was nothing for it but to obey, and in a
few minutes Burton, well and dryly clad, was
back in the consultation room, expostulating
with the doctor.

“Sit right down here,” said the doctor, disregarding
his protestations. “Do you know
what is the matter with you?”

“No,” said the young man, in surprise.

“You have eczema!”

“Eczema! Nonsense, doctor. I am quite well,
physically.”

“Now look here, young man, this is my case,
and if I say you have eczema you have eczema,
and you have it bad. So bad I’ll have to send you
to a town I know in the far West for treatment.”

“Doctor! I don’t understand you, but even
if I had eczema, or any such trouble, why should
I go to the far West for treatment? Are there
specialists there?”

“No, but—well, you see, it’s in the new homestead
country.”

“Doctor!”

“Not a word. There’s a train leaving in two
hours, and you’re going on it. By the time I
dress up that face for eczema your own father
wouldn’t know it, and a good sousing with
iodoform will keep the passengers from getting
too curious.”

“But doctor, I cannot have you do this thing.
You are assisting a fugitive. You may be held
responsible. You are running a risk.”

“Not much. I have no evidence that there
is a warrant out for you. If I make a mistake
in treating you for eczema that is simply a
professional misjudgment. A doctor is permitted
to make mistakes—and bury them.”

“But it is at least an evasion of the spirit of
the law. Of course, I’m not trying to defend the
law, I’m evading it myself, but I don’t want you
to be mixed up in it.”

“I’ve been thinking of that, too. I studied
your case while you were making your toilet.
I’m a good Canadian, and I obey the law. Society
is founded upon obedience. But if laws conflict,
which am I to obey?”

“The higher law, I suppose,” said Burton, not
just clear to what the doctor referred.

“Very well. That is just the way I figured
it out. The law of man says, ‘Hand him over to
the police.’ The law of God says, ‘Do unto
others as ye would—.’ When the law of man
conflicts with the law of God, the law of man
is
ultra vires
. We must obey the higher law,
and if men generally would do so fewer jails
would be needed. So you see how you happen
to have eczema.”

“I can’t thank you enough,” said Burton,
the moisture gathering in his eyes. “I will repay—when
I can.”

“That’s all right,” the good doctor assured
him, but he turned his face away a little. “I
helped you into the world, and I guess it’s my
privilege to help you through it.”

CHAPTER XII—LOVE—OR LAW?

“They say there is wealth in the doing,

That royal and rich are the gains,

But ’tisn’t the wealth I am wooing,

So much as the life of the plains;

For here in the latter day morning,

Where Time to Eternity clings,

Midwife to a breed in the borning,

I behold the Beginning of things!”

The Empire Builders.

Thirty hours later, in a forward seat of a
colonist car, sat a young man with his face in
bandages. A strong odour of disinfectants pervaded
that section of the car, and other passengers
avoided it as much as possible, but a doctor’s
certificate that the trouble was not of a dangerous
nature satisfied conductors and trainmen. For
thirty hours the young man had fasted, and the
interminable journey across the broad vest of
the prairie country wore on in dull monotony.
Villages, towns and cities had flashed by, and
now they were in the great unsettled ranching
country, where one may travel many townships
without seeing sign of human life. Here and there,
at great intervals, the eye caught a glimpse of
numberless herds grazing on the rolling uplands;
and at intervals greater still a horseman loomed
high against the distant horizon. The two
slender threads of steel seemed the only connecting
link with modern civilization, and as they strung
far into the endless West the very minds of the
passengers underwent an evolution, a broadening,
a disassociation with Established Things, and
assumed an attitude of receptiveness toward That
Which Shall Be. Here, at last, was the new
West, the manless land, its bosom bared for a
thousand miles to the hungry embrace of landless
man.

Through his little window Burton watched it,
and with the eye of faith and optimism saw all this
boundless country checkered into farms; towns
and cities rising where now were flag-stations and
water-tanks, telephones and telegraphs where now
were fences and buffalo runs; electric railways
groaning with wheat across the now trailless
prairie. Here was a chance to be in at the
beginning; to lay new foundations of business,
government, and society, unchecked by tradition,
unhampered by convention, undaunted by the
arrogance of precedent. How well those foundations
must be laid; a variation of a thousandth
of a principle, projected through a thousand
years, might swing the centre of gravity of
society beyond its base! And who were the
men to lay this foundation? To whom had
Fate entrusted such responsibility? He glanced
about the car, foul from its long journey, saturated
in tobacco smoke, reeking with alcoholic fumes
and the nameless odours of unwashed humanity.
Across the aisle sat a mother from Central
Europe, crowded in the seat with her three
children, clad in shawls and blankets, sweltering
in the July heat. Once he caught their eye;
they looked at him through the eye of the hunted
thing, the croucher, the oppressed; the eye
where hate serves for passion, where strength
means tyranny, where love has only an animal
significance. Was it from this that the ideal
State should rise; from this sad flotsam of the
seas of oppression and vice? And yet as he
looked he saw in that same eye another element,
deeper, perhaps, and less pronounced, as though
only rising into being. It was the element of
wonder; and whoso wonders is not without hope.
And there was ambition! This little frightened
family had dared to cross an ocean and half of
two continents—for what? Surely only to share
in a possibility impossible at home. Likely
enough the husband was already a homesteader
in the new land; he would meet them at one of
these little flag-stations with his ox-team and
wagon, and they would trek away, fifty, sixty,
a hundred miles into the wilderness to rear their
home, to lay the foundations of their future,
to bring up a family of free-born Canadians.
The whole car was filled with such foreigners;
rough and vicious-looking many of them; sad-eyed
and wondering a few, with here and there a
son of that jocund hilarity which knows no
restraint and whose current runs fullest where is
most to dry it up.

And yet, who should set bounds to their
future? What “mute, inglorious Miltons,” what
“village Hampdens” might be here, waiting
only the saving grace of environment to bring
them surging into the fulness of a life unknown,
undreamt, and yet the lure of whose prophetic
vision had fired their dark eyes in the far fields of
their unhappy ancestry! How far from the
civilisation of the past, how far even from the
civilisation of the present, had they thrown
themselves in this wild projection into the
unknown and the unlimited!

The train stood, waiting, on a side-track. With
his head out of the window Burton saw a black
cloud of smoke far to the westward; steadily it
grew until the muzzle of a locomotive could be
distinguished, and in a few minutes the eastbound
express roared past them in its down hill
run to evening dress and music and conventions
made for the fascination of disregarding them!
But even as it swept by from the open windows
of the dining car came the scent of fresh-cut
roses and carnations, and a moment later the
“newsy” hurried through the car with a bundle
of morning papers. Burton stopped him and
bought a copy, somewhat to the vendor’s surprise,
and settled down to read, verbatim, the speech
of the Prime Minister of England delivered in
London the evening before!

As the train approached the young man’s
destination he quietly slipped into the washroom
and removed his bandages. With soap
which the doctor had supplied him he erased the
salve and grease, and after a good wash, with his
hair combed and his collar and tie adjusted, he
felt more like a civilized being than at any time
since he had left the consultation room of Dr.
Millar. As the crowd swept out at the station
he mingled, unnoticed, among them.

He rushed first into a lunch-room, and after
satisfying his long hunger he had scarce set foot
on the station platform until a friendly hand
grasped him by the arm and led him to one
side.

“Come this way, Jack,” said a young man,
little older than himself, but with that alert,
active manner which is as distinctive of the
country as the chinook. “Let’s get out of this
bunch before they get wised up. Lucky I saw
you in time. Jimmy Reid, a chum of mine that
came in here homesteadin’ last year, has just got
word tuh go home tuh I-o-way, where his father’s
most all in, an’ he says to me last night—no
longer ago than last night—he says, ‘Frank, slip
down tuh the station to-morrow an’ if yuh see a
likely lookin’ fellow ’at ’ud appreciate a bit of a
start in this country put him next tuh my homestead.
I got tuh let her go,’ he says, ‘Dad’s all
in an’ I’ll have tuh coop up under Old Glory for
awhile, anyway. Put some decent fellow next
it,’ says he. Talk about luck——”

“But I am afraid I don’t understand,” said
Burton. “A man can’t sell a homestead unless
he has the patent, can he?”

The new acquaintance looked Burton in the
face for five seconds, and then burst into a
sudden guffaw.

“No, of course he can’t,” he declared, slapping
his leg and laughing hilariously. “Not any
more than he can travel on a train without a
ticket. Oh, you wise one,” he exclaimed, giving
Burton a friendly nudge in the ribs, and dropping
his voice, “what are you travellin’ colonist fer?
Oh, don’t tell me,” he went on, without waiting
for an answer. “It’s easier ’an butter. My
chum has the best homestead outa doors, an’ I
can’t take it, ’count o’ havin’ exhausted my
rights already, an’ that’s the only reason you get
in easy. All you got tuh do is stick around until
notice o’ cancellation is posted, an’ then get in
your application. He’s sixty days to get back
on the job, an’ unless he sees it’s goin’ your way
back he’ll come, an’ spoil the game of any one
that tries tuh butt in. It’s done ev’ry day in the
week, an’ you’re as safe as a dollar.”

“What’s this information going to cost me?”
Burton interrupted.

Jimmy Reid’s chum hesitated for a minute.
“I wouldn’t hardly like to say just what Jimmy
was settin’ on that place,” he said at last, slowly,
as one who is deliberating every word. “It’s easy
worth twenty dollars an acre, which is thirty-two
hundred fer the quarter, an’ when a man is
lookin’ fer a farm to achually go out an’ live on a
homestead’s as good as railway land. The
duties don’t cut no figure if your goin’ to live
there anyway. Course, Jimmy was expectin’
whoever got it ’ud use him decent—say about
two thousand.” The last word was uttered with
an inflection as though the speaker asked a question.

“I’m afraid it’s out of my class,” said Burton.
“I’ve only a few dollars with me, and I intend
to work out for a while to get enough to start me
on a claim of my own.”

“I’m awful sorry,” said the other, “I am, fer
a fact. ’Taint ev’ry day such a chance goes
strolling by. But—oh, by the way, I was forgettin’.
Here’s somethin’ right in your line.
Put that few dollars of yours into some A number
one top-notch town property an’ it’ll earn more
fer you before the snow flies than your muscles
will. Here’s somethin’ extra good,” as he drew
a map from his pocket. “See this block—high
class industrial property. Prices from one hundred
to three hundred dollars a lot, tenth down
an’ ten dollars a month until paid fer; no taxes,
interest, or charges of any kind. Here’s a fine
corner here, facin’ south an’ west, overlookin’
the town, five hundred dollars fer two lots, that’s
only fifty dollars you’d need to put up an’ we’ll
sell those lots again for a cool thousand before
December. Come along, you’re dry after your
trip; let’s wet this thing a little an’ then we’ll
take an auto out an’ show you the stuff.”

“Sorry,” confessed Burton, rather ashamed to
have to refuse, “but I really couldn’t handle any
of it. I’ve just four dollars and forty cents
in my pocket at this minute, and no more coming
until I earn it.”

“Sorry too,” said the land man, with no
abatement of his good humour. “Sorry both
fer you and me. But that really is a great buy.
Come an’ see me when yer in town. You don’t
look like a fellow that ’ud stay sod-bustin’ long
when you can make more money in town in six
months than most of these moss-backs ever saw.
Here’s my card—look me up when yuh get
settled an’ perhaps I can turn something your
way yet. Here’s a man I’ve got to see. So
long. Good luck!” and the real estate dealer
drilled away through the crowd.

Down the platform a little way a group of men
were gathered about an old farmer—a tall, thin,
one-time Yankee, typical from top boots to chin
whiskers. He was dickering with a bunch of
new arrivals for labour for his farm. A few
foreigners, curious-eyed, gazed at him for a
minute or two, their packs on their backs and
their chins drooping; then swung away to
gravitate to railway construction offices or the
town labour department. Half a dozen Anglo-Saxons
remained; two Englishmen, in riding
breeches, and three or four Eastern Canadians
and Americans. Burton joined the group.

“I came out to learn to fawm, sir,” one of
the Englishmen was saying. “I should jolly
well like to have a gow at it. Is there any gime—er—any—er
antelope or—gophahs?”

The farmer chewed a generous ration of tobacco
reflectively for some seconds, then expectorated
with much accuracy at a fish-plate on the railway.
“Ah,” he said at length, “there be some game,
all right, young man, and there also be some gun
experts. Ah got a neighbour out there who’s
been stuffin’ birds an’ beasts fer twenty year, an’
he’s so durn handy with a gun he can wing a
grass-hopper without breakin’ a bone. I reckon
he’s got most every crittur indig’ous to this
country in that collection o’ his’n. Ah,” repeated
the farmer, meditatively, “I reckon he has.”

“Ah, bah jove, I should like to meet him. A
jolly good sort, I should say.”

“Yep, not so bad. An’ awful accerate with
a gun. He’d be glad tuh see yuh, too. But if
he caught you walkin’ round in them seeder-drills
yer wearin’ he’d sure enough bag another
zoological specimen. An’ yu’d loose yerself in a
pair o’ jeans.”

There was a laugh in which all but the Englishmen
joined, and they, with a remark about a
“lot of bally rough-necks” withdrew themselves
from the group.

“I tell you what, Mr. Whiskers,” said a young
fellow wearing a Stetson and cigarette, “I think
I’m just the man you need. Was born on a farm
and know the whole deck. Can drive anything
from a dog-team to a traction engine. Nothin’
in the State had anythin’ on me when it came to
drivin’.”

The farmer focused his eyes on the cigarette
with supreme contempt. “If Ah had ye ah’d
use ye fer driving all right,” he said, speaking
with great deliberateness. “Yep. Ah’d use ye
fer drivin’ posts—if I could fit a handle!”

There was another laugh, but the crowd was
thinning down.

“Well, Ah suppose you was brung up on a
farm, too?” continued the farmer, addressing a
husky looking chap in a cottanade suit and
flannel shirt. “Can ye shock?”

“Well I guess I can,” said the man addressed.
“I was the long-distance shocker of our settlement.”

“Use tuh take in shockin’, Ah suppose,”
answered the farmer. “Waal, how many sheaves
did they put in the shock, your way about?”

The candidate for the position hesitated a
moment. “Well,” he ventured at length, “I
don’t know that I ever counted, but I should say
about fifty.”

“That’ll do fer you,” said the farmer. “You’re
not a shocker. You’re a stacker.” Then turning
to Burton, “Ah suppose you was raised on a farm
too?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Ever drive a binder?”

“Yes, sir.”

“How’s binders built—right or left-hand cut?”

“Most of them are left-hand, except McCormicks.”

“By hang,” said the farmer, addressing an
invisible audience, “here’s a fellow that knows
somethin’, anyhow. Say! Now, supposin’ you
was drivin’ a binder, an’ she was kickin’ out loose
sheaves right along, with the knot all on one
end o’ the string, what’ud yuh do fer it?”

“I’d sharpen the knotter-knife first,” said
Burton, “and if that didn’t fix it I’d——”

“Thet’ll do,” interrupted the farmer. “This
is my wagon here. Throw in yer bundle an’
stretch yerself around town fer an hour, an’
then we’ll hit the trail. But Ah forgot to tell you,
it’s fifty miles tuh my farm, an’ the comp’ny out
there ain’t much writ up in the sassiety papers.”

“The farther the better,” said Burton. There
was a touch of bitterness in his voice, and the
old man looked at him keenly.

“Love—or law?” he asked, at length.

Burton flushed but did not reply, and the
farmer continued, with a sudden kindness in his
speech, “Never mind, lad. This country’s full
of fellows who’re tryin’ to git away from one or
t’other of them two irresistibles—love an’ law.
But God help the fellow thet gits hit by both.
When a chinook crosses the path of a nor’wester
there’s trouble fer everybody.”

Burton accompanied his new employer about
the town for a couple of hours. The farmer was
making purchases at the stores and implement
houses, and as he did not expect to be in the
town again until after the threshing it was some
time before his business was completed. The
young man stood beside him in the store, and his
practical knowledge of quality and values
astonished the old farmer. At length the purchasing
was finished, and with the double wagon-box
piled high with groceries, canned goods,
dry-goods, hardware, harness, binder twine,
machine oil and all the other sundries demanded
by the activities of the harvest season, the two
men started on their journey farmwards.

The sun was well into the western sky before
they left the town, and in the hot July afternoon
the horses had to be allowed their pace. The
roads were alive with traffic, farmers driving in
as much as a hundred miles for their fall supplies.
Scores of other wagons, loaded as was this one,
were to be seen; great stacks of lumber were
dragged slowly along by four- and six-horse
teams; a veritable procession of mowers, rakes
and binders, some loaded on wagons and some
running on their own wheels, stretched along the
country road, the procession here and there
blocked into divisions by giant steam or gas
tractor outfits with their long, slow-crawling
caravan of paraphernalia.

Sundown found our travellers approaching a
diminutive farm house, where the team of their
own accord turned in at the open gate.

“This is whar Zeb Ensley lives,” said the
farmer. “His shack is small, but his hospitality
would fill a hemisphere, an’ Ah gen’rally allow
to put up with him goin’ an’ comin’. Zeb’s
English, but he’s past the moultin’ stage, an’ he’s
awful white. After an Englishman moults—gits
rid of his unnecessary feathers—they ain’t
no better neighbour.”

By this time the team had stopped in front of
an enclosure made by standing mill slabs on end,
which was all the shelter provided for Mr. Ensley’s
horses. The host himself was beside the wheel,
and placed a brown hand in the farmer’s as the
latter clambered down from the high spring
seat.

“How are you, Mr. McKay? Back this far,
safe, I see, with a big load and a likely looking
farm hand. Won’t you introduce me?”

“Waal, now, by hang, thet’s one thing Ah
can’t do,” said Mr. McKay. “They ain’t been
no formalities yet. When Ah find a man ’at knows
gee frum haw Ah don’t worry much about what
he was christened.”

“Call me Ray,” said Burton, as he threw the
inside tugs over the horses’ backs and slipped the
tongue from the neck-yoke. “Go into the house
and rest, Mr. McKay, and I will put the team
away, if Mr. Ensley will show me where.”

“Waal, what d’ye think of thet?” said Mr.
McKay, slapping his thigh. “The young fellow’s
givin’ orders already. An’ what’s more—what’s
more,” he repeated, pointing a huge fore-finger
at Burton—“what’s more, the old man’s goin’
tuh do as he’s told.”

Burton unhitched the team and watered them;
drew the harness off and rubbed them down with
a wisp of hay as Ensley filled the mangers. Then
the two men walked to the shack, where they
found Mr. McKay with his great boots off and
his stockinged feet resting comfortably on the
ash-pan of the stove, in which a slab fire burned
cheerily. The tea-kettle was singing lustily; a
saucepan of dried apples simmered on the back
of the stove, and presently the appetising smell
of frying potatoes and eggs filled the little room.
The light from Ensley’s single lamp fell on the
walls, papered with pictures and cartoons from
English publications, with a dry-goods box
nailed up for a cupboard, and over the door the
miniature arsenal which always marks the
Britisher’s home. Outside the darkness was
settling down; the long, persistent twilight of
the Canadian summer lingered in the western
sky, but the east loomed black and colourless,
and a strange night wind sighed mournfully over
the endless, sweeping fields of grass.

CHAPTER XIII—GROPING

“Then I gave him hopes he could not define and fears

that he could not flee;

And he heard my cry in the long, still night,

In my spirit-thrall I held him tight,

And his blind soul-eyes craved for the light;

But the light he could not see.”

Prairie Born.

Hiram Riles’ temper was not improved by
driving home through a soaking rain from the
Dominion Day sports at Plainville. Hiram’s
interest in sports at best was purely negative.
He enjoyed the discomfiture of the defeated team;
he gloated over the player whose costly error
brought upon him the wrath of the spectators.
At a game Hiram always stood a little to one side,
watching, not for brilliant plays, but for errors,
and passing contemptuous remarks about such
of the players as were unfortunate enough to
localise his displeasure. There had been only
one bright spot in the whole day’s experiences.
That was the news of the stolen money being
found in Burton’s trunk. Riles had never
forgiven the affair at Grant’s, and his nature was
such that his hatred grew rather than abated
with the passage of time. He now felt that his
young enemy would be properly covered with
shame; he could honourably dismiss the matter
from his mind, or at least lay it aside to be revived
when Burton regained his liberty. But the
storm had interfered with his intended carousal;
Riles’ appetite rarely got the better of his prudence,
and even the reflection that Burton was by this
time probably safe in the cells failed to give the
pleasure such a happy situation warranted.

But Riles’ displeasure during his drive home
was a small thing compared with his rage on
discovering that the hailstorm had swept out
forty acres of his best crop. The destruction
had caught only a corner of his farm, and although
his poor neighbour to the south had every stalk
of his crop destroyed Riles wasted no sympathy
on neighbours, but walked his floor all night
nursing his anger and vexation. At an earlier
hour than usual he wakened London, and cuffed
the boy soundly before he made his escape to the
stables. The cows in the corral yawned and
rose lazily, stretching their hind quarters to throw
off the night’s cramp, as a soft mist rose from the
warm spots where they had lain. London
glanced at the house, but there was no sign of
Riles; then he softly set the dog on the astonished
cattle. For a minute or two they circled the
corral; then one old cow, more venturesome than
the rest, sprang over the fence, breaking the upper
wire in the effort, and all followed her to liberty.

“That’ll give ’im somethink helse to worry
habout,” reflected the boy. “’E’ll think they
broke away when the ’ail struck ’em.”

Riles’ temper showed no improvement during
the day, nor for many days thereafter. The loss
of forty acres of grain was a matter calling for at
least as many days’ mourning. The poor neighbour,
whose crop was all he had, had taken heart
again, and whistled as he ploughed the ruin of
the storm underfoot, but Riles could not forget
that Providence had been most unfair to him,
and was even more brutal than ever with his
help, both beast and human.

But London was not the child he had been
when first he entered the farmer’s employ. He
was now eighteen years old, and although small
and ungainly of stature, and erratic in many of
his mental exploits, he had imbibed something
of the ambition and independence of the young
men of the district, and he chafed more than
ever under Riles’ authority. He found opportunity
frequently to visit the Grant farmhouse;
in fact, whenever the cattle were lost he first
inquired at Grant’s, and it was noticed that on
such occasions the stray animals were never
discovered until long after dark. This meant a
booting from Riles, but London held a couple of
hours’ respite with the Grant boys well worth
the price. Sometimes, too, he would chat with
Susy Grant or Miss Vane, and neither girl guessed
the strange workings of his dwarfed little intellect.

“Everybody calls you London,” said Miss
Vane, one evening. “But that must be a nickname.
Tell me, what is your real name? What
did your mother call you, or do you remember
your mother?” she added, softly.

“My real name is Wilfred Vickery,” answered
the boy, “but nobody calls me that. Guess
Hi’m not worth a real name,” he continued,
with a bitter little laugh. “My mother gave me
that name, but Hi never ’eard ’er speak it, leastways,
not as Hi remembers hof.”

“That is a nice name,” said Myrtle. “I am
going to call you Wilfred. You must not think
you are not worthy of a good name. You must
feel worthy—and then be worthy.”

“That’s not wot they say hin the churches,”
the boy replied. “Once Hi went to church hin
the school’ouse, to see w’at hit was loike, an’ the
preacher said as ’ow we was all sinners, an’ ’ow
we was hall to think wot big sinners we was,
an’ ’ow we was all to think we was a bigger sinner
than anybody helse. Hi guess Hi am, too,
bigger’n anybody—’cept old Riles.”

“Have you tried not to be a sinner?” the
girl asked.

“Wot? Not to be a sinner? Hi tried to
do wot the preacher said, an’ be the biggest
sinner ever was. An’ Hi guess Hi am—all but
Riles.”

“But that is not what the minister meant,
Wilfred. He meant that you must be humble,
and that you must be sorry for your own wrongdoing.”

“Wot is ’umble?”

“Why, to be humble is to feel that you are in
the world to help, and to be of service to other
people, no matter who they may be.”

“Are you ’umble, Miss Vane?”

The question was quite unexpected, and the
girl hesitated for a moment as she descended
from the abstract to the concrete.

“I hope I am,” she said at length.

“But people say as ’ow you are proud an’
stuck hup.”

“Do they Wilfred? Who say that?”

“Riles an’ Mrs. Riles. She says as ’ow you’re
a ’ot-’ouse plant, fer hornament more than use.”

“Dear me, that is too bad,” laughed the girl,
and the ripple of her voice was good to hear.
Even London knew that it was—he couldn’t
describe it—but
different
from any other voice.
“But, supposing Mrs. Riles is right, don’t you
think that to be an ornament is to be useful?
Look at that tiger lily; is it not beautiful? But
of what use is it?”

“Hi guess hit haint no use,” said the boy.
“But when Hi go over the prairie after the
cattle hoften Hi pull a lily, hand Hi loike to walk
w’ere they grow.”

“And if God took all the beautiful flowers, and
the wonderful clouds, and the glorious sunsets
and dawns, and the singing birds, and the weep of
the wind as it blows up out of the dark, and—and
the beautiful people out of the world, it wouldn’t
be such a nice place to live in, would it?”

“No, because ’Ee would ’ave to take you,
Miss Vane.”

The girl coloured, pleased with the genuine
and unexpected compliment. But she turned it
to account.

“Then it is possible for the ornamental to be
useful, isn’t it?”

The setting sun was crimsoning the fleecy clouds
far overhead, and throwing long shadows in the
warm August evening. Everywhere was the smell
of ripening wheat. The tinkle of a cowbell came
up from the distance; a meadowlark sang its
short liquid tune from a neighbouring fence post.

“Hi guess you’re right,” said the boy, after a
long pause: “Hi guess hit’s worth while bein’
beautiful. Per’aps hit’s jist has himportant to
be beautiful has to raise w’eat hand milk cows,
but nobody hever talked that wy to me before.”

“It’s worth thinking about, Wilfred. So many
people in this country have not learned that ‘the
life is more than food, and the body more than
raiment.’ They can see the use of potatoes, but
not of poetry. And they are in such a hurry!
Such a hurry to live, one would think they
wanted to get their lives over with. Poise and
repose are lost arts.”

She was looking at the gathering dusk in the
east, and spoke as though soliloquizing with
herself. London brought her back to earth.

“Hi don’t know hall you sy, but hi know
wothever you sy his roight,” he declared, with
sincere gallantry. “Hand Miss Vane, can Hi
come at noights w’enhever Hi can sneak away,
an’—talk with you, loike we did to-noight?”

“Yes, Wilfred, you may come whenever you
can, and we will talk about things that are
beautiful, and things that are useful. And we
will try to remember that there is nothing so
beautiful as a useful life, and nothing so useful
as a beautiful life. And there is nothing so
precious as—a friend.”

She took the hand of the boy, so long friendless,
in her own, and in that moment the soul of the
little Barnardo orphan burst the bonds of eighteen
years’ environment and lit up the face of a
man
.

This evening’s conversation was the first of
many. Wilfred was an artist at devising reasons
and excuses for visiting Grants’. And soon an
unlooked-for opportunity presented itself. Miss
Vane had taken a deep interest in the boy, and
did not hesitate to enlist her cousins in a little
plan for setting Wilfred at liberty in the evenings.
Accordingly, George Grant called on Riles, and,
after the customary commonplaces about the
weather and the crops, mentioned his desire to get
a boy to sit up for an hour or two at night to
watch the smudge fires, and put them out
after the cattle had settled down. Could Mr.
Riles spare London from nine to eleven for a
job like that? They would either pay him in
money for the boy’s services, or allow it when
they exchanged labour in threshing time. But
perhaps London had enough to do as it was,
and would be better in bed after his day’s——.

Not a bit of it. He was rusting for want of
exercise. Of course, he could go. Grants had
always been good neighbours, and they would
always find Hiram Riles ready to do a favour.
The boy would go over every night as long as he
was needed. For, be it said, it was one of the
whims of Riles’ nature that he entertained no
aversion to the Grants.

So it came about that Wilfred spent many of
his evenings at the Grant farm. The companionship
of the Grant boys, the parental kindness of
Mr. and Mrs. Grant, the ready wit of Susy, which
spared neither herself nor her acquaintances,
were a relevation to the boy, who had always
associated farm life with grim labour, hard
words and sour dispositions. At nine at night the
farm company gathered about the kitchen table,
where were onions from the garden and buttermilk
from the dairy; and as they ate, the exploits
of the day were re-enacted, and the best of cheer
and fellowship prevailed. And when the simple
meal was over, and the “old folks” had gone
upstairs, the young people engaged in harmless
pastimes and amusements for another hour.
Miss Vane was the soul of kindness and courtesy
to the orphan boy, and although she joined in all
the pleasantries of the evening she had through
all a deeper purpose than mere pastime, and she
seldom failed to have a few serious words with
Wilfred before he started on his walk through the
dew-laden grass to the Riles’ farm. And the lad
was responding to her interest and her confidence.
A new spirit seemed to have been born in him,
his slouchy habits gave way to an air of brisk
alertness, and his speech, although not yet refined,
had a tone of seriousness and responsibility
unknown in the past.

In conversation Myrtle seized every opportunity
to quote to the boy from the masters of literature
such selections as his awakening intellect could
appreciate, and she had the satisfaction at length
of finding his interest excited, not only in the
selections themselves, but in the authors of them.
She now knew that she had attained her first
purpose; she had made his world wider than the
boundaries of a little farming community; she
had raised him to the point where his mental
eye fastened on something beyond his horizon of
the past. She had wakened the desire for knowledge;
all other things were now possible.

Walking up the path from the pasture field
one evening—the self-same path she had walked
with Burton in that spring that seemed so many
years ago—the light night wind stirred in the
tops of the willows growing by the little stream.
Against the background of the faintly coloured
west distances took on an enchanted perspective,
and the little limbs a few feet above their heads
could easily be seen as forest monsters stretching
into the lowering sky. They paused and sat on a
grassy bank, watching the dusk gather through
the lattice-work of leaves, and as they sat the girl
repeated softly—

“I remember, I remember

The fir-trees dark and high;

I used to think their slender tops

Were close against the sky.

“It was a childish ignorance,

But now ’tis little joy

To know I’m farther off from heaven

Than when I was a boy.”

“I have heard old men choke on that last
line, Wilfred,” she added, but was hardly prepared
for his answer,—

“Yes, but they started ’igh up and grew
down. Hi started low down and ham—am, Hi
mean—growing up. For me, Hi’m closer to ’even
to-night than w’en Hi was a boy—a little boy—for
Hi’m a boy yet. Hi’m close to ’even w’en
Hi’m close to you,” declared the lad, his face
flushed with a light she could not see in the darkness.

She laughed lightly, all unguessing the streams
of passion of which his sincerity should have
made her aware. From an equal she could not
have accepted the remark without misgiving,
but from Wilfred—the idea was so unique that
it did not even occur to her.

“Oo wrote that?” the boy demanded, after
a silence.

“Thomas Hood,” was the answer. “But the
night is growing chilly. Let us go to the house.
I have a little volume of Hood’s I will lend you—if
you will read it.”

“Hindeed Hi will,” he answered, as they
walked up the path.

At the house they found that all had retired.
Myrtle slipped a little book into Wilfred’s hand.
“Read ‘The Song of the Shirt,’ and ‘The
Bridge of Sighs’ and—perhaps—‘Eugene Aram.’
Good night.”

“Good night,” he said, and disappeared in the
darkness.

Myrtle sat down in the little parlour of the farmhouse.
All was stillness. The hard labour of
agricultural life had driven the boys and Susy
early to their rooms. But their beautiful cousin
had no thought of sleep. As she walked up the
pasture path a gust of memory swept over her;
the memory of a night, dark, with slight stirring
breezes that whispered eerily among the willows;
the memory of a strong hand that had helped her
to her place on the pony, and had lain on his mane
as they walked slowly homeward. Burton’s
disappearance had been complete; since the
First of July celebration he appeared to have
dropped out of existence as absolutely as if the
earth had swallowed him. Her strong confidence
in his innocence had battled bravely against overwhelming
evidence, but in the unequal conflict she
knew it to be breaking down. Since the night of
their terrible experiences in the thunderstorm Gardiner
had not attempted to force his acquaintance
with her, but while she suffered from the injured
ankle he telephoned a courteous inquiry daily, and
since had found occasion to make a couple of casual
calls. Miss Vane had received him kindly; he
had been Burton’s friend; he was, indeed, her
friend. Burton’s disappearance placed Gardiner
in the
rôle
of a benefactor; he would forfeit the
bail given for the young man’s liberty, and the
fact that he seemed prepared to do so without a
murmur of protest gave him a strong claim upon
Myrtle’s regard. But she could not lose sight of
the fact that there was a purpose in all Gardiner’s
conduct; that he sought her for his wife, and that
he was only waiting until there seemed no possibility
of Burton’s return before he pleaded his suit
once more with her.

And if Burton did not return—what? A
hundred times she had thrown this thought from
her mind, but it intruded again more arrogantly
than ever. A hundred times she had said, “He
will return.” But time was wearing on, and
Burton’s complete disappearance left little question
as to his purpose. Even while she told
herself he would return the cold sweat of doubt
and uncertainty gathered on her brow. Early
in the history of his trouble she had written to
her brother in the East, and had received an
answer of sound advice and practical encouragement;
but Harry had soon after sailed for Europe,
and neither advice nor consolation was to be had
from him at present.

With a gesture as if warding off something
unpleasant—something real and unseen—she
walked across the room and drew a little volume
from a book-case. It opened in her hand, and as
she sat down her eyes fell upon the lines—

“Build thee more stately mansions, O my soul,

As the swift seasons roll!

Leave thy low vaulted past!

Let each new temple, nobler than the last.

Shut thee from heaven with a dome more vast.

Till thou at length art free,

Leaving thine outgrown shell by Life’s unchanging sea.”

With a sharp breath she closed the book. The
whole scene stood before her again; the house
crowded with merry-makers, their curious faces
turned toward the reciter in courteous attention,
but with an expression as though to ask what it
all was about; the young man, with slightly
flushed features but clear, deep, even voice; and
then that wonderful instant of telepathy when
their eyes met, and she heard the voice deepen
and broaden as though a great storage of reserve
energy had been connected to the human dynamo.

She rose with the book still in her fingers, drew
a shawl about her slight figure, and stepped out
into the night. It was absolutely dark. A soft
wind moved quietly, toying with the light folds
of her dress; a few heavy drops of rain spattered
in the dust. God’s heaven had descended in a
mantle of darkness and lay brooding over all the
face of the prairies. And somewhere under that
mantle of darkness, somewhere under the heaven
of that same God, was a young man, sturdy and
physically strong, but bearing in his quiet eyes
and melancholy mouth a load beyond his years.
How had his “stately mansions” narrowed in!

As high-strung natures will, she sought relief
from her mental torment in physical exercise.
Regardless of the darkness and the threatening
rain she walked down the path and out at the
gate; her feet found the hard earth of the country
road and she walked rapidly along, caring little
where she went. But the blood, demanded by
her exercise, drew away from the brain; the
cool, moist wind salved the fever of her brow,
and presently she turned her footsteps homeward.
As she passed the summer-house a sudden impulse
seized her; she entered, laid herself down on a
bench of woven willows, and in a few minutes was
lost in sleep.

CHAPTER XIV—THE SACRIFICE OF SILENCE

“Greater than the measure of the heroes of renown,

He is building for the future, and no hand can hold him down;

Though they count him but a common man, he holds the Outer Gate,

And posterity will own him as the father of the State.”

The Empire Builders.

As Wilfred walked home through the wet grass
his spirits were high with a new-born enthusiasm
of youth. The drudgery, the hardship, the toil
unlightened by a gleam of humour or a thought
except of selfishness, with which the past years
of his life had been surrounded, seemed now as
an unreal dream. There were greater things in
life than cows, and gardens, and fields of wheat;
and in a dim way these things of which he had
not so much as guessed were opening to his
astonished vision. In his hand he carried the
little book of poems, but in his heart was the joy
of a grassy slope, where they watched the night
deepening through the willows, and the sound
of her voice, liquid as the little stream before them.
He had thought of girls, always, with a shyness
strongly seasoned with an element of contempt;
but toward her he felt only a reverence so deep it
almost hurt. He was young, and buoyant with
the first great emotion of his life, and in the crude
colourings of his fancy he traced wonderful
dreams that drew out of the future and became
very real to his intoxicated senses.

But at the door of the Riles’ house his visions
fled, and the spirit of cunning that had so long
been his best protector brought him back to
earth. He slipped quietly in, found the lantern
on its nail, and silently climbed the ladder to his
room. Here he lit the lantern, and without
removing his clothing lay down to read by the
smoky light.

Wilfred’s education was very elemental, and he
stumbled through many passages with difficulty,
but in it all he was able to catch something of
the spirit of the verses. At length he settled
into “Eugene Aram,” and as the excitement of
the dramatic lines tightened about him he read
aloud, wholly unconscious of the flight of time.

On his bed below Hiram Riles fancied he heard
a mumbling sound come from his garret, and
opening his eyes saw a dim light shining through
the opening in the ceiling. It was deep in the dead
of night, but there was no question that London
was talking, in a nervous, agitated voice. Riles
could not distinguish the words; he stole to the
foot of the ladder and noiselessly ascended it
until his head came to the level of the garret floor.
Here he saw the boy lying on his mattress, a few
rags of blankets about him, his knees drawn up,
his head supported by a bundle of clothing, the
lantern sitting on the broken chair and throwing
an uncertain light upon the little volume in his
hands. Riles paused in wonder, and in a moment
was rivetted by the words—

“Two sudden blows with a ragged stick,

And one with a ’eavy stone,

One ’urried gash with a ’asty knife,—

And then the deed was done:

There was nothing lying at my feet

But lifeless flesh and bone!

“Nothing but lifeless flesh and bone,

That could not do me hill;

And yet Hi feared ’im hall the more

For lying there so still.

There was a manhood in ’is look

That murder could not kill!

“And, lo! the universal hair

Seemed lit with ghastly flame,—

Ten thousand thousand dreadful eyes

Were looking down in blame;

Hi took the dead man by ’is ’and——"

Riles’ face was writhing in an effort to find
expression, but the vocal organs refused to fill
their office. Like most men of low moral nature,
while scoffing at religion he was an easy victim
to the terrors of the supernatural. The fact that
this orphan boy, the victim of his brutality for
so many years, should lie awake at the dead of
night stammering through these ghastly lines
must carry some horrible significance. He tried
to speak, but a muffled gurgle in his throat was
all the sound that responded.

It was enough. Wilfred’s ears, sharpened by
the terror of the thing he read, caught and magnified
the guttural noise. With a shriek he sprang
from the bed and, standing in the centre of the
floor, his body bent forward, his fingers clutching
in nervous excitement, he peered about the musty
little room. Presently his eyes fell upon the
livid face of Riles, just above the floor line. They
fixed each other in a stare of terror, but, to his
own great surprise, the boy found a strong sense
of self-control beginning to bear him up.

He was first to break the silence. “So hit was
you, ’Iram Riles. You couldn’t sty awy. These
words drew you loike a magnet draws a needle.
Listen, w’ile Hi read ye more——"

“Don’t, boy; don’t!” Riles managed to
exclaim. “It isn’t true. I never harmed
him.”

Wilfred’s mind seemed to be acting by telepathy
rather than from his own initiative. Afterwards
he could not guess what put the words in his
mouth.

“Yuh never ’armed ’im, didn’t yuh? Well,
w’ere is ’e? W’ere is ’e, ’Iram Riles? That’s
wot people are haskin’, an’ they’re thinkin’ o’
you w’en they hask it. W’ere is ’e?”

“I don’t know, Wilfred”—he had never called
him Wilfred before—“I don’t know where he
is. I didn’t touch him. I tell yuh it never
struck him, do yuh hear?”

“Ho, oh, then you missed ’im! By ’ow much?
Tell me, ’Iram Riles. ’Ow much? A foot?”

The man had drawn himself into a half sitting
posture, his back against the wall, his body half
through the trap door, his arms outstretched upon
the floor. His fingers trembled, and his lips
twitched as he tried to speak. He was a poor
ghost of the strong man Wilfred had always
known.

“Listen, boy,” he said at length. “I figured
on fixin’ him, but I didn’t. I waited for him to
come out of the store, and I threw it at him, but
in the darkness I missed.”

“Han’ then yuh went in hand robbed the
syfe,” completed Wilfred.

“You lie!” shouted Riles, suddenly regaining
his self-possession. “It’s all lies! What I told
you was a lie! You hear me?”

He had risen on to his feet, and, with arms
outstretched, was slowly approaching the boy.
Wilfred read the change, and saw that the man
who had narrowly escaped committing murder
was still capable of it. But the lad had long been
accustomed to protect himself, and his cunning
did not desert him at the critical moment. Quick
as a flash he seized the burning lantern and
hurled it in the face of his assailant. For an
instant all was darkness; then a tongue of flame
shot across the floor and leapt up the oil-saturated
night garments of Riles. With a scream the man,
now a blazing torch, plunged down the opening
to the floor below and rushed into the outer air.
His wife, awakened by Wilfred’s shriek a few
moments before, showed her presence of mind by
wrapping Riles in a blanket, which extinguished
the blaze before he was seriously injured. Wilfred
took the opportunity to steal silently out of the
building. Riles was swearing terribly as the boy
slipped by the corner and disappeared in the
darkness.

Wilfred’s plans were soon laid. Bundling up
such clothing as he had been able to snatch up
in the moment allowed, he waited a short time
to see if the house would take fire. It did not,
somewhat to his disappointment. To return to
Riles would, he knew, be to court disaster. He
had a very different purpose now in view. Of
late he had been reading the papers at Grants’ in
the evenings, and had learned that the Government
of Canada was prepared to give a quarter
section to any man who would live on it and
establish a farm. It was a great day when his
poor, narrow imagination first made the leap that
supposed him—Wilfred Vickery, Barnardo boy—the
owner of a farm in his own right. But when
the supposition had once been made it grew upon
him with a resistless fascination. He was now
eighteen. The problem of getting West was a
small thing to him. The harvest season was
approaching, and he could work. He had been
nursing this great thought for weeks, and now,
at this moment, it became evident that he must
strike out and boldly grapple with destiny.
And he had another purpose, of which he scarcely
dared think, but which was in reality the foundation
of his whole desire.

Perhaps it was this deeper purpose that directed
his footsteps again to the Grant farmhouse.
He hardly knew the road he had taken until
the building loomed up before him, solemn but
friendly in the first gray suggestion of dawn. He
walked quietly around and looked at all the
windows, but there was no gleam of light. If
only
she
would appear! If only he might tell her
of his plans, his hopes—if only he dared! But
she was sleeping, dreaming, perhaps, of “the
fir trees, grim and high,” and he dared not take
the chance of discovery by remaining until the
family were astir. He must leave, silently and
without good-bye; he must pass out of her life,
for the present at least, as a leaf that falls in a
stream and is borne away in the darkness. With
a sigh he turned to go, down the little path that
lead out by way of the garden. A few steps
brought him to the door of the summer-house.
Here he paused again; the place was sanctified
with the memory of one or two holy evenings;
he stepped inside, if only to prolong the sweet
sorrow of his leave-taking.

As he stood, framed in the doorway, his vision
was drowned in the blank darkness of the little
building. But as one sense becomes inoperative
another grows more alert, and in a moment his
quick ears caught the sound of easy, regular
breathing. Someone was sleeping in the summer-house;
probably one of the boys. His first
impulse was to steal silently away, but a strange
fascination led him toward the little rustic couch
across the farther wall. Hands outstretched, he
crept toward it in the darkness, until his fingers
touched a mass so uncertain their nerve-tips scarce
detected it. He rubbed finger and thumb
together, and knew that silken tresses lay between.

With a great bound his heart almost seemed to
drive the air from the lungs; the veins of his neck
bulged as though they would burst. He sank
upon his knees, leaning forward. A flood of
warm air flushed across his tense face; it beat
and rebeat like the waves of a sea, and in that
moment the boy understood that Time is but
a segment calendared out of the circle of Eternity.
He could not be mistaken. The elective affinities
are never deceived. With a great breath he drew
his shoulders back. Within his reach, within
the very touch of his finger-tips, was the prize
of life compared to which heaven and earth
resolved into vague, uncertain promises!

She stirred slightly, as though some wandering
thought from the material world had blown
in airy ruffles across the smooth lying haven of
her spirit land. Some consciousness of human
presence—strange element of the divine, which,
like a sudden light on sleeping eyes can pass the
gates of slumber without unbarring them—was
calling the mind back to its vacated chambers.
Wilfred remained kneeling, thrilled with the
strange exaltation of triumph and humility.
His presence was operating upon her, like the
magnet upon steel. In a moment she would
speak. She would call him by name.

His eyes, straining through the darkness,
caught the outline of her face. One hand lay
across the forehead, palm upward. It fell
listlessly to her side. She turned her head gently
toward him, and a low sound escaped her
lips.

His ear had not been quick enough. He leaned
close to her, alert for the moment when she would
call his name.

“Ray,” she murmured. “Oh, Ray, they said
you would not come back.”

As a hypnotist may convert his subject into
human stone by the utterance of a single word,
the heart of the Barnardo boy froze as that low
sound struck his ear, and his tense face moulded
itself in deep, sudden furrows. Not all the years
of the future should quite efface those quick-cut
channels of disillusionment.

He sat back on his heels, his hands limp by
his sides. For a moment—one brief moment—an
unworthy warfare raged in his nature. How
completely she was in his power! But the thought
had not crossed his mind when, by some strange
instinct, he removed his hat from his dishevelled
head, as one might do in a holy presence. For
a long while he sat, staring at the blank wall
before him; then quietly rose and stole toward
the door.

“Who’s that? Who’s that?” she demanded
in a frightened tone, sitting suddenly bolt upright.
“Where am I? Speak, will you?”

Wilfred turned again toward her. “Hit’s only
London, Miss Vane,” he managed to say.

“You, Wilfred? What are you doing here?
What am I doing here? Where are we?”

“Hin the summer’ouse, Miss Vane. You
were sleepin’ ’ere, han’ I came in. Hi didn’t
know you was ’ere, Miss Vane, honest, Hi didn’t,
han’ Hi tried to leave without wakin’ yuh.”

She drew her fingers across her eyes. “I
begin to remember,” she said. “I must have
been dreaming. I thought—oh! a lot of strange
things. But what are you doing here? Have
you never gone home?”

“No, Miss Vane. That is, Hi ’ave no ’ome to
go to, any more. Hi ’ave left Riles, left ’im for
good an’ all. Hi ’ave left ’im, han’ I am goin’
away to the West to be a farmer myself. Han’
before Hi went Hi thought Hi would come along
this wy han’ maybe Hi would see—that is,
maybe Hi could sy good-bye to the boys.”

Myrtle rose and walked the few steps to where
the boy stood leaning against the door. She
looked very close in his face before speaking.

“Wilfred, do you mean this? Have you
thought it all over? Are you sure of yourself?”

“Yes, Miss Vane, Hi am. Hi am goin’ to be
a man, has other boys are men, Wy shouldn’t
Hi? Hi am goin’ to the new land, w’ere the
Gover’ment gives farms to those as will work ’em,
han’ Hi am goin’ to work hout for money to do
the himprovements. Hin three years Hi will ’ave
a farm of my hown, han’ be has good a man
has ’Iram Riles.” He ended with a defiant snap
at those last words.

“A great deal better man, I hope,” she said.
“The goodness of a man is not measured by his
possessions, although that seems one of the hardest
lessons for people to learn. Some One has said
that he who ruleth his own spirit is greater than
he who taketh a city. To control one’s ambition
is greater than to realise one’s ambition. In the
home of Riles I am afraid you have seen but little
self-control in any form. Can you measure up
to it when it is required of you?”

She had no inkling of the great test from
which he had just come out victorious. And
he answered modestly, “Hi think Hi can.”

“But why do you leave in this way?” she
asked, a new thought presenting itself. “You
are not—not running away, are you?”

“Well, Hi guess you would call hit that. Hi’d
a row with Riles, an’ Hi’m goin’.”

There was a silence that lengthened into minutes.
The boy shifted from one foot to another, powerless
to tear himself away, and yet without an
excuse for remaining longer.

“Well, good-bye, Miss Vane,” he said at
length.

She started as the words recalled her. “Not yet,
Wilfred,” she said. “Not yet, for a little while,”
and there was something akin to pleading in her
voice. “Wilfred, I believe you are an honest boy. I
believe I can trust you. Can I trust you, Wilfred?”

And again he answered modestly, “Hi think
you can.”

“Well, I am going to trust you. I am going to
tell you a secret, a secret that no one in the world
must know but our two selves. And most of all,
if you meet
him
he must not know I told you this.
But somewhere in the great West, I believe there
is one who is more to me than—than——” She
stopped for a term of comparison. “You
can’t understand, Wilfred, yet, but some day you
will know. You will know what it is to find your
life revolving around one great thought, as the
earth circles the sun, and to know that that
thought springs from one Source, for which you
were created, which is the end and purpose of
your existence. And for me that Centre has been
removed—has been torn out of my plan of life.
I may find another Centre, but I can never describe
a true circle about it. It will always be an
elliptic, an eccentric, drawn and pushed by other
forces to which I know I should not respond.”

“Hi ’ardly know hall you mean, Miss Vane,
but——”

“I don’t know all I mean myself, least of all
what I mean by talking to you in this way, but
I
must
talk to some one. The worst loneliness in
the world is to have no one to talk to, no one who
can understand you. Talk is putting thoughts
into words and draining them out of your stormy
brain, as the great thunderclouds, when they
become overloaded, find relief in rain, and out
of their wild bursts of passion emerges a cloudless
sky. But you know who I mean, don’t
you?”

“Ray Burton.”

“Yes. You may find him in that great country.
If he lives I look for him back here to stand his
trial. You can tell him that much, Wilfred.
And if he does not live ... earth has lost
another noble soul.”

They faced each other in the brightening dawn.
Suddenly, as if almost overwhelmed by a great
thought that had nearly escaped him, Wilfred
staggered forward, clutching Miss Vane by the
shoulders.

“Oh! Miss Vane,” he cried, “Hi know ’oo
took the money. Hi know ’oo took it.”

It was her turn to stagger. “You know,
Wilfred! Speak! Quick, tell me all!”

“Hit was Riles. ’E threw the bottle that
might ’a killed Burton—’e hadmitted it—han’ ’e
took the money, too. Hi haccused ’im of it,
han’ the wy ’e acted Hi know ’e did.”

“But can you prove it? Give me your
proof,” she demanded.

“Hi ’ave no proof, but Hi ’ave told yuh ’oo
took the money. P’raps the proof ’ull turn hup
yet.”

“God grant it so,” exclaimed the girl fervently.
“At least, now I
know
that Burton is innocent.”

“Yuh don’t mean tuh sy yuh ever thought hit
was Burton, do yuh?” demanded the boy, and
there was a reproach in his tone that cut. “Yuh
never thought that, did yuh?”

“No, I never thought him guilty. But if I
could prove him innocent it would make a great
difference to me—and to one or two others. The
fact is I find myself in a rather embarrassing
position. But you don’t understand, and I
can’t ex——”

“Yes Hi do, though. Hit’s about that dog
Gardiner. ’E’s worse’n Riles.”

“Wilfred!”

“Hi mean it, han’ Hi can’t prove it hit, either.”

“But you must be wrong in this case. Mr.
Gardiner has been a good friend, but that is all.
That is the trouble. Why can’t a good friend
remain a friend instead of spoiling it by wanting
to be—something more?”

The boy flushed, but it was with the pride of
victory. “Hit’s gettin’ light,” he said. “Hi
must be goin’ now. Hif Hi see
’im
, is there hany
message; hanything more than you ’ave said?”

She thought for a moment. “Only this,”
she said, reaching for the little book of poems.
It opened at a well-thumbed spot and she tore
a leaf from the binding. She folded it twice and
pressed it into his palm. “Give him that,” she
said.

He took her hand. “Good-bye, Miss Vane,”
he said.

She pressed a chaste kiss on his forehead.
“Good-bye. God bless you.”

And he walked sturdily away, carrying
unspoken the secret tragedy of his young life.

CHAPTER XV—STILL PLAYING THE GAME

“We have smelt the smoke-wraith flying in the hot October wind,

And have fought the fiery demon that came raging down behind.”

Prairie Born.

The harvest was at its height. Blood-red the
sun rose every morning to plough its silent way
across an ocean of polished steel, while white
cloud-swans, with ruffled plumage, floated on
its glassy bosom; blood-red it sank to rest every
night behind the dim haze of harvest dust. The
smell of ripe wheat filled the air, and where the
binders clattered into fields of rusty oats a red
cloud marked their pilgrimage as a modern
people fought its slow way out of the land of
bondage. The great, white, dangerous full moon
of August had left the fields unharmed, and men
and women and horses and steam and gasoline
were deep in their pitched battle against time
and the steadily shortening day and approaching
winter.

Work on the Grant homestead was in full
swing. From the earliest moment that the dew
would permit operations until the stooks stood
eerie and indistinct in the thickening dusk the
boys broadsided their two binders into the ranks
of the standing grain. Four heavy horses swung
on the tugs of each binder, their heads swaying
to the slow time of their shaggy feet. After the
first day the rattle of the machinery had no
terrors for them and they plodded sullenly along
with equine resignation, but their sly eyes missed
no standing stalk that came within the license
of their check-reins, and occasionally the off
animal would desert the path made by the drive-wheel
on the previous round to make a hurried
grab at a stook which appeared to be within reach.
Mr. Grant found his time fully occupied arranging
the relays, as the practical farmer plans that
during good weather his binder must never stop
except to change horses and oil the machinery.
Twenty thousand harvesters from the eastern
provinces had poured into the country in ten
days, and it was on this imported help the farmers
depended for the stooking. It was work, hard
work and long hours, for everybody, but it was
work with a spirit for all. The fruit of the year’s
labour now stood within measureable distance;
victory was within their grasp.

Farmers on light soil had finished cutting, and
already the whistle of the steam thresher was
heard in the land. The mills were working
short-handed, a condition with which they would
have to be content until the stooking was finished,
and a run of a thousand bushels a day was
considered better than no run at all. The thresher
first in the field was usually able to choose his
territory, and the choice might mean the difference
between loss and gain at the close of the season.

On a farm adjoining the Grants’ such a short-handed
mill was in operation. The water haul
was short, and to economise labour the same team
was being used to draw water and supply straw
to the engine. A small matter, as a general rule,
but a very important one in this instance, as it
turned out.

Having to supply both straw and water the
tankman unfortunately allowed the water reserve
to fall very low. The whistle was blowing
incessantly for water, and the driver whipped his
team with the heavy wagon across the stubble
fields. Suddenly a whiff of smoke partially
obscured the engine from his view, and the next
moment he knew that the straw with which the
engine was partially surrounded had caught fire.
The water barrels were empty, and the engineer,
instantly taking in the situation, drove his engine
forward without so much as throwing the belt,
grappled on to the separator, and backed the
outfit away from the zone of danger.

All this was done in less time than is required
to relate it, but already the fire was beyond
control. Whisked by a hot wind from the
south-west the flames leapt from the smaller pile
of straw provided for the engine to the larger one
behind the separator, and in a moment were away
across the field, the heavy, dry stubble burning
furiously. With much courage and presence of
mind the tankman swung his team around and
endeavoured to cross the path of the fire, at the
same time drawing the plug, which allowed the
water from the tank to spray out over the stubble.
The ruse did temporarily check the flames, but
they had already gained too much headway to
be stopped by a narrow strip of half-moistened
stubble, and in a moment the courageous driver
found himself and team surrounded by fire. But
his wit had not deserted him. The horses,
scenting the danger, plunged in frenzy as they saw
the fire sweeping about them, but the driver
sprang on the tongue, and, removing the draw-bolt,
released them from the wagon. From that
moment they could be depended upon to take care
of themselves, and they dashed furiously away
through the smoke and across the field. The
driver, throwing his smock about his head, faced
the fire, and in a moment was through the danger
zone and safe on burnt ground.

Harry Grant swung his binder at the northwest
corner of the field and started his team on
the south stretch. Looking suddenly up he saw
a cloud of smoke blowing across the lower end of
the field. Already he could see the red line of
flame a mile away where it swept through the
neighbour’s stooks. There were no fire guards
so early in the season, and the road allowances
stood knee-deep in dry grass. The farm buildings
were safe enough, as they were surrounded by a
considerable area of bare land, but the fire would
lick up the stooks and even burn the standing
grain, which was now dead ripe. In ten minutes
they would pay an awful price for their two
months’ dry weather, and the nearest plough was
in the implement shed, half a mile away!

In a moment Harry had his team unhitched.
Throwing himself on the back of one of the horses
he galloped them homeward, the trace-chains
flying wildly about their heels as they ran. A
wedge of hot smoke blew across their course,
but they plunged into it without slackening, as
a locomotive enters a fog. As they drew up in
front of the implement shed Harry was just in
time to meet his brother George coming out with
his four-horse team and gang plough. George
had been at a closer part of the field when he
discovered the fire.

“Start at the south-west corner, Harry,”
George shouted as he drove past. “You go east.
I’ll go north.”

The brothers did as arranged. They were able
to reach the south-west corner of the farm ahead
of the fire, and by ploughing a guard north and
east they formed a wedge to divide the fire.
The stookers had reached the scene by this time,
and ran ahead of the horses, throwing the stooks
out of the way. Mr. Grant started a back-fire,
which steadily widened the strip of bare land
between the approaching enemy and the fruit of
their year’s labours.

The Grant farm was safe, but the fire had been
spread rather than controlled. It now raced
away to the east and north, destroying every
unprotected thing in its path. The wind seemed
to rise as the flames gained headway, but above
the roaring of the fire and the crackle of the wheat
could be heard the rumble of wagons galloping
along the smoke-obscured roads. All the threshers
and harvesters within range were hurrying to
give their assistance, but indeed it was little they
could do. Further away, but still in the path of
the fire, farmers were ploughing guards and
settling out back-fires, and it was not until these
were reached that the flames finally burned themselves
out.

News of the fire had soon reached the little
town of Plainville, and business men of all classes
did not hesitate to close their stores and shops and
drive to the scene of the conflagration in wagons,
buggies and automobiles. It was little assistance
they could give at best, but there is a satisfaction
and a suggestion of heroism in even
appearing

to assist. And the face of a merchant looming
up through the smoke that enveloped a farmer’s
building might be the drawing card which would
establish another good account on that merchant’s
books.

When the telephone brought the first word
of the fire Gardiner hitched up his horse and buggy
and drove straight to the Grant homestead, but
before he arrived the fire zone had swept onward.
Some one said that young Mrs. Delt was alone
at the mercy of the fire, as her husband was away
assisting a distant neighbour, and Gardiner at
once whipped his horse in that direction. Heavy
banks of smoke lay across the road, and at places
it was with difficulty he could fill his lungs with
air. Suddenly, in such a smoke-cloud, his horse
threw itself back on the brechin, and Gardiner
fancied he heard a girl’s voice raised in alarm.
Springing out, he went to the horse’s head, and
could there distinguish the form of a woman now
standing by the side of the road.

“Why, Miss Vane! What are you doing here?”

“I might answer with the same question,
Mr. Gardiner, if there were time to play with
words. But I want to ride with you to poor
Mrs. Delt’s. Come, let’s hurry.”

“Just where I was going,” said Gardiner.
“I might have known I would find you wherever
an errand of mercy called.”

“The crack of that whip would sound better
than a compliment just now, Mr. Gardiner.
There may not be a moment to lose.”

The young man answered by urging his horse
to a run, and in a few moments they were at Mrs.
Delt’s door.

“Oh, Mr. Gardiner and Miss Vane!” cried the
farmer’s wife, as soon as she recognised her
visitors. “What
shall
I do? There are no horses
here and nothing to work with. Whatever
can

we do?”

But Gardiner had already taken in the situation.

“You are protected to the west by the summer-fallow,”
he said, “so your only danger is from the
south. There’s a strip of stubble a hundred
yards wide there that the fire would lick up in
a moment. We must throw a break across it
in some way.”

“Oh, do hurry and think what is to be done,”
cried Miss Vane. “You know all about prairie
fires and I am quite useless. I keep looking all
the time for the hose reel.”

Gardiner smiled, even as he turned over in his
mind the expedients that might be adopted.
The girl’s voice was music in his ears, and the
sense of danger and emergency seemed to deepen
the acquaintance between them, as a moment of
crisis rises superior to a century of convention.

Gardiner’s eye fell on the full water trough
beside the well.

“You have a rope?” he asked.

“Oh, yes, there is plenty of rope in the stable,”
Mrs. Delt answered, and all three at once ran in
that direction. They found a coil of rope
hanging on a harness pin. Gardiner seized the
coil bodily, and the ladies, anxious to help, found
an end apiece. As they ran the rope became
entangled and dragged along the ground, and
presently all three were precipitated in a knot
which required some moments to untie.

“Now a bed tick. You have a bed tick, Mrs.
Delt?”

“Such a question!” gasped Myrtle, as all
three rushed away again, this time to the house.
Following Mrs. Delt up the narrow stairway they
found the good lady in the spare room, littering
quilts and pillows to right and left.

“But we want an old tick—not the best you
have,” Gardiner remonstrated.

“The best tick I have is none too good for
Mr. Gardiner,” was Mrs. Delt’s reply, which left
the young man speechless. There was no time
for explanation, so tick and trio crowded down
the stairs and out into the yard. Gardiner
bundled the tick into a roll and made a couple
of loops around it with the rope.

“Now, into the tank with it,” he shouted, and
the bedding was promptly immersed. A hotter
blast of smoke hastened them in their efforts, as
the women soused the tick up and down in the
water to get it thoroughly saturated, while
Gardiner hitched it to the rear axle of the buggy
by means of the rope.

“Now, all together!” he shouted, springing
into the buggy and speaking to his horse. “One
of you sit on the tick.”

With the discipline of a regular Mrs. Delt
instantly obeyed, but at the first tug of the rope
found herself unhorsed, if the term is permissible.
Miss Vane immediately took her place and was
whisked in an uncertain course across the hundred
yards of stubble, the water dripping from the
tick all the way.

They drove across the field and back, and then,
with the added protection of a couple of water
pails and three wet sacks, they started a back-fire.
Several times it jumped the dampened streak,
but on each occasion they beat it out with the
wet sacks. The back-fire worked steadily backward
against the wind, gradually widening the
margin of protection, and by the time the fire
came speeding down upon them a strip of burnt
stubble twenty yards wide baffled its designs.
For a few minutes the flames stood up, snapping
far into the air, and throwing detached ribbons
of fire toward the Delt buildings. But their fury
was soon spent, and, admitting defeat, they
slunk back shamefacedly and died down among
the ashes.

When Gardiner had assured himself that the
danger was past he turned to his companions
and found Miss Vane busily sprinkling water
from the well on the face of Mrs. Delt, who
when the height of the excitement was over, had
availed herself of a woman’s privilege to faint
away. But the fresh water soon restored her.
For a moment her eyes wandered uncertainly from
one of her rescuers to the other, and presently
she burst out in a ringing laugh.

Gardiner looked at Miss Vane with an expression
of alarm. He was more at home fighting
a prairie fire than caring for a woman in
hysteria.

Mrs. Delt seemed to read his question. “Oh,
don’t be alarmed,” she said, as soon as she could
control herself. “I was just thinking of the
picture Miss Vane presented as she rode that tick
across the field. You couldn’t see her to advantage,
Mr. Gardiner. And my poor best tick
at that!”

Then it was time for everybody to laugh, and
when that was over and smoke clouds had cleared
away and the sun looked out blood-red from the
western sky, Mrs. Delt insisted first that Miss
Vane share some dry clothing with her, and second
that all remain for supper.

The uneasiness of the Grants was set at rest by
telephone, which, despite many burnt poles, was
fortunately still in service, and Gardiner, nothing
loath, ’phoned his clerk that he would not be in
until late.

The sun had set, and a moonless sky, studded
with a million diamond points, arched over
Gardiner and Miss Vane as they drove home
through the smoke-scented night air. A hundred
points of fire glowed like great coals on the
horizon, with here and there a brighter pyramid
of flame marking a burning stack or some
unfortunate settler’s buildings. After the heat
and excitement of the day everything was
strangely cool, and quiet, and peaceful. The
milch cows lay in their corrals, complacently
chewing, and occasionally heaving great sighs
of satisfaction; the horses, which had sniffed
the smoke in terror during the day, had by this
time concluded that it was all a part of the
mysterious designs of their strange master, man,
and settled themselves to enjoy a night free from
the bane of flies and mosquitoes. A rainbow
of light arose in the northern sky and deepened
in colour until every fairy of auroraland seemed
dancing in draperies of white and pink and
yellowish green before the footlights of the Arctic
circle to the music of the silence of immeasurable
space.

“It is wonderful, isn’t it?” said Miss Vane,
after a long silence. “These great prairies—how
majestic they are, how silent, how awe-inspiring.
It is the first time I have seen them in anger—at
war with the puny efforts of man. And even
in their anger how beautiful they are! You
prairie-dwellers have, I am told, two great
elements of danger—the blizzard and the prairie
fire?”

“Three,” said Gardiner.

“Three? And what is the third?”

“Love.”

For the moment she was taken off her guard.
It was the one subject she did not care to discuss
with Gardiner. But she answered, in a quiet
impersonal voice,

“Love is not peculiar to the prairies.”

“No, but the love of the prairies is peculiar.
How can a soul, hemmed in by the works of man,
seeing life in all the seaminess of man’s—and
woman’s—depravity, and knowing that it is but
one drop in the ocean of humanity, rise to the
sublime heights experienced by the dweller on
the prairie, where all the works of nature seem
combined to elevate the individual? The greatest
organisms come out of the cities, but the greatest
individuals will always come out of the country.
And love is individual.”

“Inhale that ‘prairie-fire smell in the gloaming,’
Mr. Gardiner. Is it not exquisite?”

“Miss Vane—Myrtle—why do you close your
eyes to that which must be obvious? You have
seen to-day the ravages of material fire—do you
imagine the fire of the heart burns less deeply, or
that it abates with the passing of time? Rather
it grows from day to day and from month to
month. The fact I declared to you that night—that
memorable night of your unfortunate
accident—seems a thousand times more a fact
now than it was then. I realise the prize I ask,
and I am astonished that I dare ask it, but what
will one not do when life is at stake? And for
me more than life is at stake; if you deny me
this prize I ask no longer anything that life can
give.”

“I do not wish to be unkind, Mr. Gardiner,
nor to coach you in your suit, but—don’t you
think you are arguing your case too much from
your point of view? To put it plainly, you
present reasons why you should want to marry
me. Would it not be more to the point to
suggest reasons why I should want to marry
you?”

“Perhaps you are right. I admit I was
speaking from my own view point. But, if I
must say it, surely I am not without recommendations.
I can keep you comfortably, and gratify
your tastes and ambitions anywhere within
reason. I have a good business, and some
investments——”

“I said I didn’t wish to coach you, but I see I
must. Can’t you see that tastes and ambitions
and business and investments are nothing—absolutely
nothing—without love? Love is the
only argument that can appeal to a true girl’s
heart, and when love argues it needs not to be
supplemented by any other consideration. Without
love there can be no marriage. There may
be a ceremony, but it is a hollow mockery—an
outraging of every principle of real virtue. That
is the argument you need, Mr. Gardiner, the
only argument that can ever persuade me. And
that argument is lacking.”

“Which is a roundabout way of saying you
don’t love me?”

“Love may be denied, but it needs not to be
confessed. Where it exists it will proclaim itself.”

“So you have not yet learned to love me?”

She did not answer.

“You are still thinking of someone else?”

She did not answer.

“I do not wish to pursue an unpleasant subject,
Miss Vane, but if you are still hoping for Burton’s
return let me urge you to disillusion yourself.
He will not return. If you care for him you
should hope that he will not return. Return can
mean only one thing to him, and he must know
that. And he will not be brought back. I may
say that I used my influence with the Department
to have no effort made to apprehend him. He
will not come back.”

“I think he will come back.”

“I will wager anything—I would lay any odds,
that he will not come back. Listen—I lay you
a wager. If Burton voluntarily returns to trial
I promise never to press this question again. If
he does not your answer is to be ‘Yes.’ Have
you faith enough in Burton for that?”

For a moment she hesitated.

“You are not so sure of him,” he urged.

“Yes, I am sure of him.”

“Then our wager is placed, and bound by the
honour of each,” he cried, exultantly.

CHAPTER XVI—KIT MCKAY

“Ned McCann owned the Double Star ’way back in the early days;

He had come out here with a sickly wife and a kid he hoped to raise

Where the climate suited the feeble-lunged, but life was scarce at its brim,

Till a little mound by a prairie hill held half of the world for him;

And his double love would have spoiled the child had she been like me or you,

But her only thought was for her dad and the mother she scarcely knew.”

Prairie Born.

The sun was setting on their second day’s
drive when Burton and Mr. McKay crested a
ridge behind which lay the farmer’s buildings
and his sweeping fields of grain, already glowing
yellowish in the long bars of amber sunlight that
bathed their gently rustling mass. Before them
stretched the prairie trail, down a gentle incline
until it lost itself in a little gulley; there was the
plain bald scar where it climbed out at the other
side, and immediately beyond was the farmhouse.
Burton’s eyes drank in the magnitude and peace
of the scene with a sense that here at least was
a haven where his troubles might not follow him.
And he mentally blessed the old farmer, for
whom he already felt a strong friendship.

“Waal, thar she be, all the same as we left her,”
proclaimed the farmer, jerking his whip-hand
forward. “Yep, thar she be, all right.”

The farmer was not emotional, and the words
seemed a very commonplace statement of fact,
but Burton guessed that beneath his rough
exterior the old man carried a heart that turned
to his home with that fervent loyalty to place
so often found among the rural classes. It was
his home—his own home, chopped from the bush
and dug from the hillside, largely by the force
of his own right arm. And between the home
that is built and the home that is acquired is a
gulf as broad as between birth and adoption.

“So that is your home,” the young man
ventured. “What a beautiful place!”

“It is purty, haint it?” said the farmer,
looking around, and there was a light of gratification
in his eye. “An’ yet,” he continued, “yu’ll
find men ’at wonder how a man can live in a
place like this. They think electric lights an’
telephones and movin’ pictures an’—an’ the left
foot on the rail most uv the time—they think
that’s what makes life. Well, by hang, Ah spend
a little money myself when Ah go to town.”
The farmer paused and chuckled meditatively
for a minute or two. “Yep. Some of ’em
holler ‘Ol’ Sport’ soon’s they see me comin’.
But Ah take my spice as an appetiser, not as a
food. Why, hang it, youngster, Ah wouldn’t
live in a city if they let me sleep in the Crystal
Palace and sent my breakfast up with the mayor!
Ah got twelve hundred and eighty acres of land
here, an’ more cattle ’an it’s worth while countin’;
Ah got all outdoors to stretch myself, and Ah
ain’t wantin’ tuh trade with nobody.”

The farmer shaded his eyes with his hand. The
rays of the sun, now almost horizontal, blinded
their vision of the valley.

“Yep,” he said at last, with a sigh of satisfaction.
“There’s Kid comin’. Ah reckoned she’d
be watchin’ fer us.”

A cloud of dust rose lazily from the ravine;
then stretched in a thin ribbon along the hot
prairie trail. Burton’s eye was not trained to
horsemanship, but it needed no experienced
observer to know that the rider was approaching
furiously. The streak of dust lengthened out as
though shot from a gun.

“That’s my daughter,” the old man said,
and Burton was conscious of a deep thrill of pride
in his voice. “She allus rides like thet. She’s
the girl fer a rusty cayuse, an’ don’t forget it.
By hang, she’d ride a rabbit if she could saddle it.
Yep, she’s a-comin’ to meet us.”

“To meet
you
, I guess,” corrected Burton.

The old man looked at him quizzically. “Waal,
Ah guess thet is more technically keerect,” he
admitted. “Ah ain’t sayin’ she’s comin’ out
particular to meet you
this trip
.”

There was an emphasis on the last words
which Burton had not fathomed when a chestnut
horse swung up beside the wagon, and a young
girl, as brown and lithe as her beautiful mount,
brought her gauntletted hand down with a
resounding smack on Mr. McKay’s shoulder.

“Ho, Dad,” she cried, “you’re a sight for the
angels.”

“Yep,” assented the old man, “fer my angel,
Ah reckon that’s right.”

“I declare,” laughed the girl, “how you do
learn those cunning speeches when you go to
town! Tell me, now, who taught you that?”

“You’re gettin’ a bigger tease than ever, Kid.
Tell me, how’s ever’thing goin’ on the farm?”

“Oh, that’s too big an order. I know I have
been all right—fine—fit. But say, Dad, haven’t
you forgotten something?”

“Waal, that might be, easy enough,” said the
farmer, looking back and surveying the heavy
load. “There’s the binder twine and the
groceries and machine oil an’ the mail——”

“Dad, you’re a chump. Here you let me live
in the wilderness, with nothing more exciting than
bronchoes and mustangs, and when a real live—possibility—comes
along you—you won’t even
introduce me!” The sentence ended in a burst
of mimic sobbing.

“Waal, by hang, one does sorta ferget his
sassiety manners, usin’ ’em so little. This is my
daughter Kid——”

“Not Kid!” exclaimed the girl. “Kath——”

“All right. Kath-er-een. Kate for short.
Kid fer shorter. She allus gets shorter——”

But by this time the chestnut had flashed
around to the other side of the wagon, and the
girl had ridden up beside Burton.

“All right, Dad,” she interrupted. “I am
sufficiently designated. Now tell me
his
name.”

“Waal, thet’s just what Ah’m kinda killin’ time
over. Ah did hear his name too, but hang me if
Ah ain’t plumb fergot it.”

Burton looked up in the bright face now close
by his side. “I find I must always assist your
father in a case of this kind,” he said, smiling.
“And as he does not appear to be much of a
formalist—just call me Ray.”

“That sounds like starting in the middle of a
book,” laughed the girl.

“The first chapters are only preliminary,
anyway,” said Burton.

“All right, Ray,” she said, extending her hand.
“This eliminates the first ten chapters. Now
I must gallop home and have your suppers ready.”
And almost before he knew he had released her
hand the cloud of dust trailed again down the
valley.

The McKay farmhouse was built of logs, with
an upper story over the main section. The board
floors were white and bare, save where a wolf
skin or other trophy of the chase served as ornament
and carpet. The hard, clean floors, the
whitewashed, bulging logs, the bare joists and
rafters, afforded a charm of rustic simplicity
which no display of wealth can provide. Even
as he ate his supper with a relish of his long drive
Burton’s eyes stole about into the shadowy
corners of the room, where the firelight from the
wood stove flickered along the floor and lost
itself in the darkness. There was everywhere
an air of comfort; of peace; of simplicity; yet
what tales might those lurking corners repeat
of the pioneers who for twenty years had
shared the McKay hospitality as they related
exploits of the early days more wonderful than
any fiction!

The meal was ended. Burton felt that at
least he had not been a bright conversationalist.
Several times the farmer’s daughter had addressed
a remark to him a second time, and he answered
almost in monosyllables. His mind was too busy
with the past—with the far, vague, distant past,
when he sat before the wood fire and felt his
young frame thrill as he listened to tales of
adventure in the shanties of the Madawaska—tales
of the river drive and the faction-fight, of
the cry of the wolverine by lonely moonlit shores
and the weird romances of loup-garou and
windigo. How he thrilled with a deep wonder of
the mystery of the untrod path which lay before
him, leading into the far, strange fields of
manhood, where he too should do great deeds and
win great victories and fear nothing. But even
as he dreamed of future bravery he would snuggle
nearer to the centre of the group. He could
almost hear the wolverine baying out beyond the
stables!... Then there was the evening prayer
and the good-night kiss, and the ascent up the
creaking stairs; the bed under the bare rafters,
where through the broken shingles a single star
watched until his eyes closed with the sweet
weariness of early childhood, and he knew that
the angels were guarding his sleep. God! How
far had he travelled since then!

“You are tired, Ray,” said the girl. “Let
me show you to your room.”

“Yep,” added the farmer. “The sleepin’
sickness has got you. We have it just as bad as in
Africa. It don’t kill anybody here, but there’s
no cure ’cept to sleep it off. Trouble is, the
new-comer allus gets the sleepin’ sickness an’ the
eatin’ sickness tugether, which makes it powerful
hard on the proprietor. It’s twenty-one years
since Ah struck these diggin’s, an’ Ah mind yet
how Ah et an’ slep’ that first year. Your mother
use to say there wa’n’t no use cookin’ agin an
appetite like that. Yep, Kid, that was twenty-one
years ago. You was born the next
spring.”

“That’s how Dad betrays a woman’s secret,”
bantered the girl. But the farmer was leaning
forward in his chair, his eyes staring at the sparks
as they dropped from the grate. His elbows
rested on his knees, his palms stretched straight
before him, the fingers touching at the tips.
There was a strange tenderness in the weather-worn
face; a misty light in those honest old eyes.
He was thinking of a little mound, just up the
hillside, on which the grass had grown for twenty
years.

The girl touched Burton’s arm. He looked in
her face, and she raised her eyebrows a hair’s-breadth.
No word was spoken as he followed her
silently up the stairs.

At the door of his room she placed the lamp in
his hand. Then in a low voice she said, “Dad
never forgets. Dear old Dad!”

She remained lost in thought for a few moments,
and Burton surveyed her. She had removed the
brown riding habit in which he first saw her, and
stood revealed in a modest black dress. Her
fair face, brown with the summer winds, seemed
almost to fade into the masses of her brown hair,
as the calm sea fades into the shore-line. The
only shade of colour she wore was a string of
scarlet ribbon drawing the dark garment together
at her throat. She was rather under average
height, and at first he thought her slim, but a
second glance convinced him that the perfection
of her proportions and her strong, athletic life
gave an impression that the scales would quickly
dissipate. The upper lip rose slightly in the
centre, as though alert to smile; the nose, strong
but not over large, caught the vision for a moment,
but immediately it was stolen by the eyes. What
eyes they were! The warmth of the chinook,
the freedom of the great plains, the wonder of
sunset and dawn, the mystery of the deep, starless
night, the courage of the white, fearless
winter—all were blended in their hazel depths;
or was it brown, or amber-grey? The lamp
tricked him; he would see in daylight.

Her wits came back from their wanderings
with a suddenness that caused her to start.

“You were dreaming at supper-time,” she
said. “I am dreaming now.”

“God bless the world’s dreamers,” said Burton,
fervently. “How often in Bible history He
revealed himself to His people in a dream! And
shall He not do it still? Can we suppose the
Father of thought has lost the key to the midnight
chambers of the brain? But practical men
despise dreamers.”

Her eyes had opened wider as he spoke; she
was leaning slightly toward him when he finished.
Thoughts are such mighty magnets that they
attract even the material bodies that encase
them. There was an appreciation in her look
and her partly opened lips that Burton did not
fail to notice.

“Practical men are fools,” she said. “Good night.”

For some days Burton did not find himself
assigned to any regular duties about the farm.
Grain-growing was only a small part of Mr.
McKay’s business, and was, indeed, still regarded
as largely experimental; the real wealth of the
farm was represented by the herds of ranch
cattle which fed in the heavy grass of the valley or
roamed the unsettled plains for miles around.
With these herds Burton had no concern; they
were under the care of two cowboys long in Mr.
McKay’s employ. Decent fellows Burton found
them to be, yet while they treated him with frank
familiarity they could not altogether disguise
their inbred conviction that the cow-puncher is
of better clay than the sod-buster. He envied
them their wild free life, their rides over the
limitless plains, their “leave and liking to shout,”
while he sharpened the binder knives and tacked
new slats on the canvases, and made fly-blankets
for the horses out of twine sacks. The
ancient war of the herdsman and the grainman
was being fought out again in his own breast, and
he secretly admitted a sense of envy. To ride the
plains seemed a greater thing than to till them.

But if the cattlemen excited a measure of envy
in the breast of Burton, he soon discovered that
he had unwittingly aroused their jealousy.
Although their feeling toward him took no
unkind form of expression, he became more and
more conscious that he was regarded as an
intruder, an unwelcome person tolerated simply
for courtesy’s sake. And the boy knew, by a
kind of intuition, that the farmer’s daughter was
largely responsible for this. With the cattlemen
she chatted flippantly, giving them word for word
and laughing at their smartest sallies; but with
Burton she talked slowly in the dusk of the long,
cool evenings, when the work inside and out was
finished, and the farmer smoked his pipe on the
kitchen porch. The cowboys, whom she had
known for years, she still held saucily at a safe distance;
but with Burton, on a week’s acquaintance,
she spoke of things whereof her soul hungered
for conversation. She had taken the boy at his
word. She had started in the middle of the book.

And to himself Burton confessed that to him
she was a new relevation of womanhood. At
times, out of the nightmare of the past, he would
conjure up that face which, in all his wanderings
and through all his associations, still hedged his
soul about on every side, so that he could follow
no emotion far until he met it. He saw her as
she rode home on her pony along the pasture path,
while the gathering dusk raised the willows very
tall about them; he saw her as they sat by the
water’s edge that never to-be-forgotten Sunday
at the Crossing; he saw her again, half-reclining
against a wall, her face drawn as though with pain
and yet flushed as in excitement, the flickering
light of an uncertain fire falling upon her fine
features. He stood her before him and he tried
to compare, but he could not compare. It was
as though one would compare form with colour,
or sound with sight. She was, he knew, everything
that was “pure womanly,” but this
daughter of the prairie was something more.
Although clothed in all the delicacy of her sex,
she seemed to hide nothing, to conceal nothing,
behind that distinction of nature which has been
so grossly misused by convention. At times she
spoke to him as a sister might speak; at other
times it might have been the voice of his mother;
again, she was a child at his feet; but most of
all it seemed she spoke as a brother. It was this
spirit of comradeship, this attitude of equality,
this frankness so sincere that it seemed the only
natural thing—the inevitable thing—it was these
that drew his soul out to her with the affection of
a brother. And yet he marvelled that the face
still hedged him about; that every new experience,
every new confidence, seemed to paint it
still clearer on his mind’s horizon.

The season wore on. Presently the wheat
fields were ripe, and Burton found himself so
lost in work that thoughts of his past, his present,
and his future seemed crowded out of the busy
hours. His practical knowledge of farm work
and farm machinery, and the genuine personal
interest he took in everything that fell to his lot,
won for him a regard by the old farmer that was
almost paternal. Indeed, more than once Mr.
McKay dropped remarks about his advancing
years, intimating that he felt the time must soon
come when he should place the active management
of his affairs in younger hands, and on such
occasions Burton felt his heart bound as the
thought of a possibility fired his pulses. But
then the face rose, calm and thoughtful, and the
possibility died away amid the mist of dreams.

And then, one Sunday afternoon, after the
wheat was all in stook, came another incident to
change the course of his career. The cowboys,
with a number of friends, were riding to neighbouring
ranches; Mr. McKay dozed over an old
newspaper as he sat in the shade of the kitchen
porch; and Burton and Kate lounged on the
front verandah, reading little excerpts from their
magazines, but most of the time staring with
dreaming eyes across the hot prairies.

“Pshaw,” said Burton, after his fourth attempt
to centre his interest in a story, “I can’t read to-day.
Let’s go for a walk, Kate.” He called her
Kate now, although he had not been able to
bring himself to the more familiar name by which
the other hands addressed her. And yet he
knew that he was much better acquainted with
her than were they.

The girl clasped her hands above her head and
yawned leisurely. Then she looked long and
intently at the fringe of willows along the gulley.
“It’s too hot,” she said at length.

“What, you a prairie girl and afraid of the
heat?” Burton bantered.

“I’m not afraid of it,” she answered, laughing,
“but I respect it. And I can’t walk in the grass
in this skirt. And most of all,” she confessed,
bringing her elbows to her knees and resting her
chin on her hands—“most of all, I’m lazy.”

“I admire lazy people,” said Burton.

“Oh, how gallant you are! I suppose if I had
said I was lame you would have admired lame
people?”

“But I spoke seriously,” he protested. “I
don’t say I admire one who is chronically lazy,
but I do respect the man or woman who can
forget the rush of life now and again and lapse
into a period of laziness. ‘Leisure,’ some people
call it, and it is closely identified with culture,
which brings us around to the poets and the
painters and art generally.”

“Speaking of art, did I ever let you see my
pictures? I have a few I gathered when I was
East at college. Oh, yes, and my photographs.
That is where so many acquaintances start, you
know, over the family album, while one expounds
to someone who doesn’t care the tribal history
of people he doesn’t know.”

The sentence was ended on the stairs. In a
minute she was down with a basketful of photographs.

“Now, Mr. Ray, you shall behold the friends
of my girlhood—up to date. By the way, when
are you going to let me into the mystery of your
surname? One of these days some of the neighbours
will call, and I shall have to introduce you
as ‘Our man Ray.’ Here I have told you my
history from Alpha to Omega, and all I know
about you is that your first name is Ray. When,
please sir, will I be sufficiently established in your
confidence to be entrusted with your name?”

For a moment he hesitated. What she said
was true. She had given large confidences and
received little. Why should he not tell his name?
Why, indeed, should he not tell her all? He was
sure that it could not change her attitude toward
him; he was sure that his trust would never be
betrayed, and the weight of his secret was hanging
heavy about his life. That strange human
instinct which demands the right of confidence
the privilege of confession, was becoming irresistibly
strong within him.

“I have a reason for concealing my name,” he
said at length. “I do not wish to tell the name
until I can tell the reason also.”

“And when will that be, may I ask?” It was a
respectful question, not a demand for information.

“Oh, perhaps the next time we chat together,”
he laughed, anxious to shelve the matter for the
moment. “Now, let us see these photographs.”

She sat on a stool beside his chair, passing up
the photographs for his scrutiny. With each she
had a word of comment, but Burton looked at
them mechanically. They were nothing to him
but strange faces, in which he felt only a reflected
interest. At length she raised a photograph
which she held a moment longer than usual.
“This,” she said, “is a picture of my particular
college chum—my best girl friend. She is pure
gold.”

She placed the pasteboard in his fingers. His
eyes wandered to the face, and then his head shot
forward as though he had been magnetised. He
instantly attempted to recover his composure,
but his fingers trembled and his breath came
hard. It was the face of Myrtle Vane!

CHAPTER XVII—THE HOMESTEAD LINE

“Where’er Endeavour bares her arm,

And grapples with the Things To Be,

At desk or counter, forge or farm,

On veldt or prairie, land or sea,

And men press onward, undismayed,

The Empire Builder plies his trade.”

The Empire Builders.

What explanation Burton made of his agitation
he never quite remembered. He knew he had
said something about a remarkable likeness to a
friend of his, but he felt that his behaviour
at best had had only a lame excuse. Kate,
however, had accepted it with the frankness
that had marked her attitude toward him
since the day they first met, and had rattled
on her tribute to Myrtle Vane, to every word
of which Burton inwardly said amen. But
when she mentioned that they still corresponded
regularly, and that she expected a letter
by the next mail, he found himself battling with
conflicting emotions. It was plain that he must
tell her all or nothing; either he must take her
into his life or he must go out of hers. He knew
that he loomed big in the world of this farmer’s
daughter, and that when she next wrote to
Myrtle she would tell about this Ray, her discovery.
The name would excite Miss Vane’s
interest, identification would surely come, sooner
or later. And what would this girl from whom
he had torn himself under the shadow of the law
and who was in very reality more to him than
existence itself—what would she say when she
knew of his life as a fugitive from justice, a
betrayer of his bondsman, whose regard for her
had been so slight that he had deserted her under
the fear of his own punishment—what would she
say when she knew he had cast off all responsibility
for the past and to-day was living in happiness,
the trusted friend of her trusted friend?
He saw his life crumbling about him like a house
of cards. He saw only too plainly how his
desertion of the girl he loved would cost him the
friendship of the girl he so much admired.

Burton excused himself to Miss McKay as soon
as he could. He walked to the stables, and,
finding himself unobserved, plunged down into
the deep gulley. Here he strode on and on, his
mind at first in a turmoil of confusion. Gradually
the exercise calmed his brain and he was able to
think more clearly. And the clearer he saw his
position the less he liked it. Two courses were
possible; to disappear and try again to lose
himself, probably by taking up a homestead far
back from the centres of civilization; or to make a
clean breast of the whole thing to Kate. But what
would she think of him when she knew the truth?
Suppose she believed in his innocence, of which he
had every confidence, would her attitude change
when she knew him to be a fugitive from the
law—an innocent man who lacked the moral
courage to prove his innocence or accept the
inevitable? That afternoon he had felt that he
could tell her all; that night he knew that he
could tell her nothing.

And yet the idea of unexplained disappearance
was unbearable to him. He felt that he owed it
to his friends here, whose home had been such an
oasis to him in his desert of bad fortune, to
relieve their minds of any doubt as to his personal
safety. He now remembered that this thought
had not occurred to him when he fled from Plainville,
and the blood slowly mounted to his forehead.
But he would not repeat that cruelty; whatever
came he would have an interview with Mr. McKay.

He returned to the house. The cowboys were
still absent, and Kate, after searching for him
in vain, had gone riding alone. He found Mr.
McKay still on the kitchen porch, and floundered
into his task.

“I have come, Mr. McKay, to tell you that I
must leave here, at once. I have just heard—that
is, I have just had information which makes
it imperative that I leave without an hour’s
delay. The heavy end of the harvest is over.
I hope you will get along without trouble. Good-bye.”

“But, boy, hang it, there’s somethin’ wrong
about this. Bad news?”

“Yes, news that takes me away, and any news
that forces me to leave your home is bad news.”

“But you will come back, Ray? You’ll be
back when your troubles—when things is
straightened up with you?”

“I don’t know.”

The farmer sat back in his chair and drew
deeply at his pipe for a full minute, his eyes
slightly elevated and his brow knit in thought.
When he spoke the words came slowly, as though
each had been chosen after deliberation.

“Waal, Ray, if your affairs take yuh away
from here, tain’t my affairs tah hold yuh back.
But Ah thought of talkin’ kind of confidential
with yuh one of these days, an’ it may as well
be now. Ah’ve held down this claim fer twenty-one
years, boy, an’ Ah reckon Ah’ve about
attained my majority. An’ Ah notice Ah don’t
climb a cayuse or handle a pitchfork quite as
spry as Ah once did. Ah’ve been lookin’ fer
some one to take part of the load offa me, an’
when Ah saw how you knew farm work, an’
how yuh shaped intuh the collar, Ah kind a’
figured Ah’d found my man at last. Ah reckon
my plans has kinda been upset again.”

“I am sure I appreciate what you have
suggested,” said Ray. “If things shape up so—but
the fact is, I can promise nothing, say nothing—at
present. Some day, perhaps. And now,
good-bye, and say good-bye to Kate.”

“I’m thinkin’ it would sound better from your
lips. But there’s a little money comin’ to
yuh.”

“I had forgotten that,” said Burton, quite
truthfully. “I suppose it may come in handy.”

The old man walked to his desk and took out
a pocket-book, from which he drew a number
of bills. These he placed in Burton’s hand, who,
with a word of thanks, shoved them in his pocket
without counting.

“Ah calculated yuh’d rather have bills than a
cheque,” said the old man, and there was something
in his voice which made Ray feel that
after all he had disguised very little from his
employer.

The two men’s hands met in a moment’s firm
grasp, and the next Burton knew he was tramping
down the road he had first seen that summer
evening six weeks before.

Once fairly on the road Burton began to cast
about for some definite plan of action. He
determined he would walk into town and there
ascertain where homestead lands were available.
Then he would go to the nearest Dominion Lands
Office and file on a quarter section away in some
remote region, where there would be little chance
of his identity being discovered. Here he would
commence life anew, under a new name, as he
felt it would not be safe to file as Raymond
Burton, and here he would hope in the years to
come to outgrow and outlive the tragedy of his
young life.

A friendly haystack loomed through the
gathering dusk, and Burton slept in its shelter
until morning. He awoke stiff and hungry, and
half regretted his refusal to accept Mr. McKay’s
offer of a horse and saddle. But he remembered a
farmhouse a few miles along the road, and there
he was given breakfast. He pressed on vigorously
through the day, and before another nightfall
turned in at Zeb Ensley’s shack. The Englishman
was watering his horses at the well, but he
looked up and recognised his visitor of a few
weeks previous.

“Hello, Ray!” he called, cheerily. “On
your way back to town? I suppose Mr. McKay’s
work is advanced sufficiently to let you go,
although, upon my word, I confess I thought
you’d likely become a permanent part of his
organisation. Especially,” he added, with a sly
twinkle in his eye, “especially as I happen to
have met that young daughter of his.”

“Well, it didn’t work out that way, Mr.
Ensley, although she’s as fine a girl——”

“Mr. Ensley only visits here on Sundays,”
interrupted the other. “The gentleman in charge
is known as Zeb. But let us get these plugs
in and then we’ll see what the cook can do for us.
Fried eggs, I expect, with warmed potatoes and
dried apples, table d’hôte.” He was unbuckling
the horses’ harness as he spoke, and presently
slipped it from their backs and turned them loose
for the night.

Once inside the shanty Burton discovered that
“the cook” was Ensley himself. But no time
was wasted in conventions, and in a few minutes
a plain but appetising supper was on the table.
“Come, dig in,” was the host’s invitation, and
there was a lull in the conversation as the hungry
men plied the viands.

“So you’ve left McKay’s,” said Ensley, after
the first insistent demands of appetite had been
satisfied. “Where are you bound for now—back
East?”

“No, I think of taking up a homestead, as soon
as I can get a map showing open land, and learn
where I may make application.”

“Good!” said the Englishman, with genuine
enthusiasm. “I’m always glad to see bright
fellows taking to the homesteads. Most fathers
think they do their boys a favour when they
coop them up in an office or a shop, but I tell you
where this country wants its bright men, some of
them, at any rate, is out on the sod. There is
a mob of little interests growing up, each with its
little coterie of promoters and parasites, but the
big industry here will always be agriculture, and
it is the big industry that needs the big brains.
Besides, where is the life of town or city that a
free man would accept in exchange for a hundred
and sixty acres to grow in? I always have an
eye for the homestead openings, and perhaps
you can get all the information you want right
here.”

After the meal was over Ensley spread a
number of maps but recently issued by the
Department of the Interior on the table, and
enlightened Burton on the details of the regulations.
“Now here,” he said, “is a fine stretch
of land, of which I have first hand knowledge, as
I cross it every fall when I take a few days off for
goose shooting. There’s no better soil in the
West. It’s about sixty miles from here, and
nearly a hundred miles from a railway, but
they’re building new lines through this country
as fast as they can buy the labour and the steel,
and you are sure to have a road near by in a few
years. Now it’s a little early for goose hunting,
but the ducks are at their best, and there is a
chance of a few chicken. Suppose we hitch up
to-morrow and make a trip out there to look over
the land?”

“Oh, I couldn’t permit you to go to so much
trouble, Mr.—Zeb.”

“No permission needed,” laughed the other.
“It’s my buckboard and my horses, and you ride
with me if you will. We leave in the morning
at seven. There’s no time to lose,” he continued,
consulting the contents of a large envelope,
“as these lands are to be opened for entry
exactly eight days from to-morrow, and you’d
better be at the land office at least a couple of days
ahead. I shouldn’t wonder but there’s men—and
women too, maybe—lined up there waiting
now, but most of them are eager to file on the
land closer in. They haven’t been out that far,
and they don’t know what they’re missing.
Now there’ll be a ten dollar fee to pay—you have
a little money?” Burton nodded. “Very well.
If you’re short, say so. There’ll be some other
expenses too. You’ll have to line up before the
door of the land office and stay there night and
day to hold your place. Caterers will bring you
food if you are willing to pay for the service, and
you can perhaps hire a man to stand in your place
part of the time, but be sure he’s honest, or he
may give it up to someone else. Then, of course,
you have a little land to break each year, and
certain improvements to make in the way of
building a house or the like, and in three years if
you can show that you have lived on the property
six months in each twelve and complied with
the other regulations you will receive from
the Government a certificate of title to the
property.”

They talked about many details in connection
with homestead life, talked, indeed, long after
they were in bed, while a coyote howled to his
mate across the plain and a waxing moon
slanted its soft light through the single square
window of the shanty.

Five days later Burton walked down the street
to the Land Office. At first he thought there
must be a riot or disturbance of some sort in
front of the buildings, but on arrival found
that the crowd was genial and orderly, and
arranged in single file in the form of a half circle
before the building. Where the end of the half
circle came back to the curb the line extended
along the sidewalk. Burton walked slowly the
length of the line, looking curiously into the faces
of these patient waiters; men of all nationalities,
Canadian, American, British Islanders, German,
Russian, French, Austrian, Pole, Italian,
Hungarian, Scandinavian, Chinamen—here they were
gathered from the corners of the globe and
waiting patiently through night and day, through
heat and cold, through wind and rain, through
any trial and any hazard for the God-sent privilege,
born of a new country, of calling the land beneath
their feet their own. There were tired faces there,
faces where the cheek bones stood rugged under
a tawny skin and the eyes glowed under deep
foreheads—faces of men from the ballast gang
and the sewer gang, from the tie camp and the
grading camp—men who had sweat hard in the
hot sun for the few dollars necessary to stake
them to home and title of their own. Here and
there a woman was seen in the line, seated on
soap box or suit case, complacently knitting or
engaged with her fancy work. But they were all
good-natured. This human material, combustible
as powder, seemed as innocent as dry sand. And
Burton learned that their good nature and their
complacence was due to one fact only—their
confidence that whatever was done would be done
in conformity with the law and with absolute
fairness to all concerned. Once shake that
confidence, and you have dropped the spark into
what you thought was sand!

Presently he reached the end of the line, and
it was not until then that he realised that he was
a part of this organisation, a link in this chain
which stretched resolute and immovable along
the street. Strange soldiers of fortune they were;
men and women who feared neither the wilderness
nor the hardships of the pioneer; volunteers
who marched out to the sunset to wrest an existence
from the unknown. Fit sires and mothers
these for the race that shall answer the questions
of the next century!

Burton seated himself on the curb beside the
last of the line. A Chinaman advanced with a
basket of sandwiches and a pot of tea. Burton
satisfied his hunger and thirst and paid the
modest bill. A news-vendor sold him a magazine,
and he sat down to while away the time until the
doors should be opened and those at the head of
the column should file in to register on the land
of their choice.

The day waned and night settled in. Burton
began to feel the need of a blanket, and hired a
boy to buy him one at a store. A street lamp
burned overhead and he bought an evening
newspaper. Its touch seemed strange to his
fingers—it was so long since he had handled a
newspaper fresh from the press. He glanced
over the black headlines, but found little of
interest. What were the papers talking about,
anyway? In the last two months he had fallen
entirely out of touch with what is called the
events of the world. In a company of well read
men he would have seemed ignorant. And yet
in his heart he felt that these last few weeks
had brought him closer to life, closer to the
real things of the world, than ever he had been
before.

He turned over the inside pages idly until his
eye, attracted by a familiar word, fell on a
paragraph in an obscure corner. In a moment
his attention was rivetted to the item, as he
read:

“
Plainville.
The first Assize Court to be
held in the town of Plainville will open on
Monday. The docket will be a light one,
consisting only of minor cases. The principal
local interest centres about a charge against
Raymond Burton of stealing $2,000 from the
safe of his employer, one of the leading
merchants of this place. The employer himself
was so satisfied of Burton’s innocence that he
went his bail, but the young man has completely
disappeared, and the confiding employer seems
likely to forfeit his bond. The stolen money,
however, was recovered, having been found
in Burton’s trunk by a detective engaged on
the case.”

He read the paragraph again and again. The
words seemed to burn into his brain. Here was
a dispatch, evidently sent through the regular
news channels, and no doubt appearing in every
daily paper in the country, a despatch that
branded him not only as a thief—the words
suggested no question as to his guilt—but as a
fugitive from justice and a bail jumper. It
placed him in the light of a criminal, and Gardiner
in that of a martyr. It was thrown broadcast to
the world. He was beginning to learn the awful
truth that publicity has more terrors than the
penitentiary. If one could go to jail quietly,
without any fuss, without any crowds, without
cameras or photographs or reporters or newspapers,
and return in the same way, it might be
bearable. But this—this was worse than any
sentence within the province of the Court. What
would the public think? What would his friends
think? What would
she
think? What
could

she think?

Burton sat and pondered, gazing down the
long street and seeing only his own checkered
career. Where would not this thing follow him?
He had thought himself safe at McKay’s; he
had fled from the farmer’s home like a frightened
child from a whipping. He had thought to lose
himself on a homestead; on the very threshold
of his hew life the tale of his shame was thrust
in his face. From somewhere a sentence came
into his mind. “Be sure your sin will find you
out.” But he had not sinned. That was the
rub. He was innocent—yes, as innocent as the
thoughtless correspondent who sent that despatch.
But stay; does an innocent man jump his bail?
Something seemed to say to Burton that at that
moment an innocent man becomes a guilty one.
And the load of his guilt seemed mounting up.
He had left Gardiner to pay the price of his
unfaithfulness. There was no evading that,
although he had not thought of it in that light
before. In the eyes of the world he was already
a criminal. And yet to go back—what would
that avail? Every evidence—every circumstance,
was against him. To go back would simply be
to have the Court confirm the sentence already
passed by public opinion.

He gazed down the long street into the darkness.
Presently a red light showed at the end, a trifle
to the left, where it glowed in narrow streaks
through the ranks of the telephone poles. It grew
quickly in volume, and Burton at first thought
it was a fire; but soon he knew it to be the rising
moon. The scene stirred something in his
memory; some vague recollection of the past.
And then it burst upon him, and he saw again
the sun setting through the stately elms at
Crotton’s Crossing; the blood, and the bars.
And then behind it all rose that quiet, thoughtful
face which guarded the end of every avenue of his
thought.

He put his head between his hands and
wept.

A man who had sat down beside him, but after
him, having arrived late that evening, straightened
up and placed a hand on his shoulder.

“Wot’s the matter, hold chap?” he asked
in a low voice, that their sleeping neighbours
might not hear. “Wot’s the matter? Got a
pine, or somethink, or are you ’omesick?”

In the dim light Burton could not distinguish
the face, but the voice he would have known
anywhere.

“London!” he cried, as he threw his arms
about the astonished boy and hugged him like
a child.

Then were a few moments of golden silence;
then a few words of explanation.

When they spoke of home Burton’s first
question was for Miss Vane.

“Hi left ’er with a ’eavy ’eart,” said Wilfred,
“but still ’oping. Ho, Hi sy, ’ere is somethink
she sent you.”

The boy produced his little pocket-book and
Burton struck a match, for the shop lights were
off and the street was in partial darkness.
Presently the lad located a little torn piece of
printed paper.

Burton took it curiously. “Why, that’s only
a scrap of paper,” he said.

“That’s wot she sent. ‘Give ’im that,’ she
said, ’an’ tell ’im hif ’e lives Hi look for ’im back
to stand ’is trial.’”

“Hold a match!” cried Burton, excitedly.
“Here, strike this and hold it.”

The flame sputtered for a moment, then grew
into a steady little light, and Burton placed the
scrap of paper where the rays fell to the best
advantage. And his eyes rested on the printed
words:

“Build thee more stately mansions, O my soul,

As the swift seasons roll!

Leave thy low vaulted past!

Let each new temple, nobler than the last,

Shut thee from heaven with a dome more vast,

Till thou at length art free,

Leaving thine outgrown shell by Life’s unchanging sea.”

CHAPTER XVIII—RIGHT ABOUT FACE

“Oh, can I doubt the Power that leads

You safe from zone to zone,

Is mindful of the man He made

In image of His own;

That though we blindly breast the gale,

Or skirt the shores of Time,

Our Pilot knows the track we take,

And guides from clime to clime?”

The Empire Builders.

Burton sprang to his feet.

“When does the next train go east?” he
demanded.

Wilfred produced a railway time-table, and
after some study he found the page. “There’s
one at midnight,” he said.

Burton glanced at his watch. It was a quarter
to twelve.

“Good-bye, old man,” he said, seizing the
hand of the Barnardo boy.

“Wot, you ain’t goin’ to-night, are you?”
said the boy. “You’ll lose your ’omestead,
hafter——”

“I’ll lose more if I don’t go. And I would
have lost it, lost it all, if it had not been for you.
God bless you, London! Stay and file on your
homestead. I’ll not be wanting one at present.
I’m thinking I will be unable to perform the
residence duties for a while,” he added, with a
bitter little laugh.

“But stay,” he continued. “Have you
selected your land?”

“No.”

“Just going it blind?”

“Yep. Just takin’ my chance with the rest
o’ them. Hi’ve a list of the hopen lands ’ere,
an’ Hi reckon to strike somethink——”

“Yes, you’ll strike a sand bed or an alkali
mine. Here’s a list of four quarters I have looked
over personally. They appear in the order of my
preference. Take it, you’re welcome to it.”

There was a look of gratitude in the boy’s
eyes which could find no expression in words.
The two friends held each other’s hand a moment
in a firm grasp, and then Burton hurried toward
the station. He reached it just in time to buy
a ticket and board his train.

Once in a car and seated, the lights of the city
died out of view, and Burton was left to collect his
thoughts. His sudden resolution to go to his
trial regardless of consequences had left him
bereft of any plan of campaign or any definite
course of action. For months he had studied
how he might evade the law, but now his only
fear was that he might not reach Plainville in
time to appear before the Court and receive
his sentence. That he would be found guilty he
took as a matter of course. He did not deceive
himself with any hope of acquittal on any ground
whatever. He was not going back to match
himself against his fate; he was going back to
accept his fate. He wondered how long his
sentence would be. It might be one year, it
might be five; it might be ten. That he supposed
would depend in some degree upon the digestion
of the judge, and whether his lordship might
decide to make an example of him for the benefit
of other evil-doers.

But he felt only a casual interest in these
matters. To his great surprise neither judge, jury
nor jail had any terror for him. He regarded them
with an impersonal feeling of unconcern, except
a desire to be done with all of them. He
wondered if they would let him wear his own
shirts in jail.

He consulted a time-table, and found that if he
made all connections he should reach Plainville
in the early morning of the first day of the assizes.
He supposed there would be a short session of the
grand jury first, but did not know whether his
absence then would affect his trial. He wondered
if they would call his case first and immediately
require Gardiner to forfeit his bail, and if they
would return the bail when he appeared and gave
himself up.

For twenty-four hours the train drilled steadily
eastward, running without incident. Darkness
had again settled down and the hour of midnight
was approaching when suddenly the emergency
brakes were applied with a force that threw
the passengers forward in their seats. The train
came to a stop in a moment, and the young men
and a few of the older ones who had not gone to
bed in the sleeping cars crowded out to see the
cause of the delay. A dull glow shone down the
track from ahead, and a whiff of wood smoke
blew in their nostrils. Aside from that and the
subdued lights in the cars all was darkness,
darkness intense and illimitable, walled in only
by the brooding silence of the great prairies.

A couple of trainmen with lanterns were seen
walking on the track, and Burton hurried to
overtake them. As he advanced the glow of
light became brighter and the smell of smoke
more noticeable. In a few minutes he had come
up with them, and together they reached a wooden
trestle which spanned a ravine where a little
stream trickled at the bottom during the summer,
but was now dried by the long period of rainless
weather. The bridge was on fire; most of the
timbers had already given way, and the hot rails
hung in two shining streaks from bank to bank.

From the conversation of the trainmen Burton
gathered that the fire was probably due to a
falling coal from a passing engine lighting the
woodwork. He ventured to ask how long it
would delay the train.

“Well, that’s hard to say,” was the answer.
“It’ll take at least twelve hours to throw a
temporary bridge in there after the work train
arrives, and they won’t likely be here before
morning. The company knows nothing about it
yet, so we’ll likely have to pull back to the last
station to give information.”

And the assize court at Plainville sat the next
morning!

Burton walked back to the train and consulted
his time-table. He was about seventy-five miles
from Plainville and on another line of railway.
Mechanically he started to read the names of the
stations which lay ahead of him, but at the
second name his heart gave a bound. That was
the town where Dr. Millar lived. That, he
estimated, was about fourteen miles away.
It was now midnight. He could be there by
four o’clock, and the doctor’s automobile would
place him in Plainville by eight easily. He
still had a chance to save his honour by appearing
in court when his name was called.

Without further delay he started out at a
brisk walk along the railway track. He scrambled
through the dry ravine, and regained the railway
on the other side. He was unhampered by
luggage of any kind, and although walking on the
ties in the darkness was rather uncertain he had
no doubt he would be standing in the doctor’s
office within five hours. The light wind was
balmy and refreshing, but very soon it began to
carry scattered drops of rain. These gradually
grew thicker until a steady shower was falling.
The moisture soon soaked through his clothing,
but the exercise kept him warm and he felt little
discomfort. And at ten minutes to four, warm,
wet and footsore, he rang the bell at Dr. Millar’s
door.

The doctor answered the ring in person. At
first glance he did not recognise his visitor, but
a very few words of explanation sufficed. Dr.
Millar was a master of the art of grasping essentials
by intuition.

He looked at his watch, and then he looked out
at the black, wet night. The rain was now
falling heavily, and the street lay white with
water where the light from the open door cut its
wedge-shaped path across it.

“It’ll be a hard drive, Burton,” he said, “but it
must be made, and the sooner we start the better.
I will be dressed in a few minutes, and I always
leave my car ready to pull out at a moment’s
notice. But you are wet. You must have some
dry clothing.”

Burton protested that he was quite comfortable,
that he did not feel the dampness at all, but the
doctor would not listen to him.

“You are warm now, because you have been
walking hard, but a few minutes in the automobile
will set your teeth chattering. Besides,
I think I have some clothes belonging to you
around here somewhere, and I want you to take
them away, this very night. Now get in there
and hustle them on,” and suiting the action to
the word the doctor shoved Burton into his
private office. There was nothing to do but
obey.

A little later an automobile pulled out from
Dr. Millar’s gate and started to plough its path
through sixty miles of mud and water.

The holding of the first assize court at Plainville
was an event of no small importance to the
people of that obscure but ambitious town.
Plainville had been fortunate enough at the last
election to place its sympathies with the winning
side, and the first evidence of appreciation was a
handsome court-house, built on a block of lots
which had been held for a dozen years by Perkins,
the lawyer, without a chance of sale, but was now
turned over to the Government at a handsome
profit. Mr. Perkins’ allegiance to the party of
purity and justice had been further rewarded by
his appointment to the office of crown prosecutor
at the assizes. It was a little disappointing,
to be sure, that the crop of criminals had so far
been distressingly small, the most serious case on
the docket being the theft of two thousand dollars
which were afterwards recovered, but neither
Plainville nor Perkins were discouraged. The
judicial district was young, and would improve
with the passage of time. Who knew but that
some public spirited criminal might yet commit
a real murder, and so bring the name of Plainville
into prominence in all the papers of the
province?

The jurors and witnesses had assembled, over-taxing
the hotel accommodation of the town,
which the thoughtful lawyers and officials had
reserved for themselves a safe period in advance.
A number of minor offices were filled by Plainville
citizens, and this rewarding of the faithful
restored the credit of several shiftless Plainville
families at the grocers’ and butchers’. The
hotels were full, the bars were busy, even the
temperance houses had more trade than they
could accommodate, and many a thrifty housewife
was ekeing out the price of a new bonnet by
placing the spare room at the disposal of the
strangers. Mrs. Goode found the demands upon
her lodgings and her table more than she could
supply, but had boldly met the situation by
pitching a number of tents in her back yard,
where her cadaverous husband could be employed
without menace to the business coming in at the
front door. Plainville was prosperous, excited
and happy.

After the great fact of the assize itself interest
centred mainly in the case of
King
v.
Burton
, and
the hot discussions in the pool-rooms and the
lobby of the post office over the young man’s
guilt or innocence had given rise to two opposing
factions. The first of these held that Burton was
innocent, and would appear to stand his trial at
the proper time; the second declared that he
was guilty, and had “skipped the country for
good.” And it was interesting to note how the
townspeople and country people lined up on the
two sides of the controversy. It was a virtual
dividing of the sheep and the goats. Those who
held high views of life and embraced all humanity
in a kindly sympathy were assured that Burton
would be back to face his trial, and even that his
innocence would be established; while that other
class of people who find it easier and more to their
tastes to believe evil than good were equally
certain that the young man had disappeared
from Plainville for ever. And among those who
held the latter belief it must be said were a few
who would have preferred to believe otherwise,
but whose judgment had forced them to the
unpleasant conclusion. There was Mr. Sempter,
of the Sempter Trading Company, who secretly
held Burton in high regard; there were the
Grant boys, who openly—and especially before
their cousin—avowed their confidence in Burton,
but who in their hearts were at a loss to understand
his disappearance; and there was Gardiner, who
at first had stoutly maintained the innocence of
his former employee, but had at last admitted
that he could no longer believe him guiltless.
There, too, was a third faction which explained
Burton’s absence on the theory that some mishap
which had not yet come to light had befallen
him. This was a comfortable position for
those who did not wish to antagonise either
of the other parties, as it left the question of
Burton’s innocence or guilt out of the discussion.
This was the belief espoused by the local
newspaper, the church organisations, and such
other institutions as felt that it would be bad
business to give offence to any section of the
community.

The great day of the opening of the assizes
at last arrived. During the night it rained
heavily, and the streets and roads were deep with
mud, but the clouds scattered about nine o’clock
and the sun looked through on the crowds filing
down to the court house. The judge read his
charge to the grand jury, and the grand jury at
once proceeded to find in accordance with the
thinly-veiled wishes expressed in the charge.
The Court then adjourned to resume its sitting at
two o’clock that afternoon.

As the hour drew near the spirits of those who
had to the last hoped for Burton’s reappearance
in the nick of time fell under the depression of a
conviction which for months they had been
trying to fight off. John Burton’s Scotch pride
had at last given away to paternal attachment,
and he engaged Bradshaw, the lawyer, to appear
in defence of his son. The lawyer’s office had
become the gathering place of the steadily
diminishing group who were still hoping against
hope, but as the minutes wore by the hope
changed to despondency. In Burton’s absence
they could read only an admission of his guilt—an
admission which cut loyal hearts deeper than
any sentence which might have been pronounced
over his protestations of innocence.

The court house was packed long before the
afternoon session commenced; and when the judge
had taken his seat on the bench and the first case,

King
v.
Burton
, was called an intensity of excitement
prevailed in the room which seemed even
to reach the officers of the law. It was not that
the crime charged was so exceptional, but the
reluctance of many good people to believe in
Burton’s guilt and the mystery of his sudden
and complete disappearance had pitched public
interest to its highest key. Many rumours had
been in circulation within the last few hours;
rumours that Burton had returned during the
night, that he had been in the custody of the police
since July and would be produced at the proper
moment, that he had been drowned in the lake,
that he had been seen in a far western town—all
of these and more were flying about in the air and
adding to the confusion of the public mind. But
at last the moment had come; something definite
was to be done, or said, or ascertained, and as
many of the townspeople, with a sprinkling of
interested ones from the country, as could crowd
into the building were agog to know whatever
could be known.

Down in the little box where the lawyers sat
someone was speaking in a low tone which reached
only to the officials of the court. Then the deep
voice of the judge filled the room.

“So the accused has not appeared for trial?
Let him be called three times.”

The court crier cleared his throat and shouted
in a raucous voice, “Raymond Burton! Raymond
Burton! Raymond Burton!”

A hush that could be felt fell over the assembled
people. For a full minute there was absolute
silence.

It was the judge who spoke again. “Bonds
were no doubt given for the appearance of this
Burton at trial?”

An official answered, “Yes, my lord.”

Gardiner stood up from the front seat of the
audience. “I am his——” he managed to say,
but was instantly silenced.

“That will do,” said the judge; “an order
will——”

At this moment a commotion was heard
among the crowd who had not been able to gain
admittance, and all eyes were turned toward the
door. In another instant a young man, flushed,
dishevelled and mud-bespattered, forced his way
into the room, glanced about the interior for an
instant to get his bearings, and walked straight
to the prisoner’s box where Bill Hagan, the town
constable, now promoted to the position of a
court official, stood with as much dignity as his
years spent in leaning over a bar made possible.

“Well, Bill, were you waiting for me?” was
the question he addressed the constable.

It was not until they heard him speak that the
crowd seemed to realise that Raymond Burton in
the flesh stood in the prisoner’s box. When they
grasped that fact an huzzah broke out from a
few enthusiasts, which was immediately seized
by others and grew in volume until it threatened
to raise the roof.

Order was quickly restored, when the judge
scolded the people soundly, threatening that he
would have the court room cleared if there were
any further demonstrations.

Then turning to Burton he asked, “Are you
the Raymond Burton named in the indictment?”

“I did not hear the indictment, my lord, but
I am Raymond Burton.”

“You have,” continued the judge, “by your
absence delayed the operation of this Court
and the machinery of justice. I may say to you
frankly, that I was given to understand that you
had evaded the police and would not appear for
trial, and at the moment of your entry I was about
to make an order distraining the bail given for
your appearance. Can you give an explanation
of your conduct?”

“I can, my lord. I was in the West, where I
intended to enter for a homestead. I was, in fact,
in line before the door of the Land Office when
I discovered that if I were to reach Plainville in
time for my trial I must leave at once. I would
have been here early this morning if my train
had come through on time, but a bridge was burned
out last night, and we were delayed. I walked
fourteen miles along the track, when a friend
provided me with an automobile, but the roads
were so bad, and we had a number of mishaps,
that I have only now reached the town. I am
very sorry, my lord, that you have been delayed.”

The judge listened patiently through this
explanation, and it was evident that he was
impressed with the sincere, straight-forward
manner in which it was given. He appeared to
accept Burton’s statement as the truth, without
question. The effect on the audience of the boy’s
appearance and the quiet words he addressed to
the Court was electrical, and they were again on
the point of bursting into a cheer when they were
restrained by a peremptory “Silence in the
court.” Burton glanced again about the room,
and to his astonishment saw tears of emotion
glistening in many eyes. Old Dick Matheson’s
face was radiant as he confided in a whisper to
a neighbour that he “knew his father on the
Muddywaski”; Alice Goode, who had stolen
away from the dinner dishes, was fairly dancing
on her chair; the Grant boys shot at him looks
electrified with enthusiasm; and to the breast
of his own father the Scotch pride had returned
as he turned about in his seat and looked with
defiance upon the assembled crowd. There
were only two black faces in the house; Hiram
Riles, of whom Burton expected nothing better;
and Gardiner, whom he did not understand.
One would have thought that Gardiner would
have been delighted at the saving of his bond,
but the merchant chewed his lip in vexation.
He had been playing for greater stakes.

And yet Burton knew that he stood under the
shadow of certain conviction; that from that
court house he would march to jail. But he had
played the part of a man; he had justified the
loyalty of his friends, and now nothing else seemed
to matter.

“Your failure to appear here on time,” said
the judge, again addressing Burton, “appears to
have been due to causes which you could not
foresee and over which you had no control.
The Court has been inconvenienced, but the Court
has no grievance in such a case. I will allow you
fifteen minutes to consult with your solicitor,
after which your trial will proceed. If it should
appear later that you are entitled to be remanded
to permit of calling witnesses in your defence,
reasonable opportunity will be afforded you to
do so.”

CHAPTER XIX—THE LIGHT AT LAST

“And though on Life’s uncertain sea,

We veer and tack in stormy stress,

I doubt not in the years to be

The generations will agree,

We sailed direct to blessedness!”

Gardiner was the first witness for the prosecution.
He told briefly facts with which the reader
is already acquainted. He had left a package
of two thousand dollars in the safe Saturday
night; on Monday morning the money was gone,
and Burton’s keys were hanging in the lock of
the cash drawer. No one but Burton and
himself knew the combination of the safe; no one
but Burton and himself had keys to the cash
drawer. On making the discovery he had placed
the matter in the hands of the police. He had
always thought Burton to be honest; he believed
he lived inside his salary and that he was free from
any extravagant vice.

The next witness was Graves. He gave his
profession as that of a detective, and said he had
been detailed to cover the theft from Mr. Gardiner’s
safe. He had obtained employment in Gardiner’s
store in the capacity of clerk, and had made a
point to cultivate Burton’s acquaintance. He had
found the prisoner to be a young man of apparent
honesty and good habits. Nothing that could be
learned at the store added any light to the
subject, so he had decided to search Burton’s
rooms. At the very bottom of Burton’s trunk
he had found the package stolen from Gardiner’s
safe. The package had been broken and a ten
dollar bill removed. Otherwise it was intact.
The envelope and money were produced in
evidence.

Burton listened to the evidence of these
witnesses without emotion—almost without
interest. But when the next name was called
he looked up with surprised interest. Hiram
Riles entered the box.

Riles testified that he was in Plainville late
on the Sunday night preceding the discovery
of the robbery. As he was walking down town
to get his team before leaving for home he fancied
he saw a glimmer of light in Gardiner’s store.
Peering in through the window he could see
Burton in the little office at the back, working
at the combination of the safe by match-light.
He knew that Burton was connected with the
store and at the time did not suspect anything
wrong.

Burton fidgeted in his chair. The mystery
of the broken bottle was now clear to him, and
he longed to charge Riles with the deed.

A hardware clerk testified to selling Burton a
revolver on the morning the theft was discovered.

Polly Lester was next called. She took the
usual oath, and Lawyer Perkins rose to question
her.

“What is your name?”

“Doris Landin.”

“Your profession?”

“I am a private detective.”

At these words a buzz of astonishment ran
about the crowded room. To many present the
girl was a stranger, but others knew her as a
domestic at Mrs. Goode’s boarding-house.

“And you, too, were watching Burton?”

“Yes, sir.”

“What did you learn of him.”

“I found nothing to reflect upon his character.”

“Exactly; but you made—that is, you were
present at a certain discovery?”

“I watched from behind the door when the
prisoner’s trunk was searched. I saw the package
taken out of his trunk.”

“And you identify the package?”

“I do.”

“Thank you. That will do, Miss Landin.”

“But that is not all I saw.”

“That will do——”

“But I am under oath to tell the whole
truth——”

“If the witness has anything to add relative
to this charge the Court will hear it,” said the
judge. “Please tell us, as concisely as you can,
what you know of this matter.”

The girl turned and faced the judge, while
all ears were strained to catch her next utterance.
The auditors felt that at last some new light
would break on this mystery. Perkins seemed
little pleased with the turn events had taken;
Bradshaw evidently enjoyed the situation,
although apparently quite at sea himself, and
Burton betrayed his eagerness by leaning forward
and clasping his hands nervously. The fact that
the girl was a detective was a relevation to him,
and he wondered what new bolt would come from
a sky so long overcast.

“May it please your lordship,” said the girl,
“all I have said is true, but it is not half the
truth. I watched the prisoner closely and
searched his room and his effects daily for any
clue that would throw light on this case, but
without result. On the morning of the first of
July, I searched his clothing and his trunk from
top to bottom, but made no discoveries. Shortly
before noon, while I was engaged in my work in
one of the other rooms, I fancied I heard stealthy
footsteps in the hall. I looked out, and was
astonished to see Mr. Gardiner making his way
silently toward Mr. Burton’s room. I followed,
unobserved. I saw Mr. Gardiner open Mr.
Burton’s trunk, which was always left unlocked,
and thrust a package far down into the trunk.
Mr. Gardiner then stole away as quietly as he had
come. I immediately entered Mr. Burton’s room
and took the package out of the trunk. I
identify it as the package already placed in
evidence. I then——”

But Perkins had sprung to his feet. “Your
lordship,” he exclaimed, “I submit that this
is very remarkable evidence. The Crown has
built up a complete and logical case, entirely
free from dime novel effects, but if this testimony
is to be credited the structure so carefully built
by the prosecution falls to the ground. It is
easy for the witness to make these statements,
absurd as they are on the face of it, but it is
impossible for the Crown to disprove them. I
ask that the evidence be not admitted.”

“Unless supported by confirmatory evidence,”
added the judge.

“Unless supported by confirmatory evidence,”
agreed Mr. Perkins.

Excitement was now intense. All eyes, by
one accord, had turned to Gardiner. He sat in
his chair as white as chalk, and apparently on the
verge of nervous collapse.

“I have provided for the point raised by the
Crown prosecutor,” continued Miss Landin, quite
unruffled by the remarks of Mr. Perkins. “I
examined the package, which I have identified.
I then broke the two wax seals and opened the
envelope. I counted the money. There were
two hundred ten dollar bills, all on the same bank,
new and apparently unused. The serial numbers
began with B-323001 and ran to B-323200. It
will be found that the package now exhibited
is one bill short, and that the missing bill is
B-323005. I now produce the missing bill,
which I took from the package at that time, and
place it in evidence.” So saying she drew from
her purse a bright new ten dollar bill, which she
handed to the clerk. “Number B-323005,” she
said.

“Correct,” said the clerk, when he had examined
the bill.

“I then,” continued Miss Landin, “replaced
the package in the trunk and awaited developments.
I had not long to wait. Mr. Gardiner,
Mr. Graves and Mr. Burton appeared in the hall
in a few minutes. They entered Mr. Burton’s
room, and Mr. Graves found the package in the
trunk. I watched them through the crack of the
door, and did not fail to notice Mr. Gardiner’s
agitation when he discovered the package had
been opened. I subsequently told Mr. Graves
that I had been a witness to what occurred in the
room, and he thought it would be a good thing
to have me appear here and give evidence. This
I have done.”

“Your lordship,” said Mr. Perkins, meanwhile
glowering at Gardiner and Graves, “these developments
were entirely unexpected by the Crown,
and place the case in an absolutely new light. I
can only ask permission to withdraw the charge.”

“I think it better to proceed with it,” said the
judge. “Do you wish to call any witnesses for
the defence, Mr. Bradshaw?”

“I had intended calling witnesses to establish
the previous good character of the prisoner,”
said Bradshaw; “but this has already been
testified to by three Crown witnesses, and I now
consider that unnecessary.”

“And very remarkable evidence it is,” said the
judge. “Where testimony, even when amply
supported, appears unreasonable on its face,
the law naturally looks for a motive. Can you
supply that in this instance?”

“
I
can,” continued Miss Landin. “Owing to—to
a love affair, in which Mr. Gardiner found the
prisoner here a dangerous rival, he determined to
bring Mr. Burton into disgrace which would cause
him to leave the country. It was a simple
matter for Mr. Gardiner to remove the package
from his safe and cast the suspicion upon his
clerk. When this failed to have the desired effect
it was another simple matter to conceal the
package in Mr. Burton’s trunk and drop a hint to
the detective who was employed on the case.”

“Then the case is closed. We will not reflect
upon the intelligence of the jury by any remarks.
Can the jury find a verdict without leaving the
room?”

“We can,” said the foreman. “All who say
‘Not guilty’ stand up.”

Every juror rose to his feet.

“Discharge the prisoner,” said the judge.
“It will, of course, rest with him whether an
action is taken against his traducer. But I
should like to sit on the case.”

Burton rose to say something, but immediately
the air became alive with hands. They were
thrust at him out of space—from above, from
below, from every side—and he found himself
seized and carried bodily out of the building.

At the door he saw Miss Landin. There was
a room there used for office purposes. At the
moment it was unoccupied. Breaking away from
his enthusiastic friends he seized the girl by the
arm, drew her into the room and locked the
door.

“Now tell me all,” he demanded. “Tell me
why you did it, how you did it, and why you kept
your discovery a secret, even from the officers
of the law. But first of all accept an apology for
the one-time bad opinion of a boy who has been
very much of a fool, and who has been saved by a
miracle. You are the miracle, Polly—I mean,
Miss Landin.”

“Hardly that,” said the girl, laughing. “And
I am not sure how much I should tell you. You
see, it wasn’t you that engaged me.”

“That’s the biggest part of the mystery. Don’t
keep me in suspense. I haven’t seen my way
for the last five months; let me see it clearly
now.”

“I should say that your way is as clear as day.
It lies straight to Mrs. Goode’s little private
parlour, where somebody is waiting for you,”
she said, with a knowing smile. “But I suppose
I owe you an explanation. Your friends are
clamouring for you at the door, so I will make it
brief. Listen.

“Myrtle Vane loves you. You couldn’t see it,
of course, being a man, and she, being a woman,
couldn’t tell you. When you got into trouble
there was only one person in whom she could
confide, and that person was her brother Harry.
She wrote him a letter—such a letter as raises
the relation of brother and sister from the human
to the divine. He called me to his office, as I had
given him service before in other matters. He
read me his sister’s letter and talked with me
frankly. ‘I want you to go to Plainville,’ he said, ‘and
find out all about this case. Learn the
character of this young man who has gained such
a hold on the affections of my sister. If he is
guilty help to convict him; if he is innocent
establish his innocence beyond the shadow of
doubt or question. But above all, learn whether
or not he is a man. See whether he can stand up
under adversity—whether he can face the inevitable
with clear eye and set chin. And when your
investigation is complete report to my sister.’”

“Wonderful!” exclaimed Burton. “And you
have reported?”

“Yes, by messenger, an hour ago. I couldn’t
report until you came back, you know.”

“Why?”

“Why? Stupid! With all your masculine
assurance, you will hardly claim that your conduct,
up to an hour ago, had a very heroic ring. But
your return—in the nick of time—your explanations,
and the course of to-day’s events establish
everything. I had to let you return thinking
you were guilty, otherwise I should have been
in doubt what to report. Now while many believed
in you, only you and I and Gardiner in all this
world knew you were innocent. You couldn’t
prove it, Gardiner wouldn’t prove it, so the secret
rested with me. And, in spite of my sex, I have
learned that there is just one way to keep a secret.
I kept it.”

“Even from Miss Vane?”

“Even from Miss Vane.”

“Polly, you’re a wonder—you’re a brick.”
There were tears in his eyes as he spoke. “I
won’t forget you—I won’t forget.” For a
moment he held her hand in his. And there
were tears in her eyes, too, when she turned away.

The Grant boys almost ate him when he reappeared
from the little office, but a clerk from
the Sempter Trading Company forced his way
to Burton. “Mr. Sempter would like to see
you in his office at once, Burton,” he said.

“I will be there in ten minutes,” was the
answer.

Burton found Mr. Sempter in his private office
at the back of the store. The merchant received
him cordially and placed a chair for him. “You
might step down and get the mail for us, Miss
Jones,” he said to his stenographer, and as soon as
the young woman had left the room he plunged
into his business with Burton.

“I have no doubt, Mr. Burton, your time is
limited to-day. Your friends, quite naturally,
will demand the privilege of showing their elation
at the happy outcome of the miserable affair with
which your name was so unjustly associated.
So I will be brief and to the point. When I
established this business here I was the first
general merchant in Plainville. As the town
grew I realised that another store was inevitable.
The farmers demand competition, and no matter
how well you may use them they prefer to deal
where they have a choice of stores. To meet
that situation it occurred to me to start another
store under another name. Gardiner was recommended
to me by an Eastern business connection.
I got into touch with him, and the outcome was
the establishment of a store under his name,
although I furnished all the capital.”

Burton raised his eyebrows a trifle. “Then
Gardiner was your employee?” he interrupted.

“Nothing more or less. But the secret was
well kept. Gardiner was a shrewd businessman,
and not even my head clerks ever suspected
my connection with the store that bore his name.
Now, to arrive at the point: I paid Gardiner two
thousand dollars a year and twenty per cent. of
the profits. That gave him a net income from
the business of between three and four thousand
yearly. His resignation is now in my hands,
and the position is open to you on the same terms.
What do you say?”

Burton was so much surprised by the revelation
made, and by Mr. Sempter’s liberal offer, that he
found it difficult to answer. But at last he
managed to say something about his inexperience
in mercantile business.

“It is not experience I am hiring,” said Mr.
Sempter. “I can hire twenty years’ experience
for twenty dollars a week. It’s character I am
bidding for now. I am an old hand on the market,
and I seldom pay more than an article is worth.
Can you assume your new duties to-morrow
morning?”

“I can,” said Burton, rising from his chair
in his sudden resolve.

The old merchant and the young one clasped
hands together, and at that moment Miss Jones
entered with the mail.

“The clerk in the post office said there was a
letter for Mr. Burton,” she explained, “and
wondered where to find him, so I brought it with
me.” So saying she placed an envelope in
Burton’s hands.

As he left the store he glanced at the post mark,
and his heart jumped as he found it was that of a
far western town. He nervously tore open the
enclosure, and read:

“
Dear Ray.
—Of course I have found out
all about you. Why couldn’t you tell me and
save all this investigation on my part? I am
addressing this letter to reach you at Plainville
on the first day of the assizes. I expect you will
be there to lift it; if it comes back to me undelivered
another pillar of my faith in humanity
will be gone. But it won’t come back. And in
some way justice will prevail, even if we do not
see it clearly just now. The fact that the lady
with the scales may sometimes be caught
napping is no fault of her customer.

“I have invited myself to visit you and
Myrtle when you get settled down. Meanwhile—good
luck!

“
Kate McKay.
”

“Dear old Kid,” said Burton, as he pressed
the letter fervently to his lips. “It’s wonderful
how many people there are in this world who
ring true, after all, isn’t it?”

As he entered the hall of the Goode boarding-house
he was overwhelmed by a pair of arms about
his neck and a resounding kiss on his cheek.
When he could disengage himself he was looking
into the laughing face of Alice Goode.

“That’s a horse to me,” she exclaimed, gleefully.
“I knew it was now or never. In fifteen
minutes you’ll be tagged and labelled, and I never
trespass on other people’s property. But until
the ‘Keep off’ sign is up I don’t mind stamping
around on the lawn a little.”

“There’ll always be a corner in the lawn for
you, Alice,” he said earnestly.

“More likely in the root garden,” she sallied.
“But hist——”—this with her finger to her
lips—“the great moment is at hand.” She led
him softly to the parlour door, and as it swung
open to her touch his eyes fell on that wonderful
face which he had seen in every dawn and every
sunset, every shadow and every sunbeam, since
that glorious day, ages ago, when their mirrored
images had blended in the glassy water at their
feet. With a spirit flooded with humility and
tenderness he stepped into the presence that to
him was nothing less than sacred.

And Alice Goode gently closed the door and
tip-toed down the hall.

BRADBURY, AGNEW, & CO. LD., PRINTERS, LONDON AND TONBRIDGE.

End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Bail Jumper, by Robert J. C. Stead

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BAIL JUMPER ***

***** This file should be named 35836-h.htm or 35836-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/3/5/8/3/35836/

Produced by Roger Frank and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdpcanada.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.

*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).

Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License.  You must require such a user to return or
destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.

Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.

Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate

Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.