The Project Gutenberg eBook, Crying for the Light, Vol. 2 [of 3], by J.
Ewing Ritchie

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

Title: Crying for the Light, Vol. 2 [of 3]
or Fifty Years Ago

Author: J. Ewing Ritchie

Release Date: July 21, 2011  [eBook #36809]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)

***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CRYING FOR THE LIGHT, VOL. 2 [OF
3]***

Transcribed from the 1895 Jarrold and Sons edition by David
Price, email ccx074@pglaf.org.  Many thanks to Norfolk and
Norwich Millennium Library, UK, for kindly allowing their copy to
be used for this transcription.

“This is the condition of humanity; we are
placed as it were in an intellectual twilight where we discover
but few things clearly, and yet we see enough to tempt us with
the hope of making better and more
discoveries.”—
Bolingbroke
.

p. ii
Crying
for the Light

or Fifty Years Ago

J Ewing Ritchie

Author of ‘East Anglia’

Vol 2

London: Jarrold and Sons

Warwick Lane E.C.

1895

p.
iv
CONTENTS OF VOL. II.

CHAPTER

PAGE

XI.

THE STRUGGLES OF A SOUL

1

XII.

IN LOW COMPANY

30

XIII.

CONCERNING SAL

54

XIV.

AN ENCOUNTER

73

XV.

ELECTIONEERING

94

XVI.

ELECTIONEERING AGAIN

114

XVII.

QUIET TALKS

138

XVIII.

THE IRISH PRASTE

176

XIX.

WENTWORTH RETIRES

195

XX.

A STORM BREWING

212

XXI.

AN UNPLEASANT RENCONTRE

232

p. 1
CHAPTER
XI.

THE STRUGGLES OF A SOUL.

There comes to us all a time when we seek something for the
heart to rely on, to anchor to, when we see the hollowness of the
world, the deceitfulness of riches; how fleeting is all earthly
pleasure, how great is the need of spiritual strength, how, when
the storm comes, we require a shelter that can defy its utmost
force.  Out of the depths the heart of man ever cries out
for the living God.
p. 2
The actress Rose felt this as much
amid the glare of life and the triumphs of the stage as the monk
in his cloister or the hermit in his desert cell.  Like all
of us, in whom the brute has not quenched the Divine light which
lighteth everyone who cometh into the world, she felt, as
Wordsworth writes:

‘The world is too much with us, late and
soon;

Getting and spending we lay waste our power.

Little we see in Nature that is ours;

We have given our hearts away a sordid boon.’

She felt, as we all must feel, that there is something more
than this feverish dream we call life—something greater and
grander and more enduring beyond.  To her the heavens
declared the glory of a God, and the firmament showed forth His
handiwork.  To her day unto day uttered speech, and night
unto night showed forth knowledge.  She had no wish to shut
out Divine speech.  Her labour was how best to hear it, and
most quickly to obey.  The history of humanity testifies to
this one all-pervading desire in ages most remote, in
p. 3
countries the
most savage.  As the great Sir James Mackintosh wrote to Dr.
Parr in 1799, after the loss of his wife: ‘Governed by
those feelings which have in every age and region of the world
actuated the human mind to seek relief, I find it in the soothing
hope and consolatory reflection that a benevolent wisdom inflicts
the chastisements, as well as bestows the enjoyments of human
life; that superintending goodness will one day enlighten the
darkness which surrounds our nature and hangs over our prospects;
that this dreary and wretched life is not the whole of man; that
an animal so sagacious and provident, and capable of such science
and virtue, is not like the beasts that perish; that there is a
dwelling-place prepared for the spirits of the just, and that the
ways of God will yet be vindicated to man.’  Our
actress felt the same; she had, she felt, a soul to be saved, a
God to be loved, a heaven to be won.

But how?  Ah! that was the question.  Naturally she
turned to the old Church of Christendom, the Church that calls
itself
p.
4
Catholic and universal.  She went to the priest; he
showed her a bleeding Saviour, and a burning, bottomless
pit.  She trembled as she stood in the old dim cathedral,
where no light of heaven ever came, where no voice of mercy ever
penetrated, where the whole air of the place was redolent of
priestcraft and artifice and sham.

‘You,’ screams the priest, ‘are all unjust,
extortioners, adulterers, dead in trespasses and sins.  Give
me money, and I will make it right with the Almighty.  Down
on your marrow-bones, eat fish on a Friday, count your beads,
confess to me—a man no better than yourself—pay for
Masses.  In my hand is the key to eternal joy; pay my fees,
and the door shall be unlocked, and you shall straightway go to
paradise.’

Refuse, and he shows you an angry Jehovah, in His rage
destroying a fair world which He Himself had called into being
and filled with life, and sweeping millions into torments that
never end.  The sight is awful.  Happily, reason comes
to the rescue, and the priest and the cathedral,
p. 5
and the Mass
and the music, the incense and wax lights, disappear.

Enter the State Church, not of the Romanist, but the
Protestant, where you are told you are made a child of God in
baptism, where the cure of souls is sold in the market-place, and
where the Bishop, or overseer of the Church, often is put into
his high position because he is a relative of a lord, or is a
firm supporter of the Minister of the day.  There is no room
for the anxious inquirer in a Church which rejoices in the
Athanasian Creed, and which regards all Free-Church life as
schism.  With its pomp and wealth and power, with its
well-paid clergy, in time past on the side of the rich against
the poor, of abuse and privilege against the rights of the people
and the progress of the nation, the Church has left the masses
whom it was paid to teach and save little better than
heathen.  You ask, What has it to do with the religion of
Jesus of Nazareth, the carpenter’s son?  What is it
but an institution to give an air of respectability to life, to
confer a prestige on
p.
6
the church-goer, and to lend an additional charm to a
State ceremony?  Is it not there emphatically that, as a
rule—to which there are splendid exceptions—

‘The hungry sheep look up, and are not
fed;’

that is, if they need something more than a musical
performance or a conventional observance?

‘Do you mean to say,’ said the actress to a
clergyman’s wife, ‘that you can follow the psalms of
the day, and ask God to crush your enemies and make them perish
for ever?’

‘Oh,’ said the lady, ‘I always repeat them
all.  You know, one does not believe exactly all one
says.  All you have to do is to give a general
assent.’

This was what the actress could not do.  Her Bible was a
constant difficulty.  She could believe it was the Word of
God, but not all of it.  Its contradictions puzzled and
perplexed her.  Give it up, said her worldly friends.
Be happy in Agnosticism.  Leave off thinking about the
hereafter and a God.  Believe what you see and hear.
Life is
p.
7
short; it has not too much of joy in it.  Be happy
while you may.

In her distress she consulted a clergyman of the class more
common now than they were then, who reject the term Protestant,
and whose aim is the revival of what they call the Church
Primitive and Apostolic.

‘You must be baptized,’ he said.

‘But I have been.’

‘Where?’

‘In a chapel.’

‘A mere form,’ was the reply.  ‘Our
Church teaches that man is made a member of Christ, the child of
God, and an inheritor of the kingdom of heaven, in and by holy
baptism.’

‘I cannot see that.’

‘Then you are shut out, unless you are baptized, from
the sacrament in which the body and blood of Christ are given to
every one who receives the sacramental bread and wine.’

‘How do you prove that?’

‘Prove it: I don’t want to prove it.  I fear
you are in grievous error.  Your duty
p. 8
and that of
everyone is to obey the Book of God: a book not to be dealt with
upon the same rules which are applicable to the works of
man.’

And then they parted; he stern and resolved, she sorrowful and
sad; he intimating something about it was a pity that people
could not remain satisfied with the station of life in which they
were born, which did not pour balm into a wounded soul.
Happily for herself, however, she could exclaim with Sir Thomas
Browne, ‘As for those mazy mysteries in divinity and airy
subtleties in religion which have unhinged the minds of many,
they have never stretched the
pia mater
of
mine.’  But to gain this position was a work of
time.

With an aching heart, once more the actress sought a
clergyman.  He was a Broad Churchman.  There were no
difficulties for him.  In antiquated forms, in vain
repetitions, in decaying creeds, there were difficulties, it
might be; but one was not to bother one’s self about
them.  It was true that one had to conform to outward form,

p. 9
but the
spirit was greater than the form.  The time would come when
the Church would burst its bonds, but at present all they had to
do was to make the best of a bad situation.  It seemed to
her such church-worship was a sham.  The man in the pulpit,
the man in the pew, alike ignored the dead creed, and instead
revelled in glib phraseology, in poetical nothings, in
much-sounding rhetoric and ecclesiastical show and ritual.
The chief things were the music, the millinery, and the
show—the white-robed choristers, the dim religious
light.

Then she thought of her old training among the Dissenters, and
went to a chapel.  She was staying at an old country
mansion, when one Sunday morning the gentlemen were going to have
the usual smoke in the stables, and examine the horses and the
hounds, and to make a few bets about a forthcoming race, and
there was a smile of perfect horror as she expressed her
intention of going to the village meeting-house, while the ladies
were inexpressibly shocked.  No
p. 10
one went to meeting; it was
low.  One could not be received in society who was known to
go to meeting.

‘I show myself once or twice in a year at church just to
keep myself on good terms with society,’ said the gentleman
of the mansion.

The actress went to the chapel, as nowadays the meeting-house
is termed.  It was as Gothic in style as it was possible to
be.  The singing was good.  The preacher was a man of
culture, and was dressed as much like a clergyman as was
possible.  The hearers were of the respectable middle class;
the working man was conspicuous by his absence.  But, alas!
it was known the next Sunday that the quiet lady who had attended
the previous Sunday was an actress from town.  She found
every eye turned towards her.  There was quite a crowd to
see her arrive and depart, and further attendance was
impossible.

When are we to have a rational change in the land?  We
have had a Reformation that, incomplete as it was, freed us at
any
p. 11
rate
from the worship of the Mass.  When is our religion to be
free of Church creeds—of the Assembly Catechism—of
the iron fetters of chapel trusts—of the traditions of the
elders—of the influence of the fables and traditions and
superstitions of the Middle Ages?  When is a man to stand up
in our midst and honestly utter what he believes, careless of his
ecclesiastical superiors, of the frowns of deacons and
elders?  When are we to get rid of conventional observances
and conventional forms?  There is no place of worship in
which it would be proper for me to enter without the chimney-pot
hat, or take a brown-paper parcel in my hand.  If I did so,
I should be set down as little better than one of the
wicked—as wicked as if I were to read the
Weekly
Dispatch
on a Sunday, or spend an hour or two in a museum or
a picture-gallery.  When are we to realize that the Sabbath
was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath?  Why are
Churches to be less tolerant than the Master, who invited all to
come, and who rebuked His ignorant disciples when
p. 12
they would
have put obstacles in their way?  It is hard to think how
many souls have been thus driven away.  You are an actress,
said the Church to her; you must give up your profession.
She felt that was wrong; that on the stage she could be as good a
Christian as anywhere else.  It was her happiness to believe
in a

‘Father of all, in every age,

In every clime, adored—

By saint, by savage, or by sage,

Jehovah, Jove, or Lord.’

Toleration is the great need of our day.  But we need
more: we need less of prayer that is not worship; of hymnology
that makes men utter on their tongues what is rarely, if ever, in
their hearts.  We want more of honesty in all our public
services, to whatever denomination we belong.  We have far
too much of indifference; too much of dogma; too much of silly
sentimentalism; too much mysticism; too much morbid faith.
Our missionaries often make converts, who are the worse, and not
the better, for the use of their primitive creeds.  The
shapeless block of wood, hideously
p. 13
carved and fantastically ornamented,
that I, in the sunlight, may look upon with scorn, my brother,
living in the dark places of the earth, may look upon as the very
highest type of his ideal god, and as such he may gaze upon it
with reverence, and worship it with awe.  And who am I that
I may say that he is not the better for so doing?  Who am I
that I am to laugh as my happy sister prays, or to deprive her of
a faith that ‘scorns delights and lives laborious
days’?  Would the savage be less a savage had he not
before him that type of a Divine ideal?  Would he be a
better man if I were to blot that out of his being?  Would
that make him less selfish, less cruel; more kindly in act, more
ready to do good?  Would he be happier in the sunshine,
braver in the battle and the storm?  Yes, it is more
religious toleration that we need, though we have, rather against
the grain, ceased to burn heretics.  And that comes only as
knowledge increases, and the torch of science throws its light
over the dark mysteries of Nature and her laws.

p. 14
The
difficulty with the actress was not faith, but the form; not with
the Spirit, but with its manifestation in so-called Christian
churches and among Christian men; not with the Divine idea, but
its human expression.  And that is the giant Difficulty of
our day.  It is impossible for any Church to realize its
truest conceptions.  It is in vain that finite man seeks to
grapple with the problem of the infinite.  It is told of St.
Augustine, how once upon a time he was perplexed about the
doctrine of the Trinity while he was walking on the
seashore.  All at once he saw a child filling a shell with
water, and pouring it out on the sand.  ‘What are you
doing?’ said the old saint.  ‘Putting the sea
into this hole,’ was the reply.  The child’s
answer was not lost on the saint if it made him feel the main
essence of Christianity is not a dogma, but a life.

The Church service day by day gets more ornate, more
artificial, more of a show, and men and women go to it as a
theatre.  But, any rate, it is devotional
p. 15
so far as
devotion is displayed in form, in the Free Churches, as they are
called, or, rather, love to call themselves, for freedom is as
much to be found in the Church service as in that of the chapel;
the pulpit and the man who fills it play a more important
part.  The vanity which is in the heart of all of us more or
less is gratified more than in the Church service, which has a
tendency to sink the man and to exalt the function.  The
whole tone of the chapel service is personal.  The man in
the pulpit is the great ‘I am.’  The deacons
have more or less the same spirit.  Positively it is
amusing: you enter before the time of commencing worship.
Presently a man ascends the pulpit stairs.  Is he the
preacher?  Oh no, he is only the man to carry up the
Bible.  Again the vestry door opens, and in the conquering
hero comes.  A deacon reverently follows.  Is he going
to assist?  Not a bit of it.  He merely shuts the
pulpit-door, and sinks back into his native insignificance.
The sermon over, then comes the collection.  It seems,
apparently, that this is
p. 16
the great thing after all.  I
remember once going into a chapel; the minister had a weak voice,
I could not hear a word of the prayer or the sermon.  The
only thing I did hear, and that was pronounced audibly to be
heard all over the place, was, ‘The collection will now be
made.’  Organization is carried to excess, till it
becomes weariness and destructive of the spirit.  What is
wanted is something simpler.  Listen to the minister as he
announces from the pulpit the engagements and arrangements for
the week; and as to the sermon, how often is it a pamphlet, or an
essay, or a newspaper leader!  One feels also prayer is too
long and wearying, and that the personal element is somewhat
intrusive.  It is there the Church has the advantage; the
chapel-goer is disgusted if the minister does not call on him, if
the deacon does not shake hands with him, if he himself has not
some official standing as a member of some committee or
other.  The poet tells us,

‘God moves in a mysterious way

His wonders to perform.’

p. 17
Not so
says the Evangelical; it is by means of our fussy activity and
mechanical organization that His wonders are performed.
‘It is,’ exclaims the Methodist, ‘a penny a
week, a shilling a quarter, and justification by
faith.’  No wonder that there are good Christians who
never darken church or chapel doors.  ‘It conduces
much to piety,’ said the late Earl Russell to his wife,
‘not to go to church sometimes.’  And the
actress was a Christian, godly, if not according to the godliness
of Little Bethel.  I don’t know that she kept the
Sabbath holy; she loved that day to get away from town and the
world, and to worship Him whose temple is all space and whose
Sabbath all time.  In the Roman Catholic or Protestant
cathedral alike, she could worship, and from occasional
attendances she often returned refreshed, but she could identify
herself with no particular body.  In the freer Churches of
Christendom she would enter, and could leave all the better for
the service, even if the preacher had, as preachers often do,
proved unequal to her state of mind.  Here
p. 18
she listened
to an essay logical and profound, which touched on no matter of
earthly interest, and was as vain and worthless as questions as
to how many angels could stand on the point of a needle, or what
were the songs the Syrens sang, or what name Achilles assumed
when he hid himself among women.  There a raw youth thumped
the pulpit, as he complacently dwelt on the doings of a God of
whom his very idea was a caricature.  Then there were
ingenious clerics who spoke upon the ‘little horn’ in
Daniel, and who, while ignorant of Cheapside and the City, could
unfold the Book of Revelation, and to whom the prophecies were as
easy as A B C.  A good deal of what is commonly called good
preaching was but to her an idle dream as preachers painfully
tried to realise the past, and talked of distant lands, and
worthy old patriarchs who had been dead thousands of years, and
grand old prophets, who though able forces in their own times and
amongst their own people, had little to do with the passions and
prejudices of the
p.
19
living present.  Even when the preacher was
morbidly sentimental, as so many of them were—and that is
why the men stop away, or only attend to please their
wives—or too prone to take for granted fables which cannot
stand a moment’s rational investigation, even, though they
were more or less common to the mythology of every nation under
the sun, poor Rose boldly faced the situation and sat it all out,
though for all practical purposes she felt that she might just as
well have listened to a lecture on the Digamma.  One admits
the force in many cases of associated worship, the charm of the
living voice, of a good delivery, of a pleasing figure; and yet a
man is not to be condemned as one of the wicked because his pew
is empty at times, because he reads the Bible and says his
prayers alone, because he is distracted by the delivery of stale
religious commonplace.

But the Free Churches, are not they the home of free
thought?  Are they not leaders in religious reform?
Alas! they all have their dogmas and creeds to the believer in
which
p. 20
they
promise eternal life, while to the unbeliever, no matter how
honest he may be, or how pure in heart and life, there is
anathema maranatha.  If the Church of England apes the
Church of Rome, what are we to say of the conventicle, with its
antiquated creed and its obsolete theology?  Are they not
still, in spite of their boasted freedom, under the rule of St.
Augustine and the monks?  Nor can it well be
otherwise.  You take a young man, ignorant of the world,
unversed in human nature; you shut him up in a college with
others as ignorant as himself.  You teach him theological
conundrums rather than real life.  Can such as they minister
to a mind diseased?  Am I to be saved by listening to such
as they?  Ah, no!

‘In secret silence of the mind,

My heaven, and there my God, I find.’

It was so with Rose as she wandered drearily from one church
door to another, seeking rest and finding none.  It was
clear to her that there was no room for her in the narrow circle
of the Churches.

p. 21
As long
as you are an actress, as long as you get your living by
following the stage, said they all, you cannot be a
church-member, forgetting that the stage itself was, in a prior
age, but the child of the Church.

One day she tried the Quakers, but there the silence was too
oppressive—nor did she feel called upon to make herself
singular by a display of Quaker dress or Quaker speech.

One Sunday she was in Edinburgh, staying at the house of one
of the University professors.  She had heard much of Scotch
piety, and she wanted to see what it was like.  A grand
scientific gathering was being held, and the house was full of
men of science.  In the morning she went to church.
Again she was taken to church in the afternoon, very much against
the grain; but she was in Rome, and had to do as the Romans
did.  In the evening there was a dinner-party.  As they
repaired to the drawing-room, the lady of the house said:

‘It is very questionable whether we shall see any more
of the gentlemen to-night.  If
p. 22
they rise from the table sober, they
will come into the drawing-room.  If they take too much,
they will go up by the backstairs to bed.’

The lady of the house said this as if it were the most natural
thing in the world, but it shocked Rose to find that, in the city
where the Sabbath is observed more strictly than anywhere else,
this was how the Sabbath night was spent, and, naturally, she had
little respect for the piety which could attend church twice a
day on the Sunday, and make the Sunday night a convivial
carouse.

What was she to do?  She went to many a Congregational,
or Baptist, or Unitarian, or Episcopalian church in London, where
she heard much that was helpful to her spiritual life—much
that it did her good to hear.

‘You can’t join my church,’ said a popular
divine to her.

‘Why not?

‘Because you are an actress.  My deacons would not
hear of such a thing.’

p.
23
‘Have you ever been to a theatre?’

‘Never!’ was the emphatic reply.

‘How, then, can you condemn that of which you are
ignorant?’ asked the actress.

‘Well,’ said the preacher, ‘I can go by
popular report.  Look at the lives of the
professionals.  Was not Kean a drunkard?  Did not the
Duke of So-and-so keep an actress?  Did not
So-and-so’—naming a popular actor—‘run
off with another man’s wife?’

‘What of that?’ said Rose.  ‘I am told
your predecessor in your very chapel did the same.’

The preacher did not know what to say, except that there were
black sheep in all professions, and that there was a Judas even
among the Apostles, and it became them all to judge in charity of
one another.

‘That is what I want of you,’ said the
actress.

But the preacher did not respond to her appeal, and again she
left the church for the world.

Another day she tried the Methodists.
p.
24
Unfortunately, as she stepped in they were singing:

‘And be the business of my life

To cry, “Behold the Lamb!”’

In that church she saw some Wesleyan tradesmen whom she
knew.  Was that the business of their lives?  Of course
not.  Man comes into the world to get a living and to make
the most of it.  The secular life is not superseded by the
religious life—only adorned and purified by it.

‘You must give up your calling,’ said they
all.

Indignantly she asked herself, Why?  Her acting was her
one talent.  Was one to hide it in a napkin?  Certainly
not, said common-sense, and for once common-sense was
right.  Was she not doing good in her way, finding people
innocent amusement, and teaching them, as she repeated nightly
the great words of the great dramatist of our land, something of
the wonder and grandeur and pathos and mystery of life?
Hers was not an art to be despised.  Hers was not a course
of life to be abandoned at the
p. 25
command of a bigot, be he Roman monk
or Protestant preacher.  There was a time when the stage was
the teacher of the people; why should it not be so now? she asked
herself.  It was her resolve that it should be so, as far as
it was in her power.  For as Tom Campbell wrote:

‘Ill can poetry express

Full many a tone of thought sublime;

And painting, mute and motionless,

Steals but one glance from Time.

But by the mighty Actor brought,

Illusion’s wedded triumphs come;

Verse ceases to be airy thought,

And Sculpture to be dumb.’

‘Ah!’ wrote Wentworth to her, ‘we need not
despair of Divine mercy.  Christ is bigger and broader than
the Church.  You in your way, and I in mine, have wandered
far in search of such happiness as earth can give, and found it
to be of little worth, and the sects look on us as sinners,
because we refuse to bow to the image they have set up, or to
utter their Shibboleth.  I know not that it matters
much.  I know not that it matters anything
p. 26
at all.
How can any man or any set of men pretend to have penetrated the
full meaning of Scripture, or that they can bid stand back those
as humble and patient in the pursuit of truth as
themselves?’

One day when Robert Hall had been having a conversation with
Sir James Mackintosh, he told a friend: ‘Sir, it was the
Euphrates pouring itself into a teapot.’  If a great
orator like Hall could say that of a fellow-man, what can we say
of such Divine revelation as comes to us either by the
experiences of actual life or by the world of nature around us,
or by the written Word which was and is Life?  How can we
grasp it?  How can we cut it up into dogmas and
creeds?  How can we say to any brother man, Believe as I
believe, or be damned?  The Churches have tried to do so and
failed, even when they had at their back the terrors of
Inquisition or the sword of the Civil Magistrates.  They are
beginning to understand that it is all up with priestcraft, and
that the Church as it exists to-day everywhere is in
p. 27
danger; that
they cannot stop the onward march of the people; that they cannot
say to the waves of free thought, ‘Hitherto shall ye come,
but no further, and here shall thy proud waves be
stayed.’  It is a kindly light that leads on, and we
cannot stop.  Take all the creeds, pile them one upon the
top of another, and there is still a void, for the finite cannot
grasp the Infinite, and man cannot by searching find out
God.  At the best we can but guess; at the best, and may we
ever be that, we are but children crying for the light.
Here we see through a glass darkly; let us humbly do our duty,
and wait the time when all mystery shall be unravelled, when we
shall stand face to face, when we shall know even as we are
known.

Wentworth and Rose had resolved to become one in life, as they
had been in years of struggle and endeavour.  As she rose
she dragged him upward and onward.  God had come to him as
his Father and his Friend.  He was of no Church.  He
needed the aid of no priest.  He distrusted
p. 28
the emotional
sensationalism of what is called religious life.  It had
done little for him in the past—only helped him to his
fall.  Church members he had found no better than other men;
church life just as worldly as that of the wicked.  It
needed not that he should enter man’s churches to see in
all His glory and tenderness and love the Man of sorrows and
acquainted with grief; Him who had wept over impenitent
Jerusalem, and had tears and pity for such frail women as Mary
the Magdalene; who had said as He walked the crowded streets of
Jerusalem, beneath the proud pillars of the Temple itself:
‘Come unto Me all ye that are weary and are heavy-laden,
and I will give you rest’; the lustre of whose life and the
music of whose voice had bettered and brightened all time and
space.  It was no Agnostic’s dream that had made
Wentworth a new man, but a great spiritual reality, of which he
felt as sure as he did of his own existence, as he wrote:

‘O Thou, the God of life and light,

In whom all heaven and earth unite,

p. 29
Fain would
I raise my humble voice

And with all people round rejoice.

‘I cannot see Thee as Thou art,

I only know Thee with the heart.

All language fails me when I try

To shadow forth Thy Deity.

‘I love, I worship, I adore—

Can man give less, can God ask more?

That love in life I would translate,

And freely trust Thee with my fate.’

p.
30
CHAPTER XII.

IN LOW COMPANY.

Nothing was blacker than the outlook in this land of ours
fifty years ago.  The parson droned away on Sunday,
preaching a gospel which had not the remotest reference to living
men, and good people sighed placidly as the preacher dwelt
apparently
con amore
—and without the slightest sign
of regret—on the torture and the flame to which the wicked
would be eternally condemned.  The hearer, if well to do,
went home complacently to his Sunday dinner and glass or two of
port; while the poor sinner preferred to sleep off the Saturday
night’s debauch, leaving the missus and the children to go
to a place of worship, on the condition that the dinner should
not be forgotten.  But it
p. 31
was chiefly the small shopkeepers who
came to attend what were called the means of grace.  I
remember a parish clerk who made a point of attending the
Wesleyan chapel in the evening.  In time the old vicar died
and a new one reigned in his stead.  In his wisdom he
proposed to have evening service in the parish church to hinder
the sheep from roving in forbidden pastures.

But said the parish clerk, when his vicar suggested the idea:
‘Oh no, sir; that will never do.  You will deprive me
of the means of grace altogether.’

Surely when Queen Victoria commenced her reign the sun never
shone on a darker land than ours.  Ignorance, poverty,
intemperance, licentiousness ran riot—in spite of the fact
that good people were subscribing their tens of thousands to
spread the Bible all over the world and to convert the heathen,
who many of them lived more decent lives than our own
people.  Not far from the scene of which I write, a noble
lord, who had been a sailor and had a fine
p. 32
gift of
swearing, presided over a local meeting of the British and
Foreign Bible Society.  As a chairman he laboured under many
difficulties, but he managed to make a short speech, in which he
assured his hearers that the society was a d---d good one and
deserved to be d---d well supported.  The country life of
the gentleman was just what we see it in ‘Tom
Jones.’  In the towns things were little better.
Lives were shortened by intemperance and neglect of all sanitary
requirements.  The employer had no thought for the people he
employed.  The peasant and the workman had little done for
them, the pauper had even less.  There were no cheap
newspapers to stir up the sleeping intellect of the
country.  If such a thing as a national conscience existed
it was very feeble—eaten up with pride.  The
Englishman was dead to the needs of the times.  The bitter
cry of the distressed had not then sounded over the land.

Little children from four to eight years of age, the majority
of them orphans, the rest
p. 33
sold by brutal parents, were trained
as chimney-sweeps.  In order to make their skins tough and
not to suffer as they climbed they were rubbed with brine before
a hot fire.  They were liable to what was called chimney
sweeper’s cancer.  They were often suffocated by soot
and died when at work.  Often they were stifled by the hot
sulphurous air in the flues; often they would stick in the
chimney and faint from the effects of terror, exhaustion and foul
air.  Lighted straw was used to bring them round, and if
that failed they were often half killed, and sometimes killed
outright, by the efforts to extricate them.  Sailors were
sent to sea in ships heavily insured—and great was the loss
of valuable life—in order that some shipowners might reap a
hellish profit.  It was reckoned that at that time the
preventible mortality of the country was annually 90,000.
In 1843 there were 1,500 young persons of fourteen and upwards
engaged as milliners and dressmakers in the Metropolis.
Their hours were from fifteen to eighteen a day,
p. 34
with only a
little interval of rest, and the consequence was that consumption
and impaired eyesight were terribly prevalent among them.

As late as 1854 a gentleman who commenced a religious service
in one of the largest cottages on his estate for the benefit of
the dense population around him of miners, had to give up the
good work, as he was threatened with a prosecution for the breach
of the Conventicle Act.  Churchyards in overcrowded
districts were allowed to spread disease and death all
around.  The houses in which the poor were forced to herd
were almost destitute of sewage drainage and water supply.

It was found that in the fourteen houses of which Wild Street,
Drury Lane, for example, consisted, nearly one thousand persons
found shelter, and that the very staircases were crowded nightly
with poor wretches, to whom even the pestilential accommodation
of the rooms was an unattainable luxury.  It was said that
more beggars were to be encountered in a walk
p. 35
from
Westminster Abbey to Oxford Street than in a tour from London to
Switzerland, whether by Paris or the Rhine.  There were
80,000 in the common lodging-houses of the City, and no authority
to see that decency and proper sanitary conditions were applied
to any of them.  Nor were the homes of the agricultural
peasants much better.

When Lord Ashley became Earl of Shaftesbury, and took
possession of the family estate, he writes: ‘Inspected a
few cottages—filthy, close, indecent,
unwholesome.’  All England was a whited sepulchre,
full of dead men’s bones.  But the climax of
wickedness was only to be seen in a low London lodging-house; let
us enter one.

Mint Street, Borough, was better known than trusted some years
not very long ago.  It was a nasty place to go down of a
night, especially if you happened to be the owner of a watch or
had a sovereign or two in your pocket, nor did the police much
care to explore its mysteries.  Somehow or other the place
bore a bad name, and has ever
p. 36
done so since the days of Jonathan
Wild and his merry men, who at one time are reported to have
resided there.  In its low lodging-houses were to be found
the very scum of the earth—the virtuous and deserving poor,
as they would have us believe they are, always in search of
employment, which they unfortunately never find—who are
dishonest, and lazy, and improvident, and drunken, and dissolute,
very much against their own inclination, and to their own intense
disgust—the victims of the wicked landlord or wickeder
capitalist.  They live in the lodging-houses of the
district, which are generally pretty full, at the rate of
fourpence a night, except when the hop-picking is on, when away
the inmates tramp by the hundred down to the pleasant hop-gardens
of Kent, or Sussex, or Hampshire, carrying with them all the
filth and squalor of the town, tainting the air and polluting the
fair face of Nature as they pass along.  It is true that now
the city missionary follows in their steps, otherwise it would be
a bad look-out indeed.

p. 37
Turning
down into the street, avoiding the policeman who happened to be
on duty at the time, one summer evening might be seen a man and a
woman.  They were tired and dusty, and had evidently
travelled far.  On both was the mark of Cain, and they were
fleeing from justice to quarters where guilt and shame find
convenient repose.  They knocked at a door, where, after
they had been surveyed through a wicket, they were received on
the payment of such small sum as the deputy-keeper was
legitimately entitled to charge.  It was a big room into
which they entered, with a great fire at one end, at which
various cooking operations were going on; and on the benches at
the side some slept, or smoked, or talked, or read, as the fancy
suited them.  Behind was a yard, in which one or two were
engaged in the process familiarly known as cleaning themselves
up.

Neither the place nor the company would have been attractive
to a decent working man.  There was a foulness in the air
and
p. 38
talk
of the place which would have revolted him, yet in that crowd of
needy and disreputable creatures were men who had been to college
and had had the benefit of a University education, and women who
had known something of the sunshine of life; alas! all—all
were given over to evil, utterly lost and reprobate.  It was
not ignorance, not misfortune, not a wicked world, that had made
them what they were.  They had been the architects of their
own lives.  They had to lie on the beds they had made.
Society is much troubled about them.  What if society were
to leave them alone, and to look better after the really
deserving poor, who are always present with us—who are so
low down in the world as to be compelled to take wages on which
they cannot possibly live—who require and deserve the
utmost sympathy from all classes of the community in their sorrow
and distress and struggles?  These are the weak, whose
burdens the strong are bidden, in the Book to which most of us
appeal for instruction and guidance, to bear.

p.
39
‘Why, ye’re soon back again,’ said one
of the inmates, engaged in the interesting operation of frying a
Yarmouth bloater—‘you’re soon back again; I
thought you was down at Sloville.’

‘Lor’ bless you! we han’t been near Sloville
for years.’

‘Ah, I remember, I heard you were in the Black
Country.’

‘Yes, we was there, but the fact was we had to hook
it!’

‘Oh, I see, up to the old trick!’ said he with a
smile.

‘Perhaps,’ was the reply.

The fact was that one afternoon the tramp and the woman met
with an old farmer coming home from market a little the worse for
liquor, and him they had kindly relieved of his watch, as he was
far too gone to be able to take proper care of it himself.
The old farmer, naturally, was aggrieved, and tried to defend
himself.  This led to a little compulsory action on the part
of his friends, and he was left senseless by the roadside, while
they made
p.
40
the best of their way out of the neighbourhood.

Fortune always favours the brave, and our friends were in this
respect no exception to the general rule.  They had had
rather a successful campaign—visiting lonely lanes
untrodden by the police, and robbing romantic young ladies fond
of the country of what jewellery they might happen to wear.
People are always asking us to pity the poor worn-out
tramp.  I am rather inclined to pity his victim.

‘But where’s the kid?’

‘Oh, we left him behind.  But, lor’ bless
you, we know where to find him again.  He’s safe to be
in Parker’s Buildings, or somewhere thereabout.’

‘Got any money about you?’

‘Not much worth speaking of—not quite done for,
either,’ continued the tramp.  ‘Look
here,’ said he, peering cautiously about, and drawing out
of his coat-pocket a very dirty and ragged handkerchief, in which
was wrapped up a watch—an old-fashioned one, but real
silver, nevertheless.
p. 41
Seeing no one was looking on, he
proudly exclaimed: ‘What do you say to that?’

‘A beauty, but why didn’t yer spout it at
once?  Suppose the peeler had collared yer—what a mess
ye would have been in.’

‘Lor’ bless ye, I wa’nt such a flat as
that.  What could I ’ave got for it on the
tramp?  Now, it is good for a round sum.’

‘Shall I go and spout it?’ said the old
acquaintance.

‘Yes, me and missus have walked enough to-day; but
ain’t it rather late?’

‘Yes, but there is the shop at the corner.  You
know they are not particular.’

And that was quite true.  The head of that respectable
establishment generally contrived to do a good deal of business,
in spite of the law and the police, and, if the receiver is as
bad as the thief, was a very bad man indeed.  In a little
while the messenger returned, bearing with him a bottle of gin, a
couple of pounds of rump steak, and the other materials for a
good supper, and a certain amount of cash, which he handed over
to the new-comer, and
p. 42
which seemed perfectly
satisfactory.  As eagles round the carcase gathered the few
casuals that happened to be present.  Most of them were old
gaol-birds, all of them were the slaves of
drink—quarrelsome or good-tempered according to their
respective temperaments.  They were ready for any feat, or
not averse to any crime, if it could be done in a sneaking,
underhand manner.  Literally their hands were against
everyone, and everyone’s hands against them.  But now
they were all on the best of terms.  There was a little
drink going on; who knew but what a drop might fall to their
share.  At any rate they were all glad to see Carroty Bill
as they called him once more in their midst; in the line of life
they affected his ruffianism made him a hero.

That night was an extra scene of festivity at the lodging
house; one of the inmates had been bagged, and had served his
time, and had come back resolved to qualify himself as soon as
possible for another term of imprisonment, at the expense of the
unfortunate taxpayer.  And there was a good
p. 43
deal of
sociable enjoyment in accordance with the old saying, that when
the wine is in the wit is out.

‘Anybody been in trouble, since I was here?’ asked
our friend the tramp.

‘No, nothing particular—drunk and disorderly,
that’s all.  But we’ve had some narrow shaves,
and the sergeant told the guvnor last night that ’e’s
got his heye on hus.’

‘His eye be blowed!  But who is yon
cove?’

‘Oh, a poor banker’s clerk.’

‘And the fellow he’s talking to?’

‘Him with the red nose?  Oh, we call him the
Professor.  He’s from Oxford University he says, and
gives himself very high and mighty airs when he’s in his
cups.  But they’re all right.’

‘I’ll soon let you know who I am,’ said a
lad who was listening to the talk.

‘Well, who are you?’

‘I am a thief, and not ashamed to own it.’

Here there was a general cry of ‘Bravo!’

p.
44
‘I ain’t done a day’s work in my life,
and don’t mean to.  Wot’s the good on it?
A fellow ain’t a bit the better for it at the year’s
end.  He’s a deal to bear.  He’s got to put
up with his master’s whims; to put up with his foreman and
his mates; to toil from morning to night, never to have a
day’s pleasure; to be a poor slave.  No, I know a
trick worth two of that.’

Again there were cries of ‘Bravo!’

‘Why should I work hard for a master to make money by
me!  Here I can lead a free life.  If I am hill,
can’t I go to the ’ospital?  If I ain’t
got a shot in the locker, can’t I nurse up at a
soup-kitchen?  At the worst I can go into the
work’ouse, and get my keep out of the parish.  And
then when I’m in luck, what a life I can have at the
music-halls and with the gals!  I heard the chaplain of the
gaol preach a sermon about honesty being the best policy.
That’s all very fine, but somehow or other I did not seem
to see it.’

Here there was more applause.

The speaker continued:

p.
45
‘I’ve done nothing wot’s good.  I
know I’m a bad un.’

‘Yes, we all know that.’

‘And why?’

‘Ah, that’s the question!’ said the
interested group of listeners.

‘I’ll tell you for why.  I han’t no
father—at any rate, I never knowed one.  My mother
turned me out o’ doors at the age of thirteen.  I then
stole a pair o’ boots, and was sent to prison for one month
for it.  What could I do when I came out but go back to
thievin’?  In a little while I was convicted for
stealing out of a till, and sent to prison for three
months.  Arter a little spreein’ about, and a few ups
and downs, I came to grief again in an attempt to steal a watch,
and this time got six months.  After I came out I renewed my
wicious courses’ (here a laugh went round the room),
‘and I got four months for stealin’ a purse.  As
soon as I came out I run agin a perliceman, against whom I had a
spite, as he was always ’avin’ his heye on me, and
got fourteen days’ imprisonment for assault.  The
p. 46
next time I
had three months for an attempt to rob a drunken old sailor in
the Borough.  Then I ’ad six months for stealin’
a watch.  And the next time—and that I did not
like—twelve months for stealin’ a purse.
However, when I came out I enjoyed my liberty, and did not make a
bad use o’ my time.  Arter that I got a long sentence,
and now for good behaviour I am out with a liberty
ticket.’

‘Well, well, such is life!’ said the red-nosed
curate, who had been listening attentively.  ‘I
suppose we’re all villains of necessity, and fools by a
divine thrusting on.  What’s the odds as long as
we’re happy?  Look at my learning, my abilities, my
virtues—where am I the better?  Are we not all on the
same low level?  All, if I may be pardoned the phrase, a
little shaky, a little down in the world?  Let’s
liquor up,’ said he, bringing out of his side pocket a
bottle of rum, and passing it round, often tasting with evident
gusto its contents.

In the midst of the excitement a gent
p. 47
came in
apparently much excited.  I say gent, as he was not a
gentleman.  He had too red a nose and too sodden an
appearance to be taken for anything of the kind.  He was a
perfect picture of a human wreck as, unwashed and unshaven, with
a short pipe in his mouth, he joined the drinking group.

‘Hollo, parson,’ they all exclaimed,
‘wot’s the row?  Anythink up?’

‘Nothing particular, only a highway robbery in the Black
Country, and a farmer left for dead.’

‘In the Black Country?  Where’s that?’
asked the tramp.  ‘Whoever heard of such a
place?’

‘Why, you just said you’d been down there,’
said one of the party.

‘Well, what if I did?  You don’t suppose I
had anything to do with the job?’ said the new-comer
angrily.

‘Of course not,’ was the universal reply.

Harmony being restored, the bottle of gin was drunk, and
another sent for.  The fun grew fast and furious.  The
conviviality
p.
48
was of the choicest character, or rather it degenerated
into an orgie.  Does the reader recollect that splendid
passage of Lord Bacon, in which he tells us, ‘In
Orpheus’s theatre all the birds assembled, and forgetting
their several appetites—some of prey, some of game, some of
quarrel—stood all sociably together, listening to the
concert, which no sooner ceased, or was drowned by some louder
noise, but every beast returned to his own nature.’
The gin in the low lodging-house had produced a similar
effect.  While it lasted the partakers for the time being
had forgot their several appetites—some of prey, some of
game, some of quarrel—and stood or sat all sociably
together.  No sooner had the supply of liquor ceased than
the good-fellowship became changed into hate and discord, as the
various natures of the guests reasserted themselves.

The tramp’s female companion became suspicious.
She was not so drunk as the rest, and had become conscious that
there was a reward of ten pounds offered to anyone
p. 49
who should
give such evidence as might lead to the conviction of the
perpetrator or perpetrators of the recent outrage.  The
company she knew comprised more than one individual who was quite
ready to earn a ten-pound note in such a way, and she determined,
as far as it was in her power, not to give them the chance.
Unperceived she slipped out, and fled as fast as she could and as
far as she could.  All at once there was a cry on the part
of the tramp and his friends, ‘Where’s
Sal?’

Some searched for her under the table, others investigated the
sleeping apartments, others the back premises, which were of the
most capacious kind, but no Sal was to be found.

The curate summoned up all his dignity, and, approaching the
inebriated tramp, said to him:

‘My friend, I have a painful revelation to
make.’

‘A wot?’

‘A painful revelation.’

‘I don’t know wot yer mane; but out
p. 50
with it, old
man, and don’t stand there as if you was
chokin’.’

‘Your wife has bolted.’

‘Oh, has she?  Let her bolt.  She’s no
wife of mine.  There are others as good as she.’

‘You don’t seem much affected by the loss,’
replied the Oxonian.  ‘You’re quite a
philosopher.  You seem perfectly aware how
femina
mutabile est
.’

‘Now, don’t come that nonsense with me,’
said the man angrily.  ‘When I drinks, I drinks; and I
don’t bother my head about anything else.  Why should
I?  As to women, they’re like all the rest of
us—here to-day, gone to-morrow.’

‘Ah, I see you’re a man of the world.’

‘I believe yer, my boy,’ said the tramp, who felt
flattered at the intended compliment.

‘You don’t think she’s gone to split,’
whispered one of the party in the tramp’s ear.

‘No, I should think not.  Let me catch her at
it!’

p.
51
‘Or me,’ added his chum.
‘We’ll be sure to mark her, and serve her d---
well!’

The sentiment being favourably received, more exhilarating
liquor was circulated.  That which cheers and inebriates at
the same time by many is much preferred to that which cheers
alone.  In that long room and low company it was
intoxicating liquor that had done the mischief.  Without
character, without clothes, without food, without money, filthy
and fallen, these poor wretches had given up all for drink.
For that the mother was ready to sell her child, or the husband
his wife.  For that the criminal was ready to give up an
accomplice, and to turn King’s evidence, or to commit any
deed of shame.  In time the drink supply was stopped, and
the drinkers staggered upstairs to the crowded bedrooms, redolent
of filth and blasphemy.

‘I say,’ said the tramp’s friend,
‘where do you think that woman’s gone?’

‘Gone; how should I know?  Perhaps she’s gone
back to Sloville.’

p.
52
‘To Sloville! why?’

‘To look after the boy.’

‘A child of hers?’

‘What do you want to know for?’ said the tramp
angrily.  ‘You’re too inquisitive by
half,’ said he, in a drunken tone, and in the next moment
he sank into a drunken sleep.  And the questioner—he,
too, in a moment was in the Land of Nod, dreaming of the days of
innocence, when he was a bright, happy boy, guarded with a
mother’s love and father’s care, in a well-appointed
home, with gardens where grew fruits and flowers, and musical
with the song of birds; where the sun shone bright and the air
was balmy; in a home where care and filth and sorrow and disease
and want and woe seemed almost unknown.  His pals carried
him off to bed.  Suddenly he woke up and asked himself where
he was.  Presently he lifted himself up in bed and looked
around.  At the far end a dim gas-light helped him to
realize the horrors of his situation.  He was in a long,
filthy, evil smelling, low room, with thirty beds in a
p. 53
row, side by
side, packed as close together as sardines in a box.  Every
bed was occupied.  And as he gazed on the sad faces near him
he gave a scream which drew down on him many a curse.

‘Hush! why can’t you be quiet?’ said the
deputy keeper, ever fearful of the police.

But the scream was renewed.

‘Why, I’m blessed,’ said one, ‘if he
ain’t got the D.T.!’

Could anything be more horrible, as the angry keepers mocked
and jeered and maddened him?  Struggling and shrieking, he
was borne off by men stronger than himself to the nearest
hospital, and for awhile there was peace.

p.
54
CHAPTER XIII.

CONCERNING SAL.

And where had the woman gone?  Westward, we are told by
the poet, the course of empire takes its way.  She had gone
west, and very naturally; not at first, she was too artful for
that—her old man, as she called him (she did not know his
proper name), might be after her, and she had had enough of him,
and wanted to be free.  In this case she had not two strings
to her bow.  She was not thinking of accepting a new keeper
in the case of the one cashiered.  She simply wanted to be
free—at any rate for awhile.  As to the child left
behind, she had no thought of that.  Somebody would give it
a crust and a night’s lodging.
p. 55
Then it would
roam into the streets to be picked up by the police, and
supported by the British taxpayer.

We are a very humane people.  The more people neglect
their offspring, the more ready are we to look after them.
If Sal, as she was called, had been a true and tender-hearted
woman, she would have dragged the little fellow out with her into
the cold, raw night away from Sloville.  He might have
caught his death o’ cold, and then and there ceased to be a
blessing to her or anybody else.  As a waif off the streets
he had a better chance of being clothed, and fed, and educated,
and cared for, and planted out in life.  It is thus we
reward our rascals.  It is thus we relieve fathers and
mothers of their responsibility, do our duty, ease our
consciences, and offer a premium to vice.

Finding the way clear, our Sal emerged from her hiding-place,
and made her way, as much hidden as possible by the dark shades
of lofty walls, towards Waterloo Bridge.  She was a
remarkable woman,
p.
56
was our Sal.  Her father was an agricultural
labourer, earning his ten or twelve shillings a week, and
bringing up a numerous family on that exceedingly limited
sum.  At the National school she had learned, in a very
imperfect way, to read and write, to do a little needlework, and
to curtsey to her betters.

As she grew up, she displayed alike her good looks and good
manners.  As to morals, they were not to be expected of a
girl who lived in a cottage with but one sleeping room for the
entire family, and whose good looks exposed her to the bucolic
amativeness of the Bœotians of the district.  All her
ambition was to go to London in service in a superior
family.  She had known girls leave that district and come
back real ladies, though they were as low down in the world as
herself.  One of the girls, a little older than herself, had
gone to London, and turned gay; and what was the result?
That she was living with the son of a lord, and she and all the
other girls, who soon learned the story, were
p. 57
quite eager
to be off to win, if possible, a similar prize.

Surely that was better than hard work, or remaining satisfied
with the station in which God had placed them, as they were told
every Sunday they ought to be—if that only meant marriage
with Hodge, and the workhouse when she and Hodge would be past
work.  It was all very well to be called a good girl by the
Rector’s wife, to be confirmed, whatever that might mean,
as a matter of course, by the Bishop, to sing in the parochial
choir, and once a year to be admitted to the privileges of the
Sunday-school treat; but that did not buy her a new bonnet, or
prevent her wearing her old clothes, or save her from doing a lot
of drudgery at times when she preferred romping in the hayfields
with Farmer Giles’s sons, strapping young fellows, just as
rustic and as ignorant as herself.

A time came when she went out to service at a country house
just by.  A London lady of fashion saw her, was attracted by
her appearance, and got her to come to
p. 58
town.  The illustrious
aristocrat she married was taken with the kitchen wench, as her
ladyship indignantly termed her, and then there was a row, and
the poor girl was ignominiously discharged to hide her head where
she could, and to give birth to an illegitimate child.  That
aristocratic admirer was Sir Watkin Strahan.

Everyone heard the story of Sal’s disgrace in her native
village, and she dared not return thither.  She had to hide
herself in London where she could, and to live as best she could,
all the while cherishing a fearful revenge against the gay
Baronet.

Her aristocratic seducer sent her fifty pounds, with an
intimation that in that quarter she was to look for no more, and
that she must do the best she could for herself.  With that
money, later on, she married a Sloville inhabitant, who soon died
and left her destitute.

Naturally, in her fallen state, she took to drink, and she
drank till her good looks were gone—till she was a bundle
of filthy rags, till she had lost alike all decency and
p. 59
sense of
shame.  It was nothing new to her to prowl about London by
night when honesty and respectability had gone to bed.  She
rather liked the excitement of that kind of life.

On she went beneath the lamps and the stars, past gin palaces,
where fair young girls were learning to fall as completely and
rapidly as herself; past cadgers and tramps, like herself on the
look-out for what chance might send in their way; past old
criminals, training young ones in the same dreary and joyless
round.  She saw what we all of us see if we walk out of a
night, the drunken harlot run in by the police, who stand in
admiration as her more fortunate and equally sinning sister
drives by in her brougham.  She saw ragged, distress,
imperiously bidden to be off, whilst wealthy rascality, in pomp
and majesty, was drawn in a carriage and pair with fine flunkies
behind.  She peered into club windows, where rich sinners
quaff rich wine in warmth and comfort, while their victims walk
the streets in sorrow and despair.

p. 60
She
stood on Waterloo Bridge—that bridge of sighs—where
many a poor girl has leaped

‘Mad with life’s history,

Glad to death’s mystery,

Swift to be hurled

Anywhere—anywhere

Out of the world.’

And she felt half inclined to climb over and do the same
herself, only the water looked so black and cold, and she put off
her half-formed purpose for another day.  Perhaps, also, she
was too old for that sort of thing.  She should have taken
the false leap when she was gay and good-looking.  Then the
papers would have made London ring with her story, and the low
pictorial pennies would have made her the subject of a
sensational sketch.

As she was, alas! prematurely old, and wrinkled, and gray, no
one would take any notice of her; it was hardly worth while
attempting to drown herself, she thought.  She might as well
live on, she could not well be worse off; and then she sat
herself
p.
61
down in the arch and fell asleep, dreaming
of—  But who can tell the grotesque misery of a
tramp’s dream?

Suddenly she was awoke by the policeman’s grasp.

‘Well, old ’oman,’ said he,
‘you’ve been having a nice time of it
here.’

‘And why not?’ said she, waking up to a sense of
her condition.  ‘Why not?  What’s the harm
of sleeping out here?  I arn’t kicking up a
row—I arn’t creating a disturbance—I
arn’t screaming “Perlice!” am I?  I
arn’t in no ways disrespectful or
aggravatin’—why can’t you let me be?’

‘’Cause it is agin the perlice regulations,’
was the reply.

‘The perlice regulations, what are they?’

‘Why, that you must not stop here, and it is as much as
my place is worth to let you.’

‘Oh, p’liceman, don’t be hard on a poor old
woman that’s enjoying the hevening hair!’

‘No, I can’t,’ said he.  ‘I am
going over
p.
62
the bridge.  When I come back, don’t let me
find you here.  You’ve had a nice little nap.
You must be as fresh as a daisy now.’

‘Perhaps I am, and perhaps I am not,’ said the
poor woman, as she renewed her aimless walk.

In a few minutes she was in the Strand, just as the theatres
were emptied of admiring crowds.  Of course the poor woman
knew all about such matters.  Many a time in the pride of
youth had she spent an evening in the pit.  Many a time, at
a later period, she had sold lucifer matches at the pit doors,
and many were the coppers she had earned thereby.

She liked to see the bright lamps, and the swells, and the
women, as well as anyone else.  The sight, she said, did her
old eyes good.  That night the crowd had been unusually
large.  The last theatrical star, as she learned from the
bills, Miss Kate Howard, had been performing, and all the world
and his wife had come there to see.

p.
63
‘Lor’ bless me!’ said Sal to herself,
‘I’ll go to the stage-door at the back.
I’ve seen a good many of these women in my time.
I’d like to see what this one is like.  I suppose she
is like all the rest of ’em, as fine as paint and fine
feathers can make ’em, but not of much account,
neither.  Many of ’em ain’t much better than me,
after all.’

She turned up a side-street, hurried down another, and soon
was at the stage-door.

A brougham was drawn up before it; on the box a page was
seated.  As she looked, her first impulse was to scream out
his name.  It was her Sloville boy, looking clean and
respectable.

‘Wait a bit, Sally,’ she said to herself.
‘This is a serious business.  It ought to be made to
pay.  Oh, my fine young gentleman belongs to the popular
actress.  Ah, if I can come the broken-hearted mother dodge
it ought to bring me a fiver.’

Presently there was a rustle under the stage-door, and a
pressure of the crowd without.  The actress appeared wrapped
up and well attended.  As she leaped into
p. 64
the brougham
she told the driver to make the best of his way home.

‘Gad! I know that voice,’ said a gentleman in the
crowd.  ‘It is that girl Rose; good heavens!
where’s her home?  Oh, there you are, Harry,’
said he, speaking to the manager as he stood at the door watching
the brougham as it drove away.  ‘You’ve done it
to-night, you have!  Where on earth does that woman
live?’

‘Well, Sir Watkin, I can tell you, but it is no
good.  She lives with her mother.’

‘And is married?’ he eagerly exclaimed.

‘Yes, to be sure.  No, not married, but just about
to be so.’

‘Then, I am after her!’ he exclaimed.
‘Faint heart never won fair lady.’

‘It is a wild goose-chase, Sir Watkin;’ but Sir
Watkin was off in a hansom, nevertheless, not before, however,
our Sal had made an effort to secure him, which effort he
impatiently evaded, bidding her ‘go to the d----’ and
not bother him.

‘You nearly had him then, old girl,’ said a ragged
bystander, in a voice perfectly
p. 65
familiar to her ear.  It was the
tramp’s chum from Mint Street.

‘You here?’ said she, in a tone which did not
express delight.  ‘I thought yer was as tight as my
old man.’

‘Not exactly; as soon as I missed you I thought
I’d see that you did not come to harm.’

‘Thank you for nothin’,’ said the woman
angrily.

‘Now, don’t be angry,’ he said, with a
good-natured smile, ‘now I’ve come.  I wants to
do yer a good turn.  That old tramp will be cotched
to-morrow as sure as eggs is eggs, and I thought I’d better
tell ye to keep out of the way.’

‘Out of the way; wot do you mean?  Do you think
I’ve been up to anything?’

‘No, of course not,’ said the chum in a mocking
tone; ‘but appearances ain’t promising, and that is
all I’ve got to say.  You’d better work yer way
along with me to-night.’

‘Where to?’

p.
66
‘Down Drury Lane way; it ain’t safe to be in
the Boro’.’

‘But lor, bless me, how you’ve altered!’
said Sal.  ‘You had a couple of arms; wot have you
done with one?’

‘Oh, it is buttoned down by my side.’

‘And your boots, where are they?’

‘Hid away in my clothes.  Ain’t it a capital
dodge?  I gets lots of coppers when I thus go out
cadging.  I was goin’ to perform on the bridge, when I
saw you walk past, and then I followed.  I ain’t made
much money to-night.  Perhaps we’d better go
home.’

‘You’re very kind, but I think I shall stop
here.’

‘No you won’t,’ said the man.

He had watched the woman, and he had come to the conclusion
that something was up.  He had seen how she gazed at the lad
on the box; how her face betrayed emotion at the sight of the
actress; how she had endeavoured to speak to a swell as he was
talking to the manager at the
p. 67
stage-door, and he had rapidly formed
a conclusion in his own mind that Sal somehow or other had
connections which might, in due time, be made subservient to his
own interest.  He was a sneak and a cur, but he had a
plausible way of talking and a certain amount of cunning which he
had always turned to excellent account.  It was with
gratification, then, that he found the woman was half persuaded
to listen to his proposals.  Alas! there’s many a slip
between the cup and the lip.  As they stood arguing the
matter, a cab dashed up against them, and when he came to his
senses he found his Sal, as he called her, had been taken to the
accident ward of the nearest hospital.

‘That’s just like my ill-luck,’ said he,
with an angry oath, as he turned away in search of cheap lodgings
for what was left of the night.

Happily it did not much matter to him if he went to bed
late.  He was under no necessity to rise early the next
morning.  The tramp in old times led a merry life.
p. 68
In London, at
the present time, he certainly leads an idle one.

Let us follow our Sal to the hospital, one of those noble
institutions which are the glory and pride of London, the money
to support which had been left long ago by pious founders, and
which have been the means of saving many a life, of setting many
a broken limb, and of curing many a foul disease.  Under its
august wall and in its studious cloisters many generations of
medical students had been trained up for a profession which has
done much to make life worth living, to stay the advance of
disease, to battle with grim death.  Gibbon tells us the
world is more ready to honour its destroyers than its
saviours.  The taunt is too true.  When it ceases to be
that, the medical profession will receive its due homage and
reward.  The courage of the medical man is quite equal to
that of the hero on the battle-field.  His ardour in the
pursuit of his vocation is greater, and the good he does, what
tongue can adequately tell? in generosity, in readiness
p. 69
to relieve
human suffering, where is the equal of the medical man?  The
more illustrious he is, the more ready he is to give of his time
and money to the poor.  There is no truer Samaritan than a
medical man.

The hospital was over London Bridge, as the tourist who rushes
to Brighton is well aware.  It stands a lasting monument to
the charitable London publisher known as Guy.  It covers a
considerable extent of ground, and consists of several buildings
more or less detached.  Little of the original building
remains, as, like the British Constitution, it has grown
considerably beyond the general design.

Thomas Guy, Alderman of the City of London, and M.P. for
Taunton, who made his fortune by a printing contract, by buying
sailors’ tickets, and by South Sea speculations, was little
aware of what London would become in the Victorian era, or of the
enormous amount of suffering and disease that would be reached
and alleviated by the hospital of which he was the original
founder.

p. 70
As you
enter you have little idea of its extent.  On each side are
the residences of officers and medical men.  Then you go
under a porch, where students have their letters addressed them,
and look into a spacious quadrangle, lined with wards, which were
part of the original building.  Further on are newer
buildings and museums, fitted up for the use of students, and in
every way skilfully planned for the accommodation of
patients.  On one side is a theatre for surgical operations,
a dead-house for post-mortem examinations, and a little green, on
which in fine weather patients are permitted to take a little
exercise, and to congratulate each other on the fact that this
time they have given the old gentleman, who is always drawn with
a scythe and an hour-glass, the slip.  Further beyond are
the gates which admit the enormous mass of out-patients, who,
alas! most of them require what not even Guy’s can give
them—fresh air, good food, and a little more cash than they
can manage to secure by their daily labour.
p. 71
It is rather
a melancholy place to visit.  Looking up at the long windows
all round you, you can’t help thinking what human suffering
lies concealed behind them, and misery defying alike the aid of
doctor or nurse or chaplain.  Science may do, and does do,
all it can to make the place healthful.  Thoughtful
consideration may line the walls with pictures, and make the old
wards gay with summer flowers, and the nurse may be the kindest
and tenderest of her sex to whom we instinctively turn when in
pain, and suffering for relief; but, nevertheless, you feel in a
hospital as if you were in a city of the dying and the dead.

Our Sal was at once carried to the accident ward, and taken
care of by tender nurses and watchful surgeons.  No bones
were broken, but she was very much bruised, and the recovery, if
she did recover, it was clear would be long and tedious.
The chances were very much against her.  Drink and evil
living had wrecked her stamina in spite of the fine constitution
which she had received
p. 72
from her parents and her early
country life.  Fever set in, and it seemed as if the poor
woman would have sunk.  She was often delirious, and her
mind wandered.

‘There’s something that keeps her back,’
said her attendant guardian.  ‘She has either
committed some crime she wants to confess, or she has some secret
of which she would fain get rid,’ and the physician was
right.

p.
73
CHAPTER XIV.

AN ENCOUNTER.

One morning, shortly after the events described in the
previous chapter, all England was startled by the intelligence
that the Ministry had been beaten, that the leader of the Liberal
Party had resigned, and that the free and independent were to be
called on to exercise their privileges by returning members to
Parliament likely to serve them well, and to promote the honour
of the country, and the best interests of the community at
large.  I write this last sentence with peculiar
pleasure.  It sounds nice and pleasant.  The fact is, I
fear, the free and independent electors, as a rule, take little
interest in politics.  The working man is, as he has every
right to be, suspicious
p. 74
of both parties alike, and especially
of his oratorical brother of his own class, who comes to him with
a pocket well lined as the result of his professional talk.

Liberal and Conservative clubs and newspapers were much
excited.  According to them never had there been such
tremendous interests at stake.  They, the enlightened, were
to rally round the altar and the throne, both in danger, said the
latter, while the former called on the intelligent manhood of the
country to take one more step in the paths of progress and
reform, and by that step to secure for ever the triumphs our
forefathers had won for us with their blood.

Never were there such tremendous gatherings at Sloville.
The Liberal leaders had held an open air meeting, which was the
grandest thing of the kind ever known, but it was surpassed by an
artfully got up demonstration by the Tories, accompanied by
popular sports and cakes and ale.  The one drawback to the
success of the Liberal Party was that they had been in office for
half a dozen years, and had disgusted all
p. 75
their
friends, and had given the enemy occasion to blaspheme by their
utter inability to pass any good measures, by their irresolute
policy on foreign matters, by their extravagant expenditure at
home, by their complete abandonment of their old battle-cry of
‘peace, retrenchment, and reform.’  Trade also
was bad, and that did not mend matters.  People are always
discontented when times are bad.  That is always the fault
of the Government for the time being.  It is generally
assumed also that they are, to a certain extent, responsible for
the weather.  There had been a great deal of wet, and that
the farmers attributed to the Radical element.

Farmers are naturally averse to Radicals.  The Radical
naturally thinks the farmers fools, because they are averse to
change, and prefer to vote for their landlords to strangers sent
down to agitate the country, who did not own an acre of land in
it, who resided chiefly in our great cities, and who had little
sympathy with agriculturists or agriculture in any shape.

p. 76
The
farmers are not quite such fools as the town radicals are apt to
fancy.  Most of them had good landlords, and few of them
were averse to the Church, and it was pretty clear to the
agricultural mind that whilst the big loaf, like the celebrated
Pickwick pen, was a boon and a blessing to men, it was a grievous
loss to themselves; much more so than was anticipated by the
learned, who assured the farmers that it was impossible to flood
the market with American wheat under fifty shillings the
quarter.  At Sloville also the brewers were afraid of the
Liberal Party, who seemed much inclined to shut up the
public-houses or, at any rate, to worry the trade.  They
struck up an alliance with the Church, and that alliance between
the friends of the Bible and beer threatened serious danger to
Liberals at Sloville as well as elsewhere.

It was clear that the battle to be fought was a very severe
one; that a good deal of money would have to be spent on both
sides; a great many windy orations made, and a good deal of the
trickery usual at
p.
77
election time would have to be resorted to.  The
theory of representative institutions is beautiful.  Nothing
sounds finer than an appeal to the country.  It is a grand
thing for the rulers of the people to have to come to them at
times, and ask for a renewal of their confidence, and a new lease
of political power.  It presumes that the public take an
interest in public questions, that they are educated and
intelligent; that they know their duty, and are prepared to
discharge it; that they are above all paltry and personal
considerations; that they only care for the public good.  It
assumes also that the candidates are men of intelligence and
patriotism—not merely wealthy nobodies anxious for the
social distinction of a seat in Parliament; or barristers in
search of office; or aristocratic hangers-on, hoping, by means of
Parliamentary influence, to secure an honourable position in one
or other of the services: diplomatic, or naval, or military.

For a long time Sloville had rejoiced in an independent
Radical as a representative,
p. 78
and yet Sloville was hard up.
It is true that he had feathered his own nest by securing for his
son a good Government appointment, but that had been no benefit
to Sloville.  He had also offended his constituents by the
paltry way in which he subscribed to the local charities and
local amusements.  He was believed to be niggardly.  It
was known that he dealt at the Civil Service Stores.  It was
clear that no Sloville tradesman would vote for him.  He had
declined to pay the expenses of local Liberals, and in disgust
they had hawked about the borough to anyone who would come down
handsomely on their behalf.  The managers of the party were
in despair.  Happily Sir Watkin Strahan offered them his
services.  He had property in the borough.  His family
were always good to the poor, and as a racing and betting man he
was popular with the sporting fraternity.  Sir Watkin was
accepted as a matter of course.

A day or two after the dissolution of Parliament had been
announced, as Wentworth
p. 79
was breakfasting in his solitary
chambers in Clifford’s Inn, slowly reading the morning
papers, and meditating out of what material he could make best a
leader, he heard a rap at the door.  Opening it, a stranger
met his view—tall, aristocratic, well dressed, in the prime
of life, with the air and appearance of a gentleman.

‘You’re Mr. Wentworth, I believe,’ he
said.

‘That’s my name, sir.’

‘I am Sir Watkin Strahan,’ was the reply, as he
handed his card to Wentworth.

‘Pray walk in, Sir Watkin.’

Sir Watkin complied with the request.

Taking a chair, and lighting a cigar offered him by Wentworth,
who did the same, the stranger continued:

‘I am commissioned to call on you by Mr. Blank,’
naming the proprietor of a morning journal with which Mr.
Wentworth was connected.  ‘The fact is, we are on the
eve of a General Election.’

‘I am perfectly aware of that,’ said Wentworth,
smiling.

p.
80
‘Undoubtedly; and I come to solicit your
aid.’

‘How can I help you?’

‘Why, the fact is, I am anxious for a seat in
Parliament.’

‘For what purpose: public or private?’

‘Why, Mr. Wentworth, how can you ask?  I am a
Liberal.’

‘And, then, are all Liberals public spirited, and not
averse to feathering their own nest when they have a
chance?’

‘Well, you know,’ replied the Baronet, ‘our
party always aim at the public good.’

‘Yes; but professions and practice don’t always
harmonize.  Sometimes private interest draws one way, and
public duty points another.’

Sir Watkin coloured.  He had consented to fight Sloville
in the Liberal interest, but he had made a bargain on the subject
with his party, and Wentworth’s casual remark had gone
home.

Wentworth continued:

‘In what way can I help you, Sir Watkin?’

p.
81
‘Mr. Blank tells me that you know something of
Sloville.’

‘Very little, indeed.  I was there a short while
some years ago.  That is all.  I doubt whether I can do
you any good there.’

‘Oh yes, you can.  I recollect hearing you speak on
the night of the Chartist meeting, and upon my word you spoke out
well.  There are many who still remember that
speech.’

‘Yes; but it did not gain me many friends.’

‘Well, it was talked about for a good while
after.’

‘Do you want me to repeat it?’

‘Not exactly, but I am not much of a speaker myself, and
I want a clever man like yourself to be by my side, and speak now
and then on my behalf.  Of course I should be prepared to
pay handsomely for such assistance.’

‘I am much obliged for the offer.  Of course I feel
complimented by it,’ said Wentworth; ‘but I fear that
sort of thing
p.
82
is not much in my line.  Indeed, I hear so much
oratory that I am sick of it, and have come to regard an orator
as a personal enemy, who really desires to do me wrong.  In
the heat of the moment an orator is apt to forget himself, to
fling charges against his opponents which he cannot justify, and
make promises to the people which he cannot perform.  I fear
a good deal of humbug goes on when there is much oratory, and
that a man who gets into a habit of public speaking later on
becomes a humbug himself.  At any rate, I know this is true
of some of our London popular orators.  You may be better in
the country.  It is to be hoped you are.’

‘As to oratory, we are very badly off.  And that is
the real reason,’ said Sir Watkin, ‘why I came to
you.  I am not, as I have said, much of a speaker
myself.  Whereas my Conservative opponent is a clever
barrister, with a tremendous gift of gab.’

‘Yes, that is it.  You ought to go to a barrister
and take him down with you.  So
p. 83
long as a barrister is well paid he
is ready to speak on any side.’

‘But there are difficulties which I fear will prevent my
doing that.  I want a novelty—a newspaper man, in
fact.  Lawyers have such a professional style of
talking.  They deceive no one; no one believes them.
If a lawyer ever does by accident make a good speech it carries
no weight with it.  It is expected as a matter of
course.  If a lawyer can’t talk we don’t think
much of him or his law, and then there is another
reason.’

‘What is that?’ said Wentworth, lazily puffing his
cigar.

‘Lawyers ain’t popular at Sloville with the
Radicals.  They say that our present law is a disgrace to
the country, and that as long as we fill the House with lawyers,
we shall never get a proper measure of law reform.  In our
town the people are very much opposed to lawyers and
parsons.’

‘Very wrong of them,’ said Wentworth
ironically.

p.
84
‘Very wrong, indeed,’ replied the Baronet;
‘but we must take people as we find them, and act
accordingly.  It is no use sending down a lawyer to fight
for me.  The people would not go to hear him.  Their
last representative won by the aid of a lawyer, and they
won’t stand another.’

‘But, then, in London there are no end of men who pass
themselves off as working-men politicians, though it is precious
little work they do.  I believe they are to be had at a very
moderate figure, and they can do the roaring part of the business
first-rate.  They are always trotted out when the Liberals
want to get up a grand demonstration, more especially when the
Conservatives are in place and power.  Had not you better
take one or two of them down with you?  They’ll be
sure to fetch the rest.’

‘Alas, I’ve tried them,’ said the Baronet,
‘and I found they were of no use.  As soon as they had
fingered a fiver or two they began to give themselves such
airs.  I could not get on with them at all, and after
all,’ said the speaker, looking down complacently
p. 85
at his
well-dressed figure, ‘people prefer a gentleman.’

‘Perhaps so; but real gentlemen are scarce
nowadays,’ said Wentworth.  ‘Where is the real
gentleman now, brave, truthful, unsullied, with hands and heart
clean, without fear or reproach?  In political life, at any
rate, he seems to me almost as extinct as the dodo.’

Wentworth was getting on dangerous ground.  He had a
faint suspicion that his visitor was not one of this class.
The visitor felt it himself, and was getting rather uncomfortable
in consequence.  He had come on business to hire a speaker,
and to pay him for his services, and to be helped in other
ways.  Fellows who wrote in newspapers had, he knew, many
ways of obliging a friend.  It was important to him to get
into Parliament.  If he carried Sloville he conferred a
favour on Ministers, who would reward him in due time with a
comfortable office, where the pay was heavy and the burden light,
and just at that time money was an object to
p. 86
our Baronet,
who as a gambler and man of the world managed to get rid of a
good deal of it in the course of a year.  At any rate he
rather liked the look of M.P. after his name, and M.P. he was
determined to be.  All his life he had lived in excitement,
and now he had reached an age when the excitement of politics in
lieu of wine or women or horse-racing or gambling had special
charms.

‘You see,’ he remarked, ‘we are an old
family in the neighbourhood, and we have a certain amount of
legitimate influence which will certainly be in my
favour.’

He might have added that in the day of rotten boroughs it was
as proprietor of Sloville, and as in that capacity a useful
servant of the Government, that the first baronet of the family
had been adorned with his hereditary rank.  A Royal Duke had
been guilty of gross misconduct—a slight indiscretion it
was termed by his friends.  The matter was brought before
Parliament, and a vote by no means complimentary to
H.R.H.—either as regards morals, or
p. 87
manners, or
understanding—would have been carried, had not the Strahan
of that day saved the Government by his casting vote.
Government was grateful, and so was Strahan—in the sense of
further favours to come.

‘Well, that is something,’ said Wentworth;
‘birth and connection are of some account in
politics.’

‘I should think so,’ said the Baronet.

‘And the borough is Liberal?’

‘Most decidedly.’

‘And you have a good chance of success?’

‘Yes; if it were not for the publicans, who have great
influence, and are bitterly opposed to the Liberals.’

‘Naturally; their craft is in danger.  Well, I
might run down to one or two of your meetings.’

‘Thanks; I’m much obliged.  I thought about
having a public meeting next week.  There is no time to
lose.  It is a great thing to be first in the
field.’

Just as Wentworth was about to reply, the door opened, and the
actress rushed in.
p. 88
Suddenly perceiving that Wentworth
had company, she exclaimed:

‘I beg pardon.  I thought you were
alone.’

‘Never mind, madam,’ said the Baronet; ‘we
have just finished what we had to say,’ turning to address
the last comer.  All at once he faltered, and turned all the
colours of the rainbow.  Could it be?  Yes, it was the
poor girl he had brought up to London, and then
deserted—left, as he coolly supposed, to perish on the
streets, and whom, to his surprise, he had seen radiant on the
stage.

A stony and contemptuous stare was the actress’s only
reply.

‘Dear me,’ said the Baronet, recovering his
self-possession.  ‘’Pon my honour, this is an
unexpected pleasure;’ but before he had finished his
sentence Rose had gone.

‘You’ll excuse me, I am sure,’ said the
Baronet, turning round to Wentworth; ‘I believe that young
lady and I are old friends.  I had lost sight of her for a
long while, and to my intense astonishment and
p. 89
gratification
I found her acting at Drury Lane.  I followed her the other
night in a cab in order to overtake her and explain everything;
but her coachman was quicker than mine, and I was obliged to give
up the chase.’

‘I am sorry you should have had so much trouble, Sir
Watkin.  That young lady needs no attention from you, nor
will she require any explanation.’

‘Well, I am sure I congratulate you, Mr. Wentworth, to
have such an acquaintance,’ returned the Baronet
ungraciously.  ‘Her beauty as a girl quite overcame
me, and I was very much tempted to act in a foolish manner to
her.  We men of the world are apt to do silly
things.’

‘Instead,’ said Wentworth, with increasing anger,
‘you preferred to make a fool of her.  I found her
when you had thrown her off, and abandoned her to the cruel
mercies of the world.  I saw her in her bitter agony and
despair.  I saved her from dishonour.  For all you
cared she might have been on the streets in infamy
p. 90
and
rags.  She has little to thank you for.  I know how she
had been deceived.  Weeping, she told me the story of her
life; but I never knew who was the wrong-doer until this
moment.  I have an account to settle with him,’ he
added angrily.

‘And you find him penitent,’ said the Baronet.

‘Penitent or not, I vowed I would call him to
account.’

‘My good sir,’ said the Baronet, ‘how was I
to know that the lady was in any danger?  I was not even in
England at the time.  I felt she would soon forget me, as
indeed she seems to have done,’ added the speaker
sarcastically.  ‘Now I come to think of it,’ he
continued, ‘I think it is I, indeed, who have reason to
complain.  You see with what scorn she treated me as she
came into the room.’

‘Surely, Sir Watkin cannot wonder at that.’

‘On the contrary, I think it rather hard, after the
money I spent on her.’

‘That won’t do, Sir Watkin!  You, and
p. 91
such as you,
are a disgrace to your class; cruel as wild beasts you spend your
lives in pursuit of victims whom you ruin with fair words and
foul lies and for foul ends.  A time must come when England
will no longer tolerate such men in her midst.  English
women will come to the rescue of their tempted sisters.
Society will demand that wealth should not thus be iniquitously
squandered in pursuit of vice and selfish gratifications.
There is no greater crime a rich man can commit, and yet there is
no punishment can reach him.  The rich man can always get
off, or take himself off.  He leaves the seduced to perish
of want and infamy, while he is honoured and admired.’

‘Upon my word, Mr. Wentworth, you are using language
which I am quite unaccustomed to.’

‘I dare say you are, Sir Watkin; but it is the language
of truth and soberness, nevertheless.’

‘Why, one would fancy you were a parson, and availing
yourself of the privileges
p. 92
of the cloth,’ said the Baronet
with sneer.

‘I was very near being one,’ said Wentworth;
‘and now I recollect that it was then you and I met for the
first time.  I remember you nearly ran over a poor old woman
who was coming to hear me preach.’

‘Upon my word you have a good memory.  I’d
forgotten all about it.’

‘So good a memory,’ said Wentworth, ‘that
for the future I recommend you to keep out of my way.’

‘By all means,’ replied the Baronet; ‘but
you ought to hear what I have to say in my defence.  I own
my conduct was shabby.’

‘It was infamous.’

‘But recollect what a mess I was in.’

‘I will not hear another word,’ said
Wentworth.  ‘Leave this room, or—’

But there was no occasion to say what he meant to say.
Putting on his hat and gathering up his gloves, the Baronet
retreated as quickly as he could, looking very different to the
finished and self-satisfied
p. 93
appearance of respectability he
presented when he first knocked at the door.

‘The scoundrel!’ said Wentworth to himself when
alone.  ‘He will hear from me further.  I have
not done with him yet.  I’ll meet him at
Philippi.  I’ll take care that he does not get in for
Sloville after all.’

And he kept his word.

p.
94
CHAPTER XV.

ELECTIONEERING.

The writ for Sloville would be out in a few days.  The
defeated Liberals were winding up business in Parliament as
quickly as possible, in order at once to appeal to the
country.  The Tadpoles and Tapers were at their wits’
ends for a good cry.  Wentworth rushed down to Sloville,
invited the electors to hear him, advertised in the local papers,
and covered the walls with his posters.  He was for the
extension of the Franchise to all men of age of sound mind,
untainted by crime, and to all women who paid rates and
taxes.  He advocated the separation of Church and State,
arbitration instead of war, reduction of national expenditure, a
reform of the House of Lords, free trade in
p. 95
land, and
free secular education.  He was ready even to give Ireland
as much Home Rule as he would give to England or Scotland.
At that time the great Liberal leader had not dreamed of anything
of the kind.

‘I like that,’ said the Tory candidate to his
agent; ‘all the respectable people will vote for
me.’

‘Confound the fellow!’ said Sir Watkin, in a
rage.  ‘I shall have hard work to beat that, and if I
did the people would never believe I meant it.  I am of an
old Whig family, and it is hard to give up one’s
principles.’

‘We shall have to
finesse
a bit,’ said Sir
Watkin’s agent and confidential man.  ‘Suppose
you placard yourself as the working-man’s
friend.’

‘Capital!’ said Sir Watkin delightedly.

‘Suppose we send agents to break up all his meetings, so
that he can’t be heard.’

‘A capital idea!’

‘Suppose we get the Rev. George Windbag, the leading
Dissenting minister in the town, to make a grand speech at our
first
p.
96
meeting, to talk of the need of unity and the danger of
splitting up the Liberal Party.  We can secure the man at
once, Sir Watkin, if you will but ask him to dinner at the
Hall.  There is not a bigger tuft-hunter in the county, and
he has immense weight with the respectable shop-keeping
class.’

‘Capital!’ repeated the Baronet.

‘And suppose we get one or two Chartists from
town.  They will be sure to come.  Pay them well, and
feed them well, and you can do anything with them.’

‘Right you are,’ said the Baronet.

‘And we might get a Socialist or Republican
down.’

‘What for?’

‘To divide the Rads.’

‘But I hate them like poison,’ said the
Baronet.

‘Never mind,’ said the agent.  ‘You
need not appear in the matter.  Leave them to me.  I
know how to secure them.  This ain’t the first time
I’ve been electioneering.’

‘So it seems,’ said the Baronet.  ‘All
I say is, keep me out of a scrape.’

p.
97
‘That is not quite so easy as it was.  Yet
the thing can be done; Parliament, naturally being in favour of
returning rich men to Parliament, is never much in earnest in
attempting to put down bribery and corruption.’

‘Ah! my father had never much difficulty in securing his
seat,’ said the Baronet in a tone of regret.

‘Yes; but he spent a good deal of money, as I have
heard.’

‘That was true; but he got it all back again.’

‘Yes, he had an easy life of it.  I was looking
over Oldmixon, and he thus describes the borough as it was in the
good old times.  You recollect the town sent two members
till the Reform Bill of 1831 robbed us of one?’

‘I have heard my father say so; but read what Oldmixon
says.’

‘“
Sloville
.—This
is a large town, containing more than a thousand houses, where
the right of election is confined to a corporation of twenty-four
individuals, who elect
p. 98
each other.  The inhabitants
have no share in choosing the members or magistrates, and as all
these corporations—possessing exclusive rights of electing
Members of Parliament—have some powerful nobleman or
opulent commoner who finds it his interest to take the lead and
management of their political influence, the election of the
members is directed by this patron.  The Earl of Fee-Fum,
who has a seat at Marbourne, within seven miles of the town, and
Watkin Strahan, Esq., of Elm Hall, whose residence and estate are
also in the neighbourhood, have first command of this
corporation.”  At that time the number of votes,
according to Oldmixon, was twenty-four.’

‘And now there are a thousand electors on the
register.  It is a pity we ever had Parliamentary
reform.’

‘Sir Watkin, you are a Whig, are you not?’ said
the agent.

‘Oh yes, of course I am.  That was only my
fun.’

‘It would not be fun if the people heard it.’

p.
99
‘No, perhaps not.  But we are talking
privately and confidentially.’

‘Of course we are.’

‘But to business.  How do matters stand?’

‘It is impossible to be better, or, rather, it would
have been impossible.  I’ve been nursing the borough a
long while, but now the appearance of another Liberal candidate
will give the Conservative a chance such as he otherwise would
not have had.’

‘Yes, that is pretty clear.  But how can we get rid
of this Wentworth?’

‘Leave that to me.  We can make it pretty hot for
him.  Just at this time the town is unusually full of
roughs, and I know where to lay my hand on them.  Brown, the
Conservative agent, told me yesterday that he could always get a
bigger lot of roughs than the Liberals.  “I
ain’t quite sure of that,” said I to myself,
“as I think this Mr. Wentworth will find out before we are
done with him.”  Of course, he has got no
money?’

‘Well, I don’t suppose he has,’ said
p. 100
Sir Watkin;
‘he is only a newspaper writer.  Just like the
impudence of his class.  They talk about the fourth estate,
and think themselves equals to Kings, Lords and Commons.
However, we are right as far as the press is concerned.  We
have only one paper here, and that is ours.  The proprietor
is hard up.  He owes me a lot of money, and he knows on
which side his bread is buttered.’

The next day Wentworth came down to hold the first public
meeting, and that same day every voter had a bill—and a
good many who were not besides—as follows:

to
the

Radical and Liberal Electors

of the

BOROUGH OF SLOVILLE.

attend
the

MEETING AT THE TOWN HALL,

On Thursday
Evening
,

At 7.45 sharp,

To prevent the Election of the Tory Candidate.

p. 101
The
placard was not in vain.  The good seed had been sown on
fruitful soil.  The chairman, an old gentleman with whom
Wentworth was familiar when he was a student, was quite unequal
to the occasion, and he gave in at the first sign of a
squall.

Let me recommend all Parliamentary candidates, when there is a
contested election, to be very particular as to their
chairman.  An immense deal depends upon him.  He ought
to have a personal knowledge of all the individuals in the
meeting, and an imperturbable good nature.  He ought to have
an enthusiastic prepossession in favour of his candidate.
He ought to have a voice that could be heard above the roaring of
any storm.  He should have an intuitive faculty at feeling
the pulse of the meeting.  He should be a master of making
an adversary look ridiculous.  He should have the physical
power to sit out any time in the midst of any row, no matter how
noisy the crowd, and how heated the atmosphere.  His tact
should be great.
p. 102
He should have immense personal
influence in the place.  Above all, he should never lose his
temper or have recourse to threats, unless he has an overwhelming
majority on his side.

When Wentworth appeared upon the scene he saw at a glance that
his enemies were far more numerous than his friends.  His
chairman, for instance, had taken no trouble about the
meeting.  He had not even brought a friend with him, and he
and Wentworth had the platform almost entirely to
themselves.  This was an initial mistake.  Learn of me,
O candidate, and never attend a public meeting unless you can
fill the platform with out-and-out adherents; men who will
applaud in season and out; men whose solid front will impose on
the ignorant and thoughtless; men whose countenances will express
the utmost rapture at your stalest jokes or feeblest witticisms,
who will seem absorbed and riveted by your dreariest display of
statistics, and who will cheer the louder the more you stumble
and get confused.
p. 103
Canning understood how useful aid of
that sort was to a speaker when he wrote:

‘Cheer him when his audience flag,

Brother Riley, Brother Bragg;

Cheer him when he hobbles vilely,

Brother Bragg and Brother Riley.’

Again, another secret in the way of successful public meetings
is to have beside the chairman, and in front of the audience, a
jolly looking fellow always ready to laugh.  We English are
an imitative people.  One laugher on the platform will make
many laugh below.  Laughter is contagious.  One man
laughs because he sees another doing so, and in nine cases out of
ten at a public meeting if you ask him he can give no better
reason.  Ladies are all very well in front, if the meeting
is harmonious, and they are well dressed and good-looking; but if
they are well bred they do not roar out, and if they clap their
hands it is in such a graceful feminine manner as to produce no
effect like your red-faced jolly fellow, always ready with the
loud laugh that speaks the vacant mind.

p. 104
A few
Radicals, delighted at Mr. Wentworth’s programme, were in
the hall at the far end.  Unfortunately between them and the
platform were the enemy, who had rallied round in consequence of
the lying hand-bill, and they were led by a full-necked
gamekeeper, who roared like a bull of Bashan all the time Mr.
Wentworth was speaking, or rather, attempting to speak.  Sir
Watkin Strahan’s agent was also present, to watch with
complacency the result of his trick.  The roughs had an idea
that the more noise they made the better, and their number was
increased by some of the Free and Independent, who had met the
Gent from London, as they termed him, at the railway station, and
who had been immensely disgusted, that in reply to their hints as
to his ordering a supply of beer, he had intimated that so far as
he could judge they had had enough already.  That was adding
insult to injury, and they resented it accordingly.

At all times the Free and Independent are a thirsty race,
particularly at election
p. 105
times.  In every beer-shop in
the borough Wentworth had thus raised up a host of enemies.
In many a borough the election has been fought and won by beer
alone; there is no other product of man’s industry,
unfortunately, such a power, and the publican is not such a fool
as he looks.

‘Who do you vote for?’ said I to one of them at
the time of an election contest.

‘For them as I gets the most by,’ was his
reply.

Frightened at the aspect of affairs, the aged chairman, with a
feeble, trembling voice, told his fellow-townsmen that he had the
pleasure of introducing to them Mr. Wentworth, a clever
journalist from London, whom some of them knew when he was
formerly a preacher in that town, and whom he hoped they would
listen to that evening with all the respect and attention the
occasion demanded.  It was with difficulty and not a little
interruption that the chairman could say as much, and then he
collapsed, wishing that he had stayed at home in the bosom of his
family.  The London
p. 106
candidate then came forward, to be
assailed with a howl of derision from his foes closely packed in
the front, while but a faint cheer from the far end was now and
then perceptible as the roar was slightly lulled.

‘Gentlemen, pray give Mr. Wentworth a fair
hearing,’ cried the chairman, and again the storm grew and
the confusion increased.  ‘Order! order!’ said
the chairman, screaming at the top of his voice.  He might
just as well have spoken to the winds or waves.  Then he
grew angry and began to threaten, and that only made matters
worse.  Wentworth, erect as a statue and with folded arms,
calmly surveyed the scene.  It was not a pleasant sight; it
suggests to one the truth of the Darwinian origin of the human
race.  In a crowd men act like monkeys.  I remember as
a boy sneaking into an election crowd and calling a decent,
respectable, white-haired old baronet, who had been the Tory
representative of the county for a quarter of a century, and whom
every decent body respected, the old Benacre Bull (Benacre being
the name of
p.
107
the village in which he lived); and everyone repeated
the nickname till the old gentleman had to stop speaking, and I
have been ashamed of the thing ever since.  Had the
individual members of that howling mob met the Baronet in the
street as he rode by on his favourite chestnut mare, there was
not one of them but would have treated him with every appearance
of courtesy and respect.  There is something very cowardly
in an election mob.

Long did the storm roar and rage as Wentworth stood up, the
true friend and earnest champion of his rough and unmannerly
audience.  The chairman in vain appealed for fair
play.  That was the last thing to be expected at such a
time; in vain he addressed them as gentlemen, or friends, or
electors, still the storm raged.  However, Wentworth was not
a man to be put down, and he resolutely maintained his
ground.

‘I am come,’ he said, ‘to put you on your
guard, to ask you not to be led away by clap-trap, to tell you
that all my life I
p.
108
have been fighting on behalf of the people, to lift up
my voice on behalf of Peace, Retrenchment and Reform.  You
have a serious duty to discharge: to send a member to Parliament
to help the good old cause of liberty and freedom and human
progress.’  Again his voice was lost in an
uproar.  ‘You have,’ he continued, ‘rights
to be won, a victory to achieve.’  Again there was an
uproar.  ‘You have three candidates before you, one of
them a Tory.  What, I ask, have Tories done for you and
yours?’—more insane clamour.  ‘You know
better than I do, they are not the friends but the foes of the
people, that it is only as you have triumphed over them that you
have become free, that the history of Toryism is a record of
resistance to popular rights—’  ‘And
precious freedom,’ said a socialist, who darted up from the
mob, amidst cheers on every side.  ‘You Liberals give
us liberty to work and slave and starve.  What with the
landlords who have robbed us of the land which belongs to the
people, and what with the millowners who grind us in their
p. 109
mills, and
your priests who make earth a hell, and then bid us think of a
better land, what have we to thank our leaders, be they Whig,
Tory or Radical, for?  We are nothing to society, whose laws
are framed for the purpose of securing the wealth of the world to
the haristocrat or the rich snob, thereby depriving the larger
portion of manhood of its rights and chances.’

This was a new doctrine for Sloville, and it was resented
accordingly, and the socialist orator was pulled and hustled out
of the hall, amidst increasing cries of order and police.
The poor frightened chairman bolted out of the chair, much to the
delight of the Tory roughs, and then one of the biggest of them
moved a resolution to the effect that Mr. Wentworth was not a fit
and proper person to represent the borough, and that he be
requested to retire, and without calling for a show of hands, or
putting the contrary, declared the resolution carried.  At
length Mr. Wentworth succeeded in getting him to do so, and the
motion was lost.  However, it was felt to be a farce to
attempt
p.
110
to do any sane business that night, and Mr. Wentworth,
as he left the hall, was heard loudly asserting that they would
hear from him again, whilst from the far end of the hall there
came many who claimed to be his supporters, and who assured him
that he had but to continue his meetings and he would be sure to
win.

He knew better, he knew that the chief agent in elections was
money, that the candidate with longest purse generally wins, and
money he was not prepared to spend.  So it has ever been,
and so it will according to present appearances ever be, and must
be so, till paid canvassing be put down by Act of Parliament, and
election agents’ fees reduced.  There is little
likelihood of Parliament doing that.  Wealthy men like to
get into the House, it confers upon them prestige, a seat in
Parliament helps the lawyer to a place, a seat in Parliament
gives a naval or a military officer another chance of dipping his
hand in John Bull’s purse, or it enables a wealthy
ignoramus who has managed either by the blessing of God upon
p. 111
his
labours, or with the aid of the devil, to become a millionaire,
to obtain admission for his sons and daughters into circles in
which they would otherwise have no claim.  Everybody who is
a somebody is anxious to see only men of wealth in
Parliament.  You may call it the people’s House if you
will, it is only the House of the rich people after all.
Now and then one of the people finds his way there as a working
man, but he is the exception, not the rule, and too often is but
the paid agent of the rich man who defrays his expenses, and
expects him, with all his show of independence, to support the
party, right or wrong.  Nor is he much more independent if
he is paid by the working men themselves.

‘What impudence!  Serve the fellow right,’
said Sir Watkin Strahan, the swell Liberal candidate, as he
talked over the matter with his brother swell, the Tory
candidate, in the club-room of Sloville next day.
‘What impudence for a London newspaper man to come down
here and upset the town!  Things have come to a pretty pass,
when
p.
112
such fellows are permitted to interfere into our local
matters.  At any rate, we may agree to get rid of him as a
common enemy.’

And for that purpose they entered into an alliance offensive
and defensive.  Sloville was to be made too hot for Mr.
Wentworth—that was understood in every public-house; there
was no need to hint any more.

Once upon a time Sir Godfrey Kneller overheard a British
working man devoting, as was the wont of British workmen in his
day (they don’t do it now, they know better), the various
members of his body to perdition.  The courtly painter was
shocked and scandalized.  ‘What!’ said he,
‘do you think that God Almighty will take the trouble to
damn a poor wretch like you?  The idea is absurd; it is
lords and fine gentlemen he will damn, I assure you.’

So it has been with the British public in the choice of a
member of Parliament.  It is only lords and fine gentlemen,
or at any
p.
113
rate rich ones, who have been held to be worthy of
being sent by the people to the House of the people.  A time
will come when the electors will think differently; when they
will feel that a newspaper man is more likely to serve them
faithfully; more likely to decide rightly in political matters;
more likely to study the best interests of the nation than a fine
gentleman, who thinks politics a bore, and who only consents to
fight the battle of party on the understanding that, whether he
wins or loses, he shall not go without his reward.

p.
114
CHAPTER XVI.

ELECTIONEERING AGAIN.

Elections fifty years ago, if partly a farce, were at any rate
picturesque.  For a while, everyone seemed insane—the
publican, who reaped a golden harvest; the local drapers, who
sold the ribbons which formed the colours of the respective
parties; the lively stable-keeper; the crowd of idle loafers who
were hired to do little more than cheer one candidate and hoot
down the other.  The town rolled in wealth, which poured in
on all sides, and a good deal of it made its way to the
electors’ wives and children.  The out-voter from the
most distant quarter was hunted up and sent down in coaches
chartered for the purpose and paid for by the happy candidate or
his friends, and
p.
115
every night there was a row and a fight, and a good
deal of bad language.  All the while there was a perpetual
canvass, and the elector was in danger of bursting, as a feeling
of his temporary importance grew and swelled within him.

Some refused to vote, as they flattered themselves, vainly,
that they should thus offend neither party.  The clergy were
specially active; nor were their dissenting brethren—with
the exception of the Methodists, at that time very cautious in
political matters—much behind.

The nomination day was one of great display, and the day of
polling was one of still greater, as hourly there was published a
state of the poll, and the rival candidates drove from one
polling-place to another to cheer the hearts of their supporters,
who were many of them so drunk as scarcely to know for whom they
were going to vote.

It was often dangerous work taking up the men to the poll
through a crowd of heated roughs, who were placed round the booth
to increase the difficulties of the
p. 116
intending electors.  Meanwhile,
all the town was holiday-making and enjoying the sport.
Ladies looked down from the first-floors of every house in the
neighbourhood to encourage one party and to cheer on its
supporters and friends.  Voters came in masses, headed by
bands playing and with colours flying.  Surely there was
excitement enough, and folly enough, displayed on the
occasion.

Sloville was agitated from top to bottom.  Yet some
people are never satisfied.  They regretted that the harvest
was so brief; that it was all over in a day, and did not last, as
it did in the good old times, a fortnight; that there was not so
much of locking up doubtful voters as of old, and keeping them
stowed away drunk till the election was over.

‘There ain’t a voter in the town but what I can
account for,’ said Sir Watkin’s agent to his
principal.  ‘I have got all their names down in black
and white.  By-the-bye, Sir Watkin, can you let me have
another cheque?’

p.
117
‘I am sorry to hear that.  How much do you
want?’

‘Another thousand will do it.’

‘Why, you have had one thousand already.’

‘Never mind,’ said the election agent.
‘What’s the good of having money if you don’t
spend it.  You’ll be sure to get it all back
again.  Nobody is so popular as a man who spends his money
freely.’

‘That may be; but money is hard to get.’

‘Oh, leave that to me,’ said the agent.

‘Well, I suppose I must.  But,’ added the
Baronet, ‘at any rate you might send up to London and see
what the Reform Club will do.’

‘Of course, we must apply to them.  A stranger came
down from town last night.  He has not shown his face, but
I’ve pumped the boots at the “Old Swan,” and I
find that he is from the Carlton, and has brought a trunk full of
sovereigns with him.  The voters must have got an inkling of
it, and are in ecstasies, and are now keeping off till
p. 118
the last
moment.  I believe I spotted the fellow in the disguise of
an old woman working in the slums this morning’.  I
could not see his face because he put up his handkerchief; but I
do believe it was no other than Shrouder.’

‘Oh, no: it can’t be him.  I am told he is at
Birmingham.’

‘You may depend upon it, Sir Watkin, he is here, and we
shall have the devil to pay.’

‘Devil take him,’ said the Baronet angrily.

‘I must say that Shrouder is a bit of a scamp, and that
he is the man for a dirty job.  But I am quite a match for
him,’ said the agent proudly.  ‘At any rate, I
am up to his little games.  I am really quite delighted to
have him as an opponent, and think it complimentary to the
borough that he is come here to work it.  The Carlton would
not have sent him here had they not felt that they were in a
desperate state indeed.  Ah,’ continued he excitedly,
‘there is nothing like a well-contested election.  I

p. 119
am of
the opinion of a noble duke.  “After all,” said
he, “what greater enjoyment can there be in life than to
stand a contested election for Yorkshire, and to win it by
one?”’

‘Yes; but I ain’t a duke, and have not got a
duke’s wealth.’

‘Never mind,’ said the agent; ‘elections
don’t happen every day, and when it is over you can
economize.’

‘For the first time in my life.  That will be hard
work.’

In the meanwhile the Baronet continued his canvass, and his
carriage with the family arms, and the servants in the family
liveries, were incessantly to be seen.  He appealed to the
Churchmen as one of themselves, to the Dissenters as their friend
and ally in the cause of religious freedom.  As a landowner
he reminded the farmers that they were all in the same boat, and
that legislation that was beneficial to the landlord was equally
to the advantage of the tenant and the farm-labourer as
well.  No one was such an ardent admirer of the
manufacturing
p.
120
system which had made us a nation of shopkeepers, and
he won the hearts of the manufacturers as he told them that to
him they seemed as the very pillars of the State.  Somehow
or other he seemed in a fair way of success, and when he got into
a mess his agent was there to pull him out.  Thus, one day
he happened to call on a humble shopkeeper, who regarded him with
natural distrust.

‘Oh, Sir Watkin,’ said he, ‘I am sure I
respect you and your family very much; but before I promise you
my vote I’d like to hear what are your
principles.’

Sir Watkin was about to give the usual and evasive reply, when
his agent pulled him back and opened a broadside:

‘His
principles
.  You ask a gentleman like
Sir Watkin his principles; go along with you!  Things have
come to a pretty pass when a gentleman like Sir Watkin must stop
in the road to tell you his principles.  Come along, Sir
Watkin, don’t be losing precious time here.’
And the small shopkeeper felt that he had done
p. 121
wrong, and
promised him his vote accordingly.

‘That was a clever trick of yours,’ said Sir
Watkin, laughing; ‘but it would not do a second
time.’

‘I don’t know, Sir Watkin; it is well to ride the
high horse now and then.’

In another case the Baronet did not get off quite so
well.  Said an operative at one of his meetings:

‘Why are the mothers and sisters of peers, who have done
nothing for the public, to be maintained in luxury and at the
public expense, while we are obliged to support our poor
relatives from our hard-earned wages or see them sent to the
workhouse?’

Happily the Baronet’s supporters made such a noise that
the reply was unheard.

But there was a stronger influence at work.

‘What is the chief recommendation of Sir Watkin?’
asked one of Mr. Wentworth’s supporters of a friend of the
Baronet’s.

p.
122
‘Money, to be sure.  He’s got it
here,’ said the Baronet’s supporter, significantly
slapping his pocket.

But the Conservative candidate had money as well.  The
question was, which had the longest purse.

‘And, then, look at the requisition presented to
him,’ continued the Baronet’s friend.

‘Got up by his agent, as a matter of course, who was
well paid for his work.’

‘Then look at his committee.’

‘All men who are his tradespeople, or tenants and
dependents, or flunkies who want to be invited to the Hall.
There has been no independent action in the matter.’

‘You are very green if you expect that in
Sloville,’ continued the Baronet’s supporter.
‘If you ask nine men out of ten in the borough who they
will vote for, the answer will be, “For them as I gets the
most by.”’

It was too true.  The Sloville people were as selfish as
their representatives.  They were like the voters of St.
Albans,
p.
123
who, when the traffic on the great North Road was
ruined by the railway, lamented that they had nothing to sell but
their votes; or like the voters of Stafford, who requested
Sheridan to vote against reform, as it was by the sale of votes
that they chiefly got their money.  They in this resembled
the illustrious Samuel Johnson, who, upon his friend Thrale
demurring to the expense of a contested election for Southwark,
remarked: ‘The expense, if it were more, I should wish him
to despise.  Money is made for such purposes as
this.’

It was an Irish M.P. who, when reproached with selling his
country, thanked God that he had got a Government to sell.
There were many of the Sloville electors who were of the
Irishman’s way of thinking.

‘I suppose there is little chance for me,’ said
Wentworth, as he walked home with the Unitarian
minister—who had a large chapel, generally empty, but which
had been crowded to suffocation to hear him utter his political
programme.  Wentworth,
p. 124
as the papers say, had received
quite an ovation.  He had come amongst them as a stranger;
he had made them all friends; he was an effective speaker, and
his audience were of his side in politics.  Unfortunately,
it consisted largely of excitable young people who had no
votes.  They had been told to do their duty: to support
neither a half-hearted Liberal nor a thorough-going old Tory, but
to rally round the gentleman from London.  The Unitarian
brother heartily endorsed that appeal.  He had known
Wentworth when he came to preach as a sapling from college.
He had sympathized a good deal with him in his view.  He had
the Christian charity not to judge too harshly of a man who, it
seemed to him, had in a sense gone wrong, but who was a man and a
brother still.

‘My dear fellow,’ said he to his guest, as they
were seated in his sanctum, ornamented with portraits and
darkened with the quartos of the old divines, ‘I fear in
politics, as in religion, people do much as they please, lecture
them as you will.  To
p. 125
listen is one thing, to practise
what you hear is another.  You are for the separation of
Church and State, and I support you; but the respected minister
who preaches in your old chapel will preach about Christ’s
kingdom being not of this world, and then will go and vote for
the Whig Baronet because he belongs to such a respectable family,
and all the respectable Dissenters in the town will do the same,
and when Christmas comes will receive their reward.  Their
deacons are very good men, but they will never vote to offend
their rich customers.  I could get a thousand people to come
and hear you, to applaud all your hits, to see all your
arguments, to endorse all your opinions, but I could not get ten
of them to vote for you—that’s quite another
thing.  It is all very well to applaud Radical sentiments,
so long as business is not interfered with.’

‘But the poorer voters—there are a good many of
them in the borough, are there not?’

‘Well, they will do as their betters, and you
can’t wonder at it.  The Tories and the
p. 126
Liberals
give away coal and beef and blankets at Christmas.  There
are lots of Radicals in the town, but they will not vote for a
Radical, however much they may cheer a Radical speech.
Their wives wouldn’t let them.’

‘I fear Sloville is in a bad way,’ said
Wentworth.

‘Well, it is a fair sample of an English borough.
I often grieve over it, nevertheless.’

‘Why not make it better?’

‘Ay, that’s the question.  I can see no other
road to improvement but to go on talking.  Liberal ideas
spread and light does come, however slowly.  Sometimes I
almost feel inclined to ask for a drastic reform.’

‘What is that?’

‘To get the borough disfranchised.  It would be
very easy to get up a petition for bribery and corruption; it
would be easier still to prove it.’

‘And then?’

‘The result would be that I should lose
p. 127
my
congregation, and be the most unpopular man in the
town.’

‘Why not “dare to be a Daniel”?’

‘Because I am poor and have a large family to keep;
because I love peace and quietness; because I am a little older
than you, know a little more of country life, and feel inclined
to make the best of it what little time I have to live.  If
we are bound to run amuck at all we disapprove of, life, I fear,
would be a burden too heavy to be borne.  I may be slow,
but, at any rate, I am sure.’

‘So you are, old fellow.  You were talking just the
same way when I came here to preach—it seems to me ages
ago—and a good deal has happened since then.’

‘Just what I was going to say,’ said the clerical
brother.  ‘Politically we have made great
progress.  We are on the eve of extension of the franchise
and vote by ballot, and whoever we return at Sloville—they
are safe.  I could have got up a petition against bribery
and corruption in the place.  I ought, perhaps, you say, to

p. 128
have
done so.  Well, I should have had to spend hundreds of
pounds, which I have not got; and if I had succeeded and got the
borough disfranchised, I should never have been able to show my
face in the town again.’

‘But you would have had another call,’ said
Wentworth, with a touch of sarcasm.

‘Not at my time of life.  But that is a
digression.  You London newspaper men may write about
bribery and corruption, and you can do good in that way, more
even than if you get into Parliament.’

‘I am of the same opinion,’ said Wentworth;
‘but, tell me, is the borough so very bad?’

‘That it is.  I can point you to no end of people
who take money and are not ashamed.  There are gangs of them
who meet in public-houses, with whom each party negotiates, and
who turn the scale.  To-day they are Liberal, to-morrow they
will be Conservative.  The men are notorious, but they are
useful to both parties.  The only remedy for that is
extension of the suffrage so as to
p. 129
include all householders, and to
make bribery impossible by the increase of the number to be
bribed.’

‘I would go a step further,’ said Wentworth.
‘In our great cities few of our working classes have that
qualification.  This raises a demand for a lodger
franchise—that is, a fancy franchise—that will give a
great opening for ingenuity and fraud, and will only work well
for the lawyers, to whom such a state of things will bring plenty
of business.  No, we must fall back on manhood
suffrage.  It is the only real and direct
qualification.  Give the working man a vote, let him feel
that he is part and parcel of the community, bone of our bone and
flesh of our flesh—not a pariah politically, but a brother
man—and he will use his vote for his own advantage, and for
that of the rest of the community.  ‘But, now I think
of it, there is a better plan.’

‘What is that?’ said the parson.

‘A money qualification.  I was in Jersey last
summer, and I found there were a large number of men who
voluntarily paid a
p.
130
certain tax in order that they might get a vote.
After all, what is Government but a limited liability company for
the governing of the nation?  In all limited liabilities
every man has a vote, but the man who has a larger share than the
others has more votes.  I would give the vote to every man
who cared enough about it to pay for it, and I think that a
revenue might be thus raised for the relief of
taxation.’

‘Your scheme is excellent, but it will never
take.’

‘I fear so, and that is why I fall back on manhood
suffrage.’

‘Yes, I quite believe that, but he must have the
ballot.’

‘I fear so, though with the ballot we shall still have a
good deal of intimidation and bullying.  The rich employer,
unless he be more Liberal than many of them, will try still to
carry his friend or himself, as the case may be.  It seems
very degrading, however, for a man to vote by ballot, as if he
were ashamed of his opinions.  I always think of what the
great American statesman
p. 131
said when he was in England on that
subject.’

‘And what was that?  I never heard of
it.’

‘When asked at a dinner-party in London whether the
ballot prevailed in his State of Virginia, he replied:

‘“I can scarcely believe in all Virginia we have
such a fool as to mention even the vote by ballot, and I do not
hesitate to say that the adoption of the ballot would make a
nation a set of scoundrels if it did not find them
so.”’

‘Rather hard, that, on the ballot, seeing that we shall
have it very shortly.’

‘Yes, the demand is a popular one with the Liberals, and
they will carry it.  There is one measure I should like to
see, but I fear there is no chance of its coming yet.’

‘What is that?’

‘Annual Parliaments.’

‘Oh,’ exclaimed the parson, ‘that will never
do!  As it is, the amount of mischief an election does in a
borough like ours in the way of creating drunkenness, and bad
p. 132
feeling,
and lying, and swearing, is incalculable.’

‘Yes, but if we had an election once a year it would be
quite different.  In the first place, an election would be a
tamer and much more commonplace an affair than it is now.  A
man would not care to spend much money on elections if his seat
was only good for a year, and all that time he would be on his
good behaviour—attending in his place, helping on needful
reforms.’

‘Why not triennial Parliaments?’

‘Why, then things would be no better than they are
now.  There would be the same excitement and
bitterness.  The new M.P. would be remiss in his attendance
the first or second year, while in the last session his only aim
would be to gain the goodwill of the electors of his
district.  Again,’ added Mr. Wentworth, ‘as a
rule the people are indifferent to politics.  You only move
them from their torpor at the time of a General Election.
When that is over they become indifferent and apathetic
again.  With an election once a year you would have
p. 133
the people
anxiously discussing political questions.  It would be an
education for them.  It would ensure all the advantages
without the disadvantages of the present system.’

‘Upon my word,’ said the parson, ‘there is a
good deal in what you say, though I never thought of it
before.  An election would then be a very commonplace
affair.’

‘And then,’ said Wentworth, ‘under such an
arrangement the people would be better educated.  As it is,
it is hard work to get them to the poll at all.
Practically, England never gives a verdict—never expresses
her political opinions.  And I mean by England, Scotland,
where the people are better educated than they are here, and
Wales, where the people are far more religious.  We have a
Tory or a Liberal Government in office in consequence of the
support of the Irish M.P.’s returned by illiterate voters
under the rule of the Roman Catholic priest—who hates
England, because it is a prosperous and Protestant nation.
The Irish “praste,” as his people call him,
p. 134
creates all
the bad blood that has done so much mischief in Ireland.  If
the Tories are in power, they can only maintain their position by
pandering to the Irish members, and if the Liberals are in power
they have to do just the same.  This difficulty arises from
the fact that, whether as regards property or population, Ireland
is over-represented.  If Sir Robert Peel had had his way,
and been able to pension the Irish priests, we should have had no
such wretched state of affairs.  The “praste”
would have taken jolly good care that the Irish M.P. was loyal to
the Government that granted him an independent income.’

‘But Peel could not have done so had he wished.
You forget the English Evangelicals, with their hatred of Popery
in any shape, and the Scotch Presbyterians, and the English
Dissenters, who object on principle to any State support of
religion.’

‘Alas! I know it too well,’ replied Wentworth;
‘yet had Peel or Pitt had their way, we should have had no
Irish difficulty.  As it is, Ireland has her revenge.

p. 135
It is
she who decides the fate of parties, the rise and fall of
ministries, the policy of our great empire, with its conflicting
interests in every corner of the globe.  Oh that the Green
Isle were a thousand miles away!  The difficulty would be
removed if Ireland had only her fair share of representation, but
that is an impossible reform.’

A curious character was that old parson; professedly a
Presbyterian, and calling himself such, he and his people were
Unitarians.  He lived on an endowment left by Lady Hewlett,
whose charities were such a bitter bone of contention between the
Unitarians and the orthodox Dissenters; but Parliament
interfered, and a Bill was carried to render all further
litigation impossible.  He preached in a grand old red-brick
chapel in the busiest part of the town.  He had an
old-fashioned pulpit with an old-fashioned sounding-board above,
and in front of him were great square pews lined with green
baize; while behind, in the little red-brick vestry, there were
quaint
p.
136
portraits of old divines, of whom no one knew
anything.  Now, in his meeting-house, with its memorial
tablets of departed workers, the worshippers were few and far
between.  Once there had been life there, but that was a
long time ago; and now his hearers were chiefly old, gray-headed
men and women, whose fathers and mothers had taken them there in
early childhood, and whose talk, when they did talk, which was
but rarely, was of Drs. Price and Priestley, and Mr. Belsham, and
of Mrs. Barbauld and other ornaments of their expiring
creed.  It was hard work to preach to such; nevertheless the
little parson was a happy man, as he thought of the God of love,
of whom once a week he loved to speak.  No one interfered
with him.  To no religious gathering in the town was he ever
invited.  Churchmen and Dissenters alike gave him the cold
shoulder.  But he upheld the standard of a Church with no
creeds; was content to receive such as could not subscribe to
other dogmas, and to believe in a Christian charity which was to
cover a
p.
137
multitude of sins.  He damned nobody, he
frightened nobody, he was nobody’s enemy.  His was a
voice crying in the wilderness.  Once a year he went to the
assembly of his denomination in Essex Street Chapel, London, and
heard how the cause with which he was connected was advancing,
and the day-dawn of a national Christianity was at hand, and then
he came back to Sloville to vegetate for another year, while
sensational preachers filled the other chapels.

He had his garden, and that was a constant source of
happiness, and as he was a vegetarian and his garden supplied all
his needs, it mattered little that his salary was a scanty
pittance, such as a respectable working mechanic would turn up
his nose at.  His wife was a lady who did not hesitate to do
all the household work herself.  Modern life in its rush and
roar has left such people far behind.  But one loves to
remember them, and their peaceful ways, their cheerful solitude,
their plain living and high thinking.

p.
138
CHAPTER XVII.

QUIET TALKS.

On the day of the public meeting, just as Wentworth had
retired to his head-quarters at the Red Lion, one of the few
old-fashioned public-houses which survive to tell us how truly
Shenstone wrote when he told us that the warmest welcome he found
was at an inn—and how wise were men of the Johnson era in
recognising that fact—he heard a tap at the door, after he
had taken off his boots and had lit his cigar.

‘Come in,’ he cried.

The new visitor availed himself of the invitation.  He
was a tremendous fellow to look at, with something of an animal
expression, with a loud voice, and a little bloated about the
face, as if he took rather
p. 139
more beer than was good for
him.  His hands were rather grimy, his clothes were the
worse for wear, and he had a short pipe in his mouth, which he
was about to put out, but did not, as he saw Wentworth was
smoking himself.

‘Your name, sir?’ said Wentworth.

‘My name—you know me well enough.  My name is
Johnson—I was at your meeting to-night, and you and I have
met before.’

‘Yes, you were there, as you say—one of my
noisiest opponents, I believe—and now I think of it, when I
was at Sloville, you were one of the Chartists who tried to put
me down.’

‘You’re right, Mr. Wentworth.’

‘Happy to renew the acquaintance.  To what am I
indebted for the honour of this visit?’

‘Well, you see, we are in now for an election, and I
flatter myself the winning candidate will be the man for whom I
vote.’

‘Is that so?’

p.
140
‘True as the Gospel.’

‘Well, you did not seem very favourable
to-night.’

‘No, and that’s why I am here.  My party
won’t think much of me unless I act an independent part,
and there’s a good many of us; we wish to have a bit of a
literary man.  It is my belief, as I tells ’em, that
there is nothing like eddication and the gift of the
gab.’

‘Upon my word, you’re right, Mr. Johnson, though
when one looks at Ireland and England, too, one is inclined to
feel that we may have too much of a good thing, and that we
should be all the better if we had a little less talk and a
little more work.’

‘Capital! that’s the very thing for Sloville, only
you must pitch it a little stronger, and fire away at the lazy
parsons and the ’aughty haristocracy, and say something
about the blood-sucking manufacturers who leave us—who make
all their wealth—to starve and die.  We’re agin
’em all, me and my pals.’

p.
141
‘Well, we will talk of that presently.  If I
get into Parliament, how am I to live?’

‘Well, we must have paid members of Parliament;
you’ll be all right then.’

‘Are you fond of professional parsons, Mr.
Johnson?’

‘No, I hate ’em like p’ison.’

‘And yet you would have professional politicians.
They are as odious to me as professional parsons.  A man may
mean well when he first sets out, but directly his political
career becomes to him his bread-and-butter, he will cease to be
an honest man.  If he is paid by the people, he will be
their slave, and not their representative.  If he is paid by
the State, he will so shape his conduct that he may secure his
re-election.  He cannot act honestly.  By the necessity
of his position he is bound to keep his place, because he needs
his salary.  It is as bad and infamous for a man to make
politics his livelihood as religion.  In America they have a
class of men known as professional politicians, and what is the

p. 142
result?
that respectable Americans rarely enter public life.’

‘Well, you do surprise me!’ said Johnson, smoking
his pipe uneasily.  ‘I knew you were a little
crotchety when you came to our Chartist meeting, but I thought
you went the whole hog.’

‘Well, we’ve secured a good deal more for the
people than you or I expected at that time.’

‘Maybe,’ said Johnson doggedly.

‘But what do you want?’

Johnson’s face brightened as he said:

‘That’s coming to the point—we do not want
any more Whigs or Tories.’

‘But if a Tory comes to Sloville and offers to give the
people land—we can’t say restore it, for we
Anglo-Saxons never had an inch of the soil of England.  If,
further, he tell them that they have not had their fair share of
the profits of capital—if he says he will get every one a
fair day’s wages for a fair day’s work—that the
working men shall have decent homes built for them by
Government—that every one shall
p. 143
have his three acres and a
cow—that the parent shall be relieved of all responsibility
as regards his children—that, in short, he will bring the
millennium—don’t you think he will get returned
whether he calls himself Whig or Tory?’

‘I believe you,’ said Johnson excitedly, giving
the table an emphatic thump.  ‘Leastways, I knows many
as will vote for him, and this I knows, that no one opposed to
him would have much chance.  There’s none on ’em
dare turn me out of a meetin’, and there’s none of
’em can drown my voice.’

‘Yes, I had a good proof of that to-night.  But
don’t you know that any man coming with such a programme is
an impostor?’

‘No, hang me if I do!  I say he is the man for me
and the United Buffaloes, of which I am the president, and who
will vote as I do.  I repeat, he is the man for
Sloville.’

‘Of course,’ said Wentworth sarcastically,
‘he is, and he is quite safe, because he knows he promises
what he can never perform.’

p.
144
‘How do you make that?’

‘Let us take the question of the working man not getting
his fair share of the profits.  You know
Lancashire?’

‘Well, I should think I do.’

‘Well, so do I, and it seems to me that the workmen are
pretty well employed, and pretty well off.  They get their
weekly wages.’

‘Yes, in course they do.’

‘But is it not a fact that not a brass farthing of
profit is being made in the cotton trades, and that consequently
at this time the workman has quite his fair share of the
capital?  Look at our great companies, our railways, our
ships, most of them earning no dividends or but small ones, but
who employ millions of men at fair wages.  You call the
capitalist a bloodsucker, a vampire.’

‘And so he is.’

‘Well, get rid of his tyranny.’

‘How?’

‘Become a capitalist yourself.  As a rule the
capitalist is a working man who has
p. 145
lifted himself out of his class by
superior self-denial, or tact, or skill, or perseverance.
Last night when I went to the Town Hall I saw the name of Brown
over a grand shop.  When I knew Sloville, Brown’s
father was one of the poorest men in the place, and there was no
boy worse off than poor Brown.  I went in and said to him:
“I am glad to see you so flourishing.”
“Yes,” said he, “I’ve much to be thankful
for.”  “How is it you’ve got on so?”
I said.  “By minding my own business, and by not going
to the public-house,” he replied.’

‘Yes,’ said Johnson, ‘Brown was allus a
pushing boy.’

‘So have all of us to be nowadays.  You don’t
think we are to sit still, and open our mouths and shut our eyes,
and see what Heaven will give us; do you?’

‘Yes, but—’

‘But what?  It is in ourselves that lies the secret
of success.  Look at Ireland: for ages the people have come
to the English Government for aid to fish, to farm, to
p.
146
manufacture, and what is the result?  That now
there are no people so badly off.’

‘Ireland, sir,’ said Johnson angrily, ‘is
ruined by the injustice of England.’

‘Not quite so much as you think.  Though Ireland
has been shamefully treated, as much by Irishmen as Englishmen,
however, I admit.  But to return to the question of capital,
why cannot a workman become an employer?  You can run a
cotton-mill if you like to co-operate and put by your
savings.  There is no need to ask Parliament to
interfere.  You want the landlords abolished.  Take to
farming yourselves.  Land is cheap enough, and farms are to
be had almost for the asking.  Don’t ask Government to
take the land and employ all who live in the country on it,
whether they are worth their salt or not.  This is a free
country, and any men who have sufficient confidence in each
other, and self-reliance, can become their own employers, as
farmers or manufacturers, if they will join their savings for
that purpose.  There are no better workmen than the
p. 147
English,
and I want to see them better off.’

‘I am glad to hear that,’ said Johnson; ‘it
seemed to me that you were rather against the working
man.’

‘I am against some of his ways,’ said
Wentworth.  ‘I am against improvident marriages.
In the middle circles of society we can’t marry till we
have a chance of keeping a wife.  But almost directly poor
lads or girls—especially in our great cities—are of
age, and often before, they are married, and have families that
they can’t keep, and then the taxpayer, often little better
off than themselves, has to pay for their support.  Is that
fair?’

‘Well, it do seem rather hard.’

‘As long as that is the case wages must be low, for the
supply will be in excess of the demand.  Suppose you get
Parliament to come to the aid of such.  The result is you
will have more improvident marriages.  Then you tax still
more heavily the middle and the upper classes, and the middle
classes become paupers themselves.  I see a remedy
p. 148
for
this.  We shall have the children of the working classes
better educated, and then they will not think of marrying till
they can live in a decent manner.  They will shrink from
inflicting hardships on innocent children, as they do
now.’

‘Well, they have to wait a long time.’

‘I fear so.  But how is trade at
Sloville?’

‘Why, just now very bad.’

‘Shall I tell you one reason?’

‘Just as you please; only, whatever you say I shall
report to the United Buffaloes.’

‘Well, I don’t want to go out of my way to offend
them, especially since they all vote together.  But you had
a strike here last summer, had you not?’

‘Yes, and a pretty time of it we had.’

‘It is over now, and what is the result?’

‘Why, that we are going on pretty much as
usual.’

‘Not exactly.  That strike cost a lot of
money.’

‘I believe you.’

‘And that is all thrown away, and to
p. 149
that extent
the working men are so much the poorer.  Is not that a
fact?’

‘Well, it is no use denying of it; but the masters have
suffered as well, though you get no benefit by their
suffering.’

‘And whose fault is that?’

‘The Unions’, I suppose.  ‘They were
beaten, at any rate.’

‘The Unions.  I am glad you mention them, because
there is another thing I have to say.  I fear that you can
never get good work as long as men are all paid alike, whether
they are good workmen or not.’

‘But that is what we insist on more than anything
else.’

‘I am sorry for it.  Such a condition is fatal to
individual excellence.  Let me illustrate my remarks: I knew
a man employed at a printing-office in connection with printing
steel-plates.  He was an intelligent, careful workman, and
he did more work and better than the others, and earned more
money.  The other men conspired against him, and he found in
his
p.
150
absence his work was spoilt, and his press injured, and
he was driven away.  Now, such cases are of constant
occurrence.  Let me give you another case: A man was taken
into an office at a lesser rate than the others, and they gave up
their work and had to come on the Union.  Again, how often
is a good man worried out of his place unless he joins the Union
and works as slowly, and makes a job last as long, as the
others!  You complain of the great competition from foreign
workmen—how is it that they are in this country?’

‘Ah! that’s the question.’

‘A question easily answered.  Most of them are
brought over on the occasion of a strike, and when they come here
they stop here, and add to the overstocked market.  Your
regulations for the support of your members are excellent, and
deserve all praise; your Unions also are most desirable when
protection is required against hard and unjust masters, though
the number of them is not so large as you
p. 151
endeavour
to make it.  But when you set up to dictate to masters as to
whom they shall employ, you do injustice to respectable men
willing to work, whom you compel to starve, and in the long-run
you help to create that depression of trade of which we all
complain.’

‘Have you anything more agin the Unions?’ asked
Johnson angrily.

‘Yes; I maintain that when they thus endeavour to
control the labour market they often drive away trade.  Why
are our shops filled with American manufactures?  For this
simple reason: In America the men are always looking out to
improve the processes of manufacture.  A workman who can
strike out a new and improved method is rewarded by his masters
and applauded by his fellows.  Here masters and men are
against him.  The workmen are too conservative.  You
are not offended, I hope, by my plain speaking?’

‘Not at all,’ replied the visitor in a sulky
tone.

p.
152
‘Well, I will add that, so far as I can see, they
often drive trade away as well.  I will just give you one
instance: I was spending an evening with an eminent judge a
little while ago.’

‘Why, the lawyers are the greatest trades unionists
going,’ said Johnson passionately.

‘It may be.  I am not a lawyer, and have not much
to say on their behalf.  The judge of whom I speak had just
been at one of our great Midland towns, where an order had come
for a large supply for a foreign Government.
“But,” said the English firm, “we must have a
strike clause inserted in the agreement, as our men will strike
directly they hear we’ve got the order.”  The
agent of the foreign Government declined to agree to such a
proposal, and the order was taken to Belgium and executed
there.’

‘Ah, that was an isolated case.’

‘Not a bit of it,’ said Mr. Wentworth.
‘I can give plenty of other cases that show how often the
British workmen unwittingly
p. 153
drive away trade, and make us all
suffer in consequence.’

‘Well, this is a free country, and the workmen have a
right to act as they think best,’ said Johnson.

‘Undoubtedly; I do not dispute that for an
instant.  All I say is, don’t throw all the blame of
poverty on the rich; a good deal of it is due to the poor
themselves.  Parliament can do little more than it has
done.  No Act of Parliament can give permanent employment
and good wages to a man who drinks, or neglects his duty, or who
will not work properly and efficiently.’

‘Ah, there are people who think otherwise.’

‘I fear there are.’

‘According to your way of talk, Mr. Wentworth,
Parliament ain’t of much use.’

‘I fear not.  I only defend representative
government as the only possible mode of political life in the
absence of a benevolent despotism, controlled by a free
press.
p.
154
The ideal government is that which interferes least
with the people.’

‘Then, what do you recommend?’

‘Moral reform.  Do you know,’ continued
Wentworth, ‘that Trade Unionism seems to me essentially
one-sided.’

‘That is rather too rich,’ said the visitor.
‘All we seek is justice to ourselves.’

‘But is not that unjust to the masters?  A firm
commences a business or works a mine.  It is put to great
expense; sinks an enormous amount of capital, and then because it
chooses to employ individuals who have a right to be employed,
who have as much right to earn their own living as other men, the
Union withdraws their men, and the works have to be stopped, and
many a firm has given up business in consequence, and thus the
area of the unemployed and the amount of national poverty and
distress is increased.  No man can serve two masters.
There must be a head somewhere, and a firm naturally may claim to
be at the head of a business, and should be left to regulate
p. 155
its own
affairs.  What would become of a ship if the crew were to
deprive the captain of his command, and to navigate it
themselves?’

‘What would you do, then?’

‘Why, just act according to Christian
principles.’

‘Christian principles—what are they?’

‘That man and master should do to each other as to
themselves.’

Johnson blackened in his face and whispered something about
nonsense.

‘But that is not all.’

‘No, I should think not,’ said Johnson.

‘My next demands are moral reform, and the power of the
people.’

‘Ah, now, that’s coming to the point.’

‘But I mean by the power of the people, not a vote at
the dictation of a caucus, but the action of an educated
independent people.’

Again Johnson frowned.

‘Well, let me hear what you recommend.  The future
belongs to you, Mr. Johnson.’

‘Why, we want State aid against the
p. 156
selfishness
of the rich, and State employment for the poor.’

‘Well, that is rather a reversal of the system which has
made England great by reason of the energy and freedom of her
people.  The State works clumsily and ineffectively.
Look at the memoirs of officials, or Government reports, or the
revelations of our great establishments, and you will see for
yourself that the State works in a way which, if a private firm
followed, it would soon be in the Bankruptcy Court.  In
America things in this respect are as bad as here.  The
abuses of the Civil Service there are greater than at home.
A distinguished American writes: “The spoil system,
introduced by President Jackson, which is now stigmatized as
‘the American system,’ imperils not only the purity,
economy, and efficiency of the Government, but it destroys
confidence in the method of popular government by party.  It
creates a mercenary political class, an oligarchy of
stipendiaries, a bureaucracy of the worst kind, which controls
p. 157
parties
with relentless despotism.”  How do you like that,
friend?’

‘Not at all,’ said Johnson.

‘No; we must continue fighting on the old lines.
Like Burke, I believe at this period of the world’s history
there is nothing new in politics or morals.  Society has got
into the groove which was the only one possible.  It must
ever go on the old lines.  Upset it, turn it topsey-turvy,
as they did in France, or as the Socialists would do, and a
little while again you will find it on the old lines.  Share
the wealth of the country, if you like, between you all; it
won’t make much difference to me, but the next generation
will be as badly off as ever—worse off—for you will
have taken from the labourer all motive for exertion.’

‘And is this what I am to tell the United
Buffaloes?’

‘If you like.’

‘If I do, not one of us will vote for you.’

‘Then, perhaps the sooner I give up the contest the
better.’

‘That is what I think,’ said Johnson, as
p. 158
he took up
his hat and departed, leaving Wentworth to fear that his mission
to Sloville was at an end.

Why, even, as he confessed to himself, the Tory programme was
more attractive than his own.  Toryism is never particular
on the score of money.  Its generosity at the expense of
other people is prodigious.  Naturally, we all like a lavish
expenditure.  There is no one so popular as a spendthrift,
as long as his money lasts, no one so hated as a screw.

When rosy-fingered morning next day dawned on Sloville, there
was quite a crowd of visitors at the hotel patronized by Mr.
Wentworth.  Everybody is supernaturally and unusually wise
when an election takes place, and, feeling how uncertain is human
life, seems apparently determined to make the most of it.
It is the harvest, if not of the busy bee, at any rate of the
busybody.  Before Mr. Wentworth had finished his coffee and
bacon and eggs, while the dry toast in the rack was yet
untouched, the aged and beery waiter announced as how
p. 159
there was a
lady outside waitin’ to speak to him.

‘Show her in,’ said the candidate, and in she
walked with that boldness and self-possession, unpleasant in
woman, which marks the advanced female.

‘I hear, Mr. Wentworth, you are a candidate for our
borough.  May I ask what are your views on the subject of
Women’s Rights?—a question of vast importance to our
sex.  You know our abject and degraded state; how we are
trodden under foot by our lord and master, man.’

The lady was a spinster, or she would not have talked in that
style, but at length she had said all that she wanted, and paused
for a reply.

‘I fear,’ said Wentworth, ‘that you and I
can never agree.  I don’t believe that man and woman
are the same.  Nature has made them different.  A woman
treads the earth with a lighter step, talks in a feebler
voice.  If she succeeds on the platform or in public life,
it is because of her exceptional performance in that character;
and
p.
160
owing to her more excitable temperament and physical
peculiarities, and to the duties devolving on her as wife and
mother, I argue that she is unfitted for public life.  Her
duty is at home.  It is there she reigns a queen, and where,
I ask, can she desire a nobler field?  Our men are what
their mothers make them.  I say it is to the home that we
have to look for the purification and elevation of our public
life; it is to the mothers of to-day that we look for the great
men of the morrow.’

‘And is this all you’ve got to say?’ said
the lady, with a somewhat chap-fallen countenance.  ‘I
did hope, as a journalist, I might have heard something more
satisfactory.  There are many of us in Sloville.  We
are affiliated to a society whose headquarters are in London, and
we are determined to vote for no man.’

‘Excuse me, I understood ladies had no votes.’

‘I mean we are determined that no man shall vote for
anyone who is not sound on the question of Women’s
Rights.’

p.
161
‘I am quite ready to give a widow, or any woman
housekeeper, or any woman in business, a vote.  As a Liberal
I don’t know whether I ought to say as much.  The
women will be sure to give a Tory vote.  They are sure to
vote as their favourite parson or priest wishes.’

‘Not the emancipated female of the future.’

‘Alas!’ said Wentworth, ‘I don’t know
her.  I can only talk of woman as she is—charming,
lovely, worthy of all honour, in her own peculiar
sphere.’

‘Thank you,’ said the lady haughtily; ‘we
want something more;’ and she went out of the room to
report to her committee that on Women’s Rights the
candidate gave a very uncertain sound.

‘Will you,’ said one other fair enthusiast a
little later on, ‘vote for the repeal of the Vaccination
Acts?’

‘Certainly not,’ said Mr. Wentworth.
‘Why should I?’

‘Because it is an interference with the freedom of the
subject.’

p. 162
In
vain he argued all government, more or less, was that, and that
small-pox was an awful malady, against which it behoved the
nation to take every precaution.  He spoke in vain.
The anti-vaccinators did not go so far as to say, as the old
opponents did, that vaccination made children as hairy as
bullocks, or that it led them to bellow like bulls.  In our
day they have shifted their grounds, but their opposition remains
the same.

The Sabbatarians came next.  They were Liberals mostly,
with a sprinkling of Tory Evangelicals, yet rather than see any
mitigation in the severity of the Jewish Sabbath, any attempt
made to divert the working man from the public-house on a Sunday,
they declared themselves dead against Mr. Wentworth.  The
loafers, of course, were against him.  He refused to treat
them to beer.  He kept no public-houses open.  He did
not even offer to stand glasses round when they called.  If
he was above obliging them, why should they put themselves out of
their way to oblige him?  He was for
p. 163
purity and
independence.  Little they cared for either the one or the
other.  Every hour it seemed to him that his chance grew
less.  What was the good of talking about an improved
foreign policy, about the advancement of the people in political
power, about the reduction of taxation, or free trade in land, or
land reform, to such men?  According to one class, an
election was simply an excuse for bribery and corruption.
It meant money and beer.  A candidate was to be bled to the
uttermost farthing, and he was to repay himself how he could, and
as best he could, when he got into Parliament.  According to
another class, a General Election was simply an opportunity for
fighting on side issues, and the ventilation of all sorts of
fads.

Musing on these things, the waiter came to him to announce
another visitor.  Mr. Wentworth groaned.

‘Not a lady, sir.’

‘Thank God for that!’ he replied.

‘A gentleman this time.’

‘Show him in.’

p.
164
‘Ah, Mr. Wentworth,’ said the new visitor,
‘I thought I would just run in and see you.’

‘Happy to see you—take a seat.’

‘I have read your programme, and am delighted with
it.’

‘Sir, you flatter me.’

‘Not a bit of it.  It is just what I like.  I
don’t think I could have done it better myself.
You’re the coming man—all Sloville will rally round
you.’

‘It does not seem like it at present,’ said
Wentworth gloomily.

‘My dear sir, you astonish me; I should have thought a
man of your talent would have carried everything before
him.  But I see I am come in the nick of time—quite
providential, as it were.  I can promise you entire
success.’

‘Upon what terms?’

‘Well, if you put it in that light, I, of course, expect
to be paid.  As a fellow literary man, I would, of course,
prefer to work for you for nothing; but you see, sir, one must
live, and the fact is, I have a duty
p. 165
to discharge to my wife and
family.  A man who neglects them, you know, is worse than an
infidel.  I believe I have Scriptural authority for that
statement?’

‘I believe you have, sir.’

‘Ah, yes, my dear sir, I thought a man of your knowledge
and good sense would admit as much.  You know me—my
name is Roberts.’

‘I can’t say that I do.’

‘Well, that is a good one!  Did you never read my
poem on the death of Prince Albert?’

‘I can’t say that I have.’

‘Don’t you remember my celebrated speech at Little
Pedlington in favour of the Society for the Equal Diffusion of
Capital?’

‘I can’t say that I ever heard of it.’

‘Well, you do surprise me!  How true it is that the
world knows nothing of its greatest men!  Surely you must
have heard of my celebrated discussion with the great
O’Toole in the Town Hall of Mudford on the rights of man,
of which the
Mudford
p. 166
Observer
remarked that I
demolished my unfortunate antagonist with the brilliancy of
Macaulay, with the philosophy of a Burke, with the wit of a
Sheridan, and with a native originality indicative of the rarest
genius.  Why, it was the talk of the whole town for
weeks.  Do you really mean to tell me, Mr. Wentworth, that
you never heard of that?’

‘Never,’ said Wentworth dryly.

‘Well, that’s a good one!  I thought you
gentlemen of London kept your eye on everybody and
everything.  But you know the Temple Forum?’

‘Oh, certainly I do.’

‘Ah! I am glad to hear that, because I am one of the
leading lights of that select assembly.’

‘Well, I am very unfortunate.  I cannot remember to
have heard you even there; but I must own I seldom went near the
place.’

‘Ah, if you had you would have known me well.  Many
is the speech I have made there.  But perhaps you will
kindly glance
p.
167
at this?’ taking out of his hat a dilapidated and
somewhat greasy paper.

Reluctantly Mr. Wentworth took it.

‘It is an account of one of my lectures before the
Minerva Institute at Bullock Smithy.’

‘Bullock Smithy—never heard of that.’

‘Come, Mr. Wentworth, you are a bit of a wag, I
see.’

‘Not a bit of it.  Never heard of Bullock Smithy in
my life.’

‘Why, it is a rising watering-place in Blankshire, and I
had the public hall to lecture in, with the head notable in the
chair, and all the
élite
of the place present; and
I assure you, as the
Bullock Smithy Observer
remarks, it
was quite a treat I gave ’em.  “Feast of reason,
flow of soul,” they call it.  I am to give ’em
another lecture next summer.’

‘I am delighted to hear it.’

‘Yes, I knew you would be.  We men of genius always
recognise each other.  And now I’ll tell you why I am
here.  I’ve come to offer you my services as a public
speaker.
p.
168
I was at your meeting the other night, and I saw what
was wanted immediately.  “Clever fellow,” said I
to myself; “but too modest and retiring—not enough
bounce and brag to fetch the general public.”  Says I
to myself: “I will do it for him; I am the boy for that
kind of work; I am used to it.”  Many a man has got
into Parliament through me.  Indeed, I have never known
anyone fail who has secured my services, and you shall have
’em cheap.  Five pounds for the week and board and
lodging, and I make a speech for you every night.
That’s what I call a fair offer.  You hesitate.
Well, suppose we say two pounds ten.  I never made so low an
offer before, but you are a man and a brother, and I would do for
you what I would not do for anyone else.’

‘I am afraid, Mr. Roberts,’ said
Wentworth—‘I fear I must dispense with your
services.’

‘No, don’t say that; don’t stand in your own
light, man.  You don’t know what you’re
refusing.  I can almost guarantee
p. 169
your
election.  Let me begin to-night.  Send the crier round
to say that Mr. Roberts, the celebrated orator of the Temple
Forum, will speak at your meeting.  If I don’t
astonish ’em I’ll eat my hat.’  A very
battered one, by-the-bye, which it would have required rather a
strong stomach to digest.

‘The fact is, Mr. Roberts,’ continued Wentworth,
‘I consider an election is purely a matter between a
candidate and his constituents, and no one else has a right to
interfere.  I should be glad of all the local strength I
could get.  That would show the electors we’re in
earnest in the matter; but as to getting strangers down from town
to dazzle the people with rhetorical fireworks, I really
don’t care about it.  I really should not care to gain
my election by such means.  I think it great presumption
even for a London committee, whether sitting at the Carlton or
the Liberal Club, to seek to control the electors.  It is
something very serious to me, the freedom of election and the
independence of the voters.’

‘Sir, you take matters too seriously.  We
p. 170
all know
electioneering is humbug, and the biggest humbug wins.’

‘I fear you and I could not agree, Mr. Roberts, and
perhaps you had better take your talents to another
quarter.’

‘And you mean to say, then, that you have no occasion
for my services?’ said the collapsing Roberts, who seemed
to become smaller every minute.

‘I do, indeed.’

‘Then, sir, I am sorry for you,’ said the
indignant orator.  ‘I came out of friendship; but I am
a professional man, and I shall be under the unpleasant necessity
of going to some other party.  I believe Sir Watkin Strahan
will be only too glad of my assistance.’

‘By all means try him,’ said Wentworth.

And the itinerant orator retreated, having first secured a
trilling loan on the plea that his journey down to Sloville had
quite cleaned him out, and that he had been disappointed of a
remittance.

No sooner had the orator departed than another arrival was
announced.

p.
171
‘A gentleman from London.’

The Hon. Algernon Smithson, a fellow-member with Wentworth of
the Mausoleum Club, was his name.  In he rushed, protesting
that he had called at the club, that he had gone to
Clifford’s Inn, that he had come on to Sloville, just to
see how his friend was getting on.

‘And is that all?’ asked Wentworth.

‘Well, now you mention it, I don’t mind telling
you,’ was the reply, ‘that our party are rather
uncomfortable about the state of things here, and Twiss, of the
Treasury, asked me if I could not have five minutes’ chat
with you, and so, you see,’ said the Honourable, with a
jolly laugh, or, rather, an attempt at it, ‘like the
good-natured donkey that I am, I’ve let the cat out of the
bag.  Perhaps that is bad policy; but, then, you and I,
Wentworth, are men of the world, and I like to be
straightforward.’

In most quarters it was considered that the Hon. Smithson was
rather a cunning old fox.

‘The fact is, you Government people
p. 172
don’t
want an independent candidate.  Is not that so?’ asked
Wentworth.

‘Why, you see, my dear friend, the circumstances of the
case are somewhat peculiar.  We are rather hard pushed, as
you know, in the House; parties are evenly balanced.  Now,
Sir Watkin has a good chance here, and his connections are very
numerous in this part of the world.  He is of an old Whig
family.’

‘Yes, I understand; he is to win the borough, and then
to be repaid by a Government appointment.  And if I throw
him out?’

‘Why, then we lose a safe man.  You are a very good
fellow, Wentworth, but, then, you are only to be depended on when
the Government is right.  You would desert us to-morrow if
we went wrong.’

‘I believe I should.’

‘And if you go to the poll you let in a Tory.
Think of that.  Our party will never forgive you.
There will be a mark against your name as long as you
live.’

‘I have an idea that there is something
p. 173
more
important than the triumph of a party.’

‘What is that?’

‘The triumph of principle.’

‘Ah, that is so like you, Wentworth!’ said the
Hon. Smithson, laughing.  ‘Men like you are always in
the clouds.  We wire-pullers are the only practical
men.’

‘And a pretty mess you’ve made of it.  Now
you’ve a Liberal Government on its last legs that four
years ago had nearly a majority of a hundred.’

‘I own it—and I own it with sorrow.  But I am
here on business.  I have a proposition to make.’

‘What is that?’

‘That you arbitrate.’

‘I am quite willing; but the question is, how to
arbitrate, and that is rather a difficult one.’

‘Not at all; it is the easiest thing in the world.
Get a public meeting, admit an equal number of the supporters of
each candidate, and abide by the result.’

‘Which, if there has been fair play—if
p. 174
one party
has not taken a mean advantage of the other—will leave
matters just as they are.’

‘Well, then, let the meeting be an open one, and let the
best man win.’

‘That won’t do.  The richer man will be sure
to pack it with his supporters.’

‘Well, then, refer it to a London committee.’

‘A committee of wealthy men, who are sure to favour the
wealthiest candidate, with whom, possibly, they may be on
friendly terms; and a rich man, with the deceitful returns of his
paid canvassing, can always make out a more plausible case than a
poor man.  I have a plan,’ continued the speaker,
‘which might solve the difficulty.’

‘What is it?’

‘Let as many candidates go to the poll as like.
Let them be ranged as Liberal or Conservative—for we have
in reality no Tories now—let the votes all together be cast
up, and let the man who has the highest number of votes on the
winning side be the elected candidate.  One advantage
p. 175
of such a
system would be that it would create more interest in an
election.  The difficulty is at present to get people to
take an intelligent interest in politics at all.’

‘Very good; but that is a question for the
future.’

‘In the meanwhile,’ said Wentworth,
‘arbitration is a farce.’

Just before the visitor could ransack his brain for a fitting
reply, the waiter (he was an Irishman and a comic genius in his
way), in a tone of awe and eagerness, interrupted the

tête-à-tête
by announcing the arrival
of Father O’Bourke.

p.
176
CHAPTER XVIII.

THE IRISH PRASTE.

There are three distinct classes of Roman Catholic
priests—the ascetic and spiritual, the jolly and
intellectual, the brutal and Bœotian.  Of the first
Cardinal Manning is the type.  The second was presented to
us in the person of Cardinal Wiseman, who made the Romanist
priest as famous in his day as Cardinal Manning in ours.  Of
the third class you may see specimens every day in every Belgian
town, and in many parts of England and Ireland.  Father
O’Bourke was a combination of the two latter types—a
man of humour, a plausible speaker, a tremendous orator, and a
man whose great art was to be conciliatory to all.  He could
be very rollicking over a
p. 177
glass of whisky-and-water, but his
power was more physical than spiritual.  He had something of
a domineering tone, the result chiefly of his mixing with the low
Irish who emigrate to England, where, like the Gibeonites of old,
they become chiefly hewers of stone and drawers of water.

Mr. Wentworth received the priest with all due politeness, as
he explained that he had come for a friendly chat.

‘I am delighted to hear it,’ said Wentworth.
‘I have been much in Ireland.’

‘And you learnt there, sir,’ said the priest,
‘that England is a very cruel country.’

‘I don’t see that, exactly,’ said Mr.
Wentworth; ‘for fifty years we English have been trying to
do all the good we can for Ireland.’

‘Ah, so you think, but I assure you, sir, that it is
quite otherwise; yet all that we ask from England is
justice.  England is rich and powerful, and uses her riches
and her power to oppress poor Ireland.’

‘How so?’

‘Sir, allow me to refer you to the history
p. 178
of my
unfortunate country.  There was a time when Ireland had a
flourishing linen trade, but England, in her jealousy of Ireland,
destroyed it.’

‘Well,’ said Wentworth, ‘I have been in
Belfast, and was struck with the prosperity of the place, the
respectability of its shops, the size of its warehouses, the
extent of its harbours.  I saw a large population all
seemingly well employed, well dressed, and well fed, with no end
of public institutions and newspapers, and all in consequence of
that linen trade which you tell me the English have
destroyed.’

‘Oh, sir,’ said the priest, ‘one swallow
does not make a summer.  If one town is fairly well off,
that is no reply to the charge of poverty produced by the
English.  You’ve seen our harbour in
Galway?’

‘I have been there, and, undoubtedly, it is a fine
harbour.’

‘Indeed, sir, it is,’ replied the priest;
‘and, as you are probably aware, at one time it was
intended to be the seat for a great Transatlantic
trade.’

p.
179
‘Yes, we all know that.  We have,
unfortunately, all heard of the collapse of the Galway
Line.  It is a sad sight to see the great warehouse standing
there empty.  I believe a good deal of money was lost by too
confiding shareholders?’

‘Indeed, sir, you’re right; but what was the
reason?’

‘Well, I really don’t recollect at this particular
moment.’

‘Sir, the reason was the jealousy of the Liverpool
shipowners.  What do you think they did?’

‘I really can’t say.’

‘Well, as soon as the Liverpool shipowners saw the line
was going to be a success, they came over to Galway and bribed
the pilot to run the ship on the only rock there was in the
harbour, and there was the end of the Galway Transatlantic
Line.’

‘Of course, Father O’Bourke, I am not going to
contradict you,’ replied Wentworth.  ‘I am not a
Liverpool shipowner, and know little about them; but I was not
p. 180
long ago in
Galway, in the very harbour to which you refer, and while I was
there a man said to me that Allan’s steamers used to call
in there for emigrants, and I asked why they did not then.
“Oh,” said he, “the fact was, that while they
charged in Londonderry a penny a ton, and in Queenstown a
halfpenny, in Galway the charges were sixpence a ton, and so the
steamers were driven away.”  Thus, you see, it was not
the Liverpool shipowners, but the Galway people themselves, that
drove the trade away.  What do you say to that?’

‘Well,’ said the priest, rather confusedly,
‘the fact is, there are wheels within wheels; we do not
want the people to emigrate.’

‘No, you fear you will lose your power over them if they
do; but, for the sake of abusing England, you tell me that
England ruined the Galway Steam Packet Company.  I am
inclined to believe it did nothing of the kind.’

‘But the landlords, what do you think of
them?’

‘So far as I have seen them, they are a
p. 181
mixed lot,
like all the rest of us—some good, some bad.  I blame
people who bid against each other in their madness to get a bit
of land on which it is impossible for anyone to live.  I
blame the priests and the patriots and the landlords who for ages
have winked at this, and allowed the people to sink into a state
of degradation such as you see nowhere else.  For miles and
miles, as you know, Father O’Bourke, in many parts of
Galway, you see fields covered with stones, and these fields are
let off as farms.  If the landlord resides on the estate the
stones are cleared off, the soil is drained, and the tenant
manages to make a living—not such as he could get in
America, or Canada, or Australia, if he had pluck enough to leave
the old country and emigrate, but a living of some kind.  If
he is under a bad landlord—a poor Irish squire, for
instance—of course it is different.  If the landlord
does not reside upon the estate—unless he be a great
English landlord, like the Duke of Devonshire—the tenant
and the land have alike a bad time of it.  But as the stars
in their courses
p.
182
fought against Sisera, so the heavens are unpropitious
to the small farmer.  If he rises early and sits up late,
and eats the bread of carefulness, all is in vain.  In
Liverpool there are five or six miles of docks filled with
American corn and cheese and bacon.  How can the small
farmer, either in England, or Ireland, or Scotland, compete with
that?  “It is my belief,” said a Liverpool
gentleman to me—who in the famine year went on a mission of
mercy, and as a messenger of relief exposed himself to all the
horrors of a Connemara winter—“that the small farmer
could not get a living even if, instead of paying rent, rent were
given him on condition of his taking the farm.”

‘I fear, Mr. Wentworth,’ said the priest,
‘you have looked at Ireland with prejudiced
eyes.’

‘Not a bit of it.  No one has been more friendly to
the Irish than the Liberal Party, of which I am a member, and yet
we are called infamous, and bloodthirsty, and base, and
brutal.  You know yourself here in
p. 183
England you
live in perfect peace and security; you are allowed to go in and
out amongst the people to make converts if you are so
disposed.  In Ireland, if I attempted to do anything of the
kind, I should stand a good chance of a broken head.’

‘Well, sir, we are a warm-hearted, impulsive people,
attached very strongly to the old religion—the religion of
our forefathers.’

‘There is no doubt of that, sir,’ continued
Wentworth; ‘wherever you go in Ireland, in the midst of all
its dirt, and starvation, and wretchedness, and poverty, you see
one man well dressed and well fed.’

‘And who may he be, sir?’

‘The parish priest.’

‘And why should he not be?  Is not he the guide and
shepherd of his flock?  I suppose you will blame him
next,’ said Father O’Bourke, reddening.

‘Yes, I do.’

‘What for?’

‘For his desertion of the people.’

‘Really, Mr. Wentworth, you are amusing.
p. 184
You make me
laugh,’ said the reverend father, looking uncommonly
angry.  ‘Should the priest not take the part of the
people?’

‘Certainly.  But he does nothing of the kind.
Is he not the partisan of the popular agitator?  Does he not
place himself by the side of men whose language is utterly
false?  Who stimulates the passions of the people to fever
heat? who teach the poor Irish—ignorant as they are,
assassins as I fear a few of them are, cowards as they are when
human life is to be saved—that they have every virtue under
heaven?’

‘Indeed, Mr. Wentworth,’ said the priest
indignantly, ‘I know nothing of the kind.  Ireland has
been trampled under foot by the murdering English, and now we are
within measurable distance of Home Rule.’

‘And what will be the good of that?’

‘That the Irish will have their rights at last; that we
shall be free of English tyranny and English
injustice.’

‘Yes, you will change King Stork for King Log.
Irishmen are bound to quarrel.  I was at Queenstown last
summer, and
p.
185
taking up the Cork paper, I read an account of the
meeting of the Harbour Commissioners.  In the course of the
meeting, one member denounced another as a humbug and miscreant
of the vilest character, and said, old as he was, he was prepared
to fight him with the weapons God had given him, and thereupon
asked him to step into the next room and have it out.  When
I mentioned the matter to a priest, he said sarcastically,
“Of course there are no rows in the British House of
Commons.”  I replied that the questions discussed
there were more likely to lead to heated debate than the trifling
matters a set of Harbour Commissioners would have to deal
with.  Furthermore, I added that when we did have a row, it
was often begun by Irishmen, and generally connected with Irish
affairs.’

‘Ireland must be governed by Irish ideas; that is all we
want.’

‘Let us look at Scotland.  England and Scotland
were joined together, and the union was as much hated by the
Scotch as the
p.
186
Irish union is hated by your people now.  Look at
England and Scotland now.  Are they not one
people—equally great, equally flourishing, equally happy
under what was, at one time, a detested union?  Why should
not England and Ireland get on just as well?  Had we given
way to Scotch ideas, we should now be at loggerheads.’

‘Unfortunately, you see, in Ireland,’ said the
priest, ‘public opinion is the other way.’

‘Public opinion!  What public opinion have you,
where boycotting and the bullet of the midnight assassin, who,
coward-like, waits for his unsuspecting victim in a ditch or
behind a stone wall, have created a reign of terror under which
all freedom of thought and action is suppressed?  Public
opinion does not exist in Ireland.  The Irish are
down-trodden indeed.  No Russian serfs are worse
off.’

‘Nevertheless, in the heart of every Irishman there is a
passionate desire for freedom which has taught her sons to lead
heroic lives and to die heroic deaths.  Think of
p. 187
Emmet, Lord
Edward Fitzgerald, and many others, whose names will live in
immortal song.’

‘By all means.  They had much to complain
of—though they sought a remedy the wrong way, and suffered
in consequence.  The Ireland of their day was bad enough;
but the Ireland of to-day is different.’

‘Different indeed,’ said the priest proudly.
‘Now we are a united people; we have the great American
nation on our side.’

‘Shall I tell you what an American lady said to me the
other day, as I saw her off in a Cunarder for New York?’
asked Mr. Wentworth.

‘If you like, sir.’

‘“Pray, Mr. Wentworth,” she said, leaning
over the ship’s side, as I was getting into the
tug—“pray don’t send us any more
Irish.”’

‘That may be, sir.  We all know ladies have their
whims and aversions as well as other people.  But you
don’t seem fond of the Irish.’

p.
188
‘On the contrary, I admire them much.  I
envy them their ingenuity, their humour, their enthusiasm, their
power of oratory, their pluck and spirit.  I only wish them
better led.  A real union of English and Irish would, I
believe, make us the first nation in the world.’

‘Then, you don’t think much of our
leaders?’

‘Oh yes I do.  They are clever men—far
cleverer than our average M.P.’s—but they have put
the people on the wrong scent.  It is not justice Ireland
wants.  England and Scotland are quite ready to accord her
that.  The people of England have been the warmest friends
of Ireland from the first.  Indeed, she has had more justice
done to her than England and Scotland.  Her farmers have
rights denied to ours; her representatives occupy almost entirely
the attention of Parliament.  Your leaders only play with
the people, and make the wrongs of Ireland a stepping-stone for
themselves to place and power.  What Ireland wants now is a
little peace.  The
p. 189
people are dying of political
delirium tremens.  Said an Irish hotel-keeper to me one day,
“What Ireland wants is more industry.  Farmers’
sons won’t work.  They prefer instead to go to fairs
and races and public meetings.  Irishmen won’t invest
in any Irish enterprise, and if they do it is always a job they
make of it.”  I myself have known when Englishmen have
gone to Ireland to establish manufactures to keep the people
employed, that the foremen have been shot and the manufactories
closed.  You must have known something of the same kind,
Father O’Bourke.’

‘It may be that there are difficulties between Irishmen
and Saxon masters, and that these difficulties may have
occasionally led to bloodshed and loss of life.  We are a
hot-headed people.  We have besides the wrongs of many long
centuries to remember.  You recollect Sir Walter Raleigh,
Mr. Wentworth?’

‘Blessings on his sacred head, I do!  Did he not
teach us to grow potatoes and smoke tobacco?  I’d
forgive a man
p.
190
a good deal in consideration of such lasting
benefits.’

‘Please recollect he was one of the English who
accompanied Lord Grey to the South of Ireland, and took part in
the attack on a great castle there.  All the inmates were
slaughtered.  A few women, some of them pregnant, were
hanged.  A servant of Saunders, an Irish gentleman, and a
priest were hanged, also.  The bodies, six hundred in all,
were stripped and laid out upon the sands—“as
gallant, goodly personages,” said Grey, “as were ever
beheld.”  Was not that murderous work?’

‘It was indeed,’ said Wentworth sadly.
‘But why treasure up such deeds of blood done ages
ago?  It is not Christian.  The Bible tells us to
forgive our enemies.’

‘But it is human nature.  We Irishmen have long
memories.  Such things can never be forgotten or
forgiven.’

‘There I think you’re wrong.  Besides, in the
case you refer to the victims were chiefly foreigners, who had no
business there,
p.
191
who had come merely for the sake of fighting.
What was done in barbarous times would not be permitted
now.  Let us strive to be better friends.  You Irishmen
come to England and we welcome you at the bar, on the press, in
trade, in the army or navy, or the public service.  I will
go further still.  It is a shame that when a bridge is to be
built over the Shannon you have to come to London.  You
ought to manage your own local affairs.  But England is an
empire, and high-spirited, intelligent Irishmen would rather take
part in Imperial politics than shine in a local Parliament.
Home Rule will not satisfy the natural aspirations of an Irishman
of talent.  I met an old Dutch naval captain at Flushing who
complained to me one day bitterly of the hardship of his
lot.  When he was born Holland was a part of France; now
Holland was independent, and he was a citizen of a little
principality rather than of a great empire.  It will be so
with the Irishman of the future—or an Irishman in search of
a career.’

p.
192
‘But, sir, is not a desire for Ireland’s
nationality a reasonable one?’

‘Undoubtedly; but Ireland never was a nation.  It
was always torn with dissension; with leaders and lords ready to
kill each other, only kept from doing so by England.  No one
would rejoice to see Ireland a nation more than I, but that is a
dream of which I despair.’

‘But Home Rule will make Ireland a nation.’

‘How can you say that, sir?’ said Wentworth
indignantly.  ‘It is in the Protestant north that the
strength of Ireland lies; it is there you meet intelligence and
industry and wealth; it is there you see what Ireland might
become.  In all other parts of Ireland, what do you see but
wretchedness and poverty?  There is a permanent line of
separation which not even Home Rule can obliterate.’

‘You are very outspoken, Mr. Wentworth—more so
than is politic, I fear,’ said the reverend Father, with a
bitter smile.  ‘We have many Irish voters in
p. 193
this
borough, and I fear they will be unable to give you their
support; and Irish support is a matter of some consequence.
In many borough elections they can turn the scale.’

‘Alas! I am quite aware of that; but I hold my opinion,
nevertheless.  The demand for an Irish Parliament
independent of an Imperial one will come to the front, the
Liberal Party will find themselves compelled to support
it—’

‘And then we shall have peace.’

‘No a bit of it!  Then we shall have civil
war.  It was only a week or two since I was talking to a
porter at the Limerick Station.  He said to me: “The
people want Home Rule.  Let ’em have it, and there
won’t be many of ’em left.”  And I fear
the porter was right.’

‘Why, who will there be to fight?’

‘The men of the North.  I have no sympathy with
Orangemen: they are hard and bigoted, and have done immense
mischief in Ireland; but they will never be content with a Home
Rule measure which will hand them over to their foes.
Things
p.
194
are bad enough now, with England keeping both parties,
to a certain extent, from flying at each other.  What
Ireland will be under Home Rule such as will be accepted by the
Nationalists I shudder to contemplate.’

‘You are easily alarmed,’ said the priest, as he
took his leave.  ‘We shall have Home Rule, and for
once Ireland will be at peace.’

‘I hope so, I am sure,’ said Mr. Wentworth, as the
reverend gentleman left him alone.

p.
195
CHAPTER XIX.

WENTWORTH RETIRES.

Just as the Irish ‘praste’ walked out, a gentleman
rushed in, breathless and unannounced.

‘Ah, my dear boy,’ said he, ‘in the language
of Scripture I ask, What doest thou here, Elijah?’

‘Ask as much as you like,’ said Wentworth;
‘but I do not know that I am bound to answer.’

‘Wentworth, you are making an ass of yourself.  You
may think the language rather strong, but it is true,
nevertheless.  You know I am a candid friend, and I tell you
this is not your place.’

‘I am almost of the same opinion.’

‘Let us look at the thing seriously.
p. 196
What is
Parliamentary life but the dreariest drudgery going?—worse
than that of the treadmill.  The House meets at four, and
rises God knows when.  In any civilized community the House
would meet in the day, and the business would be got through in a
creditable manner.  In that House you must remain night
after night, never out of the sound of the division-bell or the
call of the whip.  There is a nice smoking-room, I own, but
as it is, I believe you smoke too much.  There is a fine
library, but it is not so convenient for you as your own in
Clifford’s Inn.  I believe the dinners are not bad;
but you are a philosopher, and prefer your roast potato and your
mutton-bone—

‘“A
hollow tree,

A crust of bread and liberty.”

—to the dainties of the gourmand.  On a hot night
you can have a moonlight walk, to breathe the odours of the
silvery Thames, and the chances are you will go home to be laid
up with rheumatism.’

p. 197
This
latter aspect of the question was always a serious thing to the
speaker.  He was a medical man, and had constituted himself
the guardian of Wentworth’s health.  The two were
warmly-attached friends.  Buxton, for such was his name, had
not made much way in his profession; in fact, he was not a
lady’s man.  He was rough in voice, blunt in manner,
somewhat uncouth in appearance.  He might have done for the
army or navy; but as a general practitioner he had no chance.

Any respectable lady who had injured her health by
tight-lacing or late hours, or her figure by high-heeled boots,
or her complexion by cosmetics; any decent tradesman or
substantial British merchant who had ruined his liver by a too
generous diet and want of fresh air and exercise; any devoted
parson who had induced—as he may well have
done—softening of the brain, considering what he has to
say, and to whom, not once a week, but all the year round, would
have deemed Buxton, with his absence of all
finesse
, with
his straightforward habit of talking,
p. 198
with his rude and, to them,
impertinent and unfeeling questions, a brute; and thus Buxton
spread out his net and displayed his head full of strange wares
in vain.  But he was honest to the core, and a genuine
friend, with a love of science nothing could quench, and with a
desire to benefit his neighbours, which in his case was its own
reward.

His wants were not many, for he was a bachelor; and
independently of his profession, he had a comfortable little
property of his own.  England owes much to her medical
men.  In the priesthood of the future they will not occupy
the lowest scale.  Already they rank amongst our greatest
theological reformers.  Undoubtedly one of the healthiest
signs of the times is the attention paid by the modern Christian
to that wonderful temple of ours, the human body, fashioned, as
we would fain believe, in the Divine image by an Almighty
power.

It is lamentable to see how at one time all trace of that
elevating idea was lost sight of, and how widely it was
p. 199
accepted as
a matter of course that this poor carcase, this earthly
tabernacle, this vile body of sin and death, was, if the Divine
life was to be kept alive, to be subjected to treatment which
would have brought the wrong-doer within the four corners of any
decent Act for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, had such an
Act been in existence.  A good many of the sighs and groans
accepted as evidences of exalted piety in past days, were more
the result of earthly than of celestial influences—more due
to the fact that the digestion was weak than that the spirit was
strong; that it was ill with the body rather than it was well
with the soul.

It was a common error not many years since—it may be
that it exists more or less now—for pious people to assume
that a dislike of this world, a shutting of the mental eye to all
the wonders and glory of it as revealed by the sun that walks by
day, and the moon that rules by night, was a sure sign of fitness
for another;
p.
200
that maudlin sentimentalism was religion in its purest
form, that to be unhealthy and miserable was to be a saint.
We have got rid of that folly, at any rate, and a good deal of
the credit of it is due to Dr. Andrew Combe, brother of the
phrenologist, George Combe, whose popular phrenology and other
works did much to arouse and enlighten the public mind.

It is not now that to treat the body decently is considered a
sign of a low state of spirituality—that we hear it urged
as an excuse for neglecting to take care of one’s health,
the most precious talent given by God to man, that it is wrong to
take any trouble about the flesh in a state of sin and under
bondage, and in a few short years to be food for worms.
Such talk was pitilessly flouted, if ever Buxton chanced to come
within ear-shot of it, and good people, accordingly, in their
abounding charity, fancied he was a sceptic, that he denied the
faith, and was worse than an infidel.  Buxton continued:

p.
201
‘What can you do, what can anyone do in the House
of Commons, but register the people’s will.  It is
outside the House, not within, that the battle of public opinion
is fought.  To you or me a Parliamentary struggle is neither
more nor less than a trial of the outs to get into office, or of
the ins to retain place and power; for, let them call themselves
what they will—Tories or Radicals, Advanced Reformers or
Obstructionists—no Government can exist in this country
that does not represent public opinion, and does not do honest
work for its living.  It was so in the days of rotten
boroughs, of Sir Robert Walpole, of Pitt and Fox, of Castlereagh
and Canning and Sidmouth, and is still so now.’

‘I have said as much to you a thousand times,’
said Wentworth, smiling.

‘Of course you have.  Like myself, you are a man of
sense.  If you were a barrister, I would say, Get into
Parliament by all means.  If you did not do any good for
your country, you might get a good place
p. 202
for
yourself.  If you were a parson you could get a
living.’

‘Ah,’ said Wentworth, ‘that reminds me of a
good story; you recollect Thompson, who edited the
Political
Pioneer
?’

‘Of course I do.’

‘Well, he wrote, as you may remember, very violently and
ridiculously in favour of the late Government.  He took his
articles to the right quarter, and asked for a reward.
“If you were a barrister,” said the Government
manager, “we could give you a berth; if you were a parson,
we could give you a living.  As it is, I fear we can’t
help you.”  Somehow or other Thompson managed to get
ordained, and was given a living in the North, which he has been
obliged to leave on account of drunkenness, and he is now back in
town working at odds and ends on his old paper.’

‘Well,’ said Buxton, ‘I am not surprised at
that.  He never was a man for whom I had any respect, but I
don’t want to see you shelved in that way.  If you
want office, of course you must get into Parliament,
p. 203
but I
don’t think you care much about that sort of
thing.’

‘No, I should think not.’

‘Then, what do you want to get into Parliament
for?  Think of the hypocrisy of public life.  An
independent M.P. is a nuisance to all parties, and can do no
good.  You dislike to hear the cry of the Church in danger,
because you know the man who raises it means that he is afraid of
losing his tithes.  You laugh at the man who talks about
preserving our glorious Constitution of Church and State, because
you and I well know what he means is the preservation of caste
and injustice.  But is the Liberal politician much better,
who, to keep his party in power, goes ranting about the country
in the sacred name of Liberty and Freedom and Progress, and the
Rights of Man?  Depend upon it, there is little to choose
between one set of men and the other.  Both are equally
selfish, equally thinking of number one, when they are most
frantic for their revered leader, as they call him, or most eager
to champion
p.
204
the masses; their care is the triumph of their party,
mostly, too, with an eye to office themselves.’

‘Upon my word, I believe I have heard all this
before.’

‘I believe you have, old boy, and as long as you keep
such good company as you are in at the present time I believe you
stand an uncommon good chance of hearing it again.  There is
nothing like line upon line, and precept upon precept.  You
can speak well, but you won’t have a chance of being heard
in the House of Commons, where you will be muzzled in order that
the officials may have their say.  Besides, in the House
speeches are mere make-believe.  They never influence the
voting.  All that you can do is to vote black is white in
the interests of your party, and is it worth while going into the
House for that?  Certainly not.’

‘Go on,’ said Wentworth sarcastically.

‘Thank you, I will.  Then think of what you have to
go through to into the House—the trouble you must take;
p. 205
the time
you must waste; the money you must spend; the speeches you must
make; the lies you must utter.  You will have to tell the
voters they are intelligent—you know the mass of them are
nothing of the kind.  You must make them believe that, if
they do not strain every nerve to get you into Parliament, the
sun will refuse to shine and the earth to yield her fruit. At any
rate, if you do not say that, you will have to say something very
much like it.  You have got to make the voter feel that his
vote will do away with the wrongs of ages, when you and I well
know that in this land of ours nothing is done in a hurry if it
is done well, and that, as Tennyson writes,

‘“Freedom broadens slowly down

From precedent to precedent.”

The time is coming when the only chance for anyone to get into
Parliament will be either that he is a working man and can secure
the votes of his class, or that he shall be some large employer
of labour with a certain number of votes under his thumb,
p. 206
and
Parliament will be little better than a parish vestry.’

‘Well, we have not come to that yet, and a man may do a
great deal of good even in Parliament.’

‘Yes, he may, but he can do it better outside.  It
was an outside organization that carried the repeal of the Corn
Laws, that carried reform in Parliament, that repealed the taxes
on knowledge, that abolished West Indian slavery.’

‘Of course you mean the press.’

‘Of course I do, my boy.  I repeat daily to myself
the words of old Marvell, “Oh, printing, printing, how hast
thou disturbed the peace of mankind!  That lead, when
moulded into bullets, is not so mortal as when formed into
letters.  There was a mistake, sure, in the story of Cadmus,
and the serpent’s teeth which he sowed were nothing but the
letters he invented.”  Stick to the press, my boy, and
don’t lower yourself by descending into the Parliamentary
arena.  It is long since the House of Commons was the best
club in
p.
207
London, which conferred on a man
prestige
.
It is now a place where the work is mostly dull, and always hard
and unsatisfactory, and the company rather queer.  Shall we
give up to party what is meant for mankind?”  Shall
the blessed sun of day prove a Micker and eat
blackberries?”  Shall we harness Pegasus or Bucephalus
to a common dray?  Never, my boy, never!’

‘I hear you, Buxton, and the worst of it is that what
you say is true.’

‘I am glad to hear you say so.  Come back with me
to town.  Leave the borough to those who have nursed
it.  The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his
master’s crib.  An election is a matter of £ s.
d.  It is all very well to talk bunkum on the platform, but
the wire-pullers want cash for themselves and to work with.
When the masses are better educated, they will be proud to return
a man like you.’

‘Well,’ said Wentworth, ‘I am of your
opinion, and we’ll go back to town together.’

The mob, however, was determined not
p. 208
to let
Wentworth depart in peace.  They followed him with stones
and mud until he found shelter in the station waiting-room.

‘Good heavens!’ said the station-master.
‘Mr. Wentworth, what a state you are in!  What have
you been up to?  Who would have thought of seeing you in
such a mess?’

‘Ah, Mr. Johnson, you remember me!’

‘I should think so, sir.  We all missed you when
you left Bethesda Chapel.  But what have you been
doing?’

‘Only speaking the truth to the free and independent
electors of this enlightened borough.’

‘You mean casting pearls before swine.’

‘Well, I fear that is the proper way of putting it; but
neither you nor I may say that in this place, and especially at
this time.’

‘No, the people are half crazy, and most of them
tipsy.  They always are so at election time.  I
can’t say who are the worst, Liberals or Tories, rich or
poor—they all seem to me bad alike.  The fact
p. 209
is, parties
are very fairly divided here, that the election is really in the
hands of a few, who only want a debauch, and don’t care a
rap for politics of any kind.  The only question with them
is, Who will spend the most money?  But what are you going
to do?’

‘Why, get out of the place as soon as
possible.’

‘Well, perhaps that is the best thing you can do; but
first let me see if I can’t help to make you look a little
more respectable.’

The attempt was partly successful; and having washed and
covered his rags with a great-coat, and exchanged his battered
hat for a travelling cap, Wentworth took his seat in a
first-class carriage, and, lighting his cigar, mused on the
dangers he had run, and the disgusting scene of which he had been
a witness.

‘Good heavens!’ said he to himself, ‘what a
farce!  And yet there are those who say,
Vox populi
,

vox dei
!  Happily, as a rule, we get gentlemen in
Parliament,
p.
210
and the result of an election is not bad on the
whole.  Shall we be able to say as much when a lower class
of candidates are returned?’

The Liberal press were angry, and Wentworth came in for his
share of abuse.  He laughed as he read of his
wickedness.  Still more did he laugh as he thought of the
people who had interviewed him—the needy Scotchman who
sympathized with his manly struggle, had read his speeches with
undying interest, who fervently prayed that he might win, and
who, though he was not an elector, felt sure that Wentworth was a
Scotchman, and would lend a brother Scot a small loan; the ladies
who had endeavoured to capture him by storm; the collectors of
various great societies who felt sure that Wentworth would not
refuse to subscribe to their funds, as all the Liberal candidates
had done the same; the stupid questions he had to answer; the
slanders of which he had been the victim; the enthusiasm
p. 211
he had
evoked; the temporary importance he had achieved.  It was an
experience which he would not have missed, and so far he was
quite satisfied with the result.

p.
212
CHAPTER XX.

A STORM BREWING.

The elections were over; Parliament had met; the nobles of the
land had returned to town as well as their toadies, and admirers,
and imitators; and all was gay and glittering in the parks, at
the clubs, and in Belgravian
salons
.  The

quidnuncs
of society were as busy as bees.  In our
time the Church and the theatre are in equal request, and it is
hard to say who is the winner in the race for public favour, the
last new star at the theatre or the last pulpit pet; the last
strong man of the music-hall, the newest favourite of the
ring.  We are a catholic-minded people, and are grateful to
anyone who will give us something to talk about.

p. 213
For
once the shopkeepers of Regent Street and Bond Street were in
good spirits.  There was every prospect of a successful
season.  London was full, and there was no end of society
balls and dinners.  An Austrian archduke was to appear on
the scene.  One of the richest of the American Bonanza kings
had taken a great house in Grosvenor Square.

The deserted palace of Buckingham would once more open its
doors, and there were to be Drawing-rooms, whether as regards
numbers or brilliancy rivalling any that had ever been held.

We had a strong Government, with a strong majority behind, and
speculators on the Stock Exchange were buying for a rise.
The Rothschilds of London and Paris and Vienna had all agreed
that there should be peace, and it was also understood that a
great German Chancellor had kindly condescended to intimate that
for the present, at any rate, the sword might be sheathed, and
that honest peasant lads, instead of being served up as food for
powder, might be usefully
p. 214
employed in agricultural
occupations, much to the joy of hotel-keepers on the Rhine, at
Baden-Baden and elsewhere.  Even in the valleys and
mountains of the Alps, in the new nation of Italy, in the gilded
palaces of the Sultan on the Bosphorus, there was unusual
light-heartedness, for the Eastern Question was indefinitely
postponed.  The talk of the clubs had ceased to have any
reference to politics.  A great calm had settled everywhere
in the East of London, where poverty makes men Radicals and
Social Democrats, and in the West, where the only burning
question of the hour is how to put off the day of reckoning to a
more convenient season.

If it had not been for the occasional appearance of a wealthy
American heiress, whose father had ‘struck ile,’ of a
fair Anonyma on horseback, in an exquisitely-appointed equipage
in some fashionable thoroughfare, or for a whisper of a scandal
in high life, or for a wild adventure now and then of a man about
town, or the unexpected collapse of a favourite on the turf,
p. 215
or the
disgraceful bankruptcy of a pious banker, society would have been
duller than ditch water.  As it was, what to do with the
heavy hours intervening between luncheon and dinner seemed a
problem too difficult for human ingenuity—even when most
fitly trained and fairly developed—to solve.

It was precisely at this trying hour Sir Watkin Strahan might
be seen lolling idly and discontentedly in one of the many
armchairs which adorned the smoking-room of his Piccadilly
club.  By his side was an emptied glass, the ashes of a
defunct cigar, and the usual journals which are humorously
supposed to be comic, or to be remarkably witty, or to represent
society.  He did not look particularly pleased, not even
when a brother member, evidently a chip of the same block, seated
himself by his side, exclaiming:

‘Holloa, Sir Watkin, what brings yon up to town?  I
thought you were carrying all before you at Sloville.’

‘Sloville be d---d!’

p.
216
‘Certainly, my dear friend, if you wish it.
What’s Hecuba to me?’

‘Now, look at me, and drop that style of
remark.’

We comply with the Baronet’s suggestion, and look at
him.  He was, after all, a handsome man, carefully dressed
and fitted to shine in Belgravia; soft and gentle in manner,
sleek as a tiger.  Time had dealt gently with him, had
spared his head of hair, and saved him from the obesity which
attacks most men after a certain age.  Mr. Disraeli tells us
that the English aristocracy do not read, and live much in the
open air.  Hence their juvenility.  At a distance Sir
Watkin looked anywhere between five-and-twenty and fifty.
To-day, however, he looked nearer the latter than the
former.  He did not look like a good man, such as you read
of in evangelical biographies or on the tombstones in churchyards
and cemeteries.  There was a scowl on his forehead, anger in
his eye and in his tones.

‘Well,’ said another friend, ‘all I can say
is I have just seen ---,’ naming the
p. 217
Liberal
whip, ‘and he’s terribly cut up.  He thought you
were safe for Sloville.’

‘So I should have been if it had not been for that
infernal Wentworth.  My canvassers and election agent made
me feel quite certain of success.  I believe they humbugged
me frightfully.’

‘Oh, they always do that.  It is their
nature.’

‘But it is none the less disagreeable.  My own
opinion is, there was a good deal of bribery.  Money seemed
very plentiful.  The Carlton had a finger in the pie.
Old Shrouder was there; and he is always at his old game.
There is not another such a rascal in all England.’

‘That’s saying a great deal.  I wonder how
the old scamp has managed to keep out of Newgate.’

‘Lord bless you, man! you know none of our hands are
very clean; but I am sure I could get the new M.P. unseated on
petition.’

‘What, and claim the vacant seat?’

‘No, alas! that won’t do.  How can I
p. 218
say what my
agent was up to, or what was done by idiotic friends?  The
law is so particular.  They make out everything to be
bribery nowadays.  It is precious hard nowadays for a
gentleman to get into Parliament, and that is a rascally
shame.  We have been in the place for a hundred years.
There is not a charity in it I don’t support.  I have
spent a fortune in nursing the town.  All I can say is, next
Christmas some of the free and independent will feel rather silly
when they miss the coals and blankets, and find the key of the
wine cellar lost.’

‘I can’t make it out; there must be some other
reason.  Do you think that fellow Wentworth had anything to
do with your defeat?’ asked the Baronet’s
friend.  ‘You know he seems to be rather high-minded,
and these men are in the way at an election.’

‘Well, he might, with his nonsense, have kept some of
the voters away.  I did hear some ill-natured gossip about
myself, but I can’t trace it to him.’

p.
219
‘Oh!’ said his friend; ‘that’s
what I was waiting for.  The British mob won’t stand
that sort of thing, though they ill-use their wives every
day.’

‘Why, I never said what the gossip was.’

‘No, but I know.  You’re not a saint, Sir
Watkin.’

‘Nor you either.  The people, somehow or other, had
got it into their heads that I behaved badly to a Sloville
girl.’

‘A thing you could never think of doing,’ said his
friend, with affected indignation.

‘No, it is too near home,’ said the Baronet.

‘But you know I have always said to you that the way in
which you went on with women would, one day or other, get you
into a scrape.  Stick to the married ones, and leave the
young ones alone.  That is my plan.  If you get into a
mess then, the woman is bound to help you out.  The chances,
you see, are two to one in
p. 220
your favour.  But there is a
better plan still.’

‘What is that?’

‘Leave ’em alone.  They all mean
mischief.’

‘Well, it is not everyone who is such a cool hand as you
are.’

‘So much the worse for other people,’ was the
reply.  ‘But in the case of that Sloville girl, I
really don’t see you have anything to reproach yourself
with.  She ran away from you, did she not? and I don’t
see how any mischief could be made of that.  I suppose she
is still able to carry on the highly respectable calling of a
dressmaker; I think she was that.  She was an uncommonly
fine girl; there was quite a style about her; and a girl like
that can’t take much harm—that is, as long as she
keeps her good looks.’

‘Oh no, the girl is all right.  She is now the
popular Miss Howard, of the --- Theatre.’

‘The deuce she is!  Why, then, don’t you make
it up with her?  A bracelet and
p. 221
a dinner at the Star and Garter will
do the trick.’

‘I fear not.  The fact is, I met her accidentally a
short time ago, and she held her head as high as
Lucifer.’

‘Only acting, my dear boy.  ’Tis only pretty
Fanny’s way.  ’Tis well—she might have
come to you for money.’

‘I wish she had.  That would have given me a pull
on her.’

‘She might have served you with an action for breach of
promise.’

‘That would have been too ridiculous.’

‘She was young.  I don’t feel sure that she
might not have had you up under the Act which makes the parent
the guardian of the child till she is sixteen.’

‘Oh no, she was older than that.’

‘Perhaps she wants to excite you.  She knows now
that you are a single man, and she thinks it well to begin the
renewal of her acquaintance with a little seasonable
aversion.’

‘The fact is, she not only treated me with aversion, but
she cut me dead.’

p.
222
‘Shocking!’ said his friend.

‘Yes, it was.  I was always fond of her, and I am
mad to get hold of her again.’

‘That ought not to be difficult to Sir Watkin
Strahan.’

‘Perhaps not.  But there is a man in the
case—a newspaper fellow—the fellow, in short, who had
the impudence to come down to Sloville to contest the
borough.  I believe he lost me the seat.  I believe the
girl got him to do it out of revenge.’

‘Then, I would be even with him.’

‘So I will before I’ve done with him.  You
may be sure I’ll have my revenge,’ said the Baronet
angrily.

‘Yes, I can trust you for that,’ said his
friend.  ‘You are a good fellow, Sir Watkin, but you
neither forget nor forgive.’

‘No, we don’t in our family, and we have found it
answer our purpose very well.’

‘But, come, liquor up.  Never mind the women; leave
them to themselves.’

‘Ah, that is easier said than done.  I suppose I
must give up this sort of life.  I
p. 223
must marry
again, and reform, and settle down into a quiet life, look after
my tenants, attend the parish church, do my duty as a magistrate
and a breeder of fat cattle, as my fathers before me.  They
seem to have been all highly beloved and deeply regretted.
That is, if I read aright the inscriptions on their monuments in
Sloville Church.’

‘They must have been if they were at all like their
latest representative,’ said his friend sarcastically.

‘You be blowed!’ was the uncomplimentary
reply.  ‘I tell you what.  I see the girl is
acting to-night.  I have nothing better to
do—I’ll go and see her.’

‘Shall I come with you?’

‘No, I thank you; I’d rather go alone.’

‘You had better take me with you.  You’ll get
into another scrape.  You always do when I am not with
you.’

‘Thanks, but I think I am old enough to run alone.
If I want your valuable aid I shall send for you.’

‘Do—I shall be here all right.  It amuses me
more to have a quiet rubber than to be
p. 224
tearing all
over London by night after anything in petticoats.’

‘Ah, you are a philosopher.’

‘I wish I could return the compliment.’

‘By-the-by,’ said the Baronet, changing the
subject, ‘did you ever hear of the curious predicament I am
in?’

‘What do you mean—the birth and disappearance of
the baby?’

‘Exactly so.  You were in Italy at the time, or I
should have liked to have talked it over.  My lady, as you
know, did me the favour to present me with a son and heir.
I am not a judge of babies myself, nor am I particularly partial
to them, but it was a creditable baby, so far as I can
judge.  I imagine its lungs were sound by the way in which
it squealed.  It had the regulation number of limbs, the
family proboscis, and apparently the parental eyes.  The
women all voted it a sweet little innocent, and the image of its
father.’

‘That’s a matter of course,’ said the
friend.

‘Well, one day the child was missing.’

p.
225
‘I remember hearing of it.  It was said your
lady was in delicate health at the time, and the shock caused her
death.’

‘I believe it had something to do with it; but the fact
was with all her admirable qualities she had peculiar notions,
and that led to little unpleasantnesses between us at times, and
she worried herself about trifles in a way I am sure that was not
good for her, and I must own that when the child was missing,
naturally, she was very much cut up.’

‘And the father?’ said the friend.

‘I took it more calmly, I own.  You can’t
expect a man of the world, like myself, to have been
broken-hearted about the loss of a little bit of flesh like
that.  Had it lived to become a young man, and to have
plagued his poor father as I plagued mine, or as most young
fellows do, I should have been prostrated with grief, I dare
say.  As it was, I bore the loss with the heroism of a
martyr, and the resignation of a saint.’

‘You need not tell me that; I can quite
p. 226
believe
it,’ remarked his friend with a smile.

‘Well, as I have said, her ladyship worried herself a
good deal unnecessarily.  I never can understand why women
have such particular ideas.  I suppose they learn them from
the parson.  Now, there was Lady ---’ (naming the wife
of a volatile premier forgotten now, but much beloved by the
British public for his spirited foreign policy and his low Church
bishops).  ‘I had the honour of dining with her
ladyship at the time there was a little scandal afloat respecting
his lordship’s proceedings with a governess who had made
her appearance in the family of one of his relatives.  The
thing was in the papers, and it was nonsense pretending to ignore
it.  Somehow or other it was incidentally alluded to.

‘“Ah,” said her ladyship, turning to me with
one of her most bewitching smiles, “that is so like my dear
old man.”

‘Her ladyship was a sensible woman, and loved her gay
Lothario not a bit the less for his little peccadilloes.  I
never saw a
p.
227
more harmonious pair.  They were a model couple,
and if they had gone to Dunmow for the flitch of bacon, they
would have won it.  I never could get my lady to look at
things in such a sensible manner, and I do fear that at times she
fretted herself a good deal, and we know that is bad for
health.  One of our nursemaids was a perfect Hebe.  I
could not resist the temptation.  I believe some ill-natured
female aroused my lady’s suspicions.  At any rate, one
cold winter’s evening she forced herself into my
sanctum.  I did not happen to be alone.  Hebe, as I
called her, was with me.  We had a scene.  I took the
mail train that same night to Paris.  The poor girl, I
understand, was turned out of the house the moment I had
gone.  My opinion is she stole that baby out of
revenge.  It was missing about a month after.  I must
own her ladyship took every step she could to prove that the girl
had stolen the child.  We had detectives hard at work, and
when the child was restored in a mysterious way, the matter
dropped.  Then, alas! the child
p. 228
died, and the mother too.  That
was many years ago, and from that day to this I never have been
able to hear anything of the woman.  The child is buried in
the family vault, but I have been much troubled
lately.’

‘As how?’

‘Why, suppose the child is not dead.  That the one
restored was someone else’s.  That I have a son and
heir suddenly about to be sprung upon me, at an inconvenient
season.  That would be awkward, to say the least.’

‘D--- awkward,’ was the sympathetic reply.

‘Suppose, for the sake of argument, I were to marry
again, and have a family, and another son and heir, and a
claimant came forward for the family title and estate.’

‘Ah, that would be a nice business for the lawyers, and
a godsend for the newspapers.’

‘Undoubtedly, but a bad one for everyone else,
especially if the costs were to come out of the
estate.’

p.
229
‘Well, the lawyers would have to be
paid.’

‘You may trust them for that, but I want to keep out of
their clutches.  In case of a second marriage all this
business will have to be gone into; but marry I will, if it is
only to spite the presumptive heir, a man whom I always hated as
a sneaking boy, and I don’t love the man now he fancies he
is going to step into my shoes, or, if not, who feels that his
family will.  I am bound to marry, if only out of
spite.’

‘The best thing you can do, Sir Watkin, and I wish you
well through it.  I am not a marrying man myself.  I
never was.  I am getting too old for it, and I could not
afford it if I wished.  When we are young we have dreams of
love in a cottage, and try to persuade ourselves that what is
enough for one is enough for two; that there is nothing half so
sweet as love’s young dream.  But, oh, the terrible
awakening, when the dream is over, and the grim-reality of
poverty stalks in at the door, and the husband has endless toil,
and the wife
p.
230
endless sorrow, and even then the wolf is not kept from
the door; and things are worse when the happy couple come to
their senses and feel what fools they have been.  There is
little room for love then.  I believe matrimony is the sin
of the age.  No one can pretend now that to increase and
multiply is the whole duty of man.  The world is
over-peopled, half of the people of England cannot get a decent
living as it is.  Why am I to drag a respectable woman down
into the depths of poverty?  Why, I ask, is she to drag me
down?  I have my comforts, my clubs, my amusements, my
occupations, my position in society.  Were I married I
should lose them all, unless I married a Miss Kilmansegg with her
golden leg.  But your case is different, Sir Watkin.
You are bound to marry.  It is a duty you to owe to your
ancestors, who have given you title and fortune, to continue the
family.’

It may be that some may not approve of this style of
talk.  They may question the need of great hereditary
families.  They
p. 231
may go so far as to insinuate that
the happiness of such few individuals is often inconsistent with
the welfare of the many; that the system which keeps up such is
an artificial one; that the true aim of legislation should be the
greatest happiness of the greatest number.  Respectability
in wonder may well ask what next?  But in the coming era
respectability will have a good deal to wonder about.

p.
232
CHAPTER XXI.

AN UNPLEASANT RENCONTRE.

Left alone with himself, Sir Watkin revolved many
things.  He was not sorry after all, he tried to persuade
himself, that he was not in Parliament.  He was no eager
politician, and he had none of that fatal fluency when on his
legs, so common in our day among the ambitious clerks and traders
who join Parliamentary societies, and figure in them with the
hope at some time or other of calling themselves
M.P.’s.  It was time, he thought, that he should again
try his luck in the matrimonial market, and, indeed, he had
almost made up his mind to secure a prize which had been
temptingly displayed.

He had been staying at Brighton, at a
p. 233
grand
hotel, and there he had made the acquaintance of a wealthy
merchant, an old widower, with an only daughter, for whose hand
and heart he had already commenced angling.  The father was
chatty and cheerful in the smoking-room, of one of the Brighton
clubs, and the girl, if she had not the birth of a lady, had all
the accomplishments of one.  She was not romantic, few girls
nowadays are.  She was not a philosopher in petticoats, as
so many of them try to be.  She read novels, could quote
Tennyson, had the usual accomplishments, never failed to put in
an appearance at a fashionable church on a Sunday, and had once
or twice figured at a stall at a charity bazaar.  Her figure
looked well on horseback, and did not disgrace a Belgravian
ball-room.  It was to her credit that she had not attempted
authorship.  She was not a bad hand at a charade, and was a
proficient in lawn tennis, where one weak curate after another
had succumbed to her charms.  Poor fellows, they singed
their wings in vain at that candle.  Neither
p. 234
father nor
daughter was ecclesiastically inclined.  In addition, she
had had the measles and been vaccinated and confirmed, and was
ambitious of worldly success.

‘Just a woman to make a lady of,’ said the Baronet
to himself, as he watched her receding figure one morning as she
was on her way to Brill’s Baths for a swimming
lesson.  ‘They tell me the old man has no end of tin,
and this is his only child.’

He met the Baronet half way.  When Sir William Holles,
the son of that Sir William Holles, Lord Mayor of London, and
Alderman of Candlewick Ward, and knighted by Henry VIII., was
recommended by his friends to marry his daughter to the Earl of
Cumberland, he replied:

‘Sake of God’ (his usual mode of expression),
‘I do not like to stand with my cap in hand to my
son-in-law.  I will see her married to an honest gentleman
with whom I may have friendship and conversation.’

Sir Watkin relieved the London merchant of any apprehension on
that score, when, one day, he managed to dine in his
company.
p.
235
It was wonderful how well they got on together.
Sir Watkin talked of stocks and shares, of foreign loans and the
rate of exchange, of hostile tariffs, of the fall of this house
and the rise of another, of aldermen and lord mayors, as if he
had been a City man himself.  It is true this talk is rather
dull, but Sir Watkin was not brilliant by any means.

Back in town the Baronet felt rather dull.  Such men
often are dull.  Time hangs heavily on the hands of
such.

As Sir Watkin looked into the advertising columns of the
evening paper he caught the name of Miss Howard.  She was
acting that very night.  He would go and see her.  Just
as he resolved to carry out this idea, his old club friend
reappeared upon the scene.  Sir Watkin stated his
intention.  There could be no harm in his doing that.
Perhaps she might soften; perhaps her anger was only
assumed.  Perhaps it was not the woman but the actress that
seemed so indignant at their unexpected meeting.

p.
236
‘How foolish,’ thought his friend,
‘Sir Watkin is!  He had better take me with him, or
he’ll be sure to get into a scrape.  That’s like
him.  Just as he wants to pull off that Brighton affair
he’s off after another woman.’

Sir Watkin meanwhile is making his way to the theatre.  I
don’t say that he is to be condemned because he did
that.  As a rule a man of a gay turn or of idle disposition
is better inside a theatre than out.  At any rate, there he
is out of harm’s way, and not losing money, as he might be
if he remained betting and gambling at his club.  The life
there produced is a good deal of it artificial and unnatural, but
the spectacle is generally pleasant, and if the actors are often
ridiculous, some of them are good, and a few of them clever.

It was late when Sir Watkin entered the theatre.  For
awhile he waited in vain; at length, on the stage, sure enough,
was the woman he wanted to see.  Did she recognise him in
the stalls?  He hoped she did.  He was got up
regardless of expense, and occupied
p. 237
a good place.  He had dined
well, and had somewhat the appearance of a son of Belial, flushed
with insolence and wine.  He felt that the actress was in
his power.  He knew the manager, and was certain that he
could gain access, when he sought it, behind the scenes.
Strange to say, the actress regarded him not.  When you are
acting, it is not always easy—especially if you are in
earnest—to single out particular individuals from the
motley mass in front of the footlights.  The good actor
throws himself into his part, and has something else to do than
to gaze on occupants of the benches.  His eyes and his heart
are elsewhere.  At the time, when Sir Watkin arrived, Miss
Howard was a simple village girl, engaged in warding off the
libertine advances of a wicked baron.  It seemed that he was
about to succeed in his foul designs.  According to all
human appearances he had her completely in his power.
Happily her cry for help was heard, and, after a due amount of
agony on her part, and of breathless suspense on the part of the
audience,
p.
238
she was saved, and the curtain fell amidst thunders of
applause.  The piece was not much as regards novelty, but it
was of a class that has just that touch of nature which makes the
whole world kin.  Miss Howard well acted the

rôle
of the virtuous village maiden, and when the
true lover, who had come back with a fortune which he had made in
the Australian diggings, turned up, everyone felt that her faith
and virtue were to meet an appropriate reward.  Sir Watkin,
cynic as he was, could not but admire.  At first he ventured
to hesitate, dislike, to damn with faint praise, as in his
somewhat superior style he attempted one or two remarks to those
around; but the feeling was too strong, and he found himself
applauding in spite of his stern resolve to do nothing of the
kind.  Yes, the girl had become a fine woman and a clever
actress.  She surely would not cut him if he made his way
behind the scenes.  In vain, however, he would have tried
had not the manager seen him.

‘How d’ye do, Sir Watkin? glad to see
p. 239
you.
You have not been much with us of late.’

‘No,’ replied the Baronet; ‘I’ve been
busy elsewhere.  You’ve got a good house
to-night.  A good deal of paper, I suppose?’

‘Not a bit of it.  The public pay.’

‘I am glad to hear that.  How do you account for
it?’

‘Sir Watkin, I am surprised you ask such a question when
you see what a star we’ve got.’

‘Oh, Miss Howard.  Not bad.  I should like to
speak to her.’

‘By all means; come along.’

And they made their way to the back, cold and draughty, and
very disenchanting, as the workmen were shifting the scenes.

‘Take care, Sir Watkin.  Mind that trapdoor.
Look out, Sir Watkin!’ and suchlike exclamations were
uttered by the manager as one danger after another
threatened.  The scene-shifters, very dirty, were
numerous.  There a ballet-girl was
p. 240
talking to
an admirer, as she was waiting her turn.  There another was
by herself practising the step which was, in a few minutes, to
crown her with well-deserved applause.  In the midst of them
presently Miss Howard appeared.  The manager hastened to
introduce his old friend, who, with his hat off, was preparing
one of the polite speeches for which men of the world are famous,
and by means of which, occasionally, they ensnare a woman.

The lady walked on.

The manager was shocked.

It was now the Baronet’s turn.

‘Permit an old friend to offer Miss Howard his
congratulations on her great success this evening.’

The lady thus addressed coldly bowed, but uttered never a
word.

The situation was embarrassing.  Fain would the Baronet
have detained the actress.

‘Rose,’ he said passionately, ‘one
word!’

But before he could utter another he found himself face to
face with Wentworth,
p. 241
who, as usual, had come to see the
actress home.

‘You here?’ said he to the Baronet.

‘Yes, and why not?’ said the latter angrily.

‘And you dare speak to that lady?’

‘Yes, why not?  Do you think I am to be balked by a
fellow like you?’

‘Say that again,’ said Wentworth, ‘and
I’ll break every bone in your body.’

‘Gentlemen, gentlemen,’ exclaimed the manager,
‘pray be quiet!  Sir Watkin, come along with
me.’

The manager was in a dilemma.  He would not for the world
offend the Baronet, who had often aided him with money, and at
the same time he was afraid of the press, of which Wentworth was
a representative.  As he said afterwards, he felt as if he
were between the devil and the deep sea.  His aim was to
offend no one who could be of any use.

‘Come along with you—yes, I will, but I must have
it out with this fellow first,’ said the Baronet, making a
rush at Wentworth,
p.
242
who seemed quite prepared for the encounter.

Fortunately, just at that time there was a rush of
ballet-girls between the angry combatants.  They covered the
Baronet in a cloud of muslin, who, though not seen, could be
heard expressing indignation in no measured terms.  The
Baronet was powerless as, like a protecting wall, they encircled
him, all smiles and sunshine—a contrast to his scowling
face.

‘Pardon me, ladies,’ said he, ‘you’re
rather in my way.  I have been insulted on this stage, and
I’ll have my revenge.’

What more the Baronet would have said is lost to
history.  The stage is full of pit-fells.  One gave way
as he was speaking, and suddenly he sank out of sight.  The
ballet-girls shrieked, and then burst into a fit of laughter as
they saw no harm was done.  It is needless to say the
Baronet was soon extricated from his unpleasant position, and
made a rapid retreat.  It does not do to be ridiculous,
especially when you are in a towering rage, as we all know there
is but
p. 243
a
step between the sublime and the ridiculous.

‘I wish,’ he said to himself, as he drove home,
‘I had stopped at the club.  I was a fool to go behind
the scenes.  I would like to be revenged on that Wentworth,
but how?  That’s the difficulty.  The age of
duelling is past, murder has ceased to be one of the fine arts,
and I must grin and bear it.’

So far the Baronet was right.  In the eye of the law, and
at the bar of public opinion, the man who resorts to force is
hopelessly in the wrong.  We moderns, like the gods of
Epicurus, approve

‘The depth, but not the tumult of the
soul.’

Poor Rose was not a little upset.  Her face was marble,
but her heart was sad.  Was this man to track her steps?

‘Rose, my beautiful,’ said her companion, when
they were fairly out of the theatre, ‘we have loved each
other long, and the sooner we get married the better.  It is
not safe for you to be alone.’

p. 244
It
was thus he spoke, nor did he speak in vain.

We hear much of woman’s rights in these days.  I am
old-fashioned enough to believe that her first right is a husband
to look after her.  It is not well for man or woman to be
alone.

END OF VOL.
II.

BILLING AND
SONS, PRINTERS, GUILDFORD.

***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CRYING FOR THE LIGHT, VOL. 2 [OF
3]***

***** This file should be named 36809-h.htm or 36809-h.zip******

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/6/8/0/36809

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.

*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).

Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License.  You must require such a user to return or
destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.

Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.

Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.