The Project Gutenberg eBook, Crying for the Light, Vol. 3 [of 3], by J.
Ewing Ritchie

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

Title: Crying for the Light, Vol. 3 [of 3]
or Fifty Years Ago

Author: J. Ewing Ritchie

Release Date: July 21, 2011  [eBook #36810]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)

***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CRYING FOR THE LIGHT, VOL. 3 [OF
3]***

Transcribed from the 1895 Jarrold and Sons edition by David
Price, email ccx074@pglaf.org.  Many thanks to Norfolk and
Norwich Millennium Library, UK, for kindly allowing their copy to
be used for this transcription.

“This is the condition of humanity; we are
placed as it were in an intellectual twilight where we discover
but few things clearly, and yet we see enough to tempt us with
the hope of making better and more discoveries.”

—BOLINGBROKE.

p. ii
Crying
for the Light

or Fifty Years Ago

J Ewing Ritchie

Author of ‘East Anglia’

Vol 3

London: Jarrold and Sons

Warwick Lane E.C.

1895

p.
iv
CONTENTS OF VOL. III.

CHAPTER

PAGE

XXII.

AT THE CATTLE-SHOW

1

XXIII.

THE FUNERAL

36

XXIV.

THE HONEYMOON

48

XXV.

A REVELATION

65

XXVI.

THE ITALIAN COUNTESS

82

XXVII.

IN BRUSSELS

114

XXVIII.

A COUNTRYMAN IN TOWN

131

XXIX.

THE COLONEL

159

XXX.

ROSE RETIRES FROM THE STAGE

183

XXXI.

CHIEFLY ABOUT THE LAND

201

XXXII.

CONSULTATION

223

XXXIII.

THE FINAL RESOLVE

247

p. 1
CHAPTER
XXII.

AT THE CATTLE-SHOW.

Again we are at Sloville, on the occasion of the anniversary
of the flourishing Agricultural Society of the county—an
occasion which fills the town with rosy-faced, ruined British
farmers; which blocks up all the leading streets with flocks and
herds of oxen and sheep from a thousand hills, and which not a
little astonishes and vexes the soul of the true-born son of the
soil, as
p. 2
he
contemplates new-fangled machinery of every variety and for every
purpose; alarms him with ominous forebodings of a time when,
Othello-like, he will find his occupation gone, and the rascally
steam-engine doing the work, and taking the bread out of the
mouth of an honest man.  He thinks of Swing and sighs.
That mysterious personage had a way of putting down
threshing-machines which was satisfactory for a time; but, alas!
steam is king, and it is vain to fight with him.  It is
steam quite as much as the wickedness of the landlord, incredible
as it may seem to the Radical politician, which has emptied the
country and filled the town.  It would be all right if steam
would work off our surplus population.  Alas! it does
nothing of the kind, and each year the labourer finds himself of
less account; nor can there be any change for the better till we
get the people back on to the land, away from the crowded city
with its ever-increasing drudgery and toil.  Perhaps when
they have settled Ireland our wise men of
p. 3
Gotham may look
at home.  There is plenty for them to do there.  It is
high time that we do something for our bold peasantry, once their
country’s pride.

It is a fine, bright, sparkling morning, one rare in England,
but to be made the most of when it comes.  There are no
clouds in the sky, and there is scarce a breath of air to bring
them down from the vasty deep above.  Every hedgerow is
bright with flowers, and musical with the song of birds.
Overnight there was a shower, which laid the dust and added a
touch of freshness to the emerald meadows.  On every side
ancient oaks and wide-reaching elms cast a grateful shade.
What can be dearer than an English landscape on such a day?
Even the thatched clay cottage, with its roses and honeysuckle,
looks picturesque, and the brown cows suggest more than milk as
they lie chewing the cud, apparently at peace with themselves and
all below.  Here and there amidst the trees is the red-brick
manor-house, or the old-fashioned farmhouse, or the
p. 4
gray spire of
the village church, where from time immemorial the tribes have
repaired.  Yesterday, it were, they were teaching there the
Mass; now the Mass is unsung, and we have the doctrines and
Articles of the Church of England, which seem sadly at variance
with one and another.  To-morrow what shall we hear
there?  Who can say?  Man and his opinions change only
in our villages, the face of Nature remains the same.  You
travel all the world over, and you come back to your native
village to find it ever the same, only a little smaller, that is
all.

From the lodge of a neighbouring hall rides forth a cavalcade;
Sir Watkin Strahan, well-mounted, is the leader of the
party.  A fair girl, the rich merchant’s daughter, is
by his side; on the other is the rich merchant himself.
Behind them follows a groom in livery, perhaps the best rider of
the lot.  As they leave the gate the keeper hands Sir Watkin
an ill-written epistle on a dirty piece of paper, which Sir
Watkin indignantly tears to pieces without reading.
p. 5
‘If the
contents are of importance,’ he says to himself,
‘they will come before him in a more legitimate
manner.’

‘’Tis that old woman from the workhouse,’
says the lodge-keeper to the groom, who gives a knowing smile in
reply as he passes out.  ‘She’s a good deal
arter the maister,’ she replies, ‘but he’s not
one to take up with the likes of her.  She’s a cool
one, at any rate.’

They are now on the turnpike which leads to Sloville, and
hence to London itself.  The crowd thickens as they near the
town.  The tenants on the estate are numerous, and Sir
Watkin has a word for them all.  He inquires after their
families; as to the state of their oxen and asses; what kind of a
season it has been with them, and how the crops are getting
on.  The tenants are careful not to reply too
cheerily.  They are talking to their landlord, and he may
put up the rent if they brag too much.

The London merchant is charmed.  He has a lot more money
than Sir Watkin,
p.
6
but it brings him no gratified courtesies either abroad
or at home.  He is suspicious even of his chief clerk.
Everyone seems to look up to Sir Watkin.  There is something
in being a landowner, and the bearer of any kind of hereditary
title.

‘Why,’ he asks himself, ‘does not the Queen
make baronets of such as himself?  Men who add to British
wealth, who carry British commerce all over the world; without
whom England would never have become mistress of the seas.
Infinitely superior is the British merchant to the British
landlord.  Yet, how much we think of the one, how little of
the other.  Will it ever be so?’ he asks
himself.  Wise as he is, he fails to anticipate a time when
circumstances shall break the power of the landlord, and the
produce of Canada and America make the land an unsaleable
commodity.

As a matter of theory nothing can be more ideally beautiful
than the landed system under which England has become great and
flourishing; nor was any other
p. 7
system possible at the time it became
developed in our midst.  The sovereign apportioned the land
between his nobles as a reward for their devotion to his
service.  As they became strong, they acted as a check on
the sovereign himself; as the middle class began to grow strong
by commerce, they acted as a check on each, and king and noble
felt their importance and their power, and were ready to attach
them to their side.  It is to the credit of our aristocracy
that they aimed to be the leaders of the people; that they did
not sink into mere courtiers; that they were bold and
hardy—ready to take their share in the fighting and
adventure which became the necessity of our insular
position.  It is more to their credit that the relation
between them and their tenants was pleasant and mutually
advantageous.  The great landlord was a power in the land, a
centre of civilization, the friend of all within his sphere of
influence.  His sons served the State—in the army and
navy and the Church.  The farmer and the labourer
p. 8
had much in
common; they worked side by side, ate at the same table, talked
the same language, and were equally ready to do the will of their
superiors.  In time there grew up a different state of
things; with that love of money which is the root of all evil,
society became revolutionized—the landlord wanted higher
rents; the farmer aspired to be a gentleman, and the poor
labourer was deprived of his bit of common, of his sports and
pastimes; his cottage was pulled down, and he had to end his days
in the workhouse or in some city slum; and now Hodge has only the
beer-shop or the Primitive Methodist chapel to look to for
sympathy and friendship.  The man of to-day is the man who
makes money, no matter how.

At the time of which I write, the old tradition in favour of
the landlord was still in force, and Sir Watkin was glad to show
his City friends how all did him honour as they made their way
amidst the ever increasing throng on their way to the
cattle-show.

And the young lady—what of her?
p. 9
Her bosom
swells, and her eye sparkles with pride.  Her only
recollection of her grandfather is that of a feeble old man
dressed in rusty black, dependent for his bread and cheese on his
more vigorous and successful son.

Sir Watkin had a hall full of the portraits of his
ancestors.  Some had been great lawyers, some soldiers and
sailors—all more or less connected with the State.
And, then, what a monarch was a landlord in his domains, almost
armed with the power of life and death!  How much pleasanter
the talk of such a man than of one who was in a counting-house
all day, and whose favourite literature was to be found in the
money articles of the
Times
!  Should she become Lady
Watkin?  Certainly it would be very nice, if she could not
manage to secure a lord.  In default of the latter, she made
herself very agreeable to her host, who was old enough to be her
father, and who, if he was an Israelite, was not altogether
without guile.

At length our illustrious friends reach
p. 10
Sloville, or
rather the outskirts of the town, where the Agricultural Show is
held.  Here the sheep are inspected; and then they pass on
to the shorthorns and Herefords; and then, very evident in more
ways than one were the pigs of Berks and Hants, and other choice
breeds.  How they were watched by the fat farmers with
sympathetic eyes!  How the rustic chawbacon doted on
them!  We hear much of the roast beef of old England, but
dearer to the national heart is its roast pork, especially when
it comes to us in the shape of roast pig, immortalized by the
charming Elia, and the theme—the fitting theme—of one
of his most eloquent essays: ‘See him,’ he writes,
‘in the dish—his second cradle—how meek he
lieth!  Wouldst thou have the innocent grow up to the
grossness and indocility which too often accompany maturer
swinehood?  Ten to one he would have proved a glutton, a
sloven, an obstinate, disagreeable animal wallowing in all manner
of filthy conversation.  From these sins he is happily
snatched away.’

p.
11
’Ere sin could blight or sorrow fade,

Death came with timely care.’

The horses, as the nobler animals, had a field to
themselves.  It was there the multitude flocked, for every
Englishman thinks he knows more of horses and can manage them
better than anyone else; all were there, from the Leviathan
cart-horses, such as we see in brewers’ drays, to the
light-built hack on which my lady canters across the park.
Here Sir Watkin, as became him, was oracular, as he went from one
to the other of the candidates for the honours of the day, looked
into his mouth and inspected his teeth, felt his hoofs and
prodded his sides, took off his hat and beat a tattoo with his
riding-whip in order to get a good idea of the animal’s
performance, whilst the ostler with a straw in his mouth stood
admiring.  The farmers were proud, for Sir Watkin was a
connoisseur, and knew a thing or two.

Next to the horses, the ladies affected the poultry.
Perhaps a time will come when the British farmer will condescend
to think
p.
12
of such small fry, and divert into his own pocket the
millions we send to France and elsewhere for eggs and
poultry.  Sir Watkin did not care much about them—nor
did the British merchant—so long as he got his fresh egg
for breakfast, and his little bit of the breast with a glass of
sherry for lunch; but the lady was not to be gainsaid, and so a
half-hour was devoted to the noisy neighbourhood of Brahmas and
Dorkings and Cochin-Chinas; while rival cocks—happily far
apart—challenged each other to mortal combat, and proudly
hurled defiance from the prison walls.  A short distance off
we the improved ploughs and tumbrels and waggons, and the reaping
machines, for which we are indebted to America, and which testify
how much may be done by machinery on large farms held by farmers
of sufficient means.  Here the spectators were of a more
select class, high farming not being in everyone’s
way.  Instead of the rosy, stupid, sleek bucolic, you saw
men learned in machinery, and with some of the smartness of the
town men, bent on
p.
13
improvement and eager to turn science to profitable
account.  Wheat was threshed and dressed in the most
efficient manner.  The rustic farmer stared, open-mouthed,
questioning whether it were safer to continue as his fathers
before him or to give in to machinery which promised him such
beneficent results.  As it was, he seemed to be much
exercised in his mind.  The elder men shook their heads, the
young ones seemed ready for novelty.  Perhaps the truth lay
between the two.  Had we not of late suffered much from
potato disease? said the old farmer, and did one ever hear of
that before we had the railway?  That was a poser, as they
thought, which there was no getting over, however plausible the
speech of agricultural implement maker or vendor of artificial
manure.

As usual, the refreshment booths were the most patronized
parts of the exhibition.  There the learned and the
ignorant, the old-fashioned farmer and the man of the present
time, met on an equality.  There was to be found the touch
of nature which
p.
14
makes the whole world kin.  The townspeople
understood that part of the business as well as the farmer who
had come out for a spree; and in a little while the fun was fast
and furious.

The outskirts of the field devoted to the exhibition assumed
the aspect of a fair.  Here a crowd witnessed that popular
domestic drama known as Punch and Judy.  There the youths of
the district played madly with Aunt Sally.  In one quarter
champions from London demonstrated the art of self-defence; in
another was Mrs. Jarley with her moral wax-works.  The
peasantry were in great force, as they always are when beer is to
be had or anything out of the way to be seen.  So dense was
the crowd it was a wonder someone was not hurt, as reckless
farmers, under the influence of beer, and in order to show off
the prowess of their steeds, galloped up and down.  Boys, of
course, were always in the way.  Unfortunately a special
providence watched over them.

All at once Sir Watkin Strahan found
p. 15
that he was
followed by an old woman in a workhouse garb, who had got out for
a holiday, and who had evidently been indulging in liquor to an
extent that embarrassed her movements and impaired her forces of
speech.  It was a very disagreeable situation for him.
He was well known to everyone there, and, besides, he had a lady
under his escort in whose eye he wished to assume a good
figure.  As a popular landlord and well-known county man, so
far he had succeeded to his heart’s content.

The swells had deferred to his opinion; the farmers had
applauded his jokes, whilst their wives and daughters beamed with
smiles; and the plebeians had eyed him with reverence from
afar.  Representatives of leading firms had besought his
attention and patronage as they explained the peculiar merits of
their own machines.  His own part in the show had been very
successful.  He had won a prize with one of his own
bullocks, his sheep were classed in A 1, and his fine porkers, of
the real Berkshire
p.
16
breed, had attracted honourable mention; but wherever he
went, there was this old hag in his way, making signs to him
which he could not or would not understand.  All at once he
was separated from his friends, and the woman, seeing her
opportunity, rushed at him.

‘What the deuce do you want?’ said he angrily,
holding up his riding-whip as if about to hit her.

‘I’ve got something to say to yer
honour.’

‘Well, say on,’ said he impatiently.

‘But I cant say it here,’ was the reply.

‘I suppose,’ said the Baronet, ‘you want
some money?  There is half a crown,’ continued he,
hastily tossing it her.  ‘But don’t spend it in
beer, my good woman; you have had too much already.’

‘No, ’tis not money.  I can tell yer honour
something you would like to know.’

‘Much obliged, I am sure; but I fear you are labouring
under a delusion.’

‘No, no, Sir Watkin.’

p.
17
‘You’re drunk, I tell you.  Be off, or
I’ll give you in charge.’

‘Me drunk, Sir Watkin?  A poor lone widow as has
lived respectable in Sloville for years, though unfortunate, but
that is neither here nor there.  Me drunk?  No, no, Sir
Watkin!’

‘But I tell you you are, my good woman.’

‘Drunk or sober, Sir Watkin, you must listen to
me.’

‘I’ll do nothing of the kind.’

‘If you don’t hear me, Sir Watkin, you’ll be
sorry as long as you live.’

By this time the crowd had been attracted to the spot, and the
situation was becoming unpleasant to the Baronet, who formed the
centre of an amazed group, to whom the annoyance of the Baronet
and the tipsy gravity of the woman were more than slightly
amusing.

Sir Watkin attempted to move off.

The poor woman endeavoured to stop him.  In the attempt
she overbalanced herself, and fell prostrate on the earth, to the

p. 18
intense
delight of the spectators, who enjoyed the scene amazingly.

‘Sir Watkin, I say,’ said his persecutor, rising
slowly from her recumbent position; ‘Sir Watkin, I
say!’

But the baronet was gone, and, instead, the woman found
herself being assisted gently off the ground by an efficient
policeman, who, seeing a crowd of a peaceful character, thought
it becoming to interfere.

Had the crowd been of a different complexion, and had there
been any fighting going on, the chances are the
policeman—with the usual instinct of his order for a sound
skin or an uncracked skull—would have been looking
steadfastly in quite an opposite direction.  They all do it,
and it is natural.

The man had already asked Sir Watkin if he would have her
given in charge, an offer Sir Watkin declined.  He had no
wish, he said, to be hard on her; he only wished her to leave him
alone.  That was quite enough.

p. 19
The
crowd naturally sided with the Baronet.  He was the great
man of the district.

‘What business had a wretched woman like that to
interfere with him?  Just like her imperence!’ said
the majority.

One or two, more curious than the rest, followed the woman,
with a view to learn further particulars; but she was, for a
wonder, reticent.  She was not Sall—but Sall’s
friend and ally.  Not if wild horses were to drag her in
twain would she disclose her secret.  It was one between Sir
Watkin and herself alone.

Sir Watkin rejoined his friends, trusting that they had not
been eye-witnesses of his adventure.

Just at that moment he had no wish to have scandal or mystery
attaching to his name.  Hitherto, his appearance had been
quite a success, and the British merchant and his daughter were
duly impressed with the respect and attention he had everywhere
commanded.

‘We’ve missed you much, Sir Watkin,’
p. 20
said the lady
in a tone which flattered his vanity and raised his hopes.

‘Yes, the crowd cruelly separated us for a few
minutes.’

‘A few minutes!’ said the lady; ‘it seemed
to me a long time.’

‘You make me proud,’ said the Baronet.
‘It is something to be missed by one who has always so many
admirers.’

‘You flatter me, Sir Watkin.  But, seriously, what
was all the fuss about?’

‘Only a tipsy woman.’

‘How shocking!  But, good gracious, there she is
again.’

Sir Watkin looked in the direction pointed out, and, sure
enough, there was his old enemy.  Conducted off the ground
by one gate, she had reappeared by another, and was bearing down,
amidst the jeers of the
oi polloi
, straight upon
himself.

‘Confound her impudence!’ he exclaimed.
‘I wish I had given her in charge.’

‘Sir Watkin, I say!  Sir Watkin, hear me!
I’ve something very particular to say.’

p.
21
‘Yes, but you can’t say it now, my good
woman.  Don’t you see I am engaged?’

Again a crowd assembled in full expectation of some
fun—an extra entertainment not included in the day’s
programme.

Again, fortunately, the policeman appeared.

‘Now, my good woman,’ said he, ‘he
hoff.  Don’t you see you are creatin’ a
disturbance?’

‘I am a-doin’ w’at?’ asked the party
addressed.

‘You are a-creatin’ a disturbance and
hinterferin’ with the gentry.  It is agen the
law.  You’d best take yourself off.’

‘Oh, I am a-goin’, but I must speak to Sir Watkin
first.’

‘Call at the Hall, old gal, and leave your card, and
then Sir Watkin will be delighted to see you,’ cried one in
the crowd.  ‘The family dine at seven.
Don’t forget the hour.’

‘Yes,’ said another, ‘Sir Watkin will be
pleased to see such a beauty.  He’ll want you to stop
with him a month.  Sir Watkin
p. 22
knows a pretty gal when he sees
one—no one better.’

But by this time Sir Watkin and his party were off.  His
groom had come to the rescue and brought up the horses, and they
remounted, leaving the tipsy woman to scream after him in
vain.

This time, however, her blood was up, and she refused to be
led quietly off.  Another constable came to the rescue of
his mate, and she was carried off, kicking and struggling all the
while.  Her cries filled the air and reached the
Baronet’s party.

‘’Tis very annoying, but one can’t help such
things on a public day like this,’ said he in an apologetic
tone to the lady.  ‘The poor woman must be cracked, I
think.

‘It makes one ashamed of one’s sex,’ was her
reply.

‘Such conduct ought not to be allowed.  The police
aren’t half sharp enough,’ said the British
merchant.  ‘What do we pay rates and taxes for, I
should like to know, but to prevent such disturbances?’

The British merchant evidently expected
p. 23
the British
public to be as subdued and deferential as his clerks in his
counting-house, when they appeared in his august and imposing
presence, or as his debtors, when bills were overdue.

The ladies of his party had left the field early—their
ears stunned with the noisy scene:

‘With the striking of clocks,

Cackle of hens, crowing of cocks,

Lowing of cow and bull and ox,

Bleating of pretty pastoral flocks.’

Sir Watkin and his friend, the British merchant, had stopped
to dine at the grand banquet held on the occasion, in the leading
hotel of the town.  An Englishman can do nothing without a
public dinner.  Sir Watkin had to take the chair.

‘You will excuse me, won’t you?’ said he to
the young lady, as he parted with her.

‘Oh, yes!’ said she gaily.  ‘I am quite
aware property has its duties as well as its rights.’

‘Well, I think it is well to be neighbourly
p. 24
when one has
the chance.  But I give you my word of honour, I would far
sooner ride back with you.’

‘Well, the best of friends must part,’ said the
lady.  ‘But you will be home in good time.
Au
revoir
!  Pray, take care of papa,’ said the lady,
as she returned to the carriage that was to take her and some
other ladies to the Hall, under the care of the vicar of the
parish.

Meanwhile, Sir Watkin made his way with his friend to the
leading hotel of Sloville, where a heavy dinner of the
old-fashioned type—such as was dear to the farmer years
ago—was prepared, where the feeding and the drinking were
alike trying to the stoutest nerve and the strongest digestion,
and where the after-dinner oratory was of a truly bucolic
character.

The farmers were delighted to find their landlord in the
chair, and listened to him as if he were an oracle.  The
dinner was a great success.  As chairman, the Baronet had
especially distinguished himself.

There were fireworks in the evening, and
p. 25
a
Bacchanalian orgy such as Sloville had rarely beheld.  But
the Baronet and his friend did not stop for that, but got back to
the Hall in time to finish the day with a ball.  The old
Hall was gayer that night than it had been for a long time.
All the old family plate had been brought forth for the occasion,
and everywhere was light and music and laughter—and bright
the lamps shone on

‘Fair women and brave men.’

The revelry was loud and long, and hours after the ladies had
retired the men had remained in the smoking-room to drink soda
and brandy, and to talk of hunting exploits, of horses, of women,
and of wine.

The shades of night had passed, and the golden dawn was
glittering in the east.  The sun was commencing like a giant
refreshed to renew his daily course—the simile is old, but
it is true, nevertheless.  A slight mist—prelude of a
hot day—dimmed the valley below the Hall, and marked the
line of the little trout stream, where Sir
p. 26
Watkin had
loved to fish when a boy.  In the grand old trees around,
the birds were commencing their morning song of praise, while the
heavy rooks were preparing to take their usual flight in search
of food.  The pheasants were feeding in the surrounding
park.

Not yet had man gone forth to his daily toil, and there was
peaceful slumber in the trim cottage and the snug farmhouse
alike.  Now and then the shrill cry of the petted peacock
awoke the woods, or the clamour of the early cock.

Sir Watkin lingered to enjoy the loveliness of the rural scene
and the freshness of the morning air.  For awhile something
even of sentiment filled his heart.  What had he done that
all that lovely landscape should he his?  How could he have
lived as he had in London and Paris, in Vienna or Rome?  Was
it true that there was a God, as they told him in church, and as
he had learned on his mother’s knee—who had given him
all these things richly to enjoy, and would demand, sooner or
later, an account of his
p. 27
stewardship?  Then he looked at
the glass, and was shocked as he saw how bloodshot were his eyes,
how dark the skin underneath; how clear were the lines marked by
dissipation on his cheek and brow.

Well, it was time he settled down.  He had not behaved
well to his first wife, he admitted, but that was no reason why
be should not treat his second wife well.  Then he was
little better than a lad—now he was a man who had seen
something of the world and who knew the value of peace and
quietness.  And so resolving, he dismissed his man and
undressed.

Even then sleep was shy in coming.  He had a puzzle to
distract him to which he could find no answer.  What had
that old tipsy female at the cattle-show got to tell
him?—what was the secret she pretended to have in her
possession?  Was the mystery ever to be solved?  He had
seen in her something to remind him of a girl who had once been
in his service, but it could not be her.  Surely she had not
become what he saw.  Sir Watkin forgot that
p. 28
the beauty of
a woman, when she takes to drink and low company, is of a very
evanescent character.

Sleep—Nature’s restorer, balmy sleep—how
hard it is to get when you want it!  The morrow was to be an
important day.  It was to decide his fate.  The fair
guest had looked lovingly on him as she left the
drawing-room.  There was something in the way in which her
hand lingered in his own that suggested to the Baronet
hope.  The worldly-minded father was, at any rate, safe, and
was prepared to invest handsomely in a titled son-in-law.
He, the latter, had been of late in a somewhat shady state; there
were many whispers about him in society, and not to his
credit.  It was clear that in certain transactions, like
other young and foolish scions (considering how they are brought
up it is almost impossible for them to be otherwise), he had
suffered considerable pecuniary loss—or, in other words,
been uncommonly well fleeced.  Stately dames who ruled in
Belgravia did not seem to him as genial as formerly; doors that
were
p. 29
once
opened freely were now closed.  Low Radical newspapers
occasionally hinted that he was no credit to the class who
neither toil nor spin.  It even began to dawn on the Baronet
that his career had not been a brilliant one.

Half sleeping and half waking, there came to him unpleasant
thoughts, and dreams equally so—of women whom he had
betrayed, of friends who had trusted to him in vain, of splendid
opportunities he had missed, of time and strength frittered away
on trifles, or what was worse.  He must yet be a power in
the land—he would yet leave behind him a name—he
would yet have the world at his feet.  With a title and with
money what cannot a man do in this land of ours? asked the
Baronet of himself.  Fellows of whom he thought nothing,
whom he knew as inferiors at Eton or at College—poor,
patient, spiritless plodders—had passed him in that battle
of life which after all is only a Vanity Fair.

Such thoughts as these kept the Baronet wide awake, much to
his disgust.  It was
p. 30
the dinner, it was the wine, it was
the cigar that kept him awake.  Perhaps they did.  But
there was something else that did so, though the Baronet did not
see it—the accusal of a conscience in which he did not
believe, the workings of a divine law which he laughed at.

The next day no one was up early, and no one made his
appearance at the breakfast-table save the elderly members of the
party.  Most of the gentlemen visitors overslept themselves,
and the ladies were served in their own rooms.  Then came
the carriages and the departure of the guests—some to town,
some to fashionable health resorts.  Business required the
presence of the great merchant in London, and he took his
daughter with him.  Sir Watkin managed to get down in time
to see them off, and to promise to follow them next day.
The lady left quite content; she knew what was to come, and what
would be her reply.

Very dull and gloomy seemed the old house as the company one
by one departed.
p. 31
Sir Watkin took up the morning
papers—there was nothing in them; the society
journals—he was better informed than their writers.
No novel could interest him in his then state of mind.  He
had a headache; he would go for a ride, a sovereign remedy for
such maladies as gentlemen in his station suffer from.
Accordingly the horse was brought round, and he was in the
saddle.  He would be back before dark, and did not require
his groom, and he trotted gaily away from the ancestral Hall
under the ancestral oaks, along the gravelled drive through the
park, feeling a little fresher for the effort.  He would see
his steward, and have a talk with him on business matters.

At the lodge-gate he stopped for a moment to order a general
smartening up of that quarter.  Alas! on the other side was
an objectionable old woman, a friend who had before given him so
much trouble.  Sir Watkin’s disgust was only equalled
by his anger.  He was in no amiable mood, as the old woman
clearly saw.  She almost
p. 32
wished she had not come; she felt all
of a tremble, as she said, as she asked him kindly to stop and
hear what she had got to say.  He muttered something very
much unlike a blessing on his tormentor.  He would have
ridden over her had he not stopped his horse, which strongly
opposed the idea of stopping.  Could that old creature have
any claim on him?  The idea was ridiculous.  And as to
listening to her, why, that was quite out of the question for so
fine a gentleman.  She made an effort to clutch the
rein.  The high-spirited steed resented the indignity.
In the scuffle the Baronet was unseated, and was taken up
insensible.

‘Sure ’nough he’s dead as a stone,’
said the ploughman, who had first noticed him.

‘He’s nothing of the kind,’ said the
gate-keeper, who was soon on the spot, ‘Get on the horse
and ride to Sloville for the doctor,’ said he to the
ploughman, while he and the other servants bore the body to the
lodge-gate, where it was laid upon a bed.

p. 33
The
doctor came.  ‘No bones broken,’ said he, after
a cursory examination, ‘but a severe concussion of the
brain.  Draw down the blinds; put ice on his forehead; keep
him quiet, and he may yet rally.  In the meantime I will
telegraph to London for the great surgeon, Sir Henry
Johnson.  If anybody can save him he can.’

The hours that day in that low lodge moved very slowly.
No wife, no mother, no sister was there.  The old mother had
left that day for Scotland.  Only one sister was alive, and
she was with her husband in Italy; only the housekeeper from the
Hall was there to sit and watch and sigh, for she had known Sir
Watkin from a baby, and was as proud of him as it behoved her to
be, never believing any of the scandals connected with his name,
and, indeed, scarcely hearing of them, for his wilder life was
out of her sight and hearing.  At home he was the model
English gentleman; and then, again, when evil
p. 34
things were
said of him, she refused to listen.

‘It was not her place,’ she said, ‘to hear
bad spoken of any of the family of which she and hers generations
before had been retainers.’

About mid-day came a telegram to say that the great Sir Henry
was coming down, and that there was to be a carriage at the
railway-station to meet him.  In a couple of hours after
came Sir Henry himself—a calm, dignified man of science,
who lived in a world of which science is god, and was interested
in humanity as a subject of dissection or operation.  Apart
from that, he had a poor opinion of human nature.

‘It is a bad case—very bad,’ said he to the
country doctor, who had explained to him all the particulars of
the accident.  ‘It is a very bad case, but I think
science is equal to the emergency.  I suppose we must have
an operation.  I have brought my assistant with me, and my
case of
p.
35
instruments.  We’d better begin at
once.’  Turning to look at the insensible patient, the
great Sir Henry exclaimed: ‘I have come down for nothing;
Sir Watkin is dead!’

p.
36
CHAPTER XXIII

THE FUNERAL.

‘Worldly people,’ wrote one of our greatest
novelists, ‘never look so worldly as at a
funeral.’  The truth of this was very apparent at the
funeral of the deceased Baronet.  There was the usual parade
of outward grief at the churchyard, and in the town all the
blinds were drawn down and the shops shut—with the
exception of those set apart for the sale of beer and wine and
spirits, which were rather better patronized than usual.  It
is said grief makes men thirsty.  That certainly was the
case at Sloville, for the usual topers of the place had been
increased in number by the addition of numerous thirsty souls
from all the adjacent country, drawn together
p. 37
not so much
by grief as by a pardonable curiosity.

Heavily tolled the bell of the old-fashioned church, in the
gloomy vaults of which slept the family ancestors, whose varied
virtues were recorded in marble in all parts of the building, and
whose rotting carcases poisoned the atmosphere of the place, and
had done so for many generations.

When are we going to reform this and to cremate our dead, so
that we may go to church in safety and with no fear of detriment
to our physical well-being?  The ancients burnt their
dead.  Is there any earthly reason why we moderns should not
do the same?  I know none, except a stupid prejudice
unworthy of a generation that loves to think itself enlightened,
and that flatters itself it is wiser than any that has gone
before.  If it is to be talked of after death, surely the
urn can be as fitting a remembrance of the departed as the costly
and cumbrous marble monument, with its deception and
untruth.  ‘Five languages,’
p. 38
writes Sir
Thomas Brown, of Norwich, ‘secured not the epitaph of
Gordianus.  The man of God lives longer without a tomb than
any by one visibly interred by angels, and adjudged to obscurity,
though not without some marks directing human decency.
Enoch and Elias, without either tomb or burial, in an anomalous
state of being, are the great examples of perpetuity in their
long and living memory, in strict account being still on this
side death and having a late part yet to act upon the stage of
earth.’  In vain is all earthly vanity, but there is
no vanity so vain as that connected with the grave.
‘Yet man is a noble animal,’ as the same writer
remarks, ‘splendid in ashes, and pompous in the
grave!’

And thus it was at the funeral of the deceased Baronet.
All the clergy round had come to do him honour, and all the
county families had come to put in an appearance—or, at any
rate, sent their empty carriages to follow in the procession,
which is supposed to be the same as attending one’s
self.  A fashionable undertaker from town had been
p. 39
retained for
the occasion, and never did men wear so mournful an expression as
he and his many men.  I had almost written
‘merry’ men, for none were merrier when the dismal
farce was over and they were back to town—refreshed by
stimulants, with which they had been plentifully supplied.

There was a great crowd in the church—a great crowd in
the churchyard, and a great crowd all the way from the
Hall.  The heir, the deceased’s brother, naturally
came in for a good deal of criticism, and he was quite equal to
the occasion—apparently mourning for the deceased as if he
had loved him as much as everyone was aware he had done the
reverse.  Relatives from all parts were there, hoping
against hope that they might find their names put down for
something in the will.  The tenantry made a decent show, for
to many of them the deceased was a man after their own
hearts—fond of sport, of racing, of good cheer, of fast
living.  All the world loves a gay spendthrift more than a
sober and careful
p.
40
man who tries to live within his means and to save a
little money.  The enlightened British workman has, as a
rule, an intense hatred for the capitalist, who is, after all,
his best friend.

The peasantry were there in great force, glad to have a show
of any kind to relieve the dull monotony of their
lives—though feeling that it would make little difference
to them who reigned at the Hall, and expecting little: as it had
gone forth that the new Baronet was somewhat of a skinflint, and
that little was to be expected from the mother and daughters who
were in future to take up their residence at the old Hall.
It is needless to add that the tradesmen of the town were present
in great numbers.  They knew on which side their bread was
buttered.  Tradesmen generally do.  At any rate there
was show enough and funereal pomp to give occasion for the county
paper of the following Saturday to devote considerable space to
the affair, which—so the reporter wrote, with a touch of
imagination which did him credit—
p. 41
had saddened the county and made
everyone deplore the sudden and untimely decease of one of its
most distinguished men.

The deceased Baronet had been the great man of the
district—a leading magistrate, with power to ameliorate the
condition of the poor—a power that he had never used.
The workhouse was old and unhealthy, yet he had opposed every
effort to build a better one; the relieving-officers were
drunkards, and generally unable to keep their accounts
correctly.  The selection of such officers was, in fact, a
job in order to make provision for some aged, feeble, drunken
bankrupt, a boon companion of the farmers; nor were the medical
officers much better.  The outdoor paupers were victims of
the grossest abuses.  The aged were set to eke out their
miserable existence by breaking stones on the road, and thus
these poor creatures, half-clad, ill-fed, and suffering from
rheumatism, had to work on the bleak roadside, exposed to the
inclemency of the weather, till they ceased
p. 42
to be a
parochial charge at all; and, as a rule, their homes were unfit
for human habitation.  The vagrants suffered from the
grossest ill-usage.  One quarter of the workhouse, ill or
scarcely provided with bedding accommodation, was appropriated to
a class consisting of honest seekers for work, tramps, vagabonds,
and thieves of all ages, huddled indiscriminately together, using
or listening to the vilest language, initiated in the mysteries
of vice and crime, quarrelling and fighting.  There were no
vagrant wards, and any attempt to introduce them was strenuously
resisted, and thus, in spite of the Reformed Poor Law, as it was
called, the state of the poor grew more wretched every day.

Sir Watkin knew all this.  A word from him would have
inaugurated a better state of things, but he never spoke that
word.  He was far too busy in his pursuit of pleasure to
think of the poor on his estate, or to plead their cause, and the
guardians were content to let things slide.

Dr. Chalmers maintained that the one
p. 43
main drawback
to the effectual working of the new Poor Law would be the
defective attendance at the boards of the landlords, and, as far
as Sloville was concerned, the doctor was right.  Had the
deceased Baronet discharged the duties of his position, and
concerned himself about the welfare of the poor, he might have
been a blessing to the district.  As it was, he was very
much the reverse.  In his time, as in that of the old Hebrew
Psalmist, it might truly be said: ‘The wicked in his pride
doth persecute the poor.’

A few days and the astonishment of the town was over, and the
sun was gay, and the earth as fair as ever.  Nature takes no
heed of death; it keeps on all the same its eternal way.
The common people had their talk of old scandals, and the
lodge-keeper became quite an oracle as he hinted at the
appearance of an old woman at the gate, and expressed his wonder
at what had become of her.  He went so far as to hint at the
possession of mysterious knowledge, of which the presumptive heir
would be
p.
44
glad to avail himself; but gradually even that form of
mild excitement passed away.  The public soon got over the
event, as it generally does.

In the gay world, of which Sir Watkin had been a leading
figure so recently, things went on much as usual.  The old
captain in the club, it is true, felt the loss of a man younger
than himself, and on whom he had, to a certain extent,
leaned.  The manager of the Diamond Theatre was
inconsolable, as his bills were many in the hands of the Jews,
and he looked to the Baronet to take them up as they fell
due.  A little regret and wonder was expressed that the
deceased Baronet did not cut up quite so well as was
expected.  Well, of course, he was a gentleman, and you
can’t expect a gentleman to be a good man of
business.  But a good many who lost by the deceased were not
quite so easily consoled.  It is pleasant to be able to pay
twenty shillings in the pound, but that is not the whole duty of
man, nevertheless.  If Shakespeare had been unfortunate
p. 45
in business,
if Milton had had to make an arrangement with his creditors, we
should have thought just as well of them; nor does one think a
penny the worse of De Foe, that he was in pecuniary difficulties,
or of Dick Steele that he could not make both ends meet, or of
Goldsmith that he left two thousand pounds of debt behind
him.  In the case of Sir Watkin Strahan the estate was
strictly settled, and only his debts of honour got paid.  As
it was, there was little left for the new Baronet to start
with.

And this state of things is the consequence of the law of
primogeniture, says the ignorant reformer.  It is not
so.  Our laws of settlement are to be blamed as unfair and
unjust.  The main causes of agricultural depression, and of
continued wrongdoing on the part of landed proprietors, are the
laws which allow the owners to make deeds and wills which for
many years, and often long after the owners’ deaths,
prevent the land from being sold, or the estate from being
divided, no matter how
p. 46
expedient it may be that it should he
sold, or no matter how foolish or extravagant the owner may
be.  Mr. Kay illustrates this in a case in which he had
acted as trustee.  This estate, about fifty or sixty years
ago, came into the hands of a young nobleman, whom he calls Lord
A., when he was twenty-one.  He married when he was
twenty-two, and the marriage-deed gave him only a life interest
in the estate, and settled the property on his children.  He
had one child, and as soon as that child was twenty-one another
deed was made, giving that child only a life interest in the
estate, and settling it after his death on the children he might
leave in succession.  Lord A. was an extravagant and
reckless man.  He hunted the county; he kept open house; he
lived as if his estate were ten times as great as it really
was.  He gambled and lost heavily.  He raised money on
his life interest.  He finally fled from England deeply in
debt, and lived abroad.  The remainder of the life interest
was sold to a Jew, who knew that he would lose all
p. 47
when Lord A.
died, and found his only profit in thinning the woods.  That
state of things lasted forty years.  The farmers had no
leases or any security for expenditure.  The Jew would not
spend a penny, nor would the gentleman who took the mansion,
because he could not tell when he might be turned out; and the
tenantry were prevented from doing fairly to the land or to
themselves.  There was no one to support the schools or the
church, or to look after the labourers on the estate.  The
farm-buildings fell into decay; the land was not properly drained
or cultivated; the plantations were injured, and the mansion was
dilapidated.  And all this vast extent of mischief was the
result of the deeds which the law had allowed the lord and his
heir to execute.  Nor are such cases isolated.  Nor is
it possible to over-estimate the wretchedness and poverty they
create in rural England.  Perhaps, in time, Englishmen will
demand the abolition of laws which entail such bitter wrong on
the community at large.

p.
48
CHAPTER XXIV

THE HONEYMOON.

At that very time—in autumn, when everyone is supposed
to be out of town and blinds are drawn down in all Belgravia;
when the moors of Scotland and the health resorts of our own
highly-favoured land or of the Continent are crammed, and
white-winged yachts, like sea-fowl or flakes of snow, bedeck the
peaceful waters of the Solent, and sparkle as they shine along
our summer seas—a small party might be seen drawing up at
the registrar’s office somewhere in the neighbourhood of
the Strand.  No one knew what was going on, and the single
brougham at the door attracted little attention.  The first
to get out was our old friend Buxton, the medical
p. 49
man; then
came Wentworth, a little gayer than usual.  In another,
which followed immediately, were Rose, looking lovelier than ever
and perhaps a trifle more serious, and her mother, a quiet old
lady, much given to garrulity when she had a chance, and to
self-effacement when she found no one wanted to hear her.
The poor old soul had no idea of being married at the
registrar’s.  The business was a very simple
one—merely to make a declaration before the officer
appointed for that purpose that they were to be married, and to
sign a declaration to that effect, which was duly witnessed ere
it was sent away to be preserved among our national
archives.  This done and the registrar’s fee paid,
they drove away as quietly as they came to the Midland Railway
Station in the Euston Road, where they had a pleasant lunch; and
thence the newly-married couple took the train to the busy city
of Liverpool, ever overflowing with a very migratory
population.  Here to-day, gone to-morrow.  Of course
they did not stop there long.  The
p. 50
next day they
left the dark cloud of Liverpool smoke behind for the romantic
Isle of Man.

One of the first things they did was to take a trip round the
island, and we will accompany them.  For this purpose we
step on board the
King Orrey
, as she lies at the Douglas
Pier.  King Orrey was one of the far-famed Monarchs of the
Isle, and is now commemorated in a way of which he could have no
idea.

We are off in good time, and as the day is tempting we have
rather a numerous company on board, and no wonder, for it is not
every day that you can see England, Scotland, Ireland, and Wales
in the course of a few hours.  The legendary history of the
Isle of Man at any rate matches that of any of the countries
above-named.  It is true the scepticism of modern times has
dealt hardly with them.  No Eleanor, Duchess of Gloucester,
was imprisoned in the old Castle of Peel; no St. Patrick ever
resided there, or even ever stepped from Peel to Ireland to
Christianize the people
p. 51
there.  It is also affirmed, and
the candid student who sees the Ireland of to-day must admit
there is a good deal in the affirmation, that if St Patrick ever
did take that wonderful step, at any rate he was not very
successful as regards the main object of his trip.  Few
people now believe that when the Manx men were fighting the
ancient Britons on the other side of the water, St. German raised
such a hallelujah as to make the ancient Britons run away.
In the same way modern unbelief suspects the story of the Giant
who had three legs, and was the terror of the land, or of that
floating island which rises in Soderick Bay every seven years,
and then remains on the surface thirty minutes, no one yet having
had the courage to place a Bible on any part of it, lest in any
case of failure the enchanter might cast his club over Mona
also.  Likewise we may scorn the legend which tells us how
St. Trisman’s is left incomplete on account of the malice
of an evil spirit, who, for want of better employment, amused
himself by throwing down the roof every
p. 52
time it was
put on, accompanying his achievement with a loud fiendish laugh
of satisfaction.  As well we might credit the Fenella of
‘Peveril of the Peak’ as a living reality, and not a
wild conception of Sir Walter Scott’s busy brain.
Indeed, if the tourist to that lovely health resort—lovely
I call it, in spite of the holiday-makers and tourists, mostly
denominated Lancashire Cotton Balls—believes all he hears,
the chances are that he becomes, to quote Sir Walter—

‘Speechless, ghastly, wan,

Like him of whom the story ran,

That spake the spectre hound in Man.’

But the captain cries, ‘Go ahead,’ the last bell
rings, and we are off.  Apparently it is anticipated that
our wants will be numerous.  We are expected not to venture
to sea without a good supply of ‘all round the island
sweets;’ ragged urchins offer us lucifer matches, aged
females freshly-gathered fruits, and apparently it is presumed we
cannot enjoy the day without purchasing a guide to the island, or
photographs
p.
53
of the principal attractions.  Of course the
musicians are on board long before we are, as well as a poor
fellow who is expected to keep the company on the broad grin all
the trip by means of his songs and chaff.

‘Poor fellow, I pity thee somewhat, in spite of thy sons
and grandsons.  Thy sow, with a litter of eight
“poops,”’ as he calls them; ‘thy
readiness to liquor up and spout nonsense.  You’re not
such a fool as you look, however, and that is a
consolation.’

Mountebanks, whether in Church and State, in business, or on
the deck of an excursion steamer, generally manage to make their
nonsense pay, often better than other men their sense.

‘Rose,’ says Wentworth, ‘let us watch the
beauty of Douglas as we steam out of the Bay.  In a little
while we shall see Snaefell, monarch of Manx mountains.  We
shall pass the little glen which leads to Laxey, with that
wonderful wheel of which we hear so much, and then we are in
Ramsey.  Leaving Ramsey for the Point of
p. 54
Ayr, a
lighthouse familiar to the traders between Barrow and Belfast, we
shall note how the aspect of the land is changed, and that a
sandy shore has taken the place of the rocks, which, looking
across the water, seem to set England and Scotland at
defiance.  In a little while we shall be off Peel, with its
ancient Castle and its hardy fishermen.  The further we go,
the bolder becomes the scenery.  There we shall see a cavern
which no one yet has had the courage to explore, but which our
captain will tell us leads to Port St. Mary.  Then the
steam-pipe whistles, and the rocks re-echo the whistle as we
float along.  Then we come to cliffs white with sea-gulls,
who, startled by our approach, flap their heavy wings and fly
like snowflakes.  As we come to the Calf of Man the
picturesqueness of the scene is increased tenfold as the rocks in
their wildness guard their native shores.  Fain would we
linger, but our steamer urges on her wild career, and we must
needs go with her.  All we can do is to admire from a
distance the rough and
p. 55
rugged coast, with its tiny bay,
where the swimmer might enjoy his pastime, only disturbed, it may
be, by a merman bold, or a mermaid a little bolder, as is the
habit of the female, or by a glimpse of the great sea-serpent,
which assuredly is to be found, if anywhere, haunting these azure
waters, and then we are back in Douglas in time for
dinner.’

‘Yes, I know,’ said the lady, laughing.
‘The dinner you will be thinking of all the
while.’

‘How unkind of you to say so.  We shall have a
quarrel if you talk like that.’

‘Is it not time?’ said Rose, as she turned to him
a look more bewitching than she had ever cast upon the buckram
hero of the stage.

‘Perhaps so.  We have been married a
week.’

‘Good gracious!’ said the lady archly; ‘only
a week!  I thought it had been much longer.’

‘I am sure you did nothing of the kind.
p. 56
There,
I’ve caught you telling stories already.’

‘But you know we did not get married according to
ordinary notions of propriety.  We did not go to a
fashionable church.  We had no fashionable people to see us
made one, and there were none to wish us God-speed as we took the
cab to the Midland Railway
en route
for Liverpool.
So what can you expect?’

‘And worst of all,’ said Wentworth, laughing,
‘we got married—’

‘At the registrar’s office,’ said Rose,
shrugging up her shoulders and making a face with a sad
expression of horror, adding, after an interval: ‘And I
don’t believe anyone knows it yet.’

‘So much the better.  What has the world got to do
with our private affairs?  What to us is the world or the
world’s laws?’

‘Upon my word, Wentworth, you are talking as improperly
as ever.’

‘Yes.  I fear I’ve got that bad habit, and I
don’t expect I shall ever get rid of it as
p. 57
long as I
live.  You and I can talk plainly.  We need not try to
humbug each other.  It is little we have to trouble
ourselves about Mrs. Grundy.  The law has bound us together,
but we are bound together by something stronger than the law, I
hope.’

‘Hope, Wentworth, is not the word.  You know
it,’ said Rose, as she lovingly looked into his somewhat
grave and worn face.

On board the steamer thus the newly-married couple
talked.  Marriages are of many kinds.  For some we have
to thank God, for others, alas! the devil.

Referring to his marriage, William Hutton, the far-famed
Birmingham historian, writes: ‘I never courted her, nor she
me, yet we, by the close union with which we were cemented, were
travelling towards the temple of Hymen without conversing upon
the subject.  Such is the happy effect of reciprocal
love.’  This reciprocal love generally leads to
matrimony, and thus it was Rose and Wentworth had married.
A good deal is to be said
p. 58
against the institution.
Matrimony is not always a bed of roses.  If the roses are
there, they are often furnished with an intolerable supply of
thorns.  There can be no doubt of the fact that in many
cases matrimony has led to an immense amount of misery.  It
has kept in chains men and women who had been better apart.
It has made for them life dull, blank, sunless, joyless, a thing
only to terminate with death.  It is hard that men and women
thus ill-mated are not permitted to burst their fetters and be
free.  Take, for instance, the case of Mehetabel Wesley, the
younger sister of the celebrated founder of Wesleyanism.
Her heart was sensitive and full of love.  We know what the
mother of the Wesleys was—a stern, hard woman, whose first
duty as a mother, according to her own statement, was to break
the wills of her children.  The father left his wife’s
bed because, when he prayed for King William, she would not say
amen.  None of the girls seemed to have married happily, but
this, the youngest and fairest of them all, had a
p.
59
Benjamin’s mess of misery.  Her father
compelled her to suffer the brutality of a marriage with a low
wretch utterly unfit to be her lord and master.  Was not her
marriage an immorality?  Was it not a shame that society
should have compelled her to live with such a man?—so much
so ‘that her only hope,’ as she told a friend, was
death, ‘because we Methodists always die in transports of
joy.’  But what do men and women know of each other,
as a rule, before marriage?  Very little, indeed.
Hence so much of the wretchedness of the wife, of the immorality
of the man.  I fear that it is the married men who chiefly
sustain and create the vices of our great cities.  Hence the
bitter cry of him—our chief poet—the stern Puritan,
who wrote in strains that can never die—

‘Of man’s first disobedience and the
fruit

Of that forbidden tree, whose mortal taste

Brought death into the world and all our woe,’

on man’s behalf.  Hence the earnestness with which
he pleaded for relief to him who
p. 60
finds himself bound fast ‘to an
image of earth, with whom he looked to be the co-partner of a
sweet and pleasant society.’  However, Milton is
practically not so much an advocate for divorce as is generally
supposed.  It is well known that he took his wife back, and
they lived happily together till her death, There is generally a

modus vivendi
, unless the husband and wife be altogether
foolish.  Neither man nor woman in the long run can
withstand true love, and it is hard to break a tie which once
seemed desirable, and which is easily made bearable, especially
when the young ones come and play around the hearth.
Fathers and mothers find it hard to leave their offspring, even
if in the commerce of life they have found each other out.
The children bring with them the old atmosphere of tenderness and
love.

Returning to Douglas, Wentworth found a telegram to the effect
that Sir Watkin Strahan had suddenly died of apoplexy.

‘Not very surprising,’ said Wentworth.

Sir Watkin belonged to the past in that
p. 61
respect
rather than the present—to the age of port wine drinkers,
when men got real port wine, and did not seem to be much the
worse for it.  The light wines of France had little charm
for him, and soda-water and seltzer were equally obnoxious.
His medical man had warned him, but Sir Watkin laughed at his
warnings.  He came of a long-lived family.  His father
and his grandfather had alike far exceeded their threescore years
and ten when they were gathered to their fathers, and Sir Watkin
argued that so it would be with him, a blunder which nearly cost
him his life.

A later telegram, however, gave the particulars of the sad
accident.

‘This is a sad ending to a pleasant day,’ said
Wentworth, as they climbed the rock on which they had pitched
their tent.  Below was the town, with its noisy
merry-makers.  Up there, amongst the roses and the myrtles,
they were alone.  Over there was England, while between them
lay a gorgeous ocean, on which scarce a ship was to be seen, blue
as the heavens above, save
p. 62
where tinged by the crimson and gold
of the setting sun.  ‘How pleasant it is here!’
continued Wentworth; ‘no work to do, no friends to bother,
no letters to worry.’

Rose burst out laughing.

‘Why do you laugh when I try to be poetical?’

‘Because, dear boy,’ was the reply, ‘it is
not in your line, and because I see the postman coming up the
hill with the letter-bag.’

Away rushed Wentworth to meet him with an ardour by no means
consistent with his recent speech.  The fact is, however
tired of life we may be, however happy in some rural retreat,
however absorbed and enraptured with one another a man and wife
may be—especially during the idle season known as the
honeymoon—there is a mysterious fascination in the
appearance of the postman, and we bless the memory of Sir Rowland
Hill.

‘There are no end of letters and newspapers.  I
vote we don’t look at them till
p. 63
after breakfast to-morrow, I will
have a cigar, and you can work.’

‘Yes, that is how you men talk.  I am to work like
a slave, while you are to lie on the grass smoking.  But I
suppose I must do as you tell me, for

“Sufferance is the badge of all our
tribe.”

I tell you what—if you’re lazy, I will be lazy,
too.’

‘Yes, that is what I meant.’

‘Then why did you not say so, sir?’

‘I did.  When I tell a woman to work, of course I
mean that you are to sit and do nothing.’

‘Yes, but I am not going to do nothing.  I am going
to read what looks to me a very extraordinary letter.  It
bears the Sloville post-office mark.  It was addressed to
London, and here it has followed us all the way from town.
I must look at it—it is such a scrawl.’

‘Remember our compact.’

‘No, I don’t.  I must open this
letter—I am dying to read it.’

p.
64
‘Oh, the curiosity of woman,’ said
Wentworth, as he smoked his cigar.

Presently Rose gave a shriek.

‘What is it all about?’ asked Wentworth.

‘There, read it for yourself,’ Rose exclaimed.

It was as follows:

‘
Dear Madame
,

‘That pore boy as you took from Sloville, is the true
son and heir of Sir Watkin Strahan, go to horspitle in the
Boro’ where a woman named Sally is hill.  She can
prove it—but she can’t live long.  Hopin’
this will find you in ’elth as it leaves me at this present
time, I am yours most respectfully a sincere friend to the pore
boy.’

‘Wentworth,’ said Rose energetically, ‘we
must leave here by the first boat to-morrow morning.’

‘What a bore.  I suppose we must.  And so
fades away love in a cottage,’ exclaimed Wentworth, as he
went indoors to help his wife to pack up.

p.
65
CHAPTER XXV.

A REVELATION.

No sooner was Rose in London than she made her way to the
hospital indicated in the anonymous note which had been the cause
of her and her husband’s unwelcome return to town.

She had never been inside a hospital before.  There was
something bewildering in its vastness and its antiquity.
Close by ran swift the current of City life, ever turbid and
boisterous.  In there all was calm and still.  The one
thought that brightened and hallowed the spot was the life that
had been saved, especially among the poor, to whom our great
hospitals are indeed a blessing and a boon.

‘I want to see a patient in the women’s
p. 66
ward,’
said Rose to the porter, as she alighted at the entrance.

The porter expressed his fear that she had come in vain,
unless she had a better clue to identification.

In his despair he sent the lady in the direction of the
women’s ward, and there her difficulties began anew.
There were many poor suffering ones in the women’s
wards.  How could they tell where was the one she
sought?  As she was waiting, one of the staff came
downstairs.

‘Good heavens!’ he exclaimed; ‘Miss Howard,
how came you here?’

He knew the actress, and at once rushed to rescue her from the
dilemma.

Rose had little to go by.  The note had been sent from
Sloville.  It was clear that someone connected with Sloville
was lying ill—perhaps dying—there.  Under the
guidance of one of the nurses she went softly from one bed to
another.  One nurse after another was appealed to.  At
length one was found who had the charge of a case in one of the
wards.  Her patient had
p. 67
at times spoken of the town in
question; but she was ill, very ill, and the nurse was afraid any
excitement might be fatal.  When the medical man in charge
of the case was consulted he shook his head despairingly.
The thread of life was nearly worn out.  A woman from
Sloville had been there to see her, and the little talk between
the two had considerably increased the patient’s
danger.  Originally the woman in question had been run over
by a cab outside one of the theatres.  Her constitution was
entirely gone, and the injuries inflicted on the system had been
serious.  After three months’ nursing she had been
sufficiently healed to leave the hospital, and had led a more or
less wandering life.  Then she had gone down hop-picking in
Kent; had caught cold; that cold had settled on her lungs.
There was no earthly hope for her, and there she lay, wrestling
not for dear life, but with grim death.  But there was no
immediate danger.  Good nursing and tender care might
lengthen her days for a short season.

p.
68
‘If Miss Howard would return to-morrow, the doctor
would try and get her into a proper state for a little
talk.’

‘I would rather see her now,’ said the lady.

‘Impossible, madam; quite impossible, madam,’ said
the medico, and Rose had reluctantly to retire.

‘Surely I have enough on hand,’ said she to
herself, ‘if all the note hints is true.  People said
when I left the stage I should find life tame and dull.  I
have not found it so at present.  I believe no life is tame
and dull if one is determined to make the most of it.  After
she had left the stage, Mrs. Siddons, from the want of
excitement, was never happy.  I am not a Mrs. Siddons,
happily,’ said the retired actress to herself.

The morning came, and Rose was again at the hospital.
The medical man was there to meet her, and they went together to
the patient’s bedside.  In that emaciated face,
purified by disease from its former grossness, few would have
recognised ‘our Sally.’

We are a merciful people.  Let our
p. 69
tramps live
as they may, we take good care of them in our hospitals.

‘Father never gives beggars anything,’ said a
little boy to one of the fraternity in a small country town;
‘but he always prays for them.’

We may show a stern face to the tramp; but once inside a
hospital we give him something more than prayers—proper
food, trained nursing, the best science that can be procured for
love or money.  Comforts, nay, luxuries, he could never
procure for himself.  Indeed, in all desirable respects, he
is as well off as a millionaire.

But to return to our Sally, lying there calmly in her clean
bed, in a long and lofty ward, apparently indifferent to all
external things, simply satisfied with life such as it was.

‘A lady has come to see you,’ said the doctor, in
his pleasant tones, ‘A lady from Sloville.’

‘Take her away.  I am that bad I can’t speak
to her.’

‘Are you quite sure you don’t want to
p. 70
see
her?  She says you sent her a letter to come.’

‘No, it warn’t me.  It was that Sloville
woman as was here last week.  I told her not to bother, and
now she’s gone and done it.’

A fit of coughing came, and conversation ceased.

Then the nurse administered a little stimulus, and that
revived her.

‘Leave us alone,’ said the poor woman.

The others withdrew, and Rose stepped forward.

‘You’ve been good to my boy,’ said the
patient slowly, as if it were hard to talk.

‘What do you mean?  The boy I took from
Sloville?’

‘Yes.’

‘But someone has written to me to say that he is the
heir of Sir Watkin Strahan.’

‘Yes, he is.  I stole him.’

‘Stole him!  Why, how could you do such a
thing?’ asked the actress excitedly.

‘For revenge!’ exclaimed the poor woman, with all
the energy she could
p. 71
collect, and then fell back
exhausted.  For a time both were silent, and Rose watched
with pity the face, stained by intemperance and sensuality and
all evil living, wondering what could be the connection between
that poor pauper in the hospital and the proud deceased
Baronet.

‘Read this paper,’ said the poor woman.

‘Oct. 187-.  Saw my pore boy on a
brogham at the theatre.  I knowed him at once.  His
father is Sir Watkin Strahan, and he was on the box of Miss
Howard’s brogham.  I lost him as I was going to speak
to him.  The peeler told me to be off.’

‘Then, it was you that left him at Sloville, where I
took him up?’

‘Yes,’ said the poor woman feebly, adding:
‘Come nearer.’

Rose complied with the request.

‘I was an underservant in Sir Watkin’s
house.  He was a wicked man.  He took a fancy to
me.  I war young and good-looking, and a fool.’

The old, old story, thought Rose to herself, for the poor
woman gave her plenty of
p. 72
time to think, so slowly and feebly
did the words come out of her mouth.

‘One day the missus came and caught me in his
room.  I was turned out into the street, without a character
and without a friend.  I vowed I’d be even with him,
and I run off with his boy.’

‘How could you manage that?’

‘Oh, that was easy enough.  The nursemaid was allus
a talking to the sodgers in the park.  And an Italian
Countess helped me.  She had an idea that if she could get
rid of the child and the wife she would marry the
master.’

‘But was no effort made to get the child
back?’

‘Oh yes!  But I managed to get a dead baby, the
very moral of his’n.  An Italian lady staying in the
house helped me.  I dressed it in his clothes.  The
master thought it his own, and had it buried in the family
vault.’

‘That was very wrong of you.’

‘Perhaps it was.  But had not the master and missus
both wronged me?  Arter that
p. 73
I got married, but me and my husband
were always quarrelling about the boy, and that made me take to
drink, and then, when I lost my husband, I drank worse and
worse.’

‘And then you went on the tramp, and left the boy at
Sloville, and I took him.’

‘Yes.’

‘He is a good boy.’

‘He allus was.’

‘But why did you not see him righted?’

‘I did one day.  I had a letter sent to Sir Watkin,
and he sent me word it was all a lie, that his boy was
dead.  Then his lady died, and he went abroad,
and—’

‘And you never saw him again?’

‘Only twice.  When I saw him outside your theater
and tried to speak to him.  But he pushed me into the
street, and then I met with my accident.  He’s a hard
un and a bad un.’

‘And when again?’

‘Not very long ago; when they had the election at
Sloville.  I was there and he too, but he would not look at
me.  Oh, he was harder than ever!’

p.
74
‘Speak not of him now—he’s
dead.’

‘Dead!  Oh, dear!’ said the woman.
‘Do you mean to say he’s really dead?’

‘Yes,’ said the actress, ‘he died only a few
days since.’

‘And I am dying—oh, dear!  What a wicked
woman I’ve been!  What mischief I’ve
done!’

‘What do you mean?’

‘Why, I meant to restore the boy.’

‘It is too late—the boy has no father now.
Is this truth you tell me?  It is a strange
story.’

‘The truth, so help me God.’

Then she sank back utterly overcome.  At length she
said:

‘I’ve not long to live, have I?’

‘I fear not.’

‘You’ll see me buried decent?’

‘Yes, I will.’

‘And you’ll be kind to the boy and see that he has
his rights?’

‘If I can.’

‘That makes me feel better.’

‘I am glad of that.’

p.
75
‘You are kind.’

‘How can I be otherwise?  You’re but a woman,
and I am no more.’

‘They’re all kind here,’ said the woman,
sobbing.

‘It is because they love God.’

‘Ah, so the parson says.  Sir Watkin used to tell
me the parson told lies.’

‘And you believed him?’

‘Yes—I don’t now.’

‘God is our Father, and He loves us all.’

‘What, me?’

‘Yes, you.’

‘What, me, with all my wickedness?’

‘Yes, you and I, with all our guilt and sin.  His
heart pants with tenderness for all.  He has no pleasure in
the death of the wicked, but that he should turn to Him and
live.  He sent Jesus Christ, His Son, to save us.’

‘Do you believe that?’

‘Yes, with all my heart.  I should be wretched
indeed if I did not.  Daily my prayer is, “God be
merciful to me, a sinner.’”

‘Ah, I like to hear you talk.  I’ve not
p. 76
heerd such
talk since I was a gal, and then I did not believe it.  But
it does me good now.’

‘Yes, but I must not talk any longer, or you will be
excited and get worse.  Try and have a little sleep, and I
will go home and pray for you.’

‘Thanks, miss,’ said the woman gratefully;
‘you’ll come and see me to-morrow?’

‘Yes, I will,’ said Rose, as she turned to go
home.

But that to-morrow never came.  At midnight the summons
came, and all that was left of ‘our Sally’ was a
silent form of clay.

Some of us go out of the world one way and some another.

Happy they who can exclaim, with Cicero, ‘O preclarum
diem,’ or with Paul, ‘I know in whom I have
believed;’ or with Job, ‘Though worms destroy this
body, yet in my flesh shall I see God.’

Unhappy those who with dim eye, as it restlessly sweeps the
horizon of the future, can see no beacon to a haven of light, no

p. 77
pole-star
pointing to a land of eternal rest—

‘No God, no heaven, no earth in the void
world—

The wide, gray, lawless, deep, unpeopled world.’

Rose rushed home as rapidly as the cab she hired could carry
her.  Wentworth was in.

‘What am I to do?’ she said, as she told him the
whole story.

‘Better send for the boy,’ he said.

‘Oh no, not yet.  He is comfortable where he is,
learning to be a sailor.  He’s fond of the sea, and it
will be a pity to take him from it.’

The fact is, the young waif, as Rose thought him, was placed,
at her expense, on board one of the training-ships lying off
Greenhithe.  They are noble institutions, these
training-ships—saving lads who, if left to themselves,
might become tempted by circumstances or bad companions into
crime, and at the same time supplying us with what we English
emphatically require at the present day—English sailors on

p. 78
whom
captains can rely on board our merchant ships and
men-of-war.  There was no difficulty in getting the
actress’s
protégé
there, and there he
was rapidly training into a good sailor and a fine fellow,
well-built, obedient to his superiors, handy, and hardy, and
sturdy, morally and physically, as all sailors should be.

The next thing was to talk to a lawyer.  In this wicked
world lawyers are necessary evils.  Sometimes, however, they
do a great deal of good.  The lawyer recommended Wentworth
to call on the family lawyer of the deceased Baronet.  He
came back looking unhappy and uncomfortable, as people often do
when they have interviews with lawyers who are supposed to be on
the other side.  He found him in comfortable quarters on a
first floor in Bedford Row, Holborn, looking the very image of
respectability—bald, and in black, with an appearance
partly suggestive of the fine old clergyman of the port-wine
school, with a touch of the thorough man of the world; a lawyer,
in
p. 79
short,
who would give an air of plausibility and rectitude to any cause
in which he was embarked.

To him Wentworth apologized for making an intrusion.

‘No apology at all was needed, my dear sir.  Happy
to make your acquaintance.  I have not only read your
books—very clever, too, Mr. Wentworth—but I heard of
you more than once through Sir Watkin Strahan.’

‘Perhaps in no complimentary terms?’

‘Well, you know the late Baronet was a man of strong
passions, and, when annoyed, I must admit that his language was
what we might call a little unparliamentary.’

‘It is about his business I have called.  You are
aware there is an heir?’

‘Oh yes; Colonel Strahan, the brother.’

‘I don’t mean him.  A son.’

‘A son!  Impossible.  The deceased baronet had
only one son, and the fine fellow—’

‘Is now alive.’

p.
80
‘Nonsense, my dear sir.  He was buried in the
family vault, after the doctor and the family were satisfied of
his identity, and I was present at the funeral.  There was a
coroner’s inquest held in order to leave no room for
doubt.’

‘I think not,’ said Wentworth, as he proceeded to
unfold the details of his case, to which the lawyer listened at
first with a severely judicial air, and then with an incredulous
smile.

‘Is that all you’ve got to say?’ he asked,
when Wentworth had finished his statement.

‘Pretty much so,’ replied Wentworth.

‘Then,’ replied the lawyer, with a triumphant air,
‘we have little to fear.  Sergeant
B.’—naming a popular advocate of the
day—‘would laugh the case out of court in a quarter
of an hour.  You have a quarrel with the deceased.
Your good lady has—to put it not too strongly—been
insulted and shamefully ill-treated by him.  Who would
believe that, in promoting this suit—should you be so
ill-advised as to do that—
p. 81
you came into court with clean
hands?  The idea is perfectly preposterous.’

The worst of it was that Wentworth, as he withdrew, was
compelled to own that there was not a little truth in what the
lawyer had said.

It was not law but equity that was required in his particular
case.  In England law and equity, alas! have often different
meanings.

p.
82
CHAPTER XXVI.

THE ITALIAN COUNTESS.

‘How lovely!’ said a lady to a gentleman on the
deck by her side, as they were drinking in all the beauty of the
scene as one of the fine ships of the Orient Company dropped her
anchor in the Bay of Naples.  ‘And look what a swarm
of boats have come out to greet us!’

They were a swarm indeed, some of them with divers to exhibit
their prowess, some with fruit and flowers, some with the lava
ornaments in the manufacture of which the Neapolitans exhibit
such exquisite skill, and others with musicians—vocal and
instrumental—keeping up for the time quite a
serenade.  These Neapolitans gain but little, it is to be
feared, on such occasions, but the
p. 83
Neapolitans are a frugal people, and
make a little go a long way.

The lady was Rose, the gentleman by her side was her
husband.

‘Yes; and see, one of the boats has a young girl who has
come on deck with flowers, which she is fastening in the
gentlemen’s coats in hope of a small fee.  How pretty
she looks!’

The girl approached Rose, to whom she offered a flower.

‘Why, it speaks the language of hope,’ said
Rose.  ‘I take it as a good omen that here we shall
find the Italian lady of whom we have come in search.’

‘Let us hope that it may be so.  We have no time to
lose if we mean to go on shore.  The health officer has done
his duty, and given leave for the captain to land his
passengers.  Let us hasten to get on board the steam
launch.  I see already they have got our luggage.
Fortunately for me there is not much of it.’

And in a few minutes they were at the custom-house.  The
only difficulty was a
p. 84
small box of cigars, on which
Wentworth had to pay a most exorbitant duty.

At the end of the quay they found a crowd of coachmen waiting
for hire, shouting and gesticulating in the wildest manner.
Rose was quite frightened at their appearance, and with the noise
they made.  However, they found one who did not charge more
than double the ordinary fare to drive them to the hotel.
As they drove along they encountered, of course, some of the
awful drain smells for which the city has long been famous.

‘I don’t wonder, now,’ said Rose, as they
pulled up before a grand hotel, ‘at the saying, “See
Naples and die.”  How can people live where such
smells are met with everywhere?  But if that Italian
Countess is alive we may find her.  Perhaps she can help us
to establish our boy’s claim.’

That same morning an Italian Countess came home from her daily
drive in a great state of trepidation.  She had seen an
English face that she remembered but too well—it was that
of Miss Howard, the celebrated
p. 85
actress.  She had ordered the
coachman to keep the lady in sight; but that was impossible, the
crowd was too great, and she returned home not a little
agitated.  Was it fancy or fact? was a question she could
not determine.

What could she do?  Well, she drove off to the English
Consul next day.  Perhaps he could tell her.  Alas, he
was in utter ignorance of the matter.

There were the hotels; she would drive to them and make
inquiries.  There were only a few of them, as a rule,
patronized by the English.  It would be easy to make
inquiries.  She did so, but she could hear of no Miss Howard
at any of them.  All day long she was driving up and down
the principal streets, but in vain.  There is not much to
see in Naples itself, it is the country round that is the
attraction, and Rose and her husband were out all day long
studying the remains of Pompeii, climbing up Mount Vesuvius,
sailing to Sorrento or Capri, exploring the ruins of Baiæ,
and the grave of Virgil.  There was much to see,
p. 86
and they had
no intention to let the grass grow under their feet.  Daily
they returned at a late hour to their hotel, charmed but wearied;
and thus they had but little time to spend in the streets,
looking at the shops, or studying the manners and customs of the
people.

The Countess pondered over the matter deeply.  She lived
a retired life herself; she had few friends; her establishment
was on a very moderate scale.  There were those who said she
was not a Countess, that her title was merely an assumed
one.  This was unfair, as most of the ladies one meets in
Naples are Countesses, and the presumption therefore was in
favour of her ladyship’s claims.  Countess or no
Countess, she was in a very troubled state.  She had seen a
face that reminded her of old times in London—of her
intrigue with Sir Watkin Strahan—of her worming herself
into the confidence of his lady—of her participation in the
abduction of the heir—in fact, of her revenge; and she
sighed as she thought how little good she had gained by it.
Her
p.
87
ladyship’s maid was alarmed.  What had come
to the Countess it was beyond her power to imagine.

‘Have you anything on your mind?’ said her old
Italian priest as he sat in the first-floor of one of the villas
that looked over Naples on to its lovely bay and the sea beyond,
whilst Vesuvius on the left was indicating, in its usual way,
that it was suffering a good deal in its inside.  The old
priest lunched with her ladyship every day.

‘Anything on my mind?’ said the lady.
‘Oh, dear father, no.  Why talk to me in this way this
bright afternoon, when all nature seems so bright and gay?
Ah, it is a beautiful world when one is young—the terraces,
the gardens, the flowers, the blue sea, the old castle beneath,
the streets with the jewellers’ shops, the fine churches
with their sacred services and sacred paintings.  How I love
them all!  I could not live away from La Belle Naples.
Oh, that I could stay here for ever!’

‘That were a foolish wish, daughter,’ said the
holy man.  ‘Naples is very fine
p. 88
and its bay
is beautiful, but you have something better to look at.
See, the crucifix!  Behold Who bleeds and suffers
there—Who founded the Catholic Church of which I am a
humble member, and in whose name I speak.  At one time, if I
may believe what I hear, you were not quite so fond of Naples as
you seem to be now.  I have heard that you went to the land
of the heretics—that Island of England which has so long
denied the faith, but which I am glad to find is abandoning its
heresy, repenting of its sin, and returning to the Holy
See.  When we see the sister of an English Prime Minister
find salvation in the bosom of the Holy Church, when our sacred
officials are run after in all the highest circles, when they
astonish all London by their works of charity and labours of
love, by their eloquence and learning and saintly lives; when
these Islanders, insolent and haughty as they are to one another,
crowd as they do to Rome, and prostrate themselves at
Rome’s feet as they do, we know that the end is
near—that the time of the triumph
p. 89
of the one
Catholic and Universal Church, to whom St. Peter committed the
care of the keys, is at hand.  Pray that that blessed time
may soon arrive.  I have been to St. Paul’s—I
know Westminster Abbey—it would rejoice my heart to hear
that once more there was performed in them the Holy Service of
the Mass.’

‘Holy father, that is my daily prayer.’

‘I am glad to hear you say so.  But tell me, when
you were among the heretics were you always a daughter of the
Church?’

‘Always, holy father.  I fulfilled my
mission—you know what that was.’

‘I have heard something of it.’

‘I should think so,’ replied the lady with a
smile.  ‘I had money, and I drew around me its
worshippers.  I was of an old Italian family, and stood well
in the upper London circles.  I had beauty—smile not,
holy father, though you see me old and yellow and
wrinkled—and beauty, as you know, never spreads its net in
vain.  I believe, also, I had wit, and wit goes far in that

p. 90
land of
fogs and foxhunters, of prudish women and milksops, of cant and
humbug.’

‘Ah,’ said the monk, with a smile of approbation,
‘you seem not to have liked those English—those
heretics—those lunatic sightseers who, as they never can be
happy at home, come to us to forget their sorrows, and who fancy
that by doing so they are amusing themselves.’

‘Truly no, holy father.  How could I?  They do
not even worship the Virgin Mary!’

The holy father shook his head and sighed.

‘I think, daughter, you wished to have a chat with
me.  There was something on your mind.’

‘Holy father, you are right; and as I cannot come to
church to make confession I have sent for you.’

‘Yes; in the name of the Holy Father, and armed with his
authority, I may hear confession and grant, to the truly
penitent, absolution.  The Apostle Peter had that power, he
received it from the great Head
p. 91
of the Church; and our
Popes—His true followers—have ever used that power
for the cure of poor sinners, for the good of the Church, for the
glory of His Blessed Name.  We humble ministers hear private
confessions.  It is a sacred privilege, to be guarded
jealously; but I know its value.  I have seen how the weak
and erring mortal who has confessed to his priest has had a heavy
weight taken off his heart, has lost the cares and sorrows which
were darkening and shortening his days, has gained joy and
gladness as he thus realizes the Divine favour and feels certain
that after the pangs of death are over we shall rescue him from
the pains of purgatory, and he shall pass away to the mansions of
the new Jerusalem, shall walk its golden streets, shall drink of
its surpassing joys, shall join in its celestial harmonies, and
take his stand with the great company of the elect gathered by
the labours of the Holy Catholic Church out of every age and
country under heaven.  This is what we gain by means of the
Mass, and yet the heretics scoff at the service and
p. 92
audaciously
assert—in this respect only following the arch-heretic,
Luther—that the Mass is simply a means for getting money
out of the pockets of the people.’

‘What awful blasphemy!’ said the lady with a
shudder, at the same time making the sign of the cross.
‘Glad indeed was I to leave that horrid country.  It
is full of Free Catholics.’

‘Free Catholics!’ said the priest, in a tone of
alarm.  ‘What can they be?’

‘Alas, holy father! they are everywhere—in Paris,
in Brussels, in London.  They are only Catholics in form,
but not in heart.  In fact, they are no better than
Protestants.’

‘Not exactly—if they keep up the forms of the Holy
Church they are better than Protestants,’ said the priest,
‘who in denying the form deny the faith, as the holy
Apostle says, and are worse than infidels.  But, my
daughter, time is wearing away.’

‘Ah, truly, holy father, it is luncheon-time.
Already I hear by the gong that it is served.’

The father knew the rules of the house,
p. 93
and timed his
visit accordingly.  Soup, fowl, fish, with cut of roast
lamb, a choice bottle of Italian wine—it won’t bear
transplanting, nor a sea voyage—a few grapes and green
figs, with a cigarette and a demitasse of coffee, were not to be
despised.  He found alike his piety and his benevolence all
the better for such a feast.  The Countess kept a cook and a
butler, and they were neither of them novices by any means.
There has been good eating and drinking on the shores of the Bay
of Naples, at any rate since the time of the Romans.  Naples
owes its fame, and probably its existence, to the superlative
loveliness of its situation.  As old Sam Rogers sang:

‘Not
a grove,

Citron or pine or cedar: not a grot

Seaward, and mantled with the gadding vine,

But breathes enchantment;’

and thus it was that the
bon vivants
of the old world
loved the favoured spot—that Baiæ was the Brighton of
the Romans.  Between it and Puteoli rolled the Lucrine Lake,
over which skimmed the small yachts
p. 94
of fashionable visitors, while around
were the oyster-beds for the luxurious tables of Rome.  It
was there Sergius Orata of blessed memory established the fine
oyster-beds which have ever since been a model for all succeeding
ages, and a name grateful in the ears of the epicure.

The lady and her guest had coffee served up in an adjoining
apartment.  The lady lit up her cigarette, the gentleman did
the same.  It is wonderful how tobacco quickens the
conversational powers.  High-born dames, as well as Irish
fish women, in this respect own the influence of the seductive
weed.

‘Ah, father,’ said the Countess, ‘you have
known me long.  I have confidence in you.’

‘Yes; I have known madame long—friend of the good
cause, a supporter of the true Church—liberal with her
money and her time, strict in the observance of holy days.
What would you, my daughter?’

‘Ah, father,’ said the lady with a sigh; ‘it
was not always so—I have lived.’

p.
95
‘Yes; many of us who now pose as saints can say as
much,’ said the holy father.  ‘What a blessed
thing it is to be able to find out what is true life, what are
true joys—the ecstasy of being lost in the Divine Being, of
being waited on by angels, hasting to guide one the way to
Paradise, of appealing to the sweet Virgin Mary, of having her as
an intercessor night and day for our sins in the court of
Heaven!  Compared with these things, what are the pleasures
of sense and sin—which are soon vanished, and always leave
a sting behind?’

‘Oh yes, father; I can feel and realize all this, but I
am not happy.  I am in great anxiety—I have a great
weight on my mind.  My medical man tells me to avoid
excitement, that I suffer from disease of the heart, that any day
I may have an attack which may be attended with fatal
consequences.’

‘Oh, dear madame, calm yourself.  You look
well—madame speaks and walks well.  There is assuredly
little serious to contemplate.  These doctors, who are
they?—
p.
96
ignorant quacks who, for their own selfish ends, make us
believe that we are on the way to death when in reality we are in
the enjoyment of health and strength.  Remember how, in a
cholera year, Death met the Devil as he was on his way to
Vienna.  “I shall slay twenty thousand people,”
said Death.  In a day or two they met again.
“Ah!” said the Devil, “only ten thousand died
of cholera.”  “Ah,” said Death,
“that is true.”  “How, then,” asked
the Devil, “did you make up your number?”
“Easy enough,” was the reply; “ten thousand
were killed by the cholera and the other ten died of
fright!”  Ah, these doctors, they do a lot of
mischief!  They are also, I fear, men of science—that
is, men of no religion.  It is dangerous for one’s
soul to have them about us.  It is the priest, your
ladyship, who is the true friend of all in sickness or adversity,
or doubt or sorrow.’

‘Oh, father, I believe you.  And now to
business.’

‘With all my heart.’

p.
97
‘There is no one who is likely to overhear
us?’

‘None.  The house is silent as the grave,’ of
which it really reminded one with its funereal embellishments,
its ghastly pictures of saints and martyrs—the work of old
masters they said, horrible to look on—and crucifixes of
every kind.  In some parts of Italy this show is supposed to
indicate the possession of true piety, and that, like charity,
covers a multitude of sins.

‘Well, father, let me state a case in which I am
interested.’

‘I am all attention.’

‘In the fair city of Florence there was a girl, fair in
person, a fine figure, a sunny face, a gift of song.  She
was the child of pious parents in the neighbouring
mountains.  The father was an officer in the Pope’s
army.  When all Europe dashed its armies, not in vain,
against the holy rock of St. Peter’s, the father died as a
brave man should.  The mother lived on on her small estate
on the mountains.  The
p. 98
girl loved the city, and the museums,
and the gardens, and the picture galleries.  She would not
go back to the solitude of her country home; in fact, she ran
away, and one morning she met an English milor.  He was
rich, he was handsome, he was well-born; he told her he loved her
to distraction—she would always be happy with him.  In
a foolish hour the silly girl went on board milor’s yacht,
that was lying in the bay—just as the yachts of milors lie
there to-day.’

‘Ah! that was bad,’ said the priest.

‘Yes, it was indeed, holy father,’ continued the
lady.  ‘The girl remained there; she believed in the
milor; she learnt his language; she amused his idle hours.
He did not know his own mind; she did not know hers, and both
thought they were happy.’

‘It was bad,’ said the priest.  ‘Evil
came of it.  You need tell me no more.  Evil always
comes of such liaisons.  Where the Church does not bless,
the great enemy of souls, like a roaring lion, comes
in.’

p.
99
‘But there is a good deal more to be
told.’

‘Proceed, madam, I am all attention.’

‘The milor was lost sight of.  The lady appears in
London.  Socially, she had kept her reputation untouched;
she assumed an Italian title of nobility.  There are only
too many in London, especially among rich parvenues, who throw
open their doors to anyone with a foreign title, whether real or
assumed.’

‘So I have heard, madam.’

‘The Italian lady in this way made many acquaintances
and some friendships.  Amongst the latter was a lady in weak
health, and in great trouble of body and mind.  The Italian
lady was interested in her; she seemed so sad and
sorrowful—almost as sad and sorrowful as herself.  The
lady had many confidences to make.  She was the wife of the
rich milor; she was about to present him with a child—a son
and heir it was to be hoped.  She dreaded the event, she was
so weak and sad.’

p.
100
‘“What will you?” said the Italian
lady to the English one.  “That you come and stay with
me—that you be my companion and friend.  Everything
shall be placed in your hands.”  The Italian lady was
delighted.  In the first place it would give her an
opportunity to meet her English milor again; perhaps to regain
her old authority over him.  Alas! she was
mistaken.’

‘And it was quite as well, too,’ said the
priest.  ‘Her better part was that of a penitent; it
was only thus the ministers of the Church could absolve her of
her sin.’

‘Milor had lost all interest in the Italian woman who
had given up to him her youth, her love, her innocence, and her
life.  Milor felt no pleasure at once more recognising her
as established in his grand house in town as the friend and
companion of his wife.’

‘Was this madame, this Italian Countess, this friend of
yours, very much distressed, was she broken-hearted?’ asked
the priest with a quiet smile.

p.
101
‘Not exactly.  Her idea was to take a grand
revenge.’

‘Ah! that is more the way of Italians.  But what
was that revenge?  Did she stab the milor? did she poison
his wife?’

‘Neither the one nor the other.  As one of the
household—as its mistress as it were for the time
being—she saw how she could revenge herself in a better
way.’

‘Revenge!  Ah, that is sinful, I fear,’ said
the priest.  ‘“Vengeance is mine, saith the
Lord.”  Hear David, “O Lord, to whom vengeance
belongeth, show Thyself.”  Ah, it may be sweet for a
time,’ said the priest, as he shook his head.

‘Holy father,’ replied the lady, ‘you are
right, as you always are.  We women have not men’s
heads, we have only hearts, and those hearts often fill us with
bad passions.’

‘I fear that is too true,’ said the priest.
‘But pray proceed with your narrative.’

‘Well, her plans were artfully laid.  The servants
were her creatures.  The medical man was her dupe.  She
had sole command of the mansion.  The poor dying wife had
p. 102
begged her
to take the trouble off her hands.  Milor fancied she was
his slave; he in reality was her dupe.  She made him believe
that his child was dead.  She did more, she paid some women
to take care of a child which she pretended, with strict
injunctions to secrecy, was the heir.  Gold did it
all.  At that time the lady had plenty of gold.’

‘Which might have been better spent in the service of
the Holy Catholic Church, which needs the treasures of the
faithful, and gives them interest for the money, which will yield
rich fruit through the countless ages of eternity.’

‘Ah, my friend did not think of such things.  She
was in the world and of it.  There, in that island of
heretics, she had given up her religious observances, and had
almost lost her religious faith.  Oh, how much better it is
for the woman to stop in the land where the poetry of youth
ripens and matures, till in her old age she has all the ardour
and the blessedness of a devotee.’

‘You speak truly and well,’ said the priest, with
an approving smile; and though
p. 103
he did not often smile, his smile,
when it did appear on his marble face, was encouraging.

‘My father,’ said the penitent, weeping, ‘I
can keep up the deception no longer—I speak of
myself!’

‘I thought as much,’ he replied.  ‘I am
afraid you have done a great wrong.  But what has become of
the child?’

‘I know not; and the father is dead.’

‘Oh,’ said the priest, ‘you should have
brought him to Italy and placed him in the school of the
Monastery of St. Joseph.’

‘Yes, holy father, I ought to have brought him up in the
true faith.  I hear his father is dead; I hear they believe
there is no heir; I hear the brother and his family are now in
possession of the estate.  I know all about them.  They
are of the Low Church school which hates our faith, abuses its
priests, and even the Holy Father—’

‘Hush!’ said the priest, ‘do not sully your
lips with the foolishness and wickedness of these poor
Protestants.  I have heard them talk their blasphemies in
Naples,
p.
104
and even at Rome itself.  It is the holy
Inquisition that we need to put a stop to such vile
calumnies.’

‘I had my revenge; but I know not what became of the
boy.  If we could gain his rights we could make a Catholic
of him.  I am no longer a penitent, holy father.  I
feel as if I had been a mighty instrument in paving the way for
the return of the true religion to that unhappy land.
Here,’ placing in the priest’s hand a handsome
casket, ‘are the documents which will establish his
claim.  You go to London.  You will see the lawyer of
the family; he cannot deny the claim.  Oh, I feel so
joyful!  I’ve gained my revenge! and is it not a
sanctified one, as it is for the good of the Church?’

‘Daughter,’ said the priest, ‘I would fain
say in the language of the Holy Book, “Many daughters have
done well, but thou hast surpassed them all.”  Still,
it seems to me so marvellous, I can scarcely understand
it.’

‘The mystery is being cleared up.  I saw
p. 105
an English
actress in the street yesterday, who I believe can help us in the
matter.  But in the meanwhile let us see these
documents.  We shall have done a great work for the Church
if we can take these documents, find the child, establish his
claims in a court of law, and secure him as a true son of the
Church.  Ah, that will be grand!’ said the Countess
joyfully.  ‘I gain a son for the Church.’

‘Heaven will reward you, daughter,’ said the
priest; ‘but hasten and fetch the casket.’

The Countess left the room to find it.  In a little while
she returned with it in her hands.

‘There it is,’ said she, as she handed it to the
priest.

‘What a lovely casket!’ said the priest.

‘Ah, one thinks of what it contains,’ said the
lady; ‘a title—an estate—a life, which will all
be handed over to the Church.’

With a trembling hand the priest opened it; the Countess in an
equally excited state looking on.

In the casket was an official-looking wrapper.

p.
106
‘It is all right,’ said the Countess;
‘break the seal and master its contents.’

‘All in good time,’ said the priest.
‘Don’t agitate yourself; be calm.’

‘I am,’ said the Countess; ‘but delay
not.  Secure the prize; the hour has come.’

Suddenly the priest turned red and white.  ‘In the
name of the Holy Father,’ he said, ‘what have we
here?’

‘Why, documents of the highest importance.’

‘Nothing of the kind,’ exclaimed the priest in a
rage.  ‘Nothing but an old English newspaper,’
as he threw it on the ground, with something that sounded like a
rather expressive Italian oath.

The lady shrieked and nearly fainted away, only she thought
better of it.  The situation, it occurred to her, would be
neither interesting nor picturesque.  Alas! she had no help
for it.  That English maid-servant, of whom she fancied she
had made a dupe, was more than a match for her after all, and had
tampered with the documents
p. 107
she had carefully sealed and
religiously guarded these many years.

All she could do was weep, and weep she did, till she nearly
wept herself to death, failing of her long-treasured scheme of
revenge.  Of her servant she had lost all trace.  To
find her was out of the question; her only hope was in Miss
Howard.

But they never met.  The Countess and the priest could do
nothing; and Rose and her husband soon tired of the fruitless
search and returned, to remember in after years the delights of
the Bay of Naples—‘the most beautiful spot in the
world,’ writes George Eliot.  Everything takes us back
to the past.  It was in the bay that pious Æneas
landed.  Caligula, and Nero, and Tiberius, all loved the
spot.  The grotto of the Sybil was near, too; the tomb of
Virgil is yet shown in that neighbourhood.  Capua, famed for
its luxury and ease, was not far off.  No wonder the world
flocks to the Bay of Naples.  I stay at the Hotel de Vesuve,
kept by Mr. Mella, well-known to English members of the Coaching
Club,
p.
108
and where I find excellent accommodation.  And he
tells me 80,000 visitors pass through his hotel in the course of
a year.  It is a classical education to stop in Naples for a
while.  I love it best in the summer, when you can revel on
green figs, and apricots, and peaches, and oranges for a
song.  In the winter there are fogs and snow at times.
But there is this drawback in the summer, and that is its intense
heat, which drives everyone away.  From the deck of the
steamer the view is charming, as Naples with its terraces, and
castles, and hills rises before you; and at night, when all is
still, and the gas-lamps glitter all round the bay for miles, it
looks like fairyland.

In Naples itself there is little to see, with the exception of
the museum, which, when Garibaldi was Dictator, was thrown open
to the public, and in which some, or rather all, the most
precious works of art discovered in Pompeii are preserved.
It is not enough to go to Pompeii—you must visit the museum
in Naples as well.  But the brasses and the marbles in the
museum are
p.
109
especially fine, such as the Farnese Bull, and the
Farnese Hercules, and the Roman Emperors.  In the churches
there is little to see, and nothing to admire.  There are
showy shops in the Toledo, and at the end, as you enter, an
arcade as handsome as is to be found anywhere in Europe.
There are good public gardens where you may hear excellent music
on a summer night, and no city has better tramcars, and more
civil drivers and conductors.  I have no fault to find with
the cabs, except that their drivers never leave you alone, and
lie in wait for you at your going out and coming in.  It is
in its crowded and bustling streets that the charm of Naples
consists.  Surely there never was a people who lived so much
in the open air, and drank so much water flavoured with
lemon.  The Neapolitans are a sober people, and industrious
as well.  They are fearfully taxed, and, with their scanty
wages, how they manage to make both ends meet is a mystery.
They are much given to sleep in the summertime anywhere, on the
broad street or the
p. 110
sea-wall; and of a Sunday afternoon
they are much given to crowd into some rickety old cart, and tear
along as fast and far as the horse can go.

There is very little beauty among the common people, and you
have plenty of scope for observation, as women dress their back
hair in the broad streets, and the babies are washed in the same
public manner.  Nor can you wonder that this is so, as you
contemplate the dingy streets and high houses, divided by narrow
lanes, just like Yarmouth Rows, where no fresh air can enter, no
ray of sunlight can shine.  What strikes a stranger
especially is the awful noise.  There is an everlasting
clatter of wheels and cracking of whips, and braying of
donkeys—and in Naples they bray louder than anywhere else;
and how the hawkers shout! and they are numerous, and seem to
supply everyone.  It is amusing to see them transacting
business.  The customer is high up in the balcony, suspended
in mid air.  She needs a bit of fish, and she lets down a
basket to the hawker
p. 111
below.  That gives rise to a
good deal of talk, as the Neapolitans are a much-gesticulating
people.  If a bargain is struck, the basket is hauled up
with the fish inside.

An old French writer complained of the English people that
they were very ignorant, as they never spoke French.  In a
similar spirit the ignorance of the Neapolitans struck me.
None of them could speak a word of English.

There are others who call it the City of Flowers.  This
is nothing but a mistake.  But the cactus grows everywhere,
and thus, wherever you go—on the rail, or by the villa, or
the flat-roomed cabin where the poor peasant lives—you have
a good display of green; and in the public gardens the palm-tree
grows luxuriantly, and you are reminded of the tropics at every
step; and thus the hot hours glide peacefully on, while the
retailers of lemon and water do a roaring trade, and the ragged
who have no money curl themselves in the dark arches, met with at
every corner, and sleep the
p. 112
sleep of the just.  All Naples
is asleep in the middle of the day, and even the policeman
nods.  Happily he has little to do, as, ignorant and
priest-ridden as the people may be, they never get drunk.
At night the city is gay, as families, old and young, rush off to
the music-hall, or to hear the bands play, or to navigate the
peaceful waters by the light of Chinese lanterns.  I suppose
they fancy they cool themselves.  The fact is, Naples is
always hot in summer.  All day long the burning sun bakes up
the streets and the shops, and the old bits of rocks, all built
over; and the heat seems to me to radiate from them all night
long.  If it were not for the tramcars, which are numerous
and cheap, and the conductors of which are uncommonly civil and
well-behaved, locomotion would be impossible.  There are no
flags more trying than those of Naples, and as the cabs drive all
over the road you are never safe.  People who are deaf, who
are old and infirm, are in constant danger, in spite of the
thundering crack of the cabman’s whip, or the ear-splitting
note
p. 113
of
the conductor’s horn.  Motion seems to begin about
five, and still the tumult rages as I retire to rest.

After all, the chief fault I find with the people is the way
they work their horses and donkeys.  The latter, at any
rate, have a hard time of it, as they drag the heavy load on a
cart of two long poles with beams laid across of the most
primitive order.  I fancy the old country cart remains as it
was in the time of the Romans.  Sometimes a horse or mule or
bullock is harnessed on one side; but the patient ass, who does
the chief of the work, no one seems to pity.

On a hot day it also stirs my indignation to see a horse
dragging a cart with fourteen or fifteen strapping men inside,
and on a Sunday everyone seems to drive, and as fast as he
can.  The swell and the costermonger all tear along at a
frightful pace, and thus secure—what in England some good
people are trying to insure—a pleasant Sunday
afternoon.

p.
114
CHAPTER XXVII.

IN BRUSSELS.

‘Of course, this is a plant, my dear.’

‘Really, Colonel,’ said the lady addressed,
‘I wish you would not use such improper language; children
so easily pick up slang.  You ought to be very
careful.  It is too bad, just as we are about to move to
England, where you will take your rightful place in county
society as head of our ancient family.’

‘You’re right there,’ said the Colonel to
his lady in a laughing tone; ‘you’re right there, I
believe.  We are one of the oldest families in the
country.  It was one of them who was with Noah in the
ark.  You recollect the old epitaph—

p.
115
‘“Nobles and heralds, by your leave,

Here lies what once was Matthew Prior,

The son of Adam and of Eve,

Can Bourbon or Nassau go higher?”’

‘Colonel,’ said the lady, ‘I am ashamed of
you.’

‘What for, dearest?’

‘For quoting such a worldly poet.  We were not
allowed to read him in school.  I am sure many of his poems
are highly improper.’

‘Oh, then you’ve looked into him, have
you?’

‘Certainly not,’ said the lady, with an affected
shake of her head.

‘Then how can you condemn him?’

‘Easily enough.  He was of the world.  His was
an unsanctified genius.  He had no part or lot in the one
thing needful.’

‘At any rate,’ replied the Colonel,
‘he’s buried in Westminster Abbey.’

‘The more’s the pity.’

‘And he was the friend of the clergy.’

‘Yes, of the carnal and unregenerate.  There are
too many of such, alas, in the
p. 116
Church of England—wolves in
sheep’s clothing.’

The lady was an Evangelical of the bitterest type.

‘Well, dear, we won’t discuss the question,’
said the Colonel meekly.  ‘What am I to reply to this
letter?’

‘What, the letter from London, from Mr. Wentworth?
Short and sharp.  Say the idea is perfectly
ridiculous.  We can hear of no compromise.  It is quite
out of the question for us to give up our rights just as
Providence has opened to us a means of extended usefulness.
Mr. Wentworth is only a newspaper writer, a man of no position in
society, and I am told his wife was actually an
actress.’

‘Yes, I believe so,’ said the Colonel.  This
was enough.  The Colonel’s lady was one of the
elect—a model in a certain section of society of holy
living.  Yet, under a sanctified exterior, she was as hard,
and bitter, and selfish, and uncharitable as it was possible for
any woman to be, and the beauty of it was, that she thought
herself,
p.
117
and was considered by her friends, to be in a state of
exalted spiritualism, living in close communion with God.

Such people are by no means uncommon, the creatures of a
self-deception of a most odious kind.  Their language is
full of Scripture phraseology; they delight in pious hymns; all
their reading is confined to pious biographies, especially
religious diaries, the morbid revelations of which record at
nauseous length their diseased state of mind, which they assume
to be the direct results of a Divine inspiration and tokens of a
Divine love.  When they are in distress, it is not the
natural result of the circumstances in which they are placed, or
the conditions of ordinary life, but the Divine will and
purpose.  If they neglect the laws of health, and are ill in
consequence, it is the Lord’s doing.  If they lose
their money owing to imprudence in trusting it in rotten
companies, it is the Lord’s doing.  If trade is bad
and creature comforts fail, or they live beyond their means and
are in embarrassed circumstances, it is the Lord’s
p. 118
doing, to
wean them from the world and its sinful vanities, and to lead
them back to Himself.

There are no mysteries to them; all is clear, and their
knowledge of the Divine way is only equalled by their thorough
acquaintance with those of His great adversary the devil.
In them, peace of mind is the result of this knowledge.  To
the carnal mind their self-sufficiency and self-satisfaction is
amusing.  It is almost beautiful, the smile with which they
listen to one another, and the calm contempt with which they
regard everyone not of their way of thinking.  By the side
of them an iceberg is genial, and their power is as great as
their faith.  All the artillery of heaven is in their
hands.  Peace is theirs, but it is truly a peace that
passeth all understanding; they are not as other men are.
To the outer world their cry is, ‘Procul este,
profani!’

But let us return to the Colonel’s lady.

She continues:

‘We are not wealthy, you see,’ she was
p. 119
wont to say
to the kind-hearted Belgian ladies, when they called on her for a
subscription.  ‘We are, I may say, living quite up to
our income, and we have got our duty to do to the family, and the
Colonel keeps the money-bags so tight that I can never get a
franc.  But what I can do I do, and, after all, it matters
little—the contemptible dross of the world—if I can
give to the needy the riches, that never fade nor pass away, of
the Divine Word.’

And thus the lady excused to herself, as so many of us do, her
lack of true charity.

‘Well,’ said the Colonel, ‘what shall I say
to this Wentworth?’

‘Take no notice of him.  Refer him to your lawyer
in London.  The path of duty is very clear.  We find
ourselves, by a merciful interposition of Providence, restored to
our rightful position in society.  You to take your place as
the head of one of the old county families, I to still labour for
my blessed Master in a sphere of increased usefulness.  You
owe it to your family to at
p. 120
once take possession of the title
and estate, and not to have a moment’s delay.’

‘But,’ said the Colonel, ‘if there should be
a grain of truth in this cock-and-bull story it might be
awkward.  I should like to have an inquiry made about this
boy.’

‘Pray, do nothing of the kind.  You only open the
way to fraud and imposition.  Your late brother never
treated us fairly.  He was often positively rude to me, and
his son—if this boy is such—has no claims on
us.’

‘Well,’ said the Colonel, ‘I should not like
to behave shabbily.’

‘What do you mean, Colonel?’ said the lady
indignantly.  ‘I am not the one to recommend you to do
that.  The boy is no concern of ours.  We take what the
law gives us.  It is a duty we owe to society to do
that.  I am aware,’ added the lady, ‘that Sir
Watkin had a son, that the infant was stolen, and that the dead
body was placed in the family vault.  Not all the lawyers in
London, and they are bad enough, can upset that.’

p.
121
‘But suppose the wrong child was
buried?’

‘Fiddle-de-dee!’ said the lady.  ‘We
know better than that.  The estates are fairly ours, and we
return to England as soon as we can to take our rights.  Mr.
Wentworth and his wife between them have concocted this
villainous story, which no decent person would ever think of
believing.’

Wentworth and his wife were quite aware of that; they believed
in the boy, who was—to judge from the family
portraits—a striking representation of the deceased Baronet
at his time of life.  But would the world believe it? that
was the question to be asked.

Poor Sally on her deathbed had no inducement to tell a
lie.  Unfortunately, she had kept her secret too long.
She had hoped to have made a harvest of the boy, but death had
come to her, and all her hopes had ended in the grave.  As
is often the case, she was too clever by half.

Wentworth and his wife had an unpleasant time of it.
Indeed, the family lawyer had
p. 122
intimated in a genial mood that he
might possibly feel it his painful duty to place them in the
dock, on a charge of conspiracy to defraud—a situation for
which neither of them had any fancy.  Their best friends
seemed to regard the story with suspicion.  What jury would
be convinced by the testimony of ‘our Sally,’ whose
head was generally fuddled with drink, and whom they could not
even produce in court?  It was true that the lad very much
resembled the deceased Baronet.  It was quite within
probability that the latter was his father, but that did not
legally make him the son and heir.  It was felt that they
had better talk over the matter with the lad himself, who was
then an officer on board one of the floating hotels plying
between Liverpool and New York.

Accordingly, Rose undertook the task of interviewing him in
one of those sumptuous hotels for which Liverpool is famed.
The boy had never heard of Sir Watkin, nor were his recollections
of the deceased Sally of a very decided character.  He had,
however,
p.
123
never believed that she was his mother, and from her
mysterious hints when under the influence of drink he had come to
the conclusion that he had been stolen, though when or why he
could not make out.

It is true there was an old woman at Sloville, a pal of
Sally’s, the one who had written to Rose, who had the
identical dress which the baby wore when it was stolen, but it
was felt that the production of the article in question in court
would not much advance matters.  She had not stolen the
baby.  She could only say that the deceased Sally had
asserted she had, and had bidden her be quiet, as one day or
other she would astonish everybody by the wonderful revelation
she had it in her power to make.  It was true that Sally had
been suspected, and the more so that she was no more to be seen,
having been clever enough to put the detectives on the wrong
scent.

It was hinted that an Italian lady had been mixed up in the
matter.  The world said there had been an intrigue between
the Baronet and a fair Italian, and that thus
p. 124
she had
revenged herself for his throwing her overboard.

‘Actresses,’ continued the Colonel’s lady,
‘are not particular sort of people, and newspaper writers
are not much better, I believe.  I can’t think how old
county families can be civil to them.  In my young days such
an idea would have been scouted, and I must say then they knew
their place.  My papa helped the local printer to start a
paper on condition that it was to support Church and State.
Occasionally my papa had the man up in the Castle, and would sit
down to a bottle of port with him, but he never took any notice
of him elsewhere, nor ever introduced him to his family.  I
believe the man was a very respectable tradesman.  He was
regular in his attendance at church, and always stood by our
family in election contests; but the modern literary man gives
himself the most ridiculous airs, fancies he is a genius because
he can scribble, and that he can wield the destinies of the
nation because he is connected with some low paper.  I hear
he belongs to clubs, and goes into
p. 125
society just as if he were a
gentleman.  Every time,’ added the lady piteously,
‘every time that I take up an English newspaper, I see the
country going to the bad, the people more intolerant of good
government, the upper classes more careless as to the future,
recklessly acting in accordance with the motto, “Let us eat
and drink, for to-morrow we die.”  The Sunday is
desecrated by all classes, and the Lord will have no pity in the
day of His wrath for Sabbath-breakers.  The philosophers are
in favour of Godless education, and now they tell me there are
people who argue that Atheists have a right to sit in a Christian
Parliament.  Oh dear! the vials of God’s wrath will
soon be flung down upon that unhappy country.  The signs of
the times tell us that we have reached the beginning of the
end.  There will be weeping and wailing and gnashing of
teeth, and the day of the Lord shall come.’

The gallant Colonel was accustomed to that sort of thing, and
took it calmly.  Whether he believed what his wife said I
p. 126
don’t
know.  He always acted as if he did; never contradicted her,
as he had found that to be no use; attended her to church, sat
out with well-bred polish the dreary minutes devoted to staring
the domestics out of countenance called family prayers.  He
was always ready at his wife’s bidding to attend
Bible-readings for the select few, and when joked on the subject
by his chums, if he had any at his club, never gave railing for
railing, but took it as if it was a cross laid on him to
bear.

That he was a sincere believer no one, however, who caught him
apart from the presiding influence of his wife believed for a
moment.  He swore too much for that, and occasionally he had
been heard, when sentimental and under the influence of wine, to
refer to Cremorne, to Evans’s and the Cider Cellars, to the
Closerie du Lilas, to the Mabille, and other places in London and
Paris where wicked people, in old times, were wont to enjoy
themselves after their kind.  Beneath his frosted exterior
there was a good deal of the old Adam yet.

p. 127
Once
upon a time, according to William of Malmesbury, a merchant named
Swelf had been in the habit of calling on the holy St. Wolstan
once a year, to receive his advice in the healing of his
spiritual ailments.  After giving the needed absolution, the
prelate observed:

‘You often repeat the sins which you have confessed,
because, as the proverb goes, opportunity makes the thief.
Wherefore, I advise you to become a monk, which if you do, you
will not long have the opportunity for these sins.’

Upon this, the other rejoined that he could not possibly
become a monk, because he found it so difficult to bring his mind
to it.

‘Go your ways,’ said the bishop, in somewhat of a
passion: ‘a monk you will become, whether you choose it or
not, but only when the appliances and means of vice have waxen
old in you;’ which fact, adds the historian, ‘we
afterwards witnessed, because when now broken down by old age, he
betook himself to our monastery.’

p. 128
It
was the decay of nature rather than the growth of grace which
made that man a monk.  What we lack in old age is the power
to sin.  The body ceases to be the servant of the
senses.  We lead a better life possibly, from a conventional
point of view, but is it not often terribly against the
grain?  A man gives up a dissipated career because his
strength is not equal to its demands.  His vitality has been
prematurely exhausted.

The conversation referred to took place in the breakfast-room
of one of the attractive residences lining the route to the Bois
du Cambre, which all my readers know is one of the fairest
suburbs of Brussels, and of which, as most of them have gone
there, I doubt not, to spend a happy day, I need say no
more.  The family did not reside there, but far away in the
suburb, where rents and wages and provisions were alike
cheap.  The Colonel had gone abroad to educate his daughters
more cheaply than he could in London, and the plan had so far
succeeded that the young ladies had
p. 129
managed to read a good many French
novels, the perusal of which not a little interfered with the
enjoyment of family prayers, Bible-reading, and religious
conferences, to which they were invariably taken by their mamma,
and other means of grace.  The family funds had been rather
restricted, and at Brussels the mamma had assured herself that
there was an exceptionally attractive Evangelical ministry in the
Church of England, under the special license of the Bishop of
London, and that was enough for her, the Colonel merely
considering he could vegetate more cheaply in Belgium than in
London.  But they were all quite ready to leave for England;
the Colonel to strut as a baronet and landed proprietor, the
young ladies with a view to the matrimonial market—for,
alas! they had met with few eligibles in Brussels—and the
mamma that she might carry on on a larger scale and with
increased success the missionary operations of which she had been
the centre in Brussels.  If she had not done much good among
the
p.
130
people, she had—and that was her one great
reward—managed considerably to annoy the priests, who
glared at her with evil eyes as they watched her sallying forth
daily with her bag of tracts.  Money it was hard to get out
of the Colonel’s lady, even in the most urgent cases; but
no one was more ready with her tracts.

p.
131
CHAPTER XXVIII.

A COUNTRYMAN IN TOWN.

‘What has brought you to town?’ asked Wentworth
one morning, as they were sitting in Clifford’s Inn, to a
visitor who had just put in an appearance.  His garb denoted
his profession.  He was the Presbyterian minister who had
acted as Wentworth’s friend at the time of the
election.

‘Well, I’ve come on rather important
business.  There is an old woman in the workhouse who
maintains that the deceased Baronet has left a son who is heir to
the title and estate.  And thus I came up to London; but I
have been run off my legs.  I give you my word of honour,
you won’t catch me in a hurry in London again.’

p.
132
‘How is that?’ asked Wentworth.

‘Well, the fact is, London is the last place in the
world for anyone to visit.  It is too big, too crowded, too
noisy, too fatiguing, and at every step you are surrounded with
danger.  The omnibus and the cab ever threaten one with
annihilation, and the pickpocket is always on the watch.
The bicycle is a terror by night, as is the irrepressible
youngster who converts every quiet corner into a
skating-rink.  As to the air you breathe, it is full of
microbes; your daily bread is white with alum.  A wise man
will also avoid its milk and cream and water.  Yet all of us
have to go to London more or less, and there are people who can
live nowhere else.  Human nature can easily assimilate
itself to the conditions which surround it.  Fortunately,
there is a good deal of indiarubber in all of us.  Of this
the Londoner avails himself, and thinks himself the finest,
smartest, cleverest fellow in the world, though he sees Brother
Jonathan shutting him out of his markets, and opens his doors to
foreign paupers,
p.
133
whom not a Government under heaven save his own would
tolerate for a moment.’

‘Well, you’re right there.  But what is your
particular grievance?’

‘Grievances, you may say.  They are like the hairs
on my head; which, by-the-bye, are not so numerous as they were
once.’

‘So I see,’ said Wentworth with a smile.

‘To make the most of a short visit to London,’
continued the speaker, ‘you must arrange your plans, and I
did mine.  My first object was to find out a gentleman who
had written to me.  Before leaving home, I had written to
say that I would call on him on the Tuesday at his chambers in
Pall Mall.  When in due time I got there, I found he had
gone to Scotland for ten days, but that his son had opened my
letter and had waited for me till twelve o’clock, when he
had started for an estate which his father was laying out with a
view to building operations.  Accordingly, I resolved to
follow him, and then my troubles began.  I started on an
omnibus
p.
134
for Euston station; arrived there, I partook of
luncheon, having twenty minutes to wait.  “How do the
trains run to Bushey?” I asked of an official.
“There is one at twenty minutes to two, and another at the
quarter,” was the reply; and I learned on the same reliable
authority that the quarter to two train got there first.
Accordingly, I waited for it, and when the guard came round to
inspect the tickets, he confirmed what the official in the hall
had said; adding that I was to change at Harrow.  It was
thus with a light heart I started, and left the train at Harrow,
feeling sure that in a few minutes I should be landed at my
destination.  Alas, the train had gone, and I had to wait,
sad and solitary, for an hour.  At Bushey, a woman on whom I
called informed me that her husband and the gentleman of whom I
was in search had gone to the Board School.  It is needless
to add that they had done nothing of the kind.  In the dust
and under a blazing sun, I made my way to an estate which was
being cut up into building
p. 135
ground.  No Mr. T.—the
man I sought—was to be seen; but it was the land I
sought.  “Was there any more of it?”
“No,” said a workman, “that was
all.”  I felt he was wrong, that there must be more;
but I tramped over the ground and made my way back to the
station, to wait another dreary half-hour.  In time,
passengers for London began to assemble on the platform.
Two of them passed me.  One of them, I suppose, remembered
me, as he spoke to his companion, a much younger man, who came up
to tell me he was the one I sought.  “Had I seen the
estate?”  “Yes.”  “What did I
think of the view opposite the hall?”  I explained I
had never been there.  The workman it appeared, had led me
wrong, and as it was essential that I should see it, it was
agreed that I must have a fly and view the ground.  I did
so; and got back to town about eight, feeling that unnecessarily
I had lost the greater part of the day.

‘The next day I rose betimes to carry out my
well-arranged plans.  I slept in the City, that I might
better carry them out.
p. 136
In the first place I made my way to
see a gentleman in Fenchurch Street.  He was out.  Then
I made my way to a great manager’s office in Bishopsgate
Street; he had not arrived.  Then I made my way to the great
doctor in Manchester Square.  I have a liver; it had gone
wrong, and I knew, such is my experience of the doctor, that he
would set it right in the twinkling of an eye.  Alas! the
doctor had gone out, and that meant running up there again the
next day, and that meant my not being able to hear Henry
Melvill’s Golden Lecture; a thing on which, in the country,
I had set my heart.  However, I had a little consolation in
reserve.  An editor in Paternoster Row owed me a small sum
of money.  All the years I had known him I had never found
him absent from his post.  I would call on him, and he would
give me a cheque.  I did call, and he had gone down to
Bournemouth for a week.  Close by was another friend, the
chairman of a well-known literary club that dine together every
Friday evening.  I had
p. 137
never dined with them, though
repeatedly invited.  I would be in town on Friday, and I
would spend the evening dining with the club.  It is rather
dull work sitting in the smoking-room of a hotel of a
night.  Accordingly, I called on my friend to inform him of
my intention to accept his proffered hospitality, and you can
imagine my disappointment when the doorkeeper at my
friend’s place of business informed me that he was at
Folkestone.  In my disappointment, I wrote to an old friend
living on the Brighton Parade, that I would run down the next day
in time for dinner, and pass the night under his hospitable
roof.  There was much we had to say to each other, as he was
a retired Colonial, with whom I wished to talk over Colonial
affairs.  As soon as the train had arrived at
London-super-Mare, I made my way joyfully to his house, feeling
sure of a hearty welcome.  All the blinds were suspiciously
drawn down.  After ringing the bell twice an aged
housekeeper came to the door; the family had gone to town for the
season.  I
p.
138
turned away to a hotel, where the accommodation was
moderate; but fortunately the charge was the same.  On the
Friday, back to town with an empty purse, I made my way to an
office where I knew I could get the needful.  Alas! the
gentleman I wanted to see was out.  For the first time in
his life, I believe, Mr. W. was away—gone to the Handel
Festival.’

‘Well, you seem to have been rather
unfortunate.’

‘And oh, the terrors of that night!  I could not
get a wink of sleep.  The room was so sultry and
confined.  I opened the window, and then the noise of cabs
at all hours kept me awake.  Then I got nervous, and
wondered what I should do in case of a fire; and sleep that night
was out of the question; in fact, I’ve been wonderfully
seedy all the time I have been in town.  But I have more to
say if you care to listen.’

‘Pray proceed,’ said Wentworth.  ‘I am
all attention.’

‘Let me record two other experiences.  I
p. 139
have a
friend who keeps a boarding-house in a certain square not a
hundred miles from Holborn.  He had often asked me to stay a
night with him; he could help me with materials for an article I
wanted to write; I would spend my last night there.  Of
course, I found him out, and the house so full that any bed there
was out of the question.  One little incident in the course
of my troubles is rather amusing and characteristic.  A
West-End swell lately forced himself on my acquaintance.
His talk is all of lords and ladies and people in high life, in
whom I take no interest whatever.  I even am sick of the
woeful tittle-tattle of the newspapers, and never read it.
But I met my fine gentleman accidentally.  He was delighted
to see me, inquired most politely after the welfare of my family,
hoped I would manage to run up to a certain fashionable
exhibition—the most pleasant lounge in town of a summer
evening—and then bade me good-morning as coolly as if he
had never gone out of his way to beg me to make his house my home

p. 140
the next
time I was in London.  And this is London life, and a fair
illustration of how a countryman gets on when there, and of the
utter impossibility of accomplishing anything there in a
reasonable time.  It is wiser—better far—to stay
at home and get your business done by writing.  Londoners
love writing.  There is a difficulty I have with a limited
liability company in a matter of five shillings, and we are as
far from getting it settled as ever, though we have been
corresponding on it for half a year.  But London, with its
worrying days and sleepless nights, is to be avoided by any who
regards his health or temper or pocket.  I have quite made
up my mind that I will never visit London again—at any
rate, not till the next time.  And there is another thing
that disgusted me.  I was at a public dinner last night, and
had to sit for three hours listening to awful
speeches.’

‘Well, they are generally tedious,’ said
Wentworth.  ‘I have had to attend a good many at one
time or other.’

‘Yes, but there was such a waste of time;
p. 141
all sorts
of irrelative toasts obviously introduced merely for the purpose
of affording mediocre aldermen and M.P.’s a chance of
airing their vocabulary.  But worst of all,’ said the
minister, ‘was the awful amount of guzzling and
feeding.  Everyone seemed only intent on getting as many of
the good things on his plate as he could.  And as to the
champagne, the gentlemen, as they called themselves, seemed as if
they had never tasted any before, and as if they would never have
the chance again.  Many of them were quite drunk, and the
whole affair soon resolved itself into a drunken orgy.  I
was quite disgusted with my species.  No one who would wish
to think well of humanity ought to attend a public dinner.
The wine being provided, they seemed as if they could not have
enough of it.  It was positively sickening.’

‘And yet Thomas Walker advocates the public
dinner.  Indeed, he goes so far as to say that to ensure
good parochial government, good dinners should be provided for
the authorities.  The aim should be, he tells us, to procure
the best services at the
p. 142
cheapest rate, and in the most
efficient way, and there is no system so cheap or efficient as
that of the table.  The Athenians, in their most glorious
days, rewarded their citizens who had deserved well of the State
by maintaining them at the public expense in Prytaneum or Council
Hall.  The table also is a mode of payment for services to
be performed which goes further than any other, and will command
greater punctuality, greater attention, and greater
regularity.  When properly regulated it is the bond of union
and harmony, the school for the improvement of manners and
civilization, the place where information is elicited and
corrected better than anywhere else; and I believe, after
all,’ said Wentworth, ‘old Walker was
right.’

‘And pray who was Walker?’

‘Thomas Walker was the author of “The
Original,” a book highly popular with our forefathers and
well worthy to be read by their sons.  Walker was a police
magistrate in London.  “The Original” appeared
in twenty-nine parts.  Since then it has been
p. 143
republished
in a volume.  The first number appeared in May, 1835.
He was ill when he commenced it, and died before it was
completed.  Almost his last essay in it was on “The
Art of attaining High Health.”  It is curious to
reflect that it was written by a man at whose door death was
already knocking.  He died suddenly in Brussels, the early
age of fifty-two.  By all means, I repeat, read
Walker.’

‘So I will.  I am quite aware there are two sides
to every question.’

‘According to Walker, City feasting has many
advantages.  He is of opinion that it creates a good deal of
public spirit; as long as men are emboldened by good cheer, they
are in no danger of becoming slaves.  The City Halls, with
their feasts, their music, their associations, are, he says, so
many temples of liberty; and I believe that after all Walker was
right I speak from experience; and yet there are evils connected
with the system.’

‘Evils!’ exclaimed indignantly his ascetic friend,
‘I believe there are.  And last
p. 144
night I saw
what I never saw before, and never wish to see again: men dressed
in evening costume—respectable people, apparently—all
eating and drinking to excess.  I hope they all got home,
but they could scarcely find their way after dinner to the room
where tea and coffee were served up; utterly unable to take a
part in any rational conversation.’

‘Ah, again let me quote Walker!’ exclaimed
Wentworth.  ‘“Anybody can dine, but few know how
to dine so as to ensure the greatest quantity of health and
enjoyment.”  I am coming to believe that aristology,
or the art of dining, has yet to be discovered.  When ladies
are admitted to these banquets there will, at any rate, be less
of that eating and drinking to excess which so disgusted you last
night.’

‘Well, the sooner that good time comes the
better,’ said Wentworth’s friend; ‘but we have
female feasts in Sloville which do a great deal of
harm.’

‘You amaze me,’ said Wentworth.  ‘What
do you call the feast?’

p.
145
‘The Dorcas.  It is a society made up of
ladies who belonged to the congregation, and who worked at useful
articles to be distributed among the poor, the ladies paying half
a crown each to buy the material, and putting threepence into the
plate handed round at each meeting, to be devoted to the same
purpose.  On the night when my wife attended, there was an
unusually large attendance.  The grocer’s wife
believed in a good cup of tea, and butter which was not
margarine, and in other dainties which her guests were not slow
to appreciate.  To her credit be it said that at no other
house had the members such a really good tea.  On these
occasions a good deal of talk took place.

‘Said one, “Where is that Jane Brown?”

‘“Oh,” said another, “she said she
could not leave her mother.”

‘“A pretty excuse,” said another.
“I’ll be bound to say that if there was any
entertainment going on she could manage to leave her mother for
that.”

‘“Ah!” said another old lady, with a
p. 146
shake of
her head, “girls are not what they used to be.  I
don’t know what we are coming to.”

‘“Oh, you may well say that,” said the
deacon’s wife.  “We are living in sad
times.  It quite grieved me to hear our minister say on
Sunday that people believed in Christ.  They never did, and
they never will.  The world will always hate Christ, because
of its wickedness.  It is only the elect that can be
saved.  The world, or rather the carnal heart, is always at
emnity with God.”

‘“Yes, dear,” repeated the old lady,
“you are right there; the wicked won’t come to
Christ.  It is not to be expected as they should.”

‘Then another interrupted with the remark: “That
girl Smith is never seen in the chapel now.”

‘“Oh no! she takes herself off to Church.
She says her mother has been very poor and bad, and no one came
near her but the Rector and his wife, who were very
kind.”

p.
147
‘“Ah, there it is again,” said the
old lady; “the loaves and fishes.”

‘“For my part, I think we’re well rid of
such people.  We don’t want ’em, and the Church
is quite welcome to ’em.  There’s that man
Brown, who fell off the ladder when he was at work.  The
Rector called on him, and sent him a bottle of wine and some cold
meat, and he has never been to meetin’ since.  And now
I hear he has sent his children to the Church
Sunday-school.”

‘“Well, what can you expect?” replied the
old lady.  “It is my opinion that that man Brown never
had the root of the matter in him at all, and yet I can remember
when he used to come to meetin’ regular.  It is very
shocking when people behave like that.  The men in the town
are getting worse and worse.  They tell me there is a lot of
low Sunday papers from London come into the town, and the men
read ’em all day long.”

‘“Yes,” said a gushing girl who was present,
and who could keep silence no
p. 148
longer, “that’s quite
true.  When I go round with the tracts they refuse to take
them in; and such nice tracts too, it quite breaks my
heart.  And then there is our new supply; he takes the
men’s part.  He took up one of my tracts the other day
and asked me if I really thought working men could stand such
reading.  I asked him if he read the tracts, and he said no;
he thought he could employ his time much better.”

‘“And yet,” said the old lady, “our
dear old minister used to say one tract may save a soul; but
lor’, the young men they send us from the colleges, as they
call them, think very little of saving souls.”

‘“I fear that’s too true,” said the
deacon’s wife.  “People don’t preach the
Gospel as they used to.”

‘And that is true,’ said the Presbyterian parson
to Wentworth.  ‘They say I am a Unitarian; but the
orthodox certainly are much nearer to me than they were.  It
did them good to hear damnation dealt out to others who did not
think as they did.  God the Father, Christ the Elder
Brother,
p.
149
were little in their thoughts.  It was God the
Angry Judge, it was Christ saying, “Depart, ye cursed, into
everlasting torment,” of whom it did them good to
hear.  They quite relished the torments—the endless
torments of the lost.  Not to dwell on them in a sermon was
not to preach the Gospel.  Hard, stern, unforgiving were
these ladies of the Dorcas.  It is to be hoped that their
charities at Christmas-time to the poor of the meeting, in the
shape of flannel and other garments, did good.  Charity
covers a multitude of sins, and if they talked scandal, why, do
not others do the same?  A sister with more brains than the
rest, and of equal piety, does now and then make a sensible
remark.  But at any rate, my wife said she would never go to
one of their meetings again.’

‘I have heard of it,’ said Wentworth; ‘but I
have never attended one.’

‘Be thankful you have not.’

‘Why, I thought, in my ignorance, they were gatherings
of benevolent ladies, to work for benevolent ends!’

p.
150
‘Ah, that is what they pretend to be, but things
are not what they seem.  Believe me, Mr. Wentworth, that the
Dorcas as it is conducted in country towns is a mockery, a
delusion and a snare.’

Wentworth shook his head and groaned.

‘Yes, that is so; my wife went to one, as I have
said.  It was her first attendance and her last.  The
professed object was work for the poor, the real one
scandal.  The women talked of all the other women in the
town; how this one went on when her husband was away; how forward
was one young miss, and how sly another; how mean was this man,
how extravagant that.  There was a good deal more talking
than working, and the over-righteous were the worst of all, and
the most uncharitable.  Never was there a more unpleasant
display of feminine littleness.  But, bless me, I am
gossiping myself, when I came here on a very pressing
occasion.  And now, after this preliminary remark, let us
proceed to business.  It is one which you can help most
materially.’

p.
151
‘Pray proceed,’ again remarked
Wentworth.

‘It is one that requires a good deal of thinking
about.’

‘So much the better.  I always love to have a nut
to crack.’

‘We have an old woman in Sloville Workhouse who says
there is an heir to the Strahan estates.’

‘I know it,’ said Wentworth.

‘Well, this old woman has told her story all over the
town, and everyone believes it.’

‘But why did she not tell her story before?’

‘Well, her explanation is that the other woman got her
to conceal it, with the view of making money, but their
difficulty was how to tell a story which would not incriminate
themselves.  Once or twice she sent an anonymous letter to
the late Baronet, but he took no notice of it; and then she tried
to speak to him, but he would not let her; and she was terribly
afraid of him, as she says he was such a hard, arbitrary,
imperious sort of man.’

p.
152
‘Well, we all know he was that,’ said the
other.  ‘He certainly was not a man to stick at
anything where his passions, or his prejudices, or his interests
were concerned.  But where is the woman now?’

‘In the workhouse.  She says she had quite lost
sight of the other one, till she found her in a London hospital,
where she went to see her.  But the poor thing was too far
gone to be of any good, and now she says they have both been made
fools of, and they had better have let the child alone, so far as
making any money out of the transaction.’

‘Was the new Baronet told of it?’

‘He was.  I wrote to him on the subject.’

‘And what did he say?’

‘Virtually that it was like my impudence, and that he
hoped he should never hear from me again.’

‘Well, that was not encouraging.’

‘Then I wrote again.’

‘And so did I,’ said Wentworth, ‘and this
was the reply.’

Wentworth read as follows:

p.
153
‘“
Sir
,

‘“In reply to yours of the 19th inst., I have only
to say that I consider your letter founded on complete
misapprehension of the facts of the case.  The deceased
Baronet had no heir but myself, and any attempt to set up a claim
on behalf of another will be firmly resisted.  Trusting that
this is an end of the matter, and that I shall be troubled with
no further communications on the subject,

‘“I am, yours truly,

‘“
Hugh Robert
Strahan
.”

‘Now hear the wife.  She adds a P.S. as
follows:

‘“I have been informed that you are a
writer for the newspapers.  Let me hope that you are not one
of the Sadducees against whom our Lord warned His
disciples.  Please read carefully the General Epistle of
Jude.  If I had the means I should like to see it hung up in
all our newspaper offices.  Possibly you have met with some
of my little tracts.
p. 154
I am not proud of my literary
talents.  All boasting is unbecoming, and the true humble
Christian feels that he is an unprofitable servant after all; but
I am constrained to add that with the Lord’s blessing they
have been made useful in bringing many who were in darkness and
sitting in the valley of the shadow of death into His own
marvellous light.  Be assured that at the throne of grace
this morning I particularly remembered the case of your poor

protégé
, who is much to be pitied.  Oh,
it grieves me to the heart to see how much we all make of wealth
and rank!  What is gold but dust and ashes?  What are
titles but less than the small dust of the balance in the eyes of
the Lord?”

‘Well, did Sir Watkin ever hear the story?’

‘I don’t know.  The woman told me she left a
note for him at the lodge, of which, however, he took no
notice.’

‘I should think not.’

‘And once, she says, she tried to stop
p. 155
him; but he
was angry and threatened her, and the police took her off.
It was at the time of our last show, when Sir Watkin had, as you
can remember, a grand party at the Hall.  I never saw him in
better spirits.  It seemed as if he was going to marry a
young lady with what he always wanted particularly—a lot of
money.’

‘That’s the case, I fear, with most of
us.’

‘Yes,’ said the other.  ‘In this
respect we are most of us on an equality.  But I must say
this for Sir Watkin, that he would not make money, as some people
make it nowadays, by feathering his nest at the expense of the
public.  It is to his credit that he lent his name to no
doubtful speculation, though he was often asked to do so.
He never was a company promoter.’

‘Well, but about this woman’s story?’

‘I tell you as she told it me.’

‘I know it all,’ said Wentworth, ‘and have
known it long.  The Colonel, who claims the entailed estate,
is in London.  Let us go and see him;’ and away they

p. 156
went to
hunt him up at a swell military club of which he was a
member.

The new heir was barely civil.  When he heard what they
had to say, he replied:

‘I am sure the family are much obliged to you; but look
here, Mr. Wentworth, I am not a lawyer, but I am, I trust, a
humble Christian.  My wife and I have made this subject a
matter of prayer.  I have taken it in my closet to the
Lord.  My conscience approves of the course I take.  I
am in the path of duty.  I have the interests of my family
to think of.  I don’t talk to you as a man of the
world.  There was a time, I own, when I did belong to that
class, but then I knew no better.  But I ask you, as a
Christian man, how can I act otherwise?’

‘Why, you might come and hear what the poor woman has
got to say for herself,’ said the Presbyterian
parson.  ‘You might follow the clue she might give
you.  You might save yourself from what seems to me the
commission of a cruel wrong.
p. 157
You might act fairly to a lad who I
believe has a better title to the estate than you have.  In
short, you might do to others as you would have others do to
you.’

‘You can quote Scripture, then.’

‘Yes, I can; but it seems to be of little
use.’

‘You are right, sir.  We are told the devil can
quote Scripture.  To the carnal heart the Scripture is a
sealed book.  It is only as the Spirit opens the eyes of the
believer that he can read aught.’

‘I thought, on the contrary,’ said Wentworth,
‘Scripture was so plain that a wayfaring man, though a
fool, could not err therein.  But I did not come to discuss
such questions.  I have to ask you, sir, to pause before you
take possession of the estate.’

‘Well, sir,’ said the new heir, ‘you have
come and you have asked me.’

‘Yes, and you will pause?’

‘Not for an instant.  Why should I?  By these
distressing visitations of Providence, I have come into the
possession of property and a title.  It is the Lord’s
doing
p.
158
and it is marvellous in my eyes.  I never sought
this nor expected this.’

Wentworth looked at the speaker.  There seemed no
particular reason why the Lord should have interfered in this
matter on his behalf, he thought; but then Wentworth was not of
the elect, and knew little as to what the Lord was about.

p.
159
CHAPTER XXIX.

THE COLONEL.

Society was startled in the autumn of the year to which these
events relate by the announcement that Colonel, otherwise Sir
Robert Strahan had been shot in a duel on the Belgian
frontier.  The world wondered why he had to fight a
duel.  He had the reputation of being an austere and
strait-laced man, a great stickler for the proprieties, a strict
observer of conventional forms, regular in his attendances on
Church ordinances, and very ready to judge harshly of the
failings of others.  In all the land there was none so proud
and priggish, and his wife rejoiced greatly at the work of her
hands in transforming a man of the world into a Christian of the
regulation pattern.

p. 160
There
were, it is true, many of his fellow-officers and former
companions who wondered at rather than admired the change, who
questioned its genuineness, and believed, in heart, the Colonel
was still the same as when, in his younger days, he played
somewhat notoriously the part of a man about town; but then the
world is always uncharitable, and its men and women are of a
sceptical turn of mind, and ready to doubt people who affect to
be superior to their neighbours; and now their hour of triumph
had arrived.

This saintly Colonel was no better than other people.  In
Brussels, unknown to his wife, he had gambled heavily and
incurred great losses.  In the public dining-hall of the
ancient Spartans there was a notice to the effect that no one was
to repeat outside the conversation that took place within.
In the club of which the Colonel was a member a similar law of
honour prevailed, and as the place was outwardly respectable, and
was situated in the most respectable
quartier
, and as its
members were men who moved in
p. 161
the first circles on the Continent,
it was assumed, of course, that nothing took place but what was
respectable.  And it was presumed that if its members kept
late hours the fact was due to the interesting conversations of
the men on the political and other stirring questions of the
times.  In reality the place was a gambling den of the worst
description, where the losers were far greater in numbers than
the winners; and amongst the former was our pious Colonel, who
had immense faith in his own play, as in everything else that he
did, and whose occasional gains, only by confirming his own good
opinion of himself, helped him further into the mire.

Then all at once it became known that the worthy Colonel had
other children than his legitimate ones.  In certain
quarters he passed under a feigned name—as Captain
Smith—and children learned to know him under that
alias.  It was a pleasant retreat for the good man when the
old Adam was rather strong and seemed ready to crush
p. 162
the renewed
man; and thus he led, as many do, a double life.

Most men have their weak moments, their time of temptation,
and too often they succumb, but then the falling off is only for
a time.  But in the Colonel’s case it had
unfortunately grown into a settled habit.

My lady little dreamt of what was passing.  She had other
things to think of than her husband or his doings.  She was
active—perhaps, rather too active—in her sphere, in
good works.  The bluest Evangelical blood was in her veins,
and when in London no one was a more frequent visitor to the
country houses of pious bankers and brewers than herself.
In them she was a diamond of the purest water, shining with every
Christian grace and virtue.  She had addressed drawing-room
meetings, she had aided in many a crusade against Popery and
Ritualism and other evil things.  If any Liberal and devoted
clergyman was to be persecuted for trying to elevate the people
by Christian ideas not in accordance
p. 163
with her own, she was the first to
raise the cry of heresy, to rouse up sleepy bishops, to raise the
cry of ‘Treason in the sanctuary!’ to alarm the
warders at the gate, to flood the land with cheap tracts and
pious newspapers.  At Exeter Hall, during the May meetings,
there was no more ardent attendant; and her life in Brussels was
much the same, though on a smaller scale.

Once, at Louvain, I saw a statue in the cathedral to the
memory of Dr. Stapleton.  I could not make out who Dr.
Stapleton was, or why he was thus honoured.  Baedeker and
Murray knew him not.  Accidentally one day turning over the
pages of Froude—certainly one of the most graceful of
historians—I discovered that Dr. Stapleton, living at
Louvain, was the means of communication, in the ‘spacious
times of Queen Elizabeth,’ between the Pope on the one side
and the Roman Catholics in England on the other.  At
Brussels her ladyship acted in a similar way, though on a smaller
scale.  It was she who kept alive
p. 164
the
communication between the Belgian and the English Evangelicals,
and helped to circulate among the former the goody-goody
literature in which the latter greatly rejoiced.  Her
activity in the matter was intense.  She was always writing
to England for supplies—which were sent her without any
cost to herself—and in her continental drawing-room, and at
her receptions, sleek divines and elect ladies were not few, ever
ready to bewail the degeneracy of the times, the growth of Popery
and Republicanism and Atheism.

Perhaps it was they who frightened the Colonel away.  At
any rate it is manifest that he would have been a better husband
had she been a better wife.  When the news came of his
brother’s death it is needless to say that the Colonel was
quite ready for a change of life and scene.  Indeed, Belgium
was getting too hot for him.  The lady who passed as Mrs.
Smith had discovered the real name and status of her
protector.  One of the boys—the result of this
domestic arrangement—had gone to a Protestant
p. 165
meeting,
and there on the platform, and as one of the speakers, was
Captain Smith—announced to the meeting as Colonel
Strahan.  It was not long before his mother learned the
news, nor was it long before she turned that news, as far as her
pecuniary resources were concerned, to uncommonly good
account.

The little domestic arrangement which had been so pleasant at
first was now very much the reverse.  To shake off the woman
was now impossible, and her silence could only be secured at an
extravagant price.  She had threatened to follow him to
Sloville, and it required all his ingenuity to keep the matter a
secret.

Already he had made up his mind to stand for the county
division; already his name had been ostentatiously paraded as
president or vice-president of certain famous religious
societies, whose headquarters were London.  Already, under
the auspices of my lady, the Hall had become the headquarters of
the Low Church party.

It was hinted to the Baronet that if he
p. 166
could win
the county at the election he might possibly be made a
peer.  And now this Belgian woman had found him out and
rendered his life insupportable.  What was he to do?
He could not for the life of him tell.  There was no one to
advise, no one to whom he could tell his trouble.  The
spirit of a man can sustain his infirmity, but a wounded spirit
who can bear?  One thing he did do, which he had better not
have done—he went over to Brussels again to see what could
be done.  He had better have kept away.

And there was another matter, too, which gave him
trouble.  The reputation of the Bank was in danger.  At
the death of his brother unpleasant rumours respecting its
stability had been put in circulation.  The late Baronet
had, as it was well known, an unpleasant habit of making ducks
and drakes of his money.  It was the hope of the new one
that by his own reputation in pious circles he should be able to
live down the evil rumours, and to revive the credit of the
Bank.  In this way his wife had done him
p. 167
good
service, and thus he had secured continued confidence in some
quarters and large advances in others.  But there were
people in the money market who had their suspicions as to the
investments of the Bank and the way in which it was
managed.  More than one capitalist had withdrawn his
deposit, and the working partners were growing anxious.
Indeed, on the morning of his departure for Brussels they had an
interview with Sir Robert on the rather shaky position of
affairs.  They had lost money on the London Stock
Exchange.  Some of the mining speculations in which they
were engaged had proved disastrous.  A great contractor whom
they had financed had come to grief.  It was true that their
London agents had come to their rescue, not that they were
over-confident as to the Bank’s affairs, but that they
feared the panic its suspension would create.  But it was
believed that the temporary embarrassment might be tided
over.  Trade was reviving, and already some of their worst
investments were taking a hopeful turn.  Hope
p. 168
told a
flattering tale, and at any rate there was no occasion for
despair.  Much was expected from the reputation of the new
head of the firm in religious circles; much from a more careful
conduct of its officers; much from the improved condition of the
money market.  Still the Baronet was not happy, and it was
with anything but a light heart that he set out for the Belgian
capital.  His wife offered to accompany him, but he declined
the offer.  In reality she had no wish to go, or she would
have gone, you may be sure of that.

Thus it was in no amiable mood the Baronet once more found
himself in his old quarters, in the gay and pleasant city which
the clever diplomacy of Lord Palmerston helped to raise to the
dignity of a European capital and the seat of a monarchy, which
if not ancient is at any rate very respectable.  His first
object was to keep Mrs. Smith quiet, which, at a considerable
cost, he succeeded in doing.  Then he dined at the club,
drank heavily, played high, lost his money and his temper, and
became so
p.
169
insulting to one of the barons with whom he played,
that when he got back to the hotel he found there a challenge
awaiting him to fight a duel.  This was rather more than he
had bargained for, but he could not help himself.  As an
officer—though a retired one—he felt that he could
not refuse.  A hot-headed Irishman acted as his second, and
was so charmed with the idea of the
éclat
of having
to do with a duel, though only in the capacity of a second, that
instead of doing all that he could to put it off, he did all that
was in his power to promote it.  Accordingly it was arranged
that the aggrieved parties should meet in an obscure village on
the French frontier, where they would be sure to be
unobserved.  The Belgian baron’s aim was deadly, and
Sir Robert Strahan was no more.  Short, very short had been
his reign, and now it was all over.  Speedily was the news
telegraphed to the Hall, where everyone was shocked at the
unexpected catastrophe.  Her ladyship grieved deeply, the
girls were in despair.  It was hard, just as Providence was
opening
p.
170
up a way for their good, and they had conquered the
difficulties of a continental exile—it was hard to have all
the bitterness of the hated past revived.  In due time the
body was brought back, and there was another stately funeral and
another nine days’ wonder.  At first everyone
attributed the Baronet’s death to an accident.  Such
was the version which it seemed wise for many
reasons—family, religious, and commercial—to
circulate.  But in time the real truth leaked out, first in
private letters and then in the society journals; and there came
a run on the Bank, which the partners were not prepared to meet,
and which they could not have met had they been prepared.
And there was no alternative but to put up the shutters and to
close the doors.

Deep and dire was the consternation spread all over Sloville
when it was known that the Bank doors were shut.  Sloville
was a rising place.  Some spirited individual or other was
always introducing new industries or putting up new
buildings.  Speculation was rife; and the leading tradesmen
had all
p.
171
large accounts at the Bank, as well as the leading
hotel-keepers.  All the farmers of the district, as their
fathers before them, banked in an establishment so ancient, so
well-connected, so renowned.

‘They ha’ got £500 of my money,’ said
an angry agriculturist, as he banged away, and banged in vain, at
the doors, on which a notice was posted to the effect ‘that
in consequence of a temporary difficulty the Bank had suspended
business for a few days.’

‘They might ha’ given a fellar a hint,’
exclaimed another aggravated individual.

Every minute the crowd increased.  Of widows who had put
into the Bank their little all—many of them in
tears—and of many who had overdrawn their accounts and
trembled at what the result might be to themselves, never had
there been got together a more excited crowd.  Would the
Bank open its doors again?  Was it possible that they were
actually shut?  If the Bank were bankrupt, what would be the
dividend to be paid?  It was the one great topic of
discourse at the market, or in the
p. 172
streets, or in the shops and hotels;
indeed wherever man met man, even at church doors.

The Church was hit rather hard, for the money had been nearly
raised for the erection of a new church, and all the money
subscribed for the purpose had been placed in the Bank.  The
funds of all the working men’s societies had also been
placed there, and they were gone—all the hard-earned
savings of a life, all the wise provision of the small tradesman
or the thrifty operative against a rainy day.  Everywhere
was grief and disappointment and despair.  It was a sorry
sight to see the manager, whom everyone in the town regarded as a
friend.  Never was man more popular or trusted.  He
always wore a smile upon his face; that smile was
gone—vanished as the last rose of summer.  He shut
himself up, and was to be seen in the streets no more.  He
had no conception of what was to happen till there came to him a
telegram, as he was sitting down to breakfast with his smiling
wife and ruddy, fat-cheeked little ones, that he
p. 173
was not to
open the Bank doors.  And they were never opened again, with
the result that many other doors were closed as well, that
millowners had to stop, that their workmen had to be discharged,
that for many a poor widow had to resort to the workhouse, and
that when matters came to be inquired into closely, it was found
that the family at the Hall had been the main cause of the
calamity which had suddenly overwhelmed the town and
neighbourhood.

Bitter were the denunciations made against them.  It was
unpleasant.  The widow and her daughters wisely fled.
They had not been to blame; they were utterly ignorant of the
matter—had nothing to do with it in any way, but the public
of Sloville regarded them as the worst of robbers,
nevertheless.  Her ladyship felt that her influence was
gone, and she and the young ladies moved to a more congenial
neighbourhood, where her ladyship’s Christian graces
flourished more than ever, and where she was deemed by the select
few
p. 174
who
gathered at her ladyship’s dreary parties as one who had
been deeply tried in the furnace of affliction, and who had come
out of it as refined gold.  It was held, however, as a
matter of regret, that on her ladyship’s daughters the
painful visitation of Providence produced no such hallowed and
sanctifying effect.  To make matters worse, one of them
betook herself to a convent, where, as she told her
friends—some of whom, however, rather doubted her
statement—she found a peace and happiness she had never
known before.

In due time there was a sale at the Hall, at which all the
townspeople attended, glad to run up and down from one room to
another, to tread the antique stairs, the stately corridors, and
to seat themselves on seats and on sofas, some of which were as
old as the days of Queen Anne.  Jews from Wardour Street
came down in shoals, to pick up articles of bijoutry and virtu,
to get hold of the old-fashioned ancestors in enormous waistcoats
and knee-breeches and full-bottomed wigs, to do duty
elsewhere.
p.
175
Filthy hands dogs’-eared the choice books in the
library, while snobs bought the deceased Baronet’s
carefully-selected stock of wine at absurdly extravagant
rates.  Everything went to the hammer—carriages and
horses, and all the outdoor effects, all the farming and
agricultural stock.  The sale lasted a week, and brought so
many people from far and near as to give quite a stimulus, and to
give to the place somewhat of its former gaiety.
Shopkeepers and hotel-keepers once more began to smile, and thus,
in time, the effect of the sad disaster seemed to pass away.

The only thing to be regretted was that the old Hall was
doomed.  No gentleman would buy it, as it was too near to
the town, and no townsman was rich enough to buy such a place to
live in.  Further, as the Hall was in a tumble-down state,
and required a good deal of repair of an expensive character, it
was pulled down, and the material distributed all over the
county.  In time a manufactory occupied the site of the old
Hall, and long rows of dull red
p. 176
cottages grew up where once there
were velvet lawns, and gravel walks, and beds of roses.

And thus there vanished for ever from the face of the earth
another of

‘The stately homes of England—

How beautiful they stand

Amidst their tall ancestral trees,

Through all the pleasant land.’

It is not always that the stately home is the scene of
domestic felicity.  It is not true that it is unknown in the
humble workman’s home.  It is to be believed that, as
the workman’s home is elevated, it will be redolent not
merely of manly virtues—the ability to fight the battle of
life and win—but of the graces which at one time the upper
ten seemed to consider as their exclusive privilege; and thus, if
the cottager waxes strong, we need not deplore that the stately
home with all its high-born associations has passed away.

At Sloville there passed away not only the stately home, but
the family that lorded it long.  Thus time changes and we
change
p.
177
with it.  Thus old things pass away and all things
become new.  Thus we may look for a new heaven and earth,
wherein dwelleth righteousness—a righteousness inconsistent
with a civilization that pampered the rich and depressed the
poor, that desolated the cottage to add to the splendour of the
hall.  It is of the many, not of the few, that we have to
think in these democratic days.

And the young heir, what became of him?  He was little
disappointed when it was hinted to him that he was heir to a
bankrupt estate and a dishonoured name.  He was young,
active, healthy, stout-hearted, perfectly willing to fight the
battle of life to the best of his ability.  He was fond of
his profession, had been successful in it, and was in no hurry to
relinquish it.  He had seen a little of aristocratic life at
a distance, and he was not enamoured of it; it seemed to him
unnatural and mischievous.  They had many lads from our
public schools and men from our universities on board ship, and
it seemed to him that they were
p. 178
extravagant, thoughtless, fond of
pleasure, frivolous, and useless, and brought up in an altogether
wrong way.  If they did nothing else he held that they
smoked and drank and ate more than was good for them, that they
wasted a good deal of time in gambling and dissipation, in
reading French novels, in the music-hall and the theatre.
He did not believe that society was in a good state when the few
were born rich and the many poor.  All healthy life seemed
to him to be founded on hard work; the curse had been changed
into a blessing, and man was only happy and kept out of mischief
as he lived by the sweat of his brow.  A lazy life had no
charm for him, even though he lived in a fine mansion, had
servants to wait on him, was clad in purple and fine linen, and
fared sumptuously every day.  A gentleman in the
conventional sense of the term he could never, and would never,
be; that, at any rate, was clear.

‘Well, my boy,’ said the actress, as they met in
Liverpool, where they had both come on purpose, ‘what do
you think?  Would
p. 179
you like to be a gentleman, and lead
such a life as your father?’

‘Certainly not.’

‘Why not?’

‘Because I like hard work.  I am comfortable as I
am.  I am fond of the sea, and if I live to be a captain my
utmost ambition will be fulfilled.  I have seen a good many
gentlemen, on board ship and when I have been to the theatre, and
they seem to be a poor, helpless lot, as if they did not know
what to do with themselves, with their eyeglasses and their high
collars.’

‘But they don’t all wear high collars and
eye-glasses.’

‘No, but most of them do.’

‘Think of what you give up—the society of high
life—your position in the county.’

‘I have, and I don’t care about it.  Swells
don’t suit me, and I shan’t suit them.  I
don’t want to be a landlord where the farmers cannot afford
to pay any rent.  I don’t want to be bothered with a
lot of servants who will be most respectful in my presence, and
who will laugh at me behind
p. 180
my back.  I don’t want to
be stuck up as a mark for needy adventurers and fawning
parasites.  I cannot believe that society in England will
last long in its present position; that the wealth of the country
shall be in the hands of the few, who toil not, neither do they
spin, and that the men who make that wealth, without whom it
could not exist, shall be stowed away in unhealthy cities to
live, and breed, and die in such bitterness of poverty as can be
found nowhere else.  Does not James the Apostle tell the
rich man to go to and howl? and I believe that end is near; that
is, as soon as the working man has his political rights—a
boon that now cannot be long delayed.  No, property of the
kind you speak of has no charms for me; rather give me

‘“A life on the ocean wave,

A home on the rolling deep.”

It is thus I can carry out the mission of the age, to break
down the barriers created by the prejudices and ignorance of
nations, to make men realize by means of international commerce
that we are members one of
p. 181
another, and that God has made of
one blood “all nations that dwell on the face of the
earth.”’

‘Why, my dear boy,’ said the actress, ‘you
are quite a Radical, and a philosopher as well.  Where did
you get your ideas from?  From the newspapers?’

‘Not a bit.’

‘Where from then?’

‘From the Book of Books—the Bible.  I have
loved to think of such things in the watches of the night as I
have been alone on deck.’

‘Well, you have thought to some purpose,’ said the
actress.  ‘Wentworth will be delighted.  I am
sure you will fall in with our plan.’

‘What is that?’

‘I’ll tell you as soon as I have seen
Wentworth.’

‘You’ll hear from me soon,’ said the
actress, as she seated herself in the train, and glided along the
iron road till London was reached in safety and in good
time.  Nor were Wentworth and his wife sorry
p. 182
at his
decision.  They infinitely preferred him as he was, and thus
the matter was allowed to drop, to the infinite regret of a sharp
firm of City lawyers, who were quite ready to do battle for the
lad’s right, with a chance of making money out of the case
somehow before they had done with it.  The family lawyers
were quite content to let things remain as they were.  They
had lost money by the family, and had no more wish to trouble
themselves about their concerns.  There was no chance of
anyone coming forward to claim the family honours, and the name
of Strahan was dropped out of the book of the baronetage of
England for ever.

p.
183
CHAPTER XXX.

ROSE RETIRES FROM THE STAGE.

‘I think,’ said Rose to her husband that night,
‘I shall give up the stage.  I have been without an
engagement long; I have refused everything of the
kind.’

‘Yet, darling, you are not growing old.’

‘No, it is not that.’

‘But what?’

‘That I care less and less for the artificial atmosphere
of the stage.  We lead such a conventional life and breathe
such a conventional air; there is so much of insincerity.
“Suppose any given theatre,” writes Mr. Thomas Archer
in one of his clever essays, “suppose any given theatre
suddenly turned
p.
184
into a Palace of Truth, and all the members of the
company forced to state their true opinion of each other’s
performances, the Palace of Truth would be a
pandemonium.”  And then there are other
considerations.’

‘For instance?’

‘Well, to begin with, the atmosphere of
self-consciousness in which the actor lives and moves and has his
being.  Mr. Henry James tells us the artist performs great
feats in a dream; we must not wake him up lest he should lose his
balance.  The actor, alas! has always to be wide
awake—to think of the applause to be won.  I am sure
too much of that sort of life cannot be good for
anyone.’

‘And I have long been expecting you to say as
much.’

‘But you are not sorry, are you?’

‘On the contrary; it is the very thing I have been
looking for all along.  It is nice to feel when the public
applaud an actress that she is your own; but how much nicer to
feel as I do now,’ said Wentworth, with
p. 185
a loving
caress, ‘that she is all my own!  You were happy on
the stage; you will be ten times happier off it.’

‘Ah, that I know well enough.’

‘I fancy you little people of the mimic world are rather
inclined to overrate your importance.  By the side of it the
editorial “we” is modesty itself.  You actors
and actresses are not such great folk after all.  Admired
one day, forgotten the next!  As I think of all the men and
women I have known upon the stage, who were lions of their day,
for whom the public went into fits of madness, and then see how
completely they are forgotten, it has always seemed to me that to
illustrate the vanity of life and the nothingness of human
applause I should point to the stage.’

One morning there came the manager of the theatre.

‘No, I shall never go back to the stage,’ replied
the actress.

‘Why not, my dear?’ said the manager, a gentleman
of showy manners, and suspected of being rather over-sweet.

p.
186
‘Because I don’t like the life behind the
scenes.’

‘I am surprised to hear that.  If you knew how
young ladies of really good position bother me to give them a
trial!’

‘Ah, they are ignorant.’

‘Yes,’ said the manager; ‘remember the old
lines:

‘“Where ignorance is bliss,

’Tis folly to be wise.’”

‘Folly or not,’ replied Rose, ‘my eyes have
been opened by experience.  Once I was ignorant as they, and
thought how delightful the life behind the scenes must be; but
now I know better.  I only wish I could have a quiet chat
with some of those stage-struck girls, and warn them before it is
too late.  The life is only possible for the children of
parents who are on the stage.  It is the atmosphere in which
they have been brought up.  But as to other girls, the stage
is the last thing they should think of if I had my
way.’

‘But what do you object to?’

p.
187
‘Why, to everything: the language one is obliged
to hear; the dresses, which are often actually indecent; the way
in which one is persecuted by men supposed to be
gentlemen—the free-and-easy way in which they attempt
familiarities is decidedly unpleasant.  No, I have been
behind the scenes; I have no more illusions on that score.
I have done with the whole affair.  I am off the boards, and
I have no wish to reappear on them again.’

‘No money will tempt you?’ said the manager.

‘None,’ was the reply.

‘You will be exposed to no inconvenience, you
know.’

‘That is true; but I should have to give my sanction to
much that I disapprove of.  You must reform what goes on
behind the scenes.’

‘Oh, that is impossible.’

‘That’s what I fear.’

‘Well, as you’ve made up your mind, it is no use,
I fear, discussing the subject any longer.’

p. 188
His
appeal was in vain.

She did not want money, she did not care for applause; she had
plenty of excitement in real life.  She wanted time to
think, and read, and feel.  Behind the footlights every
night, what time has actor or actress to realize the great ends
of life as something real, and not a show with its pretended
tragedy or farce?

‘In fact,’ said the lady, ‘I wish to live
and not to act.’

‘And then return to the stage when you are getting
old,’ said the manager in dismay.  ‘Well, the
public are indulgent, I admit.  A favourite is a favourite,
whether old or young.  There are old men and women now on
the stage who ought to have retired years ago.  They cannot
act decently; with all their making up they are scarcely
presentable.  Their memory and their power are gone, or
something very like it, still the public applaud.  They do
not understand what failures the poor creatures have become, and
they praise them as liberally as when they were in their prime
and could
p.
189
act.  One cannot much wonder that under the
circumstances the veteran actor lags superfluous on the
stage.’

‘But are they not afraid of the newspaper
critics?’

Here the manager laughed.

‘Excuse me—that is too ridiculous.  Who cares
for theatrical criticism?  Of course, we managers are civil
to the critics, who give themselves amusing airs, and have a high
opinion of their own abilities, and we get an advertisement
gratuitously, which, of course, is an advantage.  But a
theatrical critic always swims with the stream—applauds
what the public applaud, and blames what they blame.  The
public don’t care a rap for the theatrical critic.  I
often wonder newspaper editors take the trouble to print what
they write.  That no one reads it, except on a wet Sunday,
they know as well as I.  But you will come back to us
soon?’ said the manager, with his most beseeching air.

‘No, I think not,’ said the lady.  ‘The
life is too exciting to be healthy, either for
p. 190
the heart
or the head.  It is all very well for a little while, but
not for long.  I have been happy on the stage, but I believe
I shall be equally happy off.  Let the younger ones have a
chance.  Every dog has his day.’

And the manager departed, thinking that the lady had made a
great mistake, that perhaps she only needed a little more
pressing.  At any rate, he said, as he bowed himself
out:

‘Madame, you shall hear from me again.’

‘It is no use,’ was her reply.

‘I am glad you have come to such an opinion.  I
also have obtained my freedom,’ said Wentworth.
‘My work at the newspaper office is done.  It has been
rather unpleasant of late.  The proprietors depend on the
Liberal Government; the Liberal Government fancy that to me it is
due that a Tory was returned for Sloville.  It was hinted to
me that I was too independent—too negligent as to the
interests of the party; that I was not severe enough on the
p. 191
sins of the
opposition; that, in short, I was not enough of a party
hack.  Our manager is a keen party man; indeed, he expects
one of these days to be knighted.  And now I am free, and so
are you, and we can set about a work I have long had in
contemplation.  You and I have often talked of
Southey’s and Coleridge’s pantisocracy—I
believe the time has come for some such an enterprise.  It
is true they never carried it out, it is true that when Robert
Owen tried to do something of the kind it failed; but that is no
reason why we should fail.’

‘Of course not,’ said Rose.  ‘Yes, let
us emigrate.  Let us leave Sodom and Gomorrah to their
fate.  The sooner we are off the better.’

‘Let us have old Buxton down to talk over the
matter,’ said Wentworth, making a signal by applying the
poker to the ceiling.

In a moment or two he was in the room, a big burly man, with a
big head and a big beard—given to the immoderate use of
tobacco; averse to wearing new clothes, and not overfond of soap
and water; rather
p.
192
inclined to be lazy; ready to say with Lord Melbourne,
when reforming action was proposed: ‘Why can’t you
leave it alone?’  Such men have their uses in a land
where fussy people—as much with a view to their own
personal gratification as to the welfare of the public—are
always putting themselves forward; attempting to wash the
blackamoor white, to have the Ethiopian change his skin or the
leopard his spots.

‘What’s up now?’ said he as he shuffled
in.  ‘You look uncommonly grave.’

‘Listen to me,’ said Wentworth.  ‘You
have read my article in this morning’s paper?’

‘Not a line.’

‘Read it then.’

Buxton shrugged his shoulders and sat down.

Wentworth continued:

‘Listen to my ideas, which I have published in the
paper.’

‘By all means.’

‘If in the multitude of counsellors there is safety, the
England of to-day has little
p. 193
to fear, in spite of the undeniable
facts that she is losing her trade and commerce, that her
national debt seems impossible of payment, that her expenditure
increases as her income declines, and that the unemployed and
pauper class threaten, like the lean kine Joseph saw in his
dream, to swallow up all the rest.  As long as I can
remember I have heard statesmen, and clergymen of all
denominations, and politicians of all creeds, say something must
be done; and they are still saying it in the most hopeless of
tones, and with air the most dejected.  We have not had our
French Revolution yet.  At the worst, the hungry mobs have
contented themselves with an occasional raid on an unfortunate
butcher or baker, or on some imprudent jeweller, whose attractive
windows have proved too strong a temptation for the
horny-handed.  In the meanwhile, people of a hopeful turn of
mind tell us—and truly—that the working classes were
never better off, better paid, or better fed.  But still,
somehow or other, it is apparent that outside of the hopeless
p. 194
pauperism
which the idiotic legislation of our fathers has called into
existence—outside the depraved, whom drink and dishonesty
have removed from the ranks of labour, to swell the bitter cry
which ever ascends from city slums, where all foul things
congregate, and where decent life is impossible—there are
hundreds, nay, thousands, who are ready to work, but for whom,
though to seek it they rise early and sit up late, no work is to
be had.  Is there any hope for such?  Are they to be
uncared for till they have lost all heart, and sink down to the
pit of misery and despair, never more, till death comes to them
as a friend, to rise again?  Is it not time that we think of
them?  In Ireland, a hundred patriots would have rent the
air with the story of their wrongs.  In England, we take
small note of them.  Yet they are our flesh and blood, with
honest hearts and hands.  A scheme has been devised for
their benefit.  That it is worth a trial, few who can
examine it can doubt.

‘The idea of this new remedy is that, now
p. 195
when
agricultural land is to be had for next to nothing, farms should
be bought on which home colonies may be planted, and labour
provided sufficient for self-support.

‘The fact is,’ said Wentworth, ‘we have
rather a grand scheme in view.  A gentleman is ready to
purchase land in America or Canada or one of the Colonies; to
plant it with poor people who can find no work at home, nor are
likely to do so, if they stop here all their lives.  And he
wants me to go out as manager; I am quite ready to do so.
And Rose is anxious for the experiment to be tried—indeed,
far more so than myself.’

‘That is a matter of course—novelty has always
charms for woman.’

‘And woman,’ said Rose, ‘is always ready to
lend a helping hand to any philanthropic scheme.’

‘Well, it requires a good deal of thinking
about.’

‘And we have thought about it long,’ said
Wentworth; ‘and the more we think
p. 196
about it
the better we like it.  But we want you to accompany
us.’

‘In what capacity?’

‘As medical man.’

‘And you think I would turn my back on London, and give
up my easy life, to undertake all this responsibility?’

‘Well, I don’t see why you should not,’ said
Wentworth.  ‘You are not doing much good here, you
know.’

‘And why should I, when everyone is fussing about doing
good and in the meantime doing a great deal of mischief,
interfering with the working of the unalterable laws of the
universe, washing blackamoors white, trying to make empty sacks
stand upright?’

‘Yes, but we are going to do nothing of the kind.
We are only finding homes and work for men and women who can find
in the old country neither the one nor the other—to save
them from sinking into hopeless pauperism, to help them to live
happy and healthful lives.  What have you to say against our
scheme?’

p.
197
‘Really, now I think about it, I can’t say
anything against it, supposing that you have a proper site for
the experiment, that you take proper people, and that you have
sufficient capital to make a fair start.’

‘Oh, as to that, everything has been provided for.
Each colonist will have a bit of ground, which he will pay for in
time by his labour.  We intend working on the old lines, not
to be led away by communistic ideas.  Each man will do the
best he can for himself, and in so doing will be best for
all.  What do you think, Buxton, of the scheme?’

‘Why, like all her ladyship’s ideas, it is
excellent.’

‘Pretty flatterer!’ said Rose.

‘He wants to cut me out,’ said Wentworth.
‘He was always envious of my superior abilities.’

‘As he had every reason to be,’ said Rose.

‘Come, that’s too bad,’ said Buxton, turning
to Rose, ‘after the way in which I
p. 198
buttered
you up just now.  Two to one ain’t fair.  But to
return to business.’

‘Hear, hear,’ said Wentworth.

‘If I had a family—which, thank Heaven, I have
not—I would not stop in England a day.  If I had a lad
to plant out in the world as you have, I’d send him off to
America or the Colonies to-morrow.’

‘Because?’

‘Because it’s all up in old England in the first
place; and in the second place, because if it were not so, the
New World offers better opportunities for a young fellow than the
old.  May I dwell upon these topics?’

‘Certainly, by all means.’

‘Well, I have met a good many Americans lately, and they
have put new ideas into my head—’

‘Not before they were wanted!’ said Wentworth.

‘Speak for yourself, sir, if you please,’ said
Buxton, with an assumed offended air.

‘Oh, I beg pardon!  Pray proceed.’

‘I was going to say,’ said Buxton, ‘until
interrupted in this unmannerly manner,
p. 199
you are
enthusiasts, I am not.  I doubt the dream of a new heaven
and a new earth.  It has done good in its time, I
admit.  It was the thought of the Messiah that was to come
that nerved the heart of the Jew as he sat by the waters of
Babylon and wept as he remembered Zion.  Paul and the
Apostles expected the new heaven and the new earth before they
laid down their lives as martyrs for their inspiring faith.
Upheld by the same living hope, tender and delicate maidens have
gone to the grave exulting, and have glorified God at the stake
or in the dungeon or on the scaffold.  “The end of all
things is at hand,” is ever the cry of the churches.
It was that of Luther in his day, and is that of the Evangelicals
in ours, who, if an earthquake destroys a town, or a deluge
sweeps over the land, or the cholera breaks out in the East, or
there are wars and rumours of wars, tell us these are the dread
signs to mark the coming of the Son of Man with His saints to
judge the earth.  I feel rather inclined to believe with old
Swedenborg that that day is past.  The talk
p. 200
of a
Millennium makes me sick.  It is a delusion and a
sham.  Such men as Dr. Cumming, with their long array of
dates and their wild dreams of the fulfilment of prophecy, make
men like myself sceptics.  It is clear to us that the odds,
at any rate, are against the Christian.’

‘I don’t know,’ said Rose.  ‘But
this is a business scheme.  We are not in search of the
Millennium.’

p.
201
CHAPTER XXXI.

CHIEFLY ABOUT THE LAND.

For three months an Englishman sits in sackcloth and
ashes.  The matter-of-fact reviewer will tell me this is not
so; and he is right and so am I.

London is not a place to live in in winter; there is,
unfortunately, no place in England that is.  People talk of
the weather.  They cannot help themselves.  In his old
age Dr. Johnson wrote, ‘I am now reduced to think and am at
last content to talk of the weather.’  That was a sign
that the Doctor at last had fallen low.  As Burney writes:
‘There was no information for which Dr. Johnson was less
grateful than for that which concerned the weather.’
If any one of his intimate companions told him it was
p. 202
hot or
cold, wet or dry, windy or calm; he would stop them by saying:
‘O-oh, O-oh!  You are telling me of that of which none
but men in a mine or a dungeon can be ignorant.  Let us bear
with patience or enjoy in quiet elementary changes either for the
better or the worse, as they are never secrets.’
Nevertheless, the state of the weather continues in all circles
an unfailing theme.  Bad weather affects the spirits by
depressing them, fine raises them.  We are attuned to every
action of the outer atmosphere.  Our suicides in November
are known all the world over.  It is scarcely possible to be
cheerful on a dull, cold, raw, foggy day.  I wonder people
who can afford to go away and have no pressing claims at home do
not rush off to the Riviera in search of its blue sky, its summer
suns, its wealth of flowers, its richer life for the delicate, or
the infirm or old.

‘We must get out of England,’ said Wentworth to
his wife, one dull wintry morn, when the raw cold seemed to fill
every apartment in the house, and the outlook
p. 203
into the
busy street only revealed half-starved figures in all their
wretchedness.  ‘We must get out of England, and the
sooner the better.’

‘Yes, I’ve long been thinking so; but the question
is, where to go.  We have got to think of other people
besides ourselves, and of other affairs than our own.  But
with our tastes and habits we can live cheaply anywhere, and I
have no wish to go where we shall meet a lot of idle rich people
only seeking to guard themselves from the English winter and
spending life in frivolous indulgence.  Let us take the
question seriously.’

‘That is just what I am trying to do,’ was the
reply.  ‘We are not too old for a grand
experiment.’

‘But are you prepared to give up journalism?’

‘Yes, I am.  I see a new spirit abroad, one which I
detest.’

But one thing remained to Wentworth of the teaching of his
early years: a love of Liberal principles; an enthusiasm for
p. 204
humanity; a
deep yearning for the mental and moral elevation of the
people—ideas deeply cherished in the Nonconformist families
of the past generation.  In every home the struggle for
reform, the hatred of slavery, the desire to give the Roman
Catholics fair play, the struggle for the repeal of the Test and
Corporation Acts, the need of a national and unsectarian system
of education, were held to be objects of paramount importance,
and were the subjects of daily converse.  In every rural
village meetings were held at the chapels in their favour, and if
there were no great orators to attend them, what was said at them
sank into prepared soil, and bore a rich harvest.  It was in
East Anglia as it was all over England.  The agitation went
from one chapel to another.  A line of communication was
thus established, wrote William Hazlitt, whose father was a
Unitarian minister in Shropshire, by which the flame of civil and
religious liberty is kept alive, and nourishes its smouldering
fires, unquenchable like the fires in the Agamemnon
p. 205
of
Æschylus, placed at different stations that waited for ten
long years to announce with their blazing pyramids the
destruction of Troy.  It was from such centres came the
soldiers who were to win the people’s victories in spite of
the nominees of Tory lords and rotten borough-mongers, of
pensioners and place-men, of time-serving priests and fawning
courtiers who then ruled the land, and who fattened on the taxes
wrung from an unrepresented and oppressed and a
discontented—and a justly discontented—nation.
Young hearts burned within them as they listened to Liberal
orators, or read the speeches of such men as Henry Brougham or
Dan O’Connell, or studied Liberal newspapers; and they
longed for the time when they, too, should gird on the shield and
buckler and do battle for the Right.  In vain timid
ministers and aged deacons uttered warning voices and shook their
heads at the new spirit which was abroad, quoted Scripture about
obeying them that have rule over you, hinted at the danger to
spirituality of life and feeling
p. 206
by mixing in the rough warfare of
the political world.  As well might they scream to the
stormy blast.  The current was too strong: they had to swim
with it or be drowned.  It was a grand time of
awakening.  The world has seen nothing like it since.
To Wentworth it was a baptism, the effect of which was never to
pass away.  Buxton, as usual, continued his morning
smoke.

‘Hear me,’ said Wentworth, as Rose rushed out of
the room, declaring that she knew all he had to say.
Wentworth continued: ‘As long as I can remember, the
“condition of England question,” as Carlyle called
it, or, as we term it, in more sensational phraseology,
“the bitter cry of the outcast,” has afforded painful
matter of reflection to the statesman, the philanthropist, the
philosopher, and the divine.  It is always coming to the
front, and it will always be coming to the front, even if you
hang all the bad landlords and jerry-builders, get rid of the
bloated capitalist, and divide the
p. 207
estates of the aristocracy and the
millions of the capitalists among the poor of the East-end.
The working classes are not to be confounded with the men and
women who herd like beasts in the wretched dens of the
east.  Underneath the lowest of them there is a conservative
residuum whom it is impossible to get rid of, whose condition it
is appalling to contemplate.  They are the men who
won’t work; who won’t go where work is to be had; who
come to London when they should never have left their country
home; who sell their manhood for a pot of beer: casuals who, born
in a poor-house or a prison, children of shame from the first,
mostly spend their lives alternately tramping the streets and in
the workhouse or the gaol.  As London increases in
population, so do they.  We have seen such men offered fair
work by hundreds, but they prefer filth and laziness, with the
chance of an appeal to the humane.  “Pull down the
rookery,” and the rooks won’t fly away.  Burn
all the fever and vice laden dens of the outcast, and
p. 208
there he is
still, a disgrace and shame—not so much, as sensational
writers pretend, to our civilization and religion as to our
common manhood.  Ever since we have known anything of the
churches—whether Established or Free—it seems to us
that they have aimed as much at the temporal as the spiritual
improvement of the outcast.  We have yet to learn that it is
a disgrace to our civilization that it does not interfere with
God’s law, that the wrong-doer must pay for his
wrong-doing, whatever that may be—that if you lose your
chance, another will take it—that it is too late to go
harvesting in winter; that the victory is to the strong, that he
that will not work shall not eat—those who forget this, who
idle away the precious moments, are soon sitting in the outer
darkness of the outcast, where there is weeping, and wailing, and
gnashing of teeth.

‘It amuses us, or would, were not the subject so
awful—for it may be taken as a sober truth that outside the
bottomless pit there is no such utter damnation as is
p. 209
to be found
among the outcast—to find clever writers talking of the
constant neglect of the last hundred years, and to ponder over
the remedies.  It is now the fashion to recommend better
houses to be built at the expense of the community.  If we
were to get free trade in land, more will be done to remove the
congestion in our great cities than by the erection of improved
dwellings, which will rather intensify the evil.  The more
society does for the outcast the more will their number and their
poverty alike increase.  The remedy is worse than the
disease.  Every halfpenny you give to the undeserving is so
much taken from the deserving.  Every benefit you confer on
the pauper is at the expense of the honest, respectable poor, who
have a prior claim.  Against State action the argument is
still stronger.  In the first place, the State cannot deal
honestly and fairly by the people.  What it does is ill
done, and at double expense.  The people who pay the taxes
are often as badly off as
p. 210
those for whose benefit they are
spent.  A slight addition to the taxation of a wealthy peer
or capitalist will not deprive him of a single luxury, but it may
send a small, struggling tradesman into the
Gazette
.
We are a nation of shopkeepers, and it is easy to perceive that a
time may come when our heavy taxation may cripple us in our trade
with foreign competitors, when they will supply the markets, on
which we have hitherto depended, when, in fact, we shall have
little left to us but our National Debt.’

‘Go on,’ said Buxton.  ‘You are getting
rather prosy, but if it relieves your feelings, pray
proceed.’

‘Well, then,’ said Wentworth, ‘I will.
A gentleman sends me a scheme of a cooperative home colony, which
will give the settlers three good meals a day, a house, a full
suit of clothing every year, education for their children, and an
allotment of half an acre of land, which shall be entirely at the
disposal of the head of the family so long as he makes a good use
of it and renders
p.
211
proper service during the regular working hours.
For the purchase of fuel or tea and coffee, and such things as
cannot be grown in this climate, the director will sell in the
public market any surplus produce such as eggs, butter and
poultry, far too much of which we get from abroad.
One-sixth of the harvest and other produce will be sold to pay
the salaries of director and foremen.  A farm of three
hundred and forty acres in the Isle of Sheppey, for instance, can
be had if it be deemed desirable.  If we get a population of
five hundred on it, fifty acres of wheat will supply the
settlement with all the bread that can be eaten there.  If
the cows were stall-fed, one hundred acres of land would keep
over a hundred head of cattle, and such a herd would supply all
the requisite milk, cheese, butter, beef and hides every year in
abundant quantities.  Flax could be cultivated and linen
woven.  A flock of sheep could be tended on the estate
sufficient to yield five pounds of wool every year per head of
the population.  There would be no expense for manure, as
the settlement would
p. 212
provide it all.  Are you
weary?’ said Wentworth.

‘Not particularly.  Pray proceed.  But why not
try it—why not begin a scheme of the kind at
once?’

‘All we have to do is to get the people back to the
land.  By the establishment of such home colonies work will
be offered in rural districts to men and women who would
otherwise be driven into our great cities to increase the
pauperism which threatens our whole social edifice.  The
scheme, if carried out, will encourage habits of industry and
thrift—unlike the work given in our workhouses, which
demoralizes and degrades the recipients; it will help the
societies instituted to distribute charity, as it will offer
strong men and women healthy labour rather than doles, which they
are ashamed to accept, which they do not ask for, and which, when
taken, have a tendency to break down that spirit of independence
and self-reliance which lies at the foundation of all decent
manhood; and lastly, and this is an immense benefit, it would
prevent land now
p.
213
in cultivation from becoming a desert.  It seems
to me this of itself is no common recommendation of the plan,
when farmers are giving up farming, and their farms either
allowed to run to waste or farmed by the landlords at a heavy
loss.  Our great Free Traders never dreamt of this when they
got Parliament and the people to destroy Protection, yet such are
the facts we have to face.’

‘And yet there are people who believe in Cobden
still,’ said Buxton.

‘I knew him well,’ said Wentworth, ‘and a
better man never lived.  He was right in the main, though
his enthusiasm led him astray, and no wonder.  Let me, in
the language of Goldsmith remind you—

‘“How
wide the limits stand

Between a splendid and a happy land.”’

Buxton laughed when Wentworth had finished his rhapsody.
Buxton was given to laughter.  He was not a man who took
life very seriously.  Perhaps he would have done better had
he done so as far as his own personal interests were
concerned.  As Swift
p. 214
said of Arbuthnot, it might be said
of him, that he knew his art better than his trade.

‘Wait a moment,’ he said, as he rushed out of the
room to his own den, whence he returned with an old faded
handbill, which was as follows:

SPENCE’S PLAN

for Parochial Partnerships in the
Land

is the only effectual remedy for the

distress and oppressions of the people.

The Landholders are not Proprietors-in-Chief;

they are but the
Stewards
of the Public,

for the
Land is the People’s
Farm
.

The expenses of the Government do not cause the

misery that

surrounds us, but the enormous exactings of those

Unjust Stewards
,

Landed monopoly is indeed equally contrary

to the benign

Spirit of Christianity, and destructive of

the Independence and Morality of Mankind.

‘The Profit of the Earth is for all.’

Yet how deplorably destitute are the great mass of the

People!

Nor is it possible for their situations to

be radically amended but

by the establishment of a system

founded on the immutable bases of

Nature and Justice.

Experience demonstrates its necessity, and the

Rights of Manhood

require it for their presentation.

p. 215
To
obtain this important object by extending the knowledge of the
above system, the Society of Spencean Philanthropies has been
established.  Further information of its principles may be
obtained by attending any of its sectional meetings, where
subjects are discussed calculated to enlighten the human
understanding; and where, also, the regulations of the society
may be procured, containing a complete development of the
Spencean system.  Every individual is admitted free of
expense who will conduct himself with decorum.

‘I never heard of Spence,’ said Wentworth.

‘Of course not,’ said Buxton.  ‘In
these days of boasted progress we know nothing of what has
been.  Radicals always ignore the past.  You really
need a little enlightenment.  Shall I enlighten
you?’

‘By all means.’

‘It was in 1775 Mr. Spence began his public
career.  Like most original thinkers, he commenced in the
country.  His political opinions were first pronounced in
the form of a lecture read before the Newcastle Philosophical
Society in 1775, and printed immediately afterwards, from which
time, he says, he went on continually publishing
p. 216
them in
some shape or other.  They are fully explained in his
“Constitution of Spensonia: a Country in Fairy Land
Situated Somewhere between Utopia and Oceana.”
According to his scheme, the land belongs to the people, and
individuals should rent the land from their respective parishes,
the rent constituting the national revenue, and the surplus,
after all expenses were paid, was to be divided equally amongst
all the parishioners.  The larger estates were to be let for
one-and-twenty years, and at the expiration of that term relet by
public auction, the smaller ones by the year, and the larger ones
sub-divided according to the increase of population.  The
legislative power was to be vested in an annual Parliament
elected by universal suffrage, women voting as well as men.
The executive was to be in the hands of a council of twenty-five,
half of which was to be renewed annually.  Every fifth day
there was to be a Sabbatical rest, not a Sabbath, for no
provision was made for public worship, and in the new world no
mention was to be
p.
217
made of parsons, though the constitution was to be
proclaimed in a more or less religious form.  At the end of
the pamphlet, as it was published, was an epilogue, intimating
the flight of poverty and misery from this lower world, and there
was an appeal:

‘“Let us all join heart and hand

Through every town and city,

Of every age and every sex,

Young men and maidens pretty,

To haste this golden age’s reign

On every hill and valley,

Then Paradise shall greet our eyes

Through every street and alley.”’

‘Ah,’ said Wentworth, ‘I see there is
nothing new under the sun.’

‘But the taxes?’ said Buxton.  He continued:
‘This scheme was published long before the French
Revolution broke out.  Up in the north there had risen a
solitary and original thinker who advocated female voting,
universal suffrage, annual Parliaments, and had got hold of the
idea—which has led many of our modern apostles to fame and
fortune—that the land lay at the
p. 218
root of the
Condition of England question, that all private property in land
must be destroyed, and that it must be done at once.

‘Spence, then, was, to use the cant of the present day,
a Progressist.  To him belongs the honour of having first
presented the land question in all its bearings to the general
public.  What was his reward?—a Government prosecution
with a fine of £20 and a year’s imprisonment at
Shrewsbury.  Well might a nobleman, as Wilberforce tells us,
show him the picture of crucified Christ, and bid him mark the
end of a Reformer.

‘One cause of Spence’s failure is obvious—he
tried to do too much.  “When I began to study,”
says he, “I found everything erected on certain unalterable
principles.  I found every art and science a perfect
whole.  Nothing was in anarchy but language and
politics.  But both of these I reduced to order; the one by
a new alphabet, the other by a new constitution.”  Of
what he called his natural or philosophical orthography we know
but little,
p.
219
save that one of his works was printed in it.  Had
he aimed at less he would have accomplished more.  He was no
vulgar demagogue; that trade was not a paying one when Spence
proclaimed himself “the unpaid advocate of the disinherited
seed of Adam.”  “This, gentlemen,” he
exclaimed when on his trial—he was too poor to retain
attorney or counsel for his defence—“this, gentlemen,
is the Rights of Man; and upon this Book of Nature have I built
my commonwealth, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against
it.”  He added, as well he might: “I solemnly
avow that what I have written and published has been done with as
good a conscience and as much philanthropy as ever possessed the
heart of any prophet-philosopher or apostle that ever
existed.”

‘It was all in vain.  The Government of the day
feared the result of his teaching.  Had he set up for a
philosopher and clothed his ideas in mystic language, perhaps he
might have been overlooked; but he published what he called
“Pig’s Meat” for the
p. 220
people, and
that made him dangerous.  He had no friends and became an
easy prey.  He was poor, he stood alone, and was generally
held to be little better than a lunatic; even the professed
friends of liberty kept aloof from him.  Well might be
exclaim, as he did before his judges, “Perhaps, my lords, I
have entertained too high an opinion of human nature, for I do
not find mankind very grateful clients.”  After his
trial and imprisonment Spence became an itinerant vendor of books
and pamphlets, chiefly his own works, which he carried about in a
vehicle constructed for the purpose.  He died somewhere
about 1812, while Britons were hard at work on sea and in every
land in Europe setting right public matters according to their
fashion—paying foreigners to fight for their own
independence, singing all the while that they never would be
slaves.’

‘We are wiser now,’ said Wentworth.

‘Perhaps,’ was the cynical reply.  ‘You
are everlastingly talking,’ he continued, ‘of an
outcast London; but, after all, it is on
p. 221
outcast
London that the chief blame of its misery lies.  Let us have
an Act for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children, and at once, in
outcast London, where boys and girls become fathers and mothers
before they are out of their teens, and when they have no chance
of earning a living, and know not and care not for the little
ones they bring into the world.  In respectable London a man
does not marry till he fancies he can keep a wife.  In
outcast London it is the reverse.  In such a case population
represents the thoughtlessness of the nation.  In many cases
it represents the most brutal selfishness.  Men and women
can’t complain if they reap what they have sown; but have
not we a right to say a word on behalf of the children?  For
men and women to bring up their children in the way in which it
is done in outcast London is a crime.  To bring a baby into
the world to lead a diseased and wretched life where it can never
get a mouthful of wholesome food, a ray of sunlight, a particle
of fresh air, to curse a young life
p. 222
that God meant to be so full of
bliss, is a crime so awful that we can see no fitting
punishment.  To improve outcast London the first thing is to
stop the supply.  There is no remedy if reckless pauperism
is to be allowed to grow rampant in our midst.

‘One word more,’ said Wentworth.
‘Suppose we think more of the decent poor, and less of the
outcast.  Suppose we give the respectable working man as
much sympathy as we give his good-for-nothing brother.
Suppose we take the sober operative as much by the hand as we do
the inebriate.  Suppose we act on the idea that industry is
honourable, and that the men who live by it are men to be
honoured; that the world with all its blessings is for the
worker, whether he tills the soil or ploughs the deep, whether he
builds the loftiest viaduct or burrows in the deepest
mine.’

p.
223
CHAPTER XXXII.

CONSULTATION.

They were sitting one morning at breakfast—that
pleasantest of meals, unless you have to be up at an unusually
early hour to catch the train and be off to London.  Modern
life is not such an improvement on that of the past as we are apt
to fancy.  The breakfast was the one meal at which people
could meet and discuss matters—private, local, political,
literary, or religious, in an informal way.  We have no
pleasant breakfast in these more ostentatious days, when society
is too large to admit of friendship; but it seems to me that in
my younger days we got a good deal more pleasure out of
life.  No wonder, then, that we sigh for the good old times,
and long
p.
224
for their revival; that we have Queen Anne furniture,
and houses built in what is called the Elizabethan style, and an
effort to do away with the rail, and to revive the far-famed
coaches with four horses which were the delight of the nation in
the Georgian days.

I can call well to mind the time when I held the coachman of a
certain Royal Mail, which made its appearance in our benighted
village about breakfast-time, to have been one of the most
eminent men of the day, and felt at least a foot taller when, as
was his wont, he gave me, boy as I was, a friendly nod of
recognition.  As to seeing the horses changed, that was a
scene I would not have missed on any account.  How we all
stood admiring as the panting steeds, which had galloped
gloriously their stage, were led sweating away, and the fresh
team, with cloths on, and their hoofs newly-cleaned, and
everything about them bright and shiny, took the vacant
places!  What a pleasure it was to see them as they stood
pawing the
p.
225
ground, impatient to be off!  How glad we were
when the coachman, as he climbed up into his lofty seat, and
gathered up the reins in his capacious hand, gave the signal,
‘Let ’em go!’  How beautiful it was to us
lads to see the coach bound off like a thing of life, while the
guard blew a farewell flourish on his horn, and the horses
settled down steadily to their work after a playful flourish or
two!

Woe is me!  I, and other miserable sinners like unto me,
come to town through tunnels, and over the tops of houses, or
along cuttings in which one gets an unlovely view of the backs of
dirty houses and slovenly yards, in a closely-packed railway
carriage, where we can neither talk, nor hear, nor read, and grow
nervous as the engine screams and shrieks on all occasions, while
the railway porters close the doors with a bang sufficient to
send one into a fit.  Life in our railway age is hard for us
all.

Wentworth and his wife were at breakfast, as I have
said.  London had been
p. 226
disturbed by rumours as to the claim
to the titles and estates of the deceased Baronet.
Newspapers were not so full of twaddle as they are now; that
spawn of the press, the newspaper interviewer, had not as yet
sprung into existence.  But still then, as now, there was a
great deal of unmeaning gossip that did manage to find its way
into the columns of the weekly and daily journals.  It has
ever been so.  Apparently, it seems as if it ever will be
so.  The fashion originated in the servants’
hall.  ‘A chambermaid to a lady of my
acquaintance,’ writes Dean Swift, ‘when talking with
one of her fellow-servants, said: “I hear it is all over
London already that I am going to leave my
lady.”’  In this respect she resembled the
footman who, being newly married, desired his comrade to tell him
freely ‘what the town really thought of it.’
From the servants’ hall the habit spread to Grub Street,
and thence to the West-End, to become the leading feature in
journals only written for men, or gentlemen, or ladies,
p. 227
as
circumstances required.  We laugh at the old divine who
wrote a threepenny pamphlet against France, and who, being in the
country, hearing of a French privateer hovering along the coast,
fled to town and told his friends that they need not wonder at
his haste, which he accounted for from the fact that the King of
France, having got intelligence of his whereabouts, had sent a
privateer on purpose to carry him away.  How ridiculous was
good Dr. Gee, Prebendary of Westminster, who wrote a small paper
against Popery!  Being ordered to travel on the Continent
for his health, he disguised his person and assumed another name,
as he fancied he would be murdered, or put into the
Inquisition.  But are we less ridiculous, or rather has not
that ridiculous exaggeration of the personal, which is the
foundation of newspaper twaddle, become more of a nuisance than
ever?

Again, we all of us think too much of money and
money-making.  Is it not time that we utter a word of
warning in the
p.
228
matter?  It is inconvenient to have no money, most
of us know by practical experience; but the possession of much of
it is not after all a guarantee of respectability of character,
or individual capacity.  We call ourselves a Christian
people, we profess to be actuated by Christian principles.
The Master was a poor man—a carpenter’s son—His
disciples were poor men.  If any class are particularly
referred to in the New Testament as far from the kingdom, they
are the rich.  All modern society is based on the opposite
idea.  We give the rich man the chief place in the
synagogue.  The society journals delight to do him
honour.  He has even made church-going the fashion.
This is no age of poor geniuses.  Our artists, our poets or
teachers are all of the well-to-do.  A Burns, or a
Bloomfield, would be thought nothing of in our time.  The
modern woman is impossible in a poor community.  When a lady
writer is described in our magazines and newspapers, the writer
dwells at painful length on the costliness of her surroundings;
her dresses, her parties,
p. 229
the expensiveness of her furniture,
and the signs of wealth she everywhere displays.  The
millions—how they toil and how miserably they live!
The rich—what an idle life they lead!  And then think
of the way in which that wealth, which is often a curse to them,
is obtained!  Far away indeed is the new heaven and the new
earth in which dwelleth righteousness; infamous as are the means
by which the wealth we envy and admire is obtained, how ready we
are to do homage to its possessor, poor as he may be in spirit,
and unclean and unlovely in his life!  Wentworth saw, as we
all do, this unsatisfactory side of all human affairs.  The
time had come, he thought, for an effort for something better,
for a state in which the wealth earned by the labourer should be
more equitably distributed.  There was a divine order in
life, he believed, which had been lost sight of, and forgotten,
and the result was unmitigated poverty and wretchedness.
For this society was responsible, and especially its rulers, who
had increased the sufferings of the poor,
p. 230
who had
trampled on the weak, who had played into the hands of the rich
and the strong; he did not believe, as some of our modern lights
do, that the masses were always right and the classes always
wrong.  It seemed to him that there were good and bad
amongst them all, that circumstances were such, that there was
little hope of change for the better.  Circumstances were
too strong for the individual to conquer.  Take
intemperance, for instance, the main cause of England’s
wretchedness; how is it possible to grapple with that in society,
where intoxicating drink is deemed, in most circles, a daily
necessity of life?

‘You must form new social conditions,’ said Buxton
as he entered: ‘I have just left,’ he said, ‘a
friend of mine.  We were fellow students.  He was the
leader in all the classes, and graduated with high honours.
He took his doctor’s degree and then became a clergyman,
acquired great popularity, was the means of drawing together a
large congregation, became one of the ornaments of the temperance
platform,
p.
231
was for awhile a power in Exeter Hall, had everything
that heart could wish, a charming wife, a comfortable income, a
large family; and now he has become a sot and a drunkard, and I
see no hope for him as long as he lives.  I can only believe
that he was born with a hereditary taint—and that after
fighting against it all his life, it has broken out at last and
proved his master.’

‘Then you think drunkenness is a disease, and that a man
is not responsible for it?’

‘In many cases I do, and I smile when I hear the parson
denounce him as guilty of a heinous sin, or the judge brand him
as a criminal offender.  Examine the drunkard’s body
after death, and you see in the stomach, in the liver, in the
heart and brain signs of a diseased condition.  At the same
time, I am ready to admit that there are many who drink out of
mere cussedness or who are so wretched that they take to it for
temporary relief; or who just drink because they live in a
drunken set, and like to do as others around them do.
Whatever
p.
232
the immorality, the vice, or the sin of drunkenness, in
a very large number of cases the drunkard is more to be pitied
than blamed, as the subject of disease.  If you get him to
take the pledge, the chances are that he will break it, and that
the last state of that man will be worse than the
first.’

‘Ah! that helps me to what I have been long thinking
of,’ replied Wentworth.

‘What is that—a community planted where no drink
can be had?  That is all very well; but while you are about
it, you may as well go a step further.  There are other
hereditary diseases besides drunkenness: why permit them?
Man is an animal,’ said Buxton.  ‘I am, of
course, speaking only from a medical point of view.  What do
we do with animals?  Why, we stamp out the disease, and thus
we get a new generation.  It is thus we battle with lung
disease in bullocks, swine fever and glandered horses.  We
must stamp out disease in men and women as we stamp it out of
other animals.’

p.
233
‘And then pay compensation to the owner.
That would be rather a costly matter.’

‘No; I would put it the other way.  Take, for
instance, a consumptive couple in humble life.  They marry
early.  The mother has a large family.  The father dies
of consumption before he has reached middle age, after being in a
hospital for months, supported at the public expense, and he
leaves his children, if they live, to be supported by the
parish.  If there is to be compensation, it is not the State
that ought to be asked to pay it.  If drink be one cause of
poverty, surely hereditary disease is another.  In a perfect
community neither should be allowed to exist.  Think of such
awful things as epilepsy and insanity, and cancer and scrofula,
none of which science can cure!  Why not ask society to
stamp them out?  It is downright wickedness to allow them to
be propagated in our midst.’

‘Public opinion would never consent to that.’

‘No,’ replied Buxton; ‘I am quite aware
p. 234
of that;
but I would create a public opinion that would regard such
marriages with horror, and then they would gradually become
rare.  Men and women have duties to society, and have to
think of something else than the gratification of selfish passion
or mere animal instinct.  It is thus hereditary disease may
disappear, and the nation be all the stronger and happier and
richer.  I know there are good people who look upon such
afflictions as the result of the Lord’s chastening hand,
and as they bury wife, or husband, or son, or daughter, learn to
kiss the rod—as they call it—and to thank the Lord
that He thus is weaning them from the world, and preparing them
for a better world, whither they tell us their loved ones are
already gone.  I have no sympathy with that state of
mind.  It seems to me almost blasphemous, as the
bereavements they rejoice in for their supposed sanctifying
effects are simply the natural result of their own folly and
imprudence and disregard of natural law.  In the days of
ignorance how did we treat the insane?
p. 235
Why, they
were regarded as victims of Divine wrath, and the priest was
called in—and of course well paid—to exorcise the
evil spirit.  That we do not do so now is a proof that we
are a little wiser than our fathers—that, in fact, we are
not quite such thundering fools; but we have a good deal yet to
learn, nevertheless.’

‘The fact is,’ said Wentworth, ‘a man must
learn to deny himself for the public good.  Rather a
difficult task that.  If the victim of hereditary disease
refuses to marry and have children, hereditary disease will die
out.  Is not that asking too much of human
nature?’

‘There we must appeal to the law for the protection of
the general public.  The community is of more importance
than the individual.’

‘But there is no law that cannot be evaded.’

‘Exactly so.  Laws against drunkenness are
constantly broken, but they have a beneficial effect
nevertheless.  A prohibitory liquor law goes too far.
To act on the idea
p.
236
that a glass of claret, or beer, or cider does mischief
to anyone is absurd.  Walter Mapes was right when he wrote
in praise of drink.  As the old monk writes—

‘“A glass of wine amazingly enliveneth
one’s internals.”’

‘You are right there,’ replied Wentworth.
‘Last summer I was at a seaside watering-place.  There
had been a regatta there, and I had written a description of it
for our paper.  In a day or two after the event was
celebrated by a grand dinner at the leading hotel, to which I was
invited.  Unfortunately, on the day of the dinner I was
desperately ill.  My head was splitting; my skin was as
tough as the hide of a rhinoceros; I ached in every limb.  I
went to the medical men of the district; there were two of them
in partnership.  No. 1 made me believe that I was in a bad
way; No. 2 made me out worse.  “Could I go to the
dinner?” I asked.  “By no means,” was the
reply.  “Take this medicine, go home and go to bed,
and we will come and see you in the morning.”  Ill as
I was, I
p.
237
went to the dinner.  It was a very jovial one, and
I sat drinking champagne till late.  I went home, slept like
a top, and woke up as well as I ever was in my life.  The
next morning the doctor came.  “Ah,” he said,
“I see you look all the better for my
medicine.”  I said, “I did not take a drop of
your medicine.  I went to the dinner, drank champagne all
night, and it was that which cured me.”  “Very
strange that,” said the doctor.  “The very
things we think poison have often quite a contrary
effect.”  My own opinion is that if I had taken the
medicine I should have been ill for a week at least.  I
don’t take wine as a daily drink, because I can’t
afford it, for one reason, and for another because I believe,
taken daily, it has a mischievous effect.  But there are
times when it does good, and life is not so joyous that we can
afford to dispense entirely with the pleasant stimulus of
wine.  I would not prevent its manufacture.  No society
has ever existed without the winecup for its feasts and
holidays.  I would not put down the liquor traffic.  I
would
p.
238
only shut up the drink shops.  It is they that
cause the drunkenness which does so much mischief, and there is
no need for their existence at all.

‘But let us hear what her ladyship has to say,’
said Buxton.

‘What are you talking about?’ she said.

‘A regenerated State.’

‘Ah, there is need for it,’ she said.
‘But how are you to get it?  That is the
question.’

‘Oh, nothing is easier.  Buy a farm in Essex and
form there a model society.’

‘With a cheap train to take your people to London in an
hour or two?  That will never do.’

‘Well, then, let us go to Canada and plant our Utopia
there.’

‘And fail, as others have done,’ said she.

‘But we shall take picked men and women, and with them
we cannot fail.’

‘But they are not immortal.’

‘Happily,’ said Buxton, ‘none of us are
that.  We’ve all got to die and make room for the new
generation.’

p.
239
‘And can you answer for the new
generation?’ asked Rose, ‘that they will remain shut
up in your Utopia to labour, not each for himself, but for mutual
benefit; that they will conform to your ideas as regards drinking
and matrimony; that no selfish passion will run riot; that no
serpent will come into that paradise to tempt another Eve; that
the new Adam will be wiser than the old one?’

‘Why, I thought you were in favour of the idea,’
said her husband.

‘But I am a woman.’

‘And therefore have a full right to change your
opinion,’ added Buxton.

‘Of course, there must be some failures.  It is by
them we learn how to succeed,’ replied Wentworth.
‘We learn from the failure of past organizations the way to
form better and more successful ones.  Are there not
successful Shaker settlements in America?’

‘You make me laugh,’ said the lady.

‘This is no laughing matter.  We are very much in
earnest.’

p.
240
‘Well, if you are in earnest, let me have the
selection of the candidates for the new society.’

‘Very good; but I am afraid you will only pass the
good-looking ones, and forget the old time-honoured maxim that
“handsome is as handsome does.”’

‘A maxim I laugh to scorn.’

‘Of course you do.’

‘Well, you want healthy men and women, don’t
you?  And good looks are only to be found with physical
health.  It is by over-eating and over-drinking and
over-working that you get a diseased and ugly race.  Go to
our east coast seaside resorts and see what fine men and women
there are there.  Contrast them with the operatives of the
mine and factory.  They scarcely seem to belong to the same
race.  A good-looking girl is happier than a plain
one.  You men are all for good looks.  A fine physical
organization indicates something more desirable.  Nor do I
blame them.  “The soul is form, and doth the body
make.”  The homage we pay to beauty in
p. 241
man or
woman is but rational.  What made Alcibiades a power in
Athens but his good looks?  Did not Jew and Greek alike
agree in doing honour to Adonis?  The outward form indicates
the inner disposition.  If men are to have a brighter world
we must people it with brighter people.  But I think on the
whole you had better stop where you are.  Society in one way
does improve.  Progress is slow—but institutions are
hard to remove, bad habits harder still.  Why go out into
the wilderness to teach people to be content with an agricultural
life?  Better fifty years of Europe than a cycle of
Cathay.  Better to bear the ills we have than fly to those
we know not of.’

‘Your ladyship is poetical!’

‘Not a bit of it—only practical, as we women
always are when you men are up in the clouds.  I believe, as
soon as the peasant has got back to the hind, we shall have a new
era for England, I believe the agricultural labourer who is
helped to emigrate to Canada can better his condition
p. 242
at
once.  But I am not an agricultural labourer.  I have
no wish to pass my days in milking cows and rearing poultry; I
have no wish to pass my days thousands of miles away from London,
or Paris, or Rome.  Am I not the heir of all the ages
underneath the sun?  I am for stopping at home and doing all
the good I can.  I do not feel called upon to dress like a
guy, as the Shaker women do; nor do I see how you can make any
settlement that can last.  It may succeed for a time, if the
conditions are favourable, and you select the men and women whom
you take out.  But as the old ones die off and the young
people grow up there will be all sorts of difficulties.
Wordsworth, Southey, and Coleridge had similar dreams.  It
was fortunate for them and the world that they were unable to
carry them out.  They did much better work at home.  As
long as human nature remains what it is we must build on the old
lines.’

‘How then, would you regenerate society?’

p.
243
‘By the regeneration of the individual.
What is society but a collection of men?  Save the man and
the mass are saved.  Buxton believes in science; Wentworth,
you believe in politics.  Well, both are means to an end;
but more is required.’

‘And that is?’

‘Christ in the heart.’

‘Rather an exploded idea in these enlightened
times.  Why, you take us back to the dark ages!’ said
Buxton.

‘Dark ages, indeed!  At any rate they were ages of
faith—when men believed in God, and did mighty works.
Alas! we have no such men now.’

‘And why not?’

‘Because this is the age of material organization, of
mechanical progress, of the exaltation of the mass over the
individual, of an artificial equality; an age that has lost
faith, an age of despair, when the rich man cries “Let us
eat and drink, for to-morrow we die;” when the statesman
recklessly legislates, believing “After me the
deluge;” when the people “feed on lies.”

p.
244
“The light shineth in the darkness, and the
darkness apprehendeth it not.”’

‘Nevertheless,’ said Wentworth, ‘I feel
inclined to make a start in Canada.  Rose, I know, will come
after a little pressing; and if you will come with us, I have a
friend who has placed some land at my disposal.  I have
found some men and women of the right stamp who are ready to
emigrate.  They live in unhealthy homes, they have bad food,
and are diseased in consequence.  They are surrounded by
evil companions, and that leads them into crime.  Man is, to
a certain extent, the creature of circumstance.

‘Yes, that is too true,’ replied Buxton;
‘but what do you propose as the remedy?’

‘Well, that is what I am coming to.  Remove the
pauper, place him in a new world, and with better surroundings,
and he will become a better man.  My friend is quite
prepared to do so; he is ready to help the poor to emigrate to
the colonies or America.’

‘But if the colonies or America will not have them, what
are you to do?  They may
p. 245
object—in fact, they do object
to the poor of this country being thrown destitute and helpless
on their shores.’

‘That is true; but my friend is resolved to send out
only deserving men and women whose characters will be carefully
inquired into, and to send them out under competent guides.
He proposes to buy a large estate in some eligible part of the
world, where land is cheap, where the climate is healthy, and
where all that is wanted to develop the fruits of the earth, and
to ensure health and happiness to the people, is human
labour.  Of course, he does not propose to deal with the
masses; but he has an idea, that if he makes an attempt and it
succeeds, other wealthy and benevolent men will follow his
example, and thus the amount of crime, and misery, and poverty in
England may be diminished.’

‘But why not try such a scheme in England?’

‘The expense is too great; the rates and taxes are too
heavy, and the difficulties created by land-laws and lawyers are
too
p.
246
great.  Besides, there would always be the danger
of the men breaking away in sudden fits of ill-humour and
discontent, and getting back to their old bad habits and evil
companionship.  They must leave all the evils of the old
world behind them and start clear.  You will come with us,
Buxton?’

‘With all my heart,’ was the reply.

p.
247
CHAPTER XXXIII.

THE FINAL RESOLVE.

The following letter was addressed to her

protégé
in Liverpool by Rose immediately
after the consultation already described:

‘
My dear Boy
,

‘Wentworth and I have formed a scheme for the future in
which we hope you will unite.

‘We propose to establish a co-operative self-supporting
community on the other side of the Atlantic.

‘Old England is played out.  It may be that there
is a new England to arise out of the ashes of the old, but it
seems rather that—like Rome, and Athens, and Tyre, and
India, and Babylon, and Corinth, and Carthage—
p. 248
its glory
has passed away.  The democracy will rule the land, and that
means the separation of Ireland and England, the ruin of the
landlords and of the capitalists, who in their turn will be
sacrificed to the popular demand for a theoretical right.  A
member of Parliament will simply have to be the mouthpiece of his
constituents; he will be imposed on them, in ninety-nine cases
out of a hundred, by an assembly of wealthy, ambitions men,
prepared to do anything to retain their hold of power.

‘Parliament or the State will have to interfere between
fools and the results of their folly.  The wretch who gets
drunk and starves his wife and children will have to be taken
under the care of the State.  The lazy loafer, who cannot
and will not work, will have to be maintained by the
community.  There is to be no coercion and no compulsion,
and everybody is to be allowed to drive to the devil in the way
most convenient.  Economic law is to be set aside to gratify
the demands of the people who want to be known as patriots,
p. 249
and who
will thus put into men’s heads ideas they would never have
dreamed of.  Probably a fierce Communism will ravage the
land, and by destroying the wealthy increase tenfold the
hardships of the poor.  It is because England has been the
reverse of all this—because it has been the land of men who
have preferred to do their duty rather than talk of their rights;
who have gained with the strong arm and the manly heart victory
over the earth and all it holds, that England has been the home
of as noble a race—mixed, as it may be, of Celts and
Saxons—as ever sailed the ocean or ploughed the land.

‘What has England now to fall back on but a
rapidly-exhausting coal supply, an overwhelming debt,
establishments—civil, and naval, and
military—preposterous in good times, wicked now when our
trade is declining everywhere, and the number daily increases of
people who have no work to do?  Shutting their eyes to all
the dangers of the situation, we see the State split up into two
parties—the one in possession of power
p. 250
clinging to
it at whatever cost of principle or consistency, and the outs
equally ready to pay the same price to get in.

‘And then we have a Church which is a sort of half-way
house to Rome, and a conventional form of worship by thousands
who call themselves Christians, but are really heathen at heart;
and hence a growing class of men who delight to call themselves
Atheists, and who fancy that they are more enlightened than other
men because they refuse to bow the knee to a supreme Being.
We are weary of all this.  On the other side of the Rocky
Mountains, where the Pacific, with its warm wind, sweeps up the
slopes of the Canadian Rocky Mountains, we have secured a large
tract of country, with mines, and fertile valleys, and rivers
abounding with fish.  The region is romantic.  The
country is fertile, and it is far from the Old World, with its
sin, its sorrow, its difficulty of living, and its corroding
care.  There, freed from the icy conventionalisms of the Old
World, we shall lead happy and useful lives—all engaged in

p.
251
remunerative labour that shall leave abundant time for
the cultivation of the mental powers, and where none will be
exhausted by overwork, either of body or of mind.  And we
hope you will join our party.’

THE
END.

BILLING AND
SONS, PRINTERS, GUILDFORD.

p. 253
Second Edition
.

Price
7
s.
6
d.

EAST ANGLIA:

Personal Recollections and
Historical Associations.

By
J.
EWING RITCHIE (‘
Christopher
Crayon
’).

OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.

‘Very interesting.’—
Daily
Graphic
.

‘A pleasant, good-natured
book.’—
Echo
.

‘It will be read with a rush by everyone who takes it
up.’—
British Weekly
.

‘We cordially recommend Mr. Ritchie’s book to all
who wish to pass an agreeable hour and to learn something of the
outward actions and inner life of their predecessors.  It is
full of sketches of East Anglian celebrities, happily touched if
light limned.’—
East Anglian Daily Times
.

‘A very entertaining and enjoyable book.  Local
gossip, a wide range of reading and industrious research, have
enabled the author to enliven his pages with a wide diversity of
subjects, specially attractive of East Anglians, but also of much
general interest.’—
Daily Chronicle
.

‘The work is written in a light gossipy style, and by
reason both of it and of the variety of persons introduced is
interesting.  To a Suffolk or Norfolk man it is, of course,
especially attractive.  The reader will go through these
pages without being wearied by application.  They form a
pleasant and entertaining contribution to county literature, and
“East Anglia” will, we should think, find its way to
many of the East Country bookshelves.’—
Suffolk
Chronicle
.

‘The book is as readable and attractive a volume of
local chronicles as could be desired.  Though all of our
readers may not see “eye to eye” with Mr. Ritchie in
regard to political and theological questions, they cannot fail
to gain much enjoyment from his excellent delineation of old days
in East Anglia.’—
Norwich Mercury
.

‘“East Anglia” has the merit of not being a
compilation, which is more than can be said of the great majority
of books produced in these days to satisfy the revived taste for
topographical gossip.  Mr. Ritchie is a Suffolk
man—the son of a Nonconformist minister of Wrentham in that
county—and he looks back to the old neighbourhood and the
old times with an affection which is likely to communicate itself
to his readers.  Altogether we can with confidence recommend
this book not only to East Anglians, but to all readers who have
any affinity for works of its class.—
Daily News
.

‘Mr. Richie’s book belongs to a class of which we
have none too many, for when well done they illustrate
contemporary history in a really charming manner.  What with
their past grandeur, their present progress, their martyrs,
patriots, and authors, there is plenty to tell concerning Eastern
counties; and one who writes with native enthusiasm is sure to
command an audience.’—
Baptist
.

‘Mr. Ritchie, known to the numerous readers of the

Christian World
as “Christopher Crayon,” has
the pen of a ready, racy, refreshing writer.  He never
writes a dull line, and never for a moment allows our interest to
flag.  In the work before us, which is not his first, he is,
I should think, at his best.  The volume is the outcome of
extensive reading, many rambles over the districts described, and
of thoughtful observation.  We seem to live and move and
have our being in East Anglia.  Its folklore, its
traditions, its worthies, its memorable events, are all vividly
and charmingly placed before us, and we close the book sorry that
there is no more of it, and wondering why it is that works of a
similar land have not more frequently
appeared.’—
Northern Pioneer
.

‘It has yielded us more gratification than any work that
we have read for a considerable time.  The book ought to
have a wide circulation in the Eastern Counties, and will not
fail to yield profit and delight wherever it finds its
way.—
Essex Telegraph
.

‘Mr. Ritchie has here written a most attractive chapter
of autobiography.  He recalls the scenes of his early days,
and whatever was quaint or striking in connection with them, and
finds in his recollection ready pegs on which to hang historical
incidents and antiquarian curiosities of many kinds.  He
passes from point to point in a delightfully cheerful and
contagious mood.  Mr. Ritchie’s reading has been as
extensive and careful as his observation is keen and his temper
genial; and his pages, which appeared in the
Christian World
Magazine
, well deserve the honour of book-form, with the
additions he has been able to make to
them.’—
British Quarterly Review
.

LONDON: JARROLD & SONS,
PATERNOSTER BUILDINGS, E.C.

***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CRYING FOR THE LIGHT, VOL. 3 [OF
3]***

***** This file should be named 36810-h.htm or 36810-h.zip******

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/6/8/1/36810

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.

*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).

Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License.  You must require such a user to return or
destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.

Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.

Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.