The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Pilot's Daughter, by Francis Cunningham

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

Title: The Pilot's Daughter
an account of Elizabeth Cullingham

Author: Francis Cunningham

Release Date: January 10, 2012  [eBook #38545]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)

***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PILOT'S DAUGHTER***

Transcribed from the 1841 L. & G. Seeley edition by David
Price, email ccx074@pglaf.org

PRINTED
BY

L. AND G. SEELEY, THAMES DITTON,
SURREY.

p. ii
THE

PILOT’S DAUGHTER;

AN ACCOUNT
OF

ELIZABETH CULLINGHAM,

WHO WAS BORN AND DIED

IN

THE PARISH OF LOWESTOFT.

BY
THE

REV.  FRANCIS CUNNINGHAM, M.A.

VICAR OF LOWESTOFT.

LONDON:

L. AND G. SEELEY, 169 FLEET STREET.

J. HATCHARD AND SON, PICCADILLY.

J. NESBIT, BERNER’S
STREET.

1841.

p. 1
THE
PILOT’S DAUGHTER.

The subject of this little memoir was so well known to her
neighbours, and to the many young persons with whom she
associated, that I have felt sure a short account of her would
not be unacceptable to them.  They knew her quiet, virtuous,
consistent, pious walk, and they will, I am sure, bear witness,
that I do not over-state the blameless character which she
maintained.  This, as it was an example to others, so it
must be a cause of heartfelt rejoicing to her friends now that
she has finished her course, and entered into her rest.  To
others, this little history may have its use.  It is not the
account of a person of unusual powers of mind, or of attainment;
nor of one placed in extraordinary circumstances, although she
was blessed with pious parents, who watchfully instructed her in
the truths of Religion,
p. 2
as well as taught her by their
example.  She had only the advantages which many young
persons in every village and town possess, nor did she attain to
any situation in life, which multitudes may not aspire to.
But she gained a deep and well-grounded feeling of
Religion.  She learned the evil nature of her heart.
She discovered and gained that treasure, which is revealed in the
Lord Jesus Christ.  She laid hold by faith on his
merits.  She was taught of the Holy Spirit; and the graces
of the Spirit were in an eminent degree manifested in her
life.  She by the same power acquired the adorning of the
hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible, even
the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of
the Lord of great price.  She followed in the simple
training of the ministry of the Church: neither seeking to wander
from its pastures, nor exercising any want of charity towards
those who differed from her, one of whom, attached to another
denomination of Christians, her only surviving sister, and
nearest friend, was her constant companion; with her she lived in
perfect unity of Spirit.  Her circumstances then had nothing
in them out of the ordinary course of human life.  She had
temptations peculiar to her own character and disposition, and
she met with the usual trials, which belong to her situation in
life.  She had her time of health, and of sickness.
She was a
p.
3
daughter and a sister.  She was engaged in a variety
of pursuits both to gain her livelihood, and to do good to
others; but in every state,—without exhibiting any quality
to which her friends and neighbours might not aspire,—she
may be truly said to have walked after her measure in her
Master’s footsteps, and to have adorned her Christian
profession.

The father of this young woman was James Cullingham.  He
had for many years been a Pilot.  He was a man of somewhat
original character.  Throughout his life he had followed,
without variation, the usual line of his calling, and faithfully
discharged the duties of his occupation.  The business of a
Pilot on this part of the coast, is to take ships coming from the
North to London.  Then to return home again, to wait perhaps
a few days till the opportunity occurs of another voyage.
This kind of life is one of a good deal of temptation; but it did
not prove more than this to him, for he passed through it without
reproach, although somewhat unsuccessfully as to his own
profit.  In the depth of the winter, when the Northern Ports
were frozen, his usual duties were suspended.  It was in
these intervals we had occasion to observe his valuable
character.  His season of rest was employed chiefly at home,
reading various books; in his latter years, books of devotion;
and he was rarely absent from the House of God.  In the
latter part of his life,
p. 4
he was in the habit, when at home, of
having stated prayer three times a day; and he read the
Scriptures in the order of the Calendar of the Prayer Book; at
this period he also gave up all watching for the coming in sight
of ships on the Sabbath day; always, however, being ready to go
out to them, as his profession called him to do, if there was any
actual necessity.  On the week days at the prayers, as well
as on the Sunday, he constantly attended the services of the
Church.  I shall long remember, during the last years of his
life, (the only period when I knew him,) his respectable
appearance, his attentive demeanour and the animation with which
he made the responses out of a large prayer book, which was his
constant companion, altogether manifesting the fulness of heart,
with which he entered into the service of God.  He was a
fine model of a man, whose religion partook of the character of a
former age.  He was deeply serious, entirely practical,
strict in his attachment to the Church; but his religious
feeling, although it led him sometimes to a fearless reproach of
sin in others, did not so much draw him to aim at the conversion
of his neighbours.  He owed very much of the expansion of
his religious mind to a social Prayer Meeting, at which he was a
constant attendant.  One of his family remembers the first
deviation from that remarkable firmness which belonged to his
natural character, on
p. 5
which occasion he came home from one
of these Meetings, deeply affected, and witnessed by his tears,
the impression he had received.  He had one remarkable
deliverance from Shipwreck.  He had been called to take
charge of a ship in distress which in the course of ten minutes
must have perished, had it not pleased God to direct an
instantaneous change of the wind.  In this danger he felt
himself calm and prepared for his end.  He was, in after
years, constantly sensible of this deliverance, and on two sheets
of paper, nailed up in his bed room, he wrote as a memorial in
his own large hand: “The Lord is my light and my salvation,
whom shall I fear; the Lord is the strength of my life of whom
shall I be afraid?”  And “The Lord is my
strength and my shield; my heart hath trusted in him, and I am
helped: therefore my heart danceth for joy, and in my song will I
praise him.”  Psalm xxviii. 8.  He was a man of
undaunted courage, considering, that in his station of life, it
was his duty to run any risks by which he might be faithful to
his occupation, and acquit himself of the responsibility
entrusted to him.

Elizabeth’s Mother was a person of no common
character.  She had been left an orphan at sixteen years of
age.  She had spent many years in service, and at the
conclusion of this time, had married.  Her character was one
of great decision, and warmth of
p. 6
feeling.  She was a person of
singular benevolence, and filled a valuable post amongst her
afflicted neighbours, and in our District Society.  Her
great sympathy with others, and her uncommon power of body and of
mind, had led her to give up days and nights to nursing her
neighbours.  This labour eventually undermined, and
permanently injured her vigorous constitution.  Those only,
who saw her in her afflictions, can be aware of the deep feeling
which dwelt in her heart.  She was in the habit of reading a
variety of common books which fell in her way.  I remember
some very curious questions, which she once put to me on the
family of an individual, which had figured in the History of
England.  Her piety was ardent.  It was her habit to
retire every afternoon to her chamber for prayer.  She had
not, perhaps, as much of adherence to the forms of the Church as
her husband, although she was zealously attached to it, and a
constant frequenter of its services.  She was very
peculiarly observant of statements of doctrine, made in the
Public Ministry, giving the most marked preference to those which
freely offered the grace of God to all.  She had been led to
very deep seriousness of religious feeling by the ardent piety
and interesting death of her second daughter, who exemplified,
during eleven weeks of painful sickness, an attainment in
religion, which afforded the fullest assurance of her joyful
entry into the everlasting
p. 7
kingdom of her Lord and Saviour.
That daughter had taken a somewhat higher course of mental
pursuit, than any of her family.  She was accustomed to
express her devout feeling in verse, and a copy book has been put
into my hands, containing a variety of little poems, which at
least shew her sweetness of mind, and her knowledge of
religion.  I cannot forbear quoting one of them, not
particularly for its excellence, but because it serves to prove,
in reply to the charge often made of ingratitude against the
poor, how frequently a deep feeling of thankfulness may exist,
which nevertheless gains no public expression.  These lines
are on the death of a venerable Clergyman, whom I myself knew to
have been frequently foremost in acts of benevolence, and often,
if necessity required it, willing to stand almost alone in deeds
of enlarged charity.

On
the death of the Rev. J. G. Spurgeon
,

Rector of Oulton
.

Hark! tis the loud knell which tolling so dreary,

Announces to all, a frail mortal’s decease;

That relieved from pain, at rest is the weary,

A Christian has entered the mansions of peace.

But it tells us a
friend of the poor
is departed,

A benevolent friend has resign’d his last breath,

And the eye where the soft tear of pity has started,

Is now closed, and sleeps in the silence of death.

p. 8
Yet while
in deep sorrow, his loss we’re deploring,

His spirit is mounting to Heaven above;

To those regions of light he is rapidly soaring,

To reap the reward of his labours of love.

Peace to thine ashes! thy warfare is ended,

Thou hast fought the good fight, and hast entered thy rest;

Still a tear dims their eye, thou so kindly befriended,

And thy memory is sweet to the poor and distress’d.

On her death bed, Susan Cullingham spoke of ‘passing the
dark valley, but,’ she added, ‘It is

light
,’ and she bade her friends go to the grave,
not to
weep
, but to look for her in heaven.

I think that I have rarely known in their rank of life, a
finer specimen, of what I might wish the whole population of my
parish to be, than the Father and Mother of Elizabeth
Cullingham.  They lived most happily together, and after
death were not long separated.  Their death I shall have
occasion presently to record.

Elizabeth’s early life was such as might be expected in
her station.  She had exceedingly good health and spirits at
this period.  She was fully on par with all other girls in
childish pursuits.  Her disposition was, however, always
careful.  She was considerate in all things, not wasteful of
any thing, a stayer at home, prudent and disposed to
seriousness.  At the age of sixteen, she went to fill a
subordinate
p.
9
situation in a family in London, in which a female
relative was the housekeeper.  In this situation she was
exposed to no more temptation than belongs to a servant in
general.  She was permitted, indeed, to partake of the usual
amusements which are allowed to servants in London, but she was
protected from the evils which might have resulted from those
amusements, by the watchful attention of the relation under whose
care she was placed, and by the preventing grace of God.

During the three years of her residence in London nothing
occurred to mark her course.  She fulfilled her duties, and
gained the character of a good servant.  She returned to
Lowestoft about the month of May, 1831, in health and
spirits.  Her return was the wish of her careful mother, who
feared to leave her daughter at a distance, without the
protection of the kind relative, who had now retired from
service.  On her return, Elizabeth resided in her own
family, and followed the business she had been taught; but her
residence at home was under somewhat new circumstances.  At
this period certain means of instruction were offered to the
young people of the parish, which, under Divine help, were
peculiarly calculated to meet her opening mind.  These means
were 1st, a Bible Class, and 2nd, a meeting of women, belonging
to the Church, for the more especial object of Social
Prayer.  Both of these
p. 10
she frequently acknowledged to have
been of great advantage to her.

In the Bible Class, the Scriptures were read, and generally
explained, whilst the object constantly kept in view was to fix
the word on the conscience of the young people.  Each one of
these were invited to repeat some portion of Scripture or a hymn,
selected by themselves.  The meeting of women was under the
immediate. direction of the minister, but presided over by Mrs.
Cunningham: in it the word of God was read, and a review taken of
the sermons of the preceding Sunday.  Two or three of the
members were then at liberty to engage in prayer.  In the
latter years of her life, Elizabeth occasionally offered up
prayer.  These meetings were generally seasons of
edification to her, and very much tended to establish her
religious mind: they had also the effect of uniting her with
those of our Church who were likeminded.  Their general
result I have found to be greatly beneficial to the Church
itself.  It was observed by her relations that from the time
of Elizabeth’s first attendance on these occasions, she
devoted herself more entirely to the service of God.  Her
conduct was altered: she became more serious, and she had more
love for the Scriptures, and as the necessary consequence, other
books were laid aside: her natural fretfulness was also brought
under, and her character assumed that sweetness and
p. 11
quietness
which it retained till the end.  For two or three years she
went on in this course.  She was laborious in gaining her
livelihood, and as her health was never strong, after her return
home she occupied herself at needle-work, at which, however,
through the indulgence of her parent, she was not required to
labour more than suited her health.

She was habitually, and by principle, industrious, feeling
that it was equally a Christian duty to be diligent in business,
as to be fervent in spirit, serving the Lord.  I do not
remember any circumstances relating to her history at this period
which were of importance.  For two or three years she
pursued the even tenor of her way.  She was dutiful to her
parents, kind to all around her, serviceable to the Church, and
in every way an ornament to her Christian profession.  The
work of conversion was obviously going on in her soul.  The
fulfilment of every duty, private and public, gave full proof of
it.

It was about the year 1833 that she had the offer made of a
situation in a gentleman’s family, of which the religious
habits were particularly suited to her.  Into this family
she entered, and was absent for about three years in a distant
part of the kingdom.  During this time she had a severe
attack of illness, which resulted in her return home.  But
as this new state of servitude was somewhat of a trial to her,
and it had its peculiar burden in her weak state
p. 12
of health,
and with her naturally anxious habit of mind, so it was
calculated to exhibit the strength of principle which she had
attained.  I am glad to be able to bring forward a witness
of her conduct as a servant during this period.  When she
was dead I wrote to her late master, to ask about her, and I
subjoin a part of his reply in his own words.

Brighton
,

July
28.

“
My dear Friend
,

“Though we cannot but lament the removal of such
manifestly bright saints as E. C. from this our lower earth, yet
every such removal is like a door opened in heaven; and one seems
to hear her peaceful spirit saying to us, “Be followers of
me, and of them who have inherited the promises.”
Blessed are such dead who die in the Lord.  As long as E. C.
was in my service, I always considered her as one of the most
perfect characters I had ever seen.  She was with us, I
should think, about three years.

“She always seemed to me a model of Christian deportment
as a servant, for I never saw one ruffle or ripple in the even
stream of her temper; I never saw her upset or put out by any
hasty order or word which I might have spoken.  She was
evidently always at rest in Jesus—enjoying very unusually
peace and joy in believing—and this was
p. 13
no doubt
granted to a more simple and consistent
obedience
than is
generally seen in professors of our days.  The
characteristic graces of her state appeared to me humility and
quiet contentment in her situation of life.  She had no high
sounding profession, but all was a meek, yet very firm, testimony
to that blessed Master’s grace who had “wrought all
her works in her.”

“When
servants
are really thus Christian, they do
especially
adorn
the Gospel of God their Saviour.
“Exhort servants to be obedient unto their own masters, and
to please them well in all things, not answering again, not
purloining, but shewing all good fidelity, that they may adorn
the doctrines of God our Saviour in all things.”
Titus ii. 9.

“She did this most eminently.  Of course I can say
little more: the incidents in a servant’s life are
generally so few.  Hers was a blessed constancy, an even
flow of calm and established piety.”

* * * * * * * * *

The testimony of this letter to the character of Elizabeth, as
a servant, is remarkable.  ‘Not one ruffle or ripple
in the even stream of her temper,’ of this naturally
anxious, and even fretful, girl.  ‘Never upset or put
out by any hasty order or word:’ ‘
consistent
obedience
:’ ‘humility and quiet contentment in
her situation in life,’ marking all her course.  How
truly may we feel with her master that all this
p. 14
was a strong
testimony to the grace of that blessed Saviour, who had
“wrought all her works in her.”  Yet what
encouragement does this case afford to many others who are
engaged in domestic service.  She fulfilled her duty as unto
the Lord, and of her Master in heaven she will doubtless receive
her reward.

Elizabeth now having returned home, took her place in the
parish.  She sought to be serviceable to others as well as
to gain her livelihood: she was a constant helper to the
ministry, and a great comfort to her parents, with whom she
dwelt.  Her religious mind appeared to be continually
progressing.  At the close of the year 1836, she began a
private journal, which has been lent to me.  It contains
chiefly notes of sermons which she heard, and of the impression
which they produced on her mind.  How happy it is when the
soul is brought so to hunger and thirst after righteousness, that
it feeds upon all the food which is presented to it; when the
means of grace are used not without profit, when sermons are
listened to, and applied to the heart, when the word of God is
read, and marked, and inwardly digested, so that the hope of
everlasting life is embraced, and held fast.  It was so with
Elizabeth C.

No word seemed to be received without attention and
application.  I wish that her example may be
p. 15
followed in
this matter, and with the same blessing.  I will now make
some extracts from her journal; they will serve to shew the very
inside of her mind.  It begins Dec. 18, 1836.
‘Mr. C. preached from Isaiah xl. 3, 5.  I felt my mind
much impressed with the sermon.  O that the Lord may remove
every mountain that impedes my way to Him.’  Saturday
being the last day of the year she writes—‘When I
look back on the past year, how many short comings and
backslidings, how much coldness and lukewarmness have I to mourn
over: O blessed Lord, enable me to dedicate myself afresh to thy
service, in entering upon another year, and do thou pardon all
that is passed.’  January 1.  ‘The first
text which caught my eye this morning was Isaiah i. 25.
“O blessed Lord, purge away all my sins, and make me to
walk humbly before thee.”  Mr. C. preached from Rom.
xii. 1, 2.  How was my mind impressed when he pointed out
the necessity of giving the whole heart to God.  I was led
to pray earnestly that the Lord would enable me to do so for
Jesus sake.  January 2.  Attended a Prayer Meeting at
the Vicarage, to implore the outpouring of the Spirit.  O
Lord, hear the prayers which have this day been offered up.
January 15.  Mr. C. preached from 1 Cor. ii. 9.  The
sermon was truly interesting and affecting, as he spoke to us of
the death of two individuals,
p. 16
Mrs. R., and Mrs. C., well known to
us, who died under very affecting circumstances.  Mr. C.
pointed out what it was to love the Lord, and what was prepared
for them that love him.  We have no doubt but our dear
friends are now enjoying those things which are prepared for the
righteous.  O blessed Lord, prepare me for every change and
condition of life; but above all prepare me for death, that I may
be ready to meet thee with joy.’

I may be permitted to digress from my subject for a few
moments, to relate the history of the two individuals alluded
to.  The elder of the two died full of years, many of which
had been spent in the Service of God.  She was 91 years of
age, and the Parent, in the fourth generation, of a large number
of our Congregation.  Although surrounded by many witnesses
at her death, she departed so quietly, that none could know when
she took her flight.  Of her it might be truly said, she had
“fallen asleep in Christ.”  The other individual
was Mary Rackham.  She was the Mother of a large family; she
acted a prominent part in her husband’s much frequented
Butcher’s shop, and this brought her into the observation
of the whole Parish.  She was well known by her constant
attention to business, being inferior to none in the active
pursuit of her daily duties.  She was confessedly the woman
in the parish, who appeared to me to have the largest share of
varied
p.
17
occupation.  She was however in the midst of all
her duties, distinguished for her obliging manners to all about
her.  In her family, the utmost good order and consistency
were observed.

She had lost one child, whom she trusted she had trained for
God, and now her longing anxiety was, that all the rest of her
family should follow in the same course.  How entirely her
heart was set upon this I could well judge, who was often led
into conversation with her on that subject.  But her labours
and conflicts, and her victory in her own soul were still more
conspicuous.  She was naturally of an eager and sanguine
temperament, but that this had an entirely new and spiritual
direction was manifest to all.  Her disposition was not to
entertain high notions of herself; yet was she confident in her
Saviour, and she never testified any doubt as to her portion in
Him.  Her zeal for the Service of God was very great, and
her attendance at his house, considering her circumstances, was
remarkable.  On Thursday Evening, as on Sunday, she was
always to be found in her place.  She was an attendant at
the latest Sacrament, and twice at the services on the last
Sunday of her life.  But her seasons of private devotion
were as regularly maintained.  She was watchful to secure
her morning and evening retirement;—and in order to keep up
the Spirit of devotion, which she feared might flag through the
hurry of business; she constantly
p. 18
retired in the middle of the day,
when her business had a pause, for the purposes of reading and
devotional exercises.  She was a member, and a constant
attendant, when she was able, on the Society for Social
prayer.  She died after her confinement; and we had the
opportunity of witnessing only an awful, but a calm and cheerful
delirium which filled up her latest hours.  But a more
beautiful and instructive example of holy devotedness to every
duty, performed in the faith of Christ, we could scarcely have
had the opportunity of witnessing, than that which she exhibited
in her daily walk and conversation.  She died at the age of
35 years, leaving five children behind her.

The Journal of E. C. goes on.  ‘Thursday Evening,
March 5.  Mr. Hogarth preached from 2 Cor. v.  He
described the body as a tent, which must soon be dissolved, and
the miseries of the wicked, who have no hope beyond this
life.  None said Mr. H., but the followers of Christ can
take up the language of the text.  Enable me, O Lord, thine
unworthy servant, experimentally to feel that I, even I, have a
building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the
heavens.  March 8.  Mr. C. spoke of a dear Christian
friend, S. J. who was called to put off her earthly tabernacle
last Sabbath.  We feel assured she had a building of God, an
house prepared
p.
19
for her disembodied Spirit—to her, said Mr. C. may
the text be applied.  “Well done, good and faithful
servant, enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord.”  Give
me grace, O Lord, to improve the talent committed to me, that
when thou callest me to give up my account, I may be ready as thy
servant was.’  Susan Jones, the person here alluded
to, was an individual of great interest.  She illustrated a
valuable little tract, entitled the “
Single talent well
employed
.”  She was one of three sisters, who
lived together in Lowestoft.  She had resided with a family
in Scotland, whose testimony to her worth, as well as that of the
heads of the family in which she died, I shall venture to
insert.  She was one of the brightest ornaments of our
little Christian Society, and much beloved by all who knew
her.  I will copy the account of her inscribed in the
memoranda of a friend.

‘This morning’s post brought me the
tidings of dear Susan Jones’ death, or rather of her being
on the point of death, and a request that I would inform her
sisters of it.  Another valued member of our Society, a true
sister in the Lord—one much beloved by us and by many here
is now departed!  The letter was from Mr. S. a Clergyman,
with whom she had been staying at Woodbridge about three months,
in order to nurse Mrs. S. in her confinement.’

p. 20
The
following is an extract of his letter.

‘Poor dear Susan was apparently well this
morning, and engaged as usual, till about 11 o’clock; when
upon her stooping down, she felt an acute pain; but as she was
subject to this, we were not alarmed.—Finding, however,
that the pain continued, we sent for our medical attendant.
The suffering for a short time became acute, and the symptoms so
alarming, that it was soon evident there was no hope of her
life.  It is considered that a vessel near the heart had
given way, and that she is sinking from internal bleeding.
She is indeed as one fallen asleep.  Her mind is calm, and
her heart is
fixed
;—her gratitude to God, her
patience, love,
humility
, combined with simple trust, are
all so conspicuous, that I cannot perceive which is the
greatest.  She appears not to have a thought in the world,
and has not said one word regarding it.  Her thoughts are
all towards God, and the voice of praise and prayer to him, for
spiritual blessings are her only theme.  “Thy will be
done,” seems the first and uppermost feeling of her
heart.  You may feel assured when you receive this, that her
Spirit is in Heaven, with her beloved Saviour.  All her
words are now either to, or of her God and Saviour, and she
appears to have closed her senses to this trying scene.  Her
bodily sufferings now are small.  I feel as though in
parting from her, I was losing
p. 21
one of my best friends, and I only
pray that the Almighty, in his mercy, may so help me, that I may
see dear Susan in another and better world.  With every good
wish and prayer,’

Believe me,

Yours faithfully,

J. P. S.’

February 27th.  ‘Received this morning the account
of dear Susan Jones’s death.  The following is an
extract from Mr. S’s. second letter.’

‘Poor dear Susan was called away a few hours
sooner than we expected.  She breathed her last a quarter
before one o’clock this morning, when she exchanged a
Sabbath day on earth, for an eternal Sabbath in heaven.  I
feel as strong a confidence that she is now in glory, as I can
feel of any person I ever knew.  The verse for the day in
the Christian Almanack, 26th February, is, “There
remaineth, therefore, a rest for the people of God,” as it
were greeting me on my coming down stairs this morning, with a
most welcome and appropriate assurance, and as it were in
confirmation of my feelings.  All I can say of her in her
life, and in her death, would come short of the reality, and I
can only hope and pray that I may be kept from abusing the
privilege I have had in her friendship; and that her image and
example may, by God’s
p. 22
blessing, be the means of assisting
my weakness, and helping me on to an
entrance
into glory
for ever and ever with her!’

May we seek to follow her humble and Christian course,
blameless and harmless as she was, loved by all, and loving
all.  She was not quick to discover, or speak of the faults
of others, being too humbly alive to her own.  I never
remember to have left her after the fullest communications with
her, distressed or perplexed by histories of others, and their
faults and failings; over these she drew the curtain, and fixed
her eye
only upon her own
.  She introduced the
subject of other people only to speak kindly and affectionately
of them: she appeared “without partiality,” nor had
she that selfishness which soon takes affront: I never knew her
vexed with any one for supposed unkindness or neglect: she seemed
always to think she received more than she deserved.  O may
we all have grace to follow her in this, and in many other of her
Christian virtues.

When thus suddenly seized, and with nothing but death before
her, her soul was found perfectly
staid
.  No
distressing fears or conflicts overwhelmed her; but she met the
summons with perfect fortitude and resignation.  When Mr. S.
said to her, ‘Dear Susan, do you not feel
afraid?’  ‘O no, sir, I have no fear; I am
leaning on the arm of Jesus, He is my support—He is holding
me behind and before.
p. 23
God has laid his hand upon me: His
will be done; He will keep me, He will support me.’
The sting of death seemed entirely withdrawn, and the glorious
hope of being for ever with the Lord, swallowed up all pain in
quitting this valley of tears.  O the blessedness of living
thus in preparation for death!  May the instructive lesson
sink deeply into all our hearts, leading us to a watchful
circumspect devotion to our God and Saviour; that, when he shall
please to call us, we may say with her, ‘
ready
,

Lord
,
ready
.’

As it was my painful office to inform her dear sisters of the
affecting event of Susan’s seizure and probable departure
at that moment, I went in after the service on Sunday
morning.  At the moment of my entry, Hannah was reading a
paper she held in her hand.  I asked them if they had heard
any thing of Susan.  ‘Not very lately; but we have
just been reading a paper of her’s we found in her
Bible.’  These were the words:—‘O my dear
sisters, we have now began another year, O may we live it
fit
to die
, should we be called away before it is past.
This day I have been to hear Mr. Salmon, and we had a most
excellent sermon from Zechariah i. 5.  “Your fathers,
where are they?” God bless you both.—Susan
Jones.’

This seemed a merciful preparation for breaking to them the
sorrowful tidings, which I did, as carefully
p. 24
as possible,
endeavouring to arm them with Christian feeling of dependance
upon God, and with sense of His presence and love in this
event.  They were not at first so overwhelmed as I expected:
they were deeply attached to each other, and nothing could exceed
the careful and affectionate manner in which Susan had nursed
Elizabeth in a long and painful illness.  Her watchful
affection had bound them still more closely together.

Elizabeth Jones has since died, and has left ample testimony
to her faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, and her meetness to appear
in the presence of God, through the merit of her Saviour.
We had most interesting and satisfactory testimonies of Susan
Jones’s character from others.  Lady H. thus writes of
her in a letter to Elizabeth.

‘You cannot doubt how great were my feelings
of sorrow, when I heard of the decease of my faithful friend,
your dear sister Susan; indeed I hardly think any such event, out
of my own family, could have grieved us all so deeply.
Almost the last words I ever heard from her were, ‘if I am
gone when you return to England, never sorrow for your poor old
servant.’  But I do sorrow for her very deeply, and
shall always think that I have lost a faithful friend, one who
did me and my children good, and not evil, during all those days
of her life which she spent with me, and I am very sure she has
continued
p.
25
to do us good by the hearty prayers she addressed for
us, to Him whose eyes are in every place.  Her unwearied
kindness to my children, I never did, and never could, repay; I
allude chiefly to the good principles she taught them, of love to
God, love to their parents, to one another, and to all their
brethren of mankind.  O happy mother shall I be, if my
offspring depart not from the ways which their old nurse taught
them.

‘When I was at the Lord’s table last Sunday, I
thought of Susan, who had so often been there with her master and
me.  I was prepared to remember her when we are directed to
bless the Lord ‘for all his servants departed this life in
His faith and fear,’ whose good example, whatever their
station in this world may have been, we pray for grace to
follow.’

But I will return to some portions of E. C’s.
journal.  ‘March 12.  Attended the Prayer Meeting
as usual in the morning.’  This meeting was held on
the Sabbath morning at 9 o’clock, and is composed of a few
persons who meet together to ask a blessing on the coming means
of grace.

‘I felt my mind,’ she says, ‘much drawn out
in prayer.  The meeting was lively, and I trust the Lord was
with us, though some of the weakest of his creatures.  In
the morning, Mr. C. preached from Hebrews ix. 13, 14, the first
part considering what it was to purge the conscience from dead
p. 26
works.
He spoke not only of the dead works of the unconverted, but also
of the dead works of the Christian.  How often is he found
hard-hearted, and cold, and lukewarm, and too often bringing
forth fruit to the dishonour of God.  What then but the
blood of Christ can cleanse him from his dead works.  Lord,
give me grace and faith to apply to that blood
continually.’  So did she speak of her own

deficiencies
.  Next she speaks of her own

labours
on the same day.  ‘Attended the school
in the afternoon.  O Lord, bless and own my poor
labours.  Enable me to teach for Thee, that thy name may be
glorified.’  Passing over a portion of her journal,
she comes to ‘April 16.  Mr. Hoare preached from
Hebrews ix. 14–16.  He beautifully described how
Christ was the High Priest of his people; how He atoned for their
sins by shedding his own blood; and how he entered into the
Holiest of Holies, where he ever liveth to make intercession for
them.  He also spoke of the tenderness of Christ; whereby he
sympathized, and of his power, whereby He was able to save to the
uttermost all that come to God by Him.  He most earnestly
entreated the trembling believer to come boldly to One who was
both able and willing to save him.’  Her own
reflections on this sermon may be gathered from the expressions
she has applied to it.

‘Mr. Swanison from Jer. xxxi. 18–20.  In the

p. 27
conduct of
Ephraim teaching us the nature of true repentance.  The
prayer of Ephraim shews the change in his mind.  He entreats
God to turn him, feeling that he cannot turn himself.  He
feels and owns he has been a rebel, but he relies on the Lord to
turn him and to pardon all his sins.  Here we see the mercy
and the love of God displayed.  He does not receive the
repentant sinner as a servant, but he calls him his dear
son.  Oh what encouragement to the poor returning sinner, to
know that God, whom he feels that he has offended, earnestly
remembers him still.’

I am glad to make extracts from the sermons of many of my dear
fellow helpers in the gospel, who have been working with me in
this field of labour, and who have each,—one planting, and
another watering, but God giving the increase;—been so
honoured as to give suitable culture to a plant of the Lord, whom
they will one day meet in glory, in the heavenly paradise.
I also make these extracts, that we may be enabled to trace the
means by which the mind of our departed friend, was furnished
with food convenient for its growth in grace and holiness.

‘May 21.  Attended the morning Prayer
Meeting.  Felt rather dead in prayer.  May the Lord
quicken my affections and warm my cold heart.’
‘Mr. C. from Amos viii. 8, 9.  Sermon on the
Jews.
p.
28
He spoke much on the fulfilment of prophecy; the Lord,
in various places, threatening to disperse and destroy this
people, but not make a full end, &c. &c.  O Blessed
Lord, give me to live, that I neglect not this message, for if
thou spared not the natural branches, neither wilt thou spare me
if I neglect thy word.  Lord, give me thy Spirit, and guide
me in all my ways, for thy dear Son’s sake.’

Passing over other subjects, we may take the effect produced
on her mind, by one of the social meetings before alluded to.

‘Monday Evening, Sept. 1.  Attended Mrs. C.’s
meeting.  Mrs. C. spoke much of the Omnipresence of
God.  I felt the subject very much, and I was enabled to
pour out my soul in prayer.  Surely the Lord’s
presence was with us at that time.  O blessed Lord, keep me
humble; empty me entirely of self, that my unworthy services may
be acceptable in thy sight.’  It is plain by this
passage, that she had felt the approach of temptation, but she
met it in the spirit of watchfulness and prayer.

On another occasion, she says, ‘I attended the
meeting.  I trust the Lord was with our little party, and
that he will hear and answer prayer.  I feel my own
weakness, and utter unworthiness in approaching thee, O Lord, but
look thou in mercy upon me; pardon my sins, forgive my
iniquities,
p.
29
and let not the imperfections of my prayers render them
odious in thy sight.  Thou Lord, knowest my weakness; O
strengthen me that I may be enabled to confess thee with more
boldness; but O keep me humble.’

‘Oct. 15.  This Morning, the Rev. D. Hogarth
preached from Malachi ii. 2, 3.  O Blessed Jesus, do thou
purify and cleanse my soul from the dross of sin, which I feel
still hinders me from enjoying the light of thy
countenance.  O remove the veil from mine eyes, and sin from
my heart, that I may see and understand what thy will is; do thou
enlighten and guide me in thy way.’

An event now occurred in the family of Elizabeth Cullingham,
of the deepest interest and importance.  This was the death
of her Father.  On Monday, Jan. 8, 1838, about two
o’clock in the afternoon, a foreign ship came in sight, and
hoisted a flag for a Pilot.  She was about ten miles from
the shore, but although the weather was threatening, and the
evening approaching, it seemed practicable to reach the ship; and
as it was suspected, that others might be in the offing, which
would likewise require assistance, two Pilots put off, with
thirteen men in one yawl, and one Pilot with twenty-one in
another.  The dangers which might have terrified ordinary
men, did not prevent these brave seamen from encountering
p. 30
the perils
which threatened them in the way of duty.

It was a maxim of James Cullingham, that he ought, in his duty
as a Pilot, to fear no danger, and that whenever others would
take him, he should go.  The yawls carried their mainsails
at first, and expected to reach their object.  But the
vessel, instead of keeping its first course towards the boats,
when they were five or six miles from the shore, stood out to
sea.  The yawls therefore, in their effort to reach the
ship, were carried far from land,—and daylight drew to a
close before the men were aware of their situation.

The wind meantime arose, and the snow drifted heavily.
The greatest anxiety was soon felt by all on shore.  The
scene which presents itself on these occasions, may be conceived,
but not described.  Fathers, Mothers, Wives, Sisters,
Brothers, and Children, are seen intently watching every change
in the sky and waves, eagerly gazing upon the distance to catch a
glimpse of the absent objects of their love: grasping every
phantom of hope which may present itself; but at
length—convinced by some undoubted sign, that they must
hope no more.—Many are the vows which are then made; many
are the prayers which are then offered.  The watching and
suspense, however, were in this case, soon at an end.  At
seven o’clock one of the yawls through
p. 31
great danger,
reached the shore, and this left no doubt as to the loss of the
other, in which was James Cullingham, and another Pilot.  It
is supposed this yawl, the ‘Peace,’ in endeavouring
to get into the gat-way, had missed the light, it being thick
with snow, that she got into broken water, and had gone
down.  But none were left to tell the tale of woe.  The
boat itself, sometime afterwards, was washed on shore, a complete
wreck.  Very few of the bodies were recovered: but amongst
the number, that of James Cullingham was found, very remarkably,
eight months afterwards.  Twelve widows and thirty two
children, were in consequence of this disaster, left
destitute.  This was, indeed, a night of agony, to numbers
on shore.  Still the possibility of escape presented itself
to their minds, but it was hoping against hope.  Yet was
every one afraid of acknowledging to the chief mourners, what in
their own minds was their fixed opinion, that no chance
remained.  None would, at all events, be the first to
declare the awful truth to those broken hearted sufferers.

But there must have been a scene even more affecting than the
one now recorded.  In the boat were fifteen men, who were in
the very jaws of destruction.  One other heave of the
impetuous sea, and their state was fixed, fixed for ever.
Some of them, perhaps, had been drunkards, or Sabbath breakers,
or
p.
32
neglecters of Religion; but now they were called at once
to give account of what they had done, and what they had left
undone, and nothing could be left, to which they might look
forward, but the punishment which awaits the sinner.  It is
impossible to conceive a scene more really appalling, although
outwardly its awfulness might be concealed by the anxiety and
efforts which it caused.  But to think of the never-dying
soul, hitherto uncared for, unprepared with all its sins upon it,
hurried in one moment into judgment, and to the wages of its
transgressions, is awful indeed!  What may have been the
case of these men, the day of Judgment will disclose.
“Blessed are the dead which die in the

Lord
.”  That it was the portion of James
Cullingham so to die, we can have no doubt.  His faith, his
converted heart, evidenced by his life, afford a warrant of good
hope as to his condition.  He lived to Christ, and death was
doubtless gain to him.  Whether at sea, or on his bed, he
might sink in peace, for a joyful inheritance would await
him.

But what was the lot of the mourners in his own bereaved
family on that sad night?  James Cullingham had left his
house in the morning, and that he was gone, was probably not more
noticed than at other times.  It was expected that the yawl
which took him out, would in due course return.

Soon however, alarm arose on the beach, and rapidly
p. 33
spread itself
in the town.  In the evening, it was naturally expected that
some news would come from the Pilots, for the boat which conveyed
them to the vessels must of necessity return.  But no news
arrived.  Elizabeth had been sent to bed by her Mother, who
with her other daughter sat alone in the house in the deepest
anxiety.  The wind became very tempestuous.  The snow
drifted.  A solemn awe was spread over the cottage.
But there was nothing to be done, but to wait, and pray, and to
support the mind in silence; still hoping that every moment would
bring them tidings.

The eldest daughter at length went up stairs, leaving her
Mother alone.  The three brothers had been on the beach; and
soon apprehending the real state of the case; they had scattered
themselves on the coast, several miles to the southward, hoping
that the boat might be driven on shore in that direction.
Meanwhile a universal apprehension was spread abroad, and every
one who knew how deeply the news would affect the family of James
Cullingham forbore to come to the house, lest they might be the
involuntary means of conveying the sad intelligence.  The
Mother sat alone till the morning, at this time a stranger
unwittingly revealed the extent of the calamity.  She was
heard passing the road, when the anxious wife went to the door to
ask whether she had heard any thing of the yawl.  She
p. 34
replied,
unconscious to whom she was speaking.
“
Nothing
.
It will never come back
again
!”  The awful fact now broke in upon the mind
of Mrs. Cullingham.  At once she understood that all was
lost; she received the news however, without any outcry or
lamentation.  But it sunk deeply within.  Her
expression to her daughter was, ‘your Father is gone, he is
safely arrived, I shall join him in Heaven.’  She
never once was heard to murmur.  But the blow was intensely
severe, and the weight of sorrow seemed to be borne alike, by the
daughters and the Mother.  It may be said to have been the
death signal at a more remote period of Elizabeth, as well as of
her Mother.  Neither of them ever recovered their
health.  To the Widow the loss was in all respects very
great.  It might truly be said of her and her husband,
“they were pleasant in their lives, and in their death they
were not divided.”  In a very few months, she was
called to follow him.  A large subscription which was
raised, chiefly at a distance from home, together with the
property of her husband, and the assistance of her Children, left
the Mother of Elizabeth in no want as to her worldly
circumstances.  But the suddenness, and the manner of her
husband’s death, and the haunting reflection that his body
was yet unburied, left a sort of wretchedness in her mind, which
nothing but her faith and hope could subdue.  Her mode of
life was now some
p.
35
what altered.  She had more time to read the
Scriptures, which she did every afternoon, as well as morning and
evening.  But in the month of March, she was attacked with a
paralytic stroke.  This was not violent, and it affected her
body more than her mind.  It was a time of deep heart
searching to her, and of preparation for her end.  Her mind
might be said to dwell in heavenly hope.  She was deeply
earnest in her devotions.  I have entered her room, and
finding her intent in prayer, have retired unobserved.  Her
mind was not easily distracted when employed in communing with
God.  But her state was not happy; she was oppressed with
the sensation of her disorder, and she continued to feel
intensely the circumstances of her husband’s death, and to
mourn over his undiscovered and unburied body.  At length
however, it pleased God to relieve her from one of these causes
of grief, by a remarkable interposition of his favor.  By a
very singular accident, her husband’s body was washed on
shore in the month of October, many miles from the place where he
was lost.  It had been lying nearly nine months in the sea,
and, on reaching the shore, had been found, and buried.
Information having been given that a body had been so found, it
was disinterred, and identified by his children.  It was
then brought home to Lowestoft, where it now lies in our
churchyard, among the remains of different members
p. 36
of his
family.  This was an occasion which peculiarly called out
the gratitude of his widow.  After this event, she recovered
the full powers of her mind.  During the remaining few weeks
of her life, she seemed to have gained clearer assurance of her
own safety, and a more joyful hope and anticipation of future
blessedness.  Her state of conflict was now changed to one
of full assurance of hope.  One remarkable scene of her last
days, of which I was a witness, I will relate in
Elizabeth’s words, copied from her journal.  On the
day of her mother’s death she writes, ‘The Lord has
been pleased to take my dear mother out of this state of trial
and suffering.  How calm, how patient she was through her
long and painful illness.  No murmuring, no repining ever
escaped her lips.  Her end was peace.  Mr. C. called to
see her on the Sunday evening: she was then able to speak only at
intervals.  He spoke to her of the joys of heaven.  She
appeared to take no notice for some moments, when suddenly
reaching forth her hand to heaven, she exclaimed,
Christ
there
!  Then bringing it back, and laying it on her
heart, she said,
Christ here
!’  How expressive
were these simple words of her state of mind, and of her hope in
her Redeemer.  On this day she spoke to me of ‘going
home,’ which was the view she entertained of her
departure.  On the last morning of her life she made sign
p. 37
to her
daughter to read to her: she read part of John xiv.  The
mother then clasped her hands in prayer.  This was nearly
the last act of her life.  She seemed now to be peculiarly
alive to the reality of the presence of her Lord and Saviour as
the Way, the Truth, and the Life, and that by Him a heavenly
mansion had been prepared for her.  Her room had been a kind
of shelter from the bustle and confusion of the world around, and
her daughters, who in turn remained at home on the Sabbath day,
and read the service of the Church to her, testified of the
comfort which those seasons of retirement ministered to
them.  These were, indeed, times of refreshment from the
Lord.  A friend of her’s thus describes an interview
which she had with her a short time before her death.
‘I had delightful communication with her just before I left
home: I sat by her bed-side, and we talked much on the eternal
state.  She was entirely sensible, could look at the
approaching dissolution of her body with perfect peace.  We
spoke of the heavenly Jerusalem, and of the joyful prospect
before her of entering into rest: her faith was strong and
clear.  She renounced every thing in herself, and through
the unmerited mercy of her dear Redeemer, she felt assured that
her sins were pardoned, and that an abundant entrance would be
ministered to her into the everlasting kingdom of her God and
Saviour.
p.
38
Her life of faith, and of active duty, and her death, so
cheered by confidence in the Good Shepherd, afforded the fullest
warrant of this blessed end of all her labours and her
trials.’

I must now carry back this memoir to the beginning of the
year.  A funeral sermon was preached on the occasion of the
death of James Cullingham.  He was a communicant, and his
character called for this public notice.  Advantage was
taken of the same occasion to speak of the death of another
individual, a friend of Elizabeth and her mother, and I believe
of most of the servants of God, who came within her reach in our
little flock.  This was Mary Smith.  Her
husband’s shop in which she served, made her well known in
the parish, and enabled her to do much for others, and thus
brought into view most of the infirmities which belonged to her
nature.  She was a woman of very marked and zealous
character, well known to those about her, both in her natural and
her renewed state.  In both she was industrious and
kind-hearted, a good wife, mother, and neighbour; but in her
former state very clearly without that feeling of religion which
marked her latter years.  Indeed it may be said that she had
gone so far as to ‘persecute that way which she afterwards
followed.’  She was a very marked instance of an
entire change of heart, by the power of the Holy Spirit.
The natural ardour of her
p. 39
mind was sanctified in her converted
state; it worked with the same power, but in another direction,
and under another influence: she traced the change in her mind to
a sermon which she heard on Phil. ii. 12.  She then set
conscientiously about working out her salvation, and she found
her heavenly Father, ever ready to work in her, both to will and
to do of his good pleasure.  Her sense of this marked
interference of the divine power on her behalf was never lost
sight of; for the anniversary of the day when she first gave heed
to the message of salvation, she remembered with much
feeling.  Of her domestic character, those who have lived
with her have spoken to me, and have borne high testimony to her
as a wife and a mother, and during her employment in the business
of her shop.  Her will became remarkably subjected to the
will of God in all things.  It may be truly said, that she
did her duties as “to the Lord.”  She had a very
praiseworthy habit of praying with her children, whenever she
found them in fault.  Her religious character was marked by
a strict conformity to the doctrines of the Church, of which she
was a consistent, faithful, zealous member.  In attendance
on its services she had been brought to the knowledge of
salvation, and she continued to walk in the truest submission,
and the most lively attachment to its ministry.  In another

p. 40
point she
has left us an example.  She was ever particularly alive to
watch for the souls of others, to lead them forward, and to draw
them to seek God.  There are many now living who could bear
witness to the earnestness, with which she sought to warn the
unconverted, to reclaim the wanderer, to recover the
backslider.

Her kindness to her poor neighbours was remarkable.  Her
medical man informed me, that he scarcely ever went into her
house, without her first asking him about some one who wanted
relief, which relief she was always eager to give according to
her means, and many were the portions which her provision-shop
supplied.  Few ministers have had a more valuable
‘helper,’ in all respects.  I must add a short
account of her, given to me in writing by one in her own house,
who, at the time when she, Mrs. S. was opposed to spiritual
religion, had chosen another fold than the Church of England in
which to seek the way of salvation.  This testimony is
therefore not given in ignorance of her real character, or in
undue partiality to her principles.

After speaking of the striking circumstances of her
conversion, the paper goes on to say, ‘The words of the
Apostle were fulfilled in her.  “If any man be in
Christ he is a new creature.  Old things are passed away,
behold, all things are become new.”  Yes, I know the
truth of this, for I have seen it
p. 41
in her who is departed.  Indeed
she has proved to all around her, that she was a faithful
follower of the Lord Jesus Christ; not one who said, “Lord,
Lord,” but in works denied him.

‘She showed her love to God by keeping His
commandments.  I have known her, many and many a time,
sacrifice her own comforts to relieve her poor neighbours.
I have known her take her clothes from her back, and her shoes
from her feet.  It was her delight to do her heavenly
Father’s will in all things.  She was determined, as
far as she was able, to do good to all, especially to those of
the household of faith.  She was one who visited the sick
and afflicted, the fatherless and widow, and strove to keep
herself unspotted from the world.  Her views of herself were
truly humble: she took the word of God for her guide.  She
did not shun to reprove sin, but knowing the terror of the Lord,
she sought to persuade her fellow-sinners to be reconciled to
God.  She sought after backsliders with great care and
perseverance, and aimed to encourage those that stood fast in the
Lord.  Her love of the means of grace, both public and
private, was very great, and witnessed by her regular attendance
on them.  Her patience in her affliction, and resignation to
the will of God, was indeed striking.  Her sufferings and
trials had been many in life, “but not too many,” as
she said on her dying bed.  The
p. 42
cup had been wisely mixed by her
heavenly Father.’

January 2.  She began to complain of her head, and the
next day she was wholly confined to her bed.  Two days
after, she became so weak as to be unable to help herself.
On Sunday the 7th she took but little notice.  She was then
asked, whether she was happy.  She replied, ‘Oh, yes,
very happy, very happy: Christ very precious to me.’
At another time she was asked, whether she could say, with the
Apostle, that she was “ready to be offered up?”
‘Oh yes,’ she said.  On Monday, speaking of
death as the gate of life, she said, ‘O blessed
gate—it is the gate of heaven to me:’ and at another
time, ‘Christ is all in all to me.’  On the
following morning she had the power of attention, and answered to
the prayer of others in a fervent Amen.  So she departed in
peace and blessedness.

I must now return to the history of Elizabeth
Cullingham.  Deep and constant was her grief at her
father’s death.  She sympathized with her family; but
she had then the pleasing task of waiting on her mother through
her long affliction, and never was nursing more tenderly
ministered, or more kindly received than by these two sisters,
and their sinking parent.  If there was some variety in
p. 43
their form of
worship, their feelings were the same.  To gratify their
mother’s wishes was next to the love of God, the main
object with her daughters.  With her

‘That constant flow of love, that knew no
fall,

Ne’er roughened by those cataracts and breaks,

That humour interposed too often makes.’

Whilst they

‘The tender office now engage,

To rock the cradle of reposing age,

With lenient arts extend a mother’s breath,

Make languor smile, and smooth the bed of death;

Explore the thought, explain the asking eye,

And keep awhile
one
parent from the sky!

But I must suffer Elizabeth again to speak for herself.

What follows was written at the close of the year of sorrow,
through which she had just past.  ‘Thou, O Lord, hast
seen fit to take both my parents from me, but thy word of promise
is, “When father and mother forsake thee, the Lord will
take thee up.”  Enable me, O Lord, to follow my dear
parents, as they followed Christ; that when time with me shall be
no more, I may have a joyful entrance into thy kingdom, where
parting shall be no more known, and every tear shall be wiped
from
p. 44
my
now weeping eyes.  I would desire, blessed Lord, to submit
to thy will in these most affecting bereavements.  O comfort
me with the consolations of thy Spirit, and bring me and my dear
brothers and sisters near to thyself.  Amidst our many
trials may we remember our many mercies.  May we be enabled
to thank Thee for all.  What a comfort not to sorrow as
those without hope: but to be assured that through the merits of
Christ our dear parents are translated from a body of sin and
corruption, to a glorious immortality.’

So Elizabeth wound up the history of the past eventful
year.  Her patience, meekness, and resignation, her
thankfulness for the mercies she received, and her joyous hope
are alike an instructive lesson to us all.

I find another interesting record at the beginning of the year
1839.

‘I have now entered upon another year.  Oh how
different do all things now appear, to what they did at the
commencement of the last.  I was then blessed with my dear
parents, and I looked forward for some years of comfort and of
guidance from them; but thy ways, O Lord, are not my ways,
neither are Thy thoughts my thoughts; Thou hast taken them from
me that I may look to thee alone for help and comfort.  O
give me grace to seek all I want from Thee.  Wean me,
blessed Lord, from
p.
45
the world, and all its treatments, and enable me to live
entirely to Thee.  Thou knowest, Lord, my weakness and
proneness to start aside from my best Friend, but pardon all Thou
hast seen amiss in me, through the past year, and enable me now
to live more devotedly to Thy service.’

The method which she chose of quietly taking a review of the
past, and forecasting the circumstances of the new year, appeared
to be peculiarly profitable, and may afford a direction as to the
mode of spending this interesting season.

Elizabeth and her sister were now thrown on their own
resources.  Their father’s house was sold for the
benefit of his family.  After their removal, they kept a
school.  This flourished, and it was a great benefit, as far
as it went, in the parish, being conducted with so much good
order and Christian feeling.  But after a time, the noise of
the children became unbearable to Elizabeth, and obliged her
sister to give it up, and to turn to other means of
support.  Elizabeth’s mind, as appears from her
Journal, was all this time gradually growing in grace.  The
habits of their little family were very regular.  The two
sisters read three or four verses, and prayed together every
morning, in addition to the usual family prayer with their
brother, who lived with them.  Elizabeth’s chief
infirmity was a proneness to be hurt by unkindness
p. 46
or neglect;
this she tried to conquer, and through Divine Grace, succeeded to
a great degree.  She had always been careful of her money,
feeling how needful it might be to her in her weakly state of
health.  At the time of her death she had a small sum in the
savings bank; but she was alive to the snare of
covetousness.  She used to say, what shall we give?
She subscribed to the Missionary and the Jewish Society, and
originated a little Bible Society collection: but she also felt
the duty of denying herself, that she might save something more
for these works of charity.  She was constantly diligent,
and during the last winter of her life she read the Scriptures a
great deal, and grew proportionally in grace.  She was
regular in her attendance at the different meetings, being
generally accompanied by a friend in somewhat similar
circumstances of life, who was attached to our communion.
But nothing more marked her character than a holy, humble,
simple, unpretending walk, carrying about with her, I may truly
say, the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit.  She
repeatedly wrote in her Journal during the last year of her
life.  Her observations were chiefly founded on sermons
which she had heard, and which she applied to herself.
There was not one observation in them of a carping critical
character.  But what she received she sought to turn to the
best profit, and to obtain from it growth in grace.
Speaking
p.
47
of the sermon of a young Minister among us, she was
struck with his appeal for decision in religion, on the ground of
the uncertainty of life.  ‘O,’ she adds,
‘how he warned and exhorted the young to decide for God,
that they might obtain pardon and peace here, and happiness in
the world to come.’  She concludes her account of
another sermon.  ‘Help me, O Lord, to watch always,
that I sin not against Thee, and help me so to pray, that the
enemy may flee before me:’ and again, ‘Help me,
blessed Lord, to be daily growing in holiness, humility, and
love, that I may feel in every trial, and temptation, thou art my
Rock and Defence.’  As the summary of one week, she
says, ‘I have felt my soul decay in the last week.
The enemy has been permitted to buffet and assault me very much,
tempting me to unbelief.  But O thou compassionate Saviour,
who prayed for thy disciple of old, that his faith might not
fail, look upon me, and deliver me from my strong foe.  O
strengthen my faith, for it is weak.  Show me wherein I have
sinned; lift up the light of thy countenance upon
me.’  Again, after a sermon of Mr.
Allen’s.  ‘What encouragement to the believer to
know that Jesus, his Saviour and Redeemer, has before trodden
every painful path, and endured every conflict, and has promised
that as he overcame, so shall we, through his merit.’

p. 48
She
heard a Sermon from a minister before alluded to, on growth in
religion, in which that subject was illustrated by a tree in the
growth of its roots, in its branches, and in its
fruitfulness.  The subject appears very much to have struck
her.  She concludes it by saying, ‘Help me, blessed
Lord, to be daily growing in holiness, humility and love; and may
I feel in every trial and temptation, that thou art my Rock, and
my Defence.’  ‘Nov. 24.  I have felt much
depressed to day by fretfulness and coldness: O Lord, quicken
me.’  ‘Heard Mr. R. this evening, from Luke v.
31, 32.  Felt my mind much impressed by the Sermon.
Blessed Lord, impress it on my heart, by thy Spirit.  Strip
me of all self-righteousness, make me feel more and more, my need
of thee.’

The above extracts from her Journal, will shew the quiet
working of the Spirit of God in her heart, chiefly by means of
the word of God.  Other means are not so commonly and
particularly alluded to by her, but she always in life expressed
her profit in all; in the Lord’s Supper, in the social
prayer meetings on Monday Evening, and Sunday Morning, and the
bible class, all of which she continued constantly to
attend.  I add two testimonials concerning her.  One of
them was communicated to a friend at a distance, who had been
staying some time in Lowestoft, and who had been made acquainted
with Elizabeth.
p. 49
It is written by a person who was in
the constant habit of seeing her, and who knew her well.
The other is written by a very intimate friend.

Lowestoft
,

July
6. 1840.

My dear Friend
,

‘I must indulge myself by writing a few lines to you,
for my heart is full to-night.  We have lost our sweet young
friend Elizabeth Cullingham, in whom you were so much
interested.  Do not you remember her spiritual and
interesting prayer, the first morning I went with you to the
Sunday prayer meeting?  I recollect introducing her to
you.  She was indeed a true christian.  I never
recollect to have heard any one find the slightest fault with
her, nor had I myself ever occasion to do so in all the
intercourse I have had with her, during the last nine
years.  Her’s was indeed a chaste conversation,
coupled with fear.  It was not the outward adorning of
wearing of gold, or of putting on of apparel, but the ornament of
a meek and quiet Spirit, which shone most conspicuously in
her.  Chastity, meekness, and modesty were her striking
characteristics.  I am glad I introduced you so particularly
to her, and I think you will not forget the sweet impression of
those
visits
.  Her lovely subdued countenance, her
neat appearance, the perfect consistency of her dress,
p. 50
for she was
always beautifully neat.  I think—I may say I never
knew her expend money on ribbon or other unnecessary article in
dress.  I mention this as it is a rare quality, even amongst
the sober and serious young people.  The love of dressing
beyond their means and situation in life is so common a habit,
and so great a temptation to young people in general, that her
correct conduct in this respect, was one lovely fruit of having
her affections set on things above.  O that our dear young
people might see and feel the beauty of this line of
conduct.  By her circumspect and careful conduct, she
silenced every tongue that could rise up against her.  The
wandering and unsettled desire after pleasure, was quite subdued
in her.  She was content to lead a quiet, sober, religious
life.  She found it better to avoid the general society of
young persons, and was sweetly content in the situation in which
God had placed her; setting an example to other young women of
the beauty of a retired and modest demeanour, avoiding from
taste, as well as principle, all society that was not
religious.  She felt that light and trifling intercourse
with those whose hearts followed after vanity and pleasure, was
unprofitable and hurtful.  O how blessed it is to see young
persons turn away from following vanity!  To see as a fruit
of religion, a separation from the world, from the manners, the
appearance,
p.
51
and the spirit of it.  I saw all this in
Elizabeth.  She had for many years been a member of our
women’s meeting, and though one of the youngest, her ardent
love of the ministry under which she lived, her Christian
experience, and occasionally her prayers, were a help and comfort
to our society, and she was most persevering, though often very
ill.

‘I must also notice her example in the house of
God.  There was no lightness, or carelessness in her
demeanour, but her mind seemed to be filled with the sense of the
divine presence, and to be thirsting after the knowledge of his
truth; she gave the deepest attention to the preacher’s
word.  No religious mind can shew lightness in the house of
God.  How often have I enjoyed sweet sympathy with her, when
sitting near her in her usual seat at St. Peter’s
Chapel.  Have we not endeavoured to “pray with the
Spirit, and to sing with the understanding also?”  I
could weep from my heart to find her seat empty.  She met
patiently her many trials, and meekly bowed her head to the will
of God.  The awful death of her father in the yawl, had
deeply afflicted her; indeed she never recovered the shock: but I
may say, under every trial and bodily suffering, of which she had
much, I never heard her complain, but with calm serenity she
yielded herself unto the Lord.

‘I had the privilege of visiting her the day before
p. 52
her death,
and found her sweetly serene and happy, full of confidence in her
Saviour; delighting in prayer, and evidently finding it
“sweet to lie passive in her Saviour’s hands,”
and to know no will but his.  And the next day, a few hours
before her end, can I ever forget the solemn impressive scene of
our partaking of the body and blood of Christ together in the
Holy Sacrament; her deep attention—her response to the
words of the service—her fervent manner in taking the
bread, as a sign or seal of her living upon Christ, who was to
her soul the bread of life, and her drinking the wine as an
emblem of that blood, that she had felt to be so

precious
?’

‘After this solemn communion together, we united in
earnest prayer and thanksgiving on her account, that the works in
her might be finished in righteousness, and that she might soon
find herself in the glorious mansions prepared for her, by the
beloved of her soul.  She appeared perfectly sensible, and
able to taste this spiritual and interesting communication with
us.  I then arose and took my leave of her.’

The testimony of her friend is as follows:

‘During the ten years of my intercourse with
her, I have found her conversation as becometh the gospel of
Christ.  She has treated me at all times with a sisterly
affection and respect; I have proved her a tried friend, one that
would not forsake in
p. 53
time of trouble.  Though
separated for three years, I always found her the same dear
friend as ever.  I have often been cheered with her kind
exhortation to me, to seek with earnestness the Lord, and attend
at all times the means of grace, telling me they were indeed
channels, through which the Lord bestowed his blessings to his
faithful followers.  Though we were separated in body, we
were not separated in our union with Christ.  When I have
needed reproof, she has given it to me, but in the meekest manner
possible.  She was also very tender over the faults of
others.  I never heard her speak unkindly of any
one—“considering herself, lest she also should be
tempted.”  She was most earnest for a revival in
religion, both in our own Church, and for the spread of the
gospel in distant lands.  This was evident, both in her
prayers and her zeal in subscribing to different societies.
How sorry are we to lose her name from the number of those young
people who are interested in the Jews, for we always found her
most willing to aid in this delightful cause, and what she gave,
seemed to be in the spirit of prayer.  How often I have
heard her pour forth her heart in prayer, that the Jews might be
brought into the fold of Christ; and truly we may say, concerning
our Bible Association, which was formed amongst a few of us, that
indeed our head is gone.  She was so
p. 54
deeply
interested in it, and did so long for the Anniversary Meeting,
that our subscription might be carried in, not to gain the praise
of men, but with a desire to do something for the glory of
God.  But she is gone, and her works do follow her.
May I always remember her christian walk and conversation, for in
her I saw the fruits of the Spirit shine forth, for she was not
desirous of vain glory, but in all points, she esteemed others
better than herself.  Humbly do I hope, that the grace which
made her to differ, may constrain me to walk in her
steps.’

The commencement of the year 1840, the last year of
Elizabeth’s life, is noticed by her in her Journal, with
her usual seriousness.

‘Through the mercy of God, I have been
permitted to enter upon another year; and O how much have I to
thank him for the mercies of the year that is passed.  I
have had many little illnesses, but the Lord has in mercy spared
me, while many that I know, have been summoned to give up their
account.  O Lord what am I, that thou hast spared me a
worthless worm of the earth?  O fill my heart with love and
gratitude for all thy mercies to me, and if my life be spared,
may it be entirely devoted to thy service.  Great God,
enable me to live to thee.  O let me enjoy all that I have,
as coming from thee, and whatever thou art pleased to take
p. 55
from me, take
not away thy Holy Spirit.  O blessed Spirit, who art One
with the Father, and the Son, enter into my poor sinful heart,
and root out all my sinful and corrupt affections and reveal
Jesus to me as all in all.’

As her time drew to a close, her conflicts do not seem to have
been lessened.

On March 24.  She says, ‘Being off my guard this
morning, the enemy gained an advantage over me in my
temper.  Immediately I felt my sin, and was led to cry out,
“Against thee, thee only have I sinned.”  I was
almost driven to despair, but these precious promises were
applied, “If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteousness,” and “the
blood of Christ cleanseth from all sin.”  O my God
whom I have offended, let this be a warning to me to watch and
pray, that I enter not into temptation.’

On her birth-day she says, ‘I have passed another year
of my life; but O my God, how little to thy glory.  I have
been very much tried in my soul of late.  The enemy has been
permitted to tempt me very much with unbelief.  Sometimes I
question whether I am a Christian at all, yet my desire is to
love and serve my God.  The conflict is sharp, yet do I
believe Jesus will deliver me.  I do feel willing to part
with any thing, if Jesus smile upon me.’

p.
56
‘On Sunday, heard a sermon from Mr. R. on these
words, “There shall not a hair of your head
perish.”  The sermon was delightfully
encouraging.  I have felt the comfort of it during the last
week, having had some little perplexing things to meet.  O
how sweet to feel in the time of trial and temptation, that
nothing is unnoticed by our Heavenly Father.

‘Sunday, April 12.  I feel my health very
poorly.  I know not what the Lord is about to do with
me.  Whether life or death, Lord make me thine.  I
desire to glorify thy name upon earth, and find my way to
heaven.’

Her usual industry and care in recording the sermons she
heard, appears this year as it did the last.  But I pass
over all these records, and now I come to the last entry of her
Journal.  It is dated April 17.  Good Friday.

‘I was informed divine service began half an
hour later than it did.  I was therefore very late at
Chapel, which vexed me very much.  I could not enjoy the
service.  My head is in a very bad state.  The enemy
takes advantage of my bodily infirmities and sorely distresses
me.  I was led this afternoon, earnestly to entreat the Lord
to direct my mind to some portion of his word for comfort.
I prayed with the Bible before me, and opened on 2 Cor. xii.
9.  Satan then seemed to say, this is not for you;
p. 57
but my God
tells me, “His grace is sufficient for me.”
Lord, enable me to trust in thee.’

It was a strong act of faith, performed with suitable
solemnity, which made this young woman believe that she should
find in the Bible an answer to her prayer.  But she did so
in a remarkable manner, and having received the direction to
depend on the grace of God as sufficient for her, how strikingly
her faith led her to hold it fast, so that angel, principality,
or power could not separate her from it.  But how
instructive is her example in dealing with temptation.  She
felt its danger; she sought, as the weapon of defence, “the
sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.”  The
Lord was pleased to direct her to a suitable text.  She
received it in faith and obtained the victory.  Most gladly,
therefore, might she with the Apostle, “glory in her
infirmities, that the power of Christ might rest upon her,”
and say with him, “When I am weak then am I
strong.”’

The last months of Elizabeth’s life afforded her the
means of quietly pursuing her course in preparation for her
end.  She was unable to do more than work at her
needle.  This however afforded her the opportunity of calm
and continual meditation.  Her circumstances were entirely
favourable for her state of mind.  Her kind brother who
resided with her and her sister made every effort to afford her
relief.  In the last ten days of her life her symptoms
became
p.
58
more decided: she laid aside her work, and ceased to
think of the things of the world.  She herself was not at
that time able to read, but she could still listen to
others.  On the Sunday evening the subject of heaven and
reunion with those already there, chiefly occupied her
attention.  Her state was calm and suffering, but neither
she, nor any one, thought her end was so near; but I will give
the account of this from her sister and constant companion.

‘The health of my dear sister had been some
time declining; her last illness was short and severe: she
suffered much pain, but bore it with Christian patience and
resignation.  Her weakness was extreme; she could speak but
little, but when able to converse, she would freely tell me the
state of her mind.  She was indeed building on the Rock of
Ages, on the sure foundation; but she had humbling views of
herself, although sweet and exalted views of the Saviour.
We did not think death so near; but the last morning of her life
a sudden change took place, which was better perceived by those
around her, than felt by herself.  As usual, in the morning
we read and prayed together.  She joined with peculiar
earnestness: but when I had risen from my knees I could not
refrain from weeping.  I saw her hands darkened in colour,
which marked the alteration in her bodily state.  She asked
me why I cried.  I said, I am sorry to
p. 59
see you so
ill.  She answered, ‘I thought I was better this
morning.’  With great anxiety I waited the arrival of
her medical attendant, and soon found my fears respecting the
near approach of death were not groundless.  Upon my again
entering the room, she anxiously enquired the opinion of the
doctor.  I told her as gently as the excited state of my
feelings would permit.  I asked if she could rest her soul
on Christ.  She said, “Yes, I feel peace; but O for a
fuller assurance.”  I told her we had sent for Mr. C.
and her brothers, at which she expressed great satisfaction, and
said, “I feel drowsy, but do not let me sleep; I have no
time for sleeping; I want to speak while I can.”’

When I arrived in her chamber, she said at once, ‘I
think that I am dying.’  I did not contradict
her.  She then expressed herself as not feeling all that joy
in her departure which she had hoped might have been her
portion.  But the fact was, that a profound humility gave a
tone to all her feelings of herself.  She put me in mind of
the expression of Mr. Simeon on his dying bed.  ‘I
think that if you should see me die, you will not see me die
triumphantly.  No! triumph will not suit me till I get to
heaven.  If I am admitted, as I hope to be there, then, if
there be one that will sing louder than the rest, I think I shall
be that one; but while here, I am a sinner, a redeemed sinner,
and as such I would lie here to the last, at the foot of the
cross,
p.
60
looking unto Jesus, and go as such into the presence of
God.’  Elizabeth’s Journal shews this to have
been her feeling.  She then, however, declared her sense of
the possession of a true peace, founded on the atonement of her
Saviour.  She expressed a very earnest desire for the
spiritual welfare of all about her, especially of the young with
whom she met in the Bible Class.  She was dying.  She
asked to receive the Sacrament.  I engaged to come in the
afternoon, and administer it.  In all this there was nothing
of hurry, or fearfulness, or mistrust, but the image of a soul
fearing no evil, and walking though the Valley of the Shadow of
Death, with the comfort of her Saviour’s rod and
staff.  It left no doubt in my mind as to her state of
blessedness.  But I will now return to her sister’s
narrative.  ‘On Mr. C.’s arrival, he conversed
and prayed with her; she then requested to receive the Sacrament:
he took his leave, promising soon to return.  She now took
an affectionate leave of her brothers and other relatives,
speaking to each with great kindness, respecting the salvation of
their never dying souls.  After settling some little affairs
(this was the distribution of her little property, and the gift
of some money to the societies to which she had subscribed) she
looked at me, and said, I think that is all.  ‘How
long will Mr. C. be, I wish him to come now.’  I said,
‘Dear, I will send for and
p. 61
hasten him.’  She said,
‘Do so, I wish once more to commemorate the dying love of
the Saviour on earth, then I will lay me down and die in
Jesus.’’

Jesus can make a dying bed,

Feel soft as downy pillows are.

The scene of this celebration of the Lord’s Supper I
shall not readily forget.  Herself, her sisters, the valued
friends of her life, were before me.  Her own countenance
was so beautifully calm and heavenly.  She sat up, but she
was sinking very fast, and I feared that she might die during the
service; but all the while she made the greatest effort to give
all her strength to this holy ordinance.  She followed me in
the responses, and at the conclusion I read over to her the
blessing of the ‘Visitation of the Sick,’ ‘Unto
God’s gracious mercy and protection we commit thee.
The Lord bless thee, and keep thee; the Lord make his face to
shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee.  The Lord lift
up the light of his countenance on thee, and give thee peace both
now and evermore.’  I do not expect again to see a
face upon which the radiant light of God’s countenance may
shine more brightly and happily than upon this dying saint.
The scene was most touching in every way.  After I had done,
a dear friend, one whom I have mentioned before, commended her
soul to God, in a solemn strain of spiritual blessing.
p. 62
After a
pause, at her own request, I read her a hymn.  I then took
my leave, desiring to give up her dying moments to her own
disposal, and feeling that there were others in the house to whom
she might wish to speak some last words of admonition or of
comfort.

‘After partaking of the Sacrament,’ her sister
continues, ‘she appeared sweetly composed, while Mr. C.
commended her parting soul to God.  She then looked round,
as if looking for some one, and as I approached the bed, she
fixed her dying eyes upon me, and said, “Happy
translation.”  I said, “Dear, do you feel very
happy now?”  She answered, “O yes, happy.”

[62]
Soon after this, her medical man,
Mr. B., came in, and she conversed with him on her approaching
end.  She said she was sure he had done all he could in a
medical point of view.  She thanked him for his attention
during her illness, and then added, “Now, sir, pray with
me.”  After prayer, she repeated the following
lines:—

‘What is there here to court my stay,

Or hold me back from home;

While angels beckon me away,

And Jesus bids me come.’

Some time after, she said, ‘now I must pray for
p. 63
patience to
wait the Lord’s time.  Come Lord Jesus!’
Soon after she said, ‘I would not come back again, now I
have got a glimpse of the heavenly kingdom.’  She made
use of similar expressions, till she gradually sunk in death, and
her Spirit took its flight to the paradise of God.

The funeral of Elizabeth Cullingham took place in the usual
course.  It was attended, as well by her own family, as by
many of her christian friends.  There was nothing in it to
call for attention.  It was consistent with her own simple
unostentatious life.  A large party of the attendants met at
a neighbouring cottage, where the voice of thanksgiving was
raised for the mercies which had been granted to our departed
friend, and prayer was offered up for all who had been connected
with her.  On the ensuing Sunday Evening, a funeral Sermon
was preached on her account.  The text was taken from Rev.
iii. 12.  “Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in
the temple of my God, and he shall go no more out: and I will
write upon him the name of my God, which is new Jerusalem, which
cometh down out of heaven from my God: and I will write upon him
my new name.”

The subjects dwelt upon in the Sermon were—The course of
a christian’s life; and the eternal reward which follows
his death.  The victory over the world, the flesh, and the
devil was through divine grace,
p. 64
obtained by our departed friend, and
now she has her reward.  She is become a pillar in the
temple of her God, to shew forth his praises through eternity
amidst the redeemed in heaven; where “they hunger no more,
neither thirst any more: neither shall the sun light on them nor
any heat.  For the lamb which is in the midst of the throne
shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of
waters: and God shall wipe away all tears from their
eyes.”

Her tomb stone in the church yard, bears a memorial to the
truth of which all who attended upon her in her last hours can
bear witness.  They are lines somewhat transposed from a
beautiful little poem of Mr. Dale’s.

‘Triumphant in thy closing eye,

The hope of glory shone;

Joy breath’d in thy expiring sigh,

To think the fight was won.

‘And thus shall faith’s consoling power,

The tears of love restrain,

O! who that saw thy parting hour,

Could wish thee back again?’

She was aged 28
years
.

In drawing this memorial to a conclusion, I wish to add a few
words in the way of encouragement to any young persons, who may
read the account which has been given.

In the first place I wish to repeat, what I have
p. 65
before
stated, that the subject of this history had nothing in her
natural character or her situation in life, which distinguished
her case from that of thousands.  She was not particularly
clever, or naturally very amiable, or very much instructed, or a
person of great leisure, or brought up under very extraordinary
circumstances.  She had a moderate portion of talents
committed to her—but she used what she had well.  I
know how prone we all are, to think that others around us have
advantages which we have not, and to take this for an excuse for
not giving ourselves to God as others do.

I wish to make the same remark about all the persons whose
history has been introduced into this memoir.  They were
occupied in business, or engaged in the common duties of life;
they had no greater advantages than belong to many of their
neighbours, they were persons of like passions with others.
There is nothing therefore in their case to make an excuse for
those who have not followed in their steps.  It must however
be admitted that some individuals are often situated in a more
favourable position than others for the cultivation of religious
duties, and I am willing to allow that Elizabeth Cullingham had
every advantage of this kind.  At the same time I say
without hesitation, that I believe the great mass of our young
people possess the means, by which she gained her highest
advantages.  The preached word
p. 66
seems to have been her chief outward
help, and the ordinary instruction in the scriptures, and the
little meetings for prayer, were the means of grace which she
followed.  Within her own mind, however, she at the same
time laboured diligently, she watched and prayed, she came out
from worldly temptation, and she sought to set her affections on
things above.  But these efforts are within the reach of all
who will enter upon them.  Such is the liberty given to
young persons in this present day, that it seems to me, that in
almost any case, the excuse of not having the fullest opportunity
of obtaining religious instruction is groundless.  There may
indeed be cases where young persons are deprived of a liberty
which they should always have of attending at the House of God at
stated times.  But these instances are very few.  No!
the fault is not with the husbandman.  ‘What could I
have done more,’ the divine master says, ‘that I have
not done.’  It is with ourselves.  Our heavenly
Father would gather us to himself, but we will not.

But, I will shortly point out the chief rules of christian
doctrine, by which I think that Elizabeth advanced to that state,
in which she became so meet for her heavenly rest.

A chief failing which is constantly dwelt upon in her writings
is that
of her own sinfulness
.  I will not refer to
any more passages of her Journal, but
p. 67
we may gather this from those already
cited.  This sense of sinfulness, distinct from a mere
regret at the inconvenience and disgrace of sin, must form the
foundation of a sound religious state; ‘against thee, thee
only have I sinned,’ was David’s feeling.  Thus
it was with Elizabeth Cullingham also.  Notwithstanding her
meek and holy walk, and the conscientious feeling which she had
of the uprightness of her motives, she felt the deceitfulness of
her heart, and the sinfulness of her state in the sight of God;
and that she had within her a root of bitterness, which
continually brought condemnation, and which required the constant
renewal of the Holy Ghost to overcome.

But in this, ‘her fervent spirit laboured.  Here
she fought, and here obtained fresh triumphs o’er
herself.’  Still the sinfulness of her nature was a
subject continually present in her mind.  She mourned over
it; she strove against it; and it was a constant burden, which
only the cross of Christ could enable her to bear.

But a second feeling which dwelt in her mind, and which
produced the most important practical consequences was, that

God is reconciled to sinners through the Atonement of Jesus
Christ
,
and received in the heart by Faith
.  The
doctrine conveyed by this view of religion was the foundation
stone on which her peace, and liberty in prayer, and holiness
rested.
p.
68
“Ye,” says the Apostle, “who were far
off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ, for he is our
peace,” and “being justified by faith, we have peace
with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.”  Although
constantly cast down by the sense of her sinfulness, Elizabeth
was enabled, as constantly to look by faith to the Atonement; and
if her sense of sin, by reason of the assaults of Satan, became
greater as she advanced in years, yet with it, her hope of pardon
increased, so that in the end, she felt an assurance that an
‘entrance would be ministered unto her abundantly, into the
everlasting kingdom of her Lord and Saviour.’  On the
doctrine of the Atonement moreover was founded her
comfort in
prayer
, for it was only as she felt that God was willing to
accept her as a returning child, that she was enabled to ask with
confidence.  But in this belief, she was enabled to go to
God, with the simplicity of a child.  She felt that he, who
as a Father had redeemed her, was now willing freely to give her
all things.  Moreover, this doctrine was the foundation of
her
holiness
, as she believed that she was
not

pardoned by any work of her own, so she was not tempted to
measure her goodness towards God by a rule, or standard which she
judged might constitute his requirements; but her aim was rather
to serve Him in the measure in which she loved Him, with all her
heart, and mind, and soul, and strength.  If she had felt
that
p. 69
she
had been justified by works, she would have sought only to have
done those works which might have secured her pardon; but now,
being justified by faith, its constant attendant,
constraining
love
, was begotten in the mind, and she felt that there was
nothing she did not long to devote to the service of her God and
Saviour.

One other doctrine was a source of the greatest comfort and
benefit to her, it was a
belief in the converting
,

consoling power of the Holy Ghost
.  Her dependence
for growth in Christian graces, was alone on the power of the
Holy Spirit; the love of the Spirit seemed to dwell in her heart,
and she was most anxious not to lose this holy influence by sin,
or by doubts, or unwillingness to receive his Holy
influences.

Her whole creed and course of conduct, may be said to have
been very simple.  It was that directed by the Church, to
which she was greatly attached, and which she followed with a
holy, humble, obedient mind.  Her aim was constantly to lead
a serious, practical, quiet life, she meddled very little with
the world, she aimed to live above it.  Her chief desire was
to be a follower of Christ, according to the station in which she
had been placed.

But I now wish to add a word on the choice which she so
deliberately made of a life dedicated to religion, and the
advantages which resulted to her from it.

p. 70
How
many refuse to take the course of religious duty, thinking its
pursuits irksome, its reward in no wise tending to present,
whatever they may do to future, comfort.  But I may venture
to assert, from the constant demeanour of our departed friend,
that although her course was one of conflict and of trial, it was
still one of substantial peace and comfort; and if she had not
the joys which the world esteems, she had others which never left
her, till she exchanged them for higher and purer delights.
She early learned that young people, who fancy that substantial
enjoyment is only to be found in the ordinary pleasures of life,
make a great mistake.  There may be much of indulgence or of
excitement in worldly gratifications, and those who seek them may
reap a present pleasure from them, but substantial happiness is
alone to be found in religion.  For this is a happiness
which does not depend on external circumstances, it is the same
in all states of life, and usually it rises higher when the hour
of trial and of sickness comes on, which deadens the present
enjoyments of life, and overwhelms the senses.  It makes the
cup run over even in the deepest desolations which the Christian
is called to pass through.

But O how incomparably more blessed is her state now, and will
be in all eternity, than if she had followed another course in
life!  She now regrets nothing she suffered, by which the
work of
p.
71
God in her own soul was carried on; she rejoices to have
borne the cross, inasmuch as it hath worked for her a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory.  All the seed of good
which for years she was permitted to sow, she now reaps, and the
fruit of it shall all be gathered into the garner of God.

If then
she
found the way of religion to be a way of
pleasantness, and a path of peace, and if now she is reaping a
good reward for the confession of Christ, we have the same way
opened by which to return to the Father, and the Holy Spirit is
at hand to teach us, to enlighten, to strengthen, to comfort, to
direct us in prayer.  Let no one refuse the offer which the
Gospel makes of its blessings.  Let all, without delay,
hasten to give themselves up to the service of Christ, not
doubting but ‘if they are stedfast, unmoveable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord, their labour will not be in
vain in the Lord.’

THE
END.

p. 72
PRINTED
BY

L. AND G. SEELEY, THAMES DITTON,
SURREY.

Footnotes

[62]
I have subsequently to this
event, found the same signal of faith in a dying person recorded
in one of Mr. Richmond’s tracts.—
Vide
Churchman’s Monthly Review
.  April 1841.

***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PILOT'S DAUGHTER***

***** This file should be named 38545-h.htm or 38545-h.zip******

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/8/5/4/38545

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.

*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).

Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License.  You must require such a user to return or
destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.

Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.

Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.