The Project Gutenberg eBook, Collins' Illustrated Guide to London and
Neighbourhood, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

Title: Collins' Illustrated Guide to London and Neighbourhood

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: April 5, 2012  [eBook #39379]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)

***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COLLINS' ILLUSTRATED GUIDE TO
LONDON AND NEIGHBOURHOOD***

Transcribed from the 1873 William Collins, Sons and Company
edition by David Price, email ccx074@pglaf.org

COLLINS’

ILLUSTRATED

GUIDE TO LONDON

AND

NEIGHBOURHOOD:

BEING
A

CONCISE
DESCRIPTION OF THE CHIEF PLACES OF INTEREST IN THE

METROPOLIS, AND THE BEST MODES OF
OBTAINING ACCESS

TO THEM: WITH INFORMATION RELATING
TO

RAILWAYS, OMNIBUSES, STEAMERS,
&c.

With fifty-eight Illustrations by
Sargent and others,

AND

A CLUE-MAP BY BARTHOLOMEW
.

LONDON:

WILLIAM COLLINS, SONS, AND COMPANY,

17 WARWICK SQUARE, PATERNOSTER
ROW.

1873.

p.
v
PREFACE.

In
this work an attempt is made to
furnish Strangers with a handy and useful Guide to the chief
objects of interest in the Metropolis and its Environs:
comprising also much that will be interesting to permanent
Residents.  After a few pages of General Description, the
various Buildings and other places of attraction are treated in
convenient groups or sections, according to their nature.
Short Excursions from the Metropolis are then noticed.
Tables, lists, and serviceable information concerning railways,
tramways, omnibuses, cabs, telegraphs, postal rules, and other
special matters, follow these sections.  An
Alphabetical Index
at the end furnishes the
means of easy reference.

The information is brought down to the latest date, either in
the Text or in the Appendix at the end.  And the Clue-map
has, in like manner, been filled in with the recently opened
lines of Railway, &c., as well as with indications of the
Railways sanctioned, but not yet completed.

p.
vi
CONTENTS.

PAGE

Hotel Charges

viii

General Description

9

A First Glance at the City

15

A First Glance at the
West-End

27

Palaces and Mansions, Royal and
Noble

33

Houses of Parliament; Westminster
Hall; Government Offices

40

St. Paul’s; Westminster Abbey;
Churches; Chapels; Cemeteries

47

British and South Kensington Museums;
Scientific Establishments

62

National Gallery; Royal Academy; Art
Exhibitions

68

Colleges; Schools; Hospitals;
Charities

70

The Tower; The Mint; The Custom House;
The General Post-Office

77

The Corporation; Mansion House;
Guildhall; Monument; Royal Exchange

84

The Temple; Inns of Court; Courts of
Justice; Prisons

90

Banks; Insurance Offices; Stock
Exchange; City Companies

93

The River; Docks; Thames Tunnel;
Bridges; Piers

97

Food Supply; Markets; Bazaars;
Shops

109

Clubs; Hotels; Inns; Chop-Houses;
Taverns; Coffee-Houses; Coffee-Shops

116

Theatres, Concerts, and Other Places
of Amusement

121

Parks and Public Grounds; Zoological,
Botanical, and Horticultural Gardens

125

Albert Hall and International
Exhibition

129

Omnibuses; Cabs; Railways;
Steamers

136

p.
vii
SHORT EXCURSIONS—

Up the
River

143

Down the
River

154

Crystal Palace,
&c.

162

APPENDIX.

TABLES, LISTS, AND USEFUL HINTS—

Suburban Towns and Villages, within
Twelve Miles’ Railway-Distance

169

Chief Omnibus Routes

171

Tramways

173

Clubs and Club-Houses

173

The London Parcels’ Delivery
Company

174

Money-Order Offices, and Post-Office
Savings-Banks

175

London Letters, Postal and Telegraph
System

175

Reading and News-Rooms

176

Chess-Rooms

177

Theatres

177

Concert Rooms

178

Music Halls

178

Modes of Admission to Various
Interesting Places

179

Principal, Public, and Turkish Baths

180

Medicated Baths

181

Cabs

182

Hints to Strangers

183

Commissionaires or Messengers

183

The Great Interceptive Main Drainage
System of London

184

INDEX

185

p.
viii
HOTEL CHARGES.

There
is only one class of hotels
in and near London of which the charges can be stated with any
degree of precision.  The
old
hotels, both at the
West-End and in the City, keep no printed tariff; they are not
accustomed even to be asked beforehand what are their
charges.  Most of the visitors are more or less

recommended
by guests who have already sojourned at these
establishments, and who can give information as to what

they
have paid.  Some of the hotels decline to
receive guests except by previous written application, or by
direct introduction, and would rather be without those who would
regard the bill with economical scrutiny.  The
dining

hotels, such as the
London
and the
Freemasons’
Tavern
, in London, the
Artichoke
and various whitebait
taverns at Blackwall, the
Trafalgar
and
Crown and
Sceptre
taverns at Greenwich, and the
Castle
and

Star and Garter
taverns at Richmond, are costly taverns
for dining, rather than hotels at which visitors sojourn; and the
charges vary with every different degree of luxury in the viands
served, and the mode of serving.  The hotels which can be
more easily tested, in reference to their charges, are the

joint-stock
undertakings.  These are of two kinds:
one, the hotels connected with the great railway termini, such as
the
Victoria
, the
Euston
, the
Great
Northern
, the
Great Western
, the
Grosvenor
, the

Charing Cross
, the
Midland
and
Cannon
Street
; while the other group are unconnected with railways,
such as the
Westminster Palace
, the
Langham
, the

Salisbury
, the
Inns of Court
,
Alexandra
,

&c.

p.
9
COLLINS’

ILLUSTRATED GUIDE TO LONDON.

Whether we consider London as the metropolis of a great and
mighty empire, upon the dominions of whose sovereign the sun
never sets, or as the home of more than three millions of people,
and the richest city in the world to boot, it must ever be a
place which strangers wish to visit.  In these days of
railways and steamers, the toil and cost of reaching it are,
comparatively speaking, small; and, such being the case, the
supply of visitors has very naturally been adjusted to the
everyday increasing opportunities of gratifying so very sensible
a desire.  To such persons, on their arrival at this vast
City of the Islands, we here, if they will accept us as their
guides, beg to offer, ere going into more minute details, a

GENERAL DESCRIPTION.

Without cumbering our narrative with the fables of dim
legendary lore, with regard to the origin of London—or

Llyn-Din
, “the town on the lake,”—we may
mention, that the Romans, after conquering its ancient British
inhabitants, about
a.d.
61, finally
rebuilt and walled it in about
a.d.

301; from which time it became, in such excellent hands, a place
of not a little importance.  Roman remains, such as fine
tesselated pavements, bronzes, weapons, pottery, and coins, are
not seldom turned up by the spade of our sturdy excavators while
digging below the foundations of houses; and a few scanty
fragments of the old Roman Wall, which was rather more than three
miles round, are still to be seen.  London, in the
Anglo-Norman times, though confined originally by the said wall,
grew up a dense mass of brick and wooden houses, ill arranged,
unclean,
p.
10
close, and for the most part terribly
insalubrious.  Pestilence was the natural consequence.
Up to the great plague of 1664–5, which destroyed 68,596,
some say 100,000 persons—there were, dating from the
pestilence of 1348, no fewer than some nine visitations of
widely-spreading epidemics in Old London.  When, in 1666,
the great fire, which burnt 13,200 houses, spread its ruins over
436 acres, and laid waste 400 streets, came to force the Cockneys
to mend their ways somewhat, and open out their over-cramped
habitations, some good was effected.  But, unfortunately,
during the rebuilding of the City, Sir Christopher Wren’s
plans for laying its streets out on a more regular plan, were
poorly attended to: hence the still incongruous condition of
older London when compared, in many instances, with the results
of modern architecture, with reference to air, light, and
sanitary arrangements.  On account of the rubbish left by
the fire and other casualties, the City stands from twelve to
sixteen feet higher than it did in the early part of its
history—the roadways of Roman London, for example, being
found on, or even below, the level of the cellars of the present
houses.

From being a city hemmed within a wall, London expanded in all
directions, and thus gradually formed a connection with various
clusters of dwellings in the neighbourhood.  It has, in
fact, absorbed towns and villages to a considerable distance
around: the chief of these once detached seats of population
being the city of Westminster.  By means of bridges, it has
also absorbed Southwark and Bermondsey, Lambeth and Vauxhall, on
the south side of the Thames, besides many hamlets and villages
beyond the river.

By these extensions London proper, by which we mean the

City
, has gradually assumed, if we may so speak, the
conditions of an existence like that of a kernel in a thickly
surrounding and ever-growing mass.  By the census of 1861,
the population of the
City
was only 112,247; while
including that with the entire metropolis, the number was
2,803,034—or
twenty-five times
as great as the
former!  It may here be remarked, that the population of the

City
is becoming smaller every year, on account of the
substitution of public buildings, railway stations and viaducts,
and large warehouses,
p. 11
in place of ordinary
dwelling-houses.  Fewer and fewer people
live
in the
City.  In 1851, the number was 127,869; it lessened by more
than 15,000 between that year and 1861; while the population of
the
whole
metropolis increased by as many as 440,000 in
the same space of time.

If we follow the Registrar-General, London, as defined by him,
extends north and south between Norwood and Hampstead, and east
and west between Hammersmith and Woolwich.  Its area is
stated as 122 square miles.  From the census returns of
1861, we find that its population then was 2,803,921 souls.
It was, in 1871, 3,251,804.  The real
city
population
was 74,732.

The growth of London to its present enormous size may readily
be accounted for, when we reflect that for ages it has been the
capital of England, and the seat of her court and legislature;
that since the union with Scotland and Ireland, it has become a
centre for those two countries; and that, being the resort of the
nobility, landed gentry, and other families of opulence, it has
drawn a vast increase of population to minister to the tastes and
wants of those classes; while its fine natural position, lying as
it does on the banks of a great navigable river, some sixty miles
from the sea, and its generally salubrious site and
soil—the greater part of London is built on gravel, or on a
species of clay resting on sand—alike plead in its
favour.

At one time London, like ancient Babylon, might fairly have
been called a brick-built city.  It is so, of course, still,
in some sense.  But we are greatly improving: within the
last few years a large number of stucco-fronted houses, of
ornamental character, have been erected; and quite recently, many
wholly of stone, apart altogether from the more important public
buildings, which of course are of stone.  Of distinct
houses, there are now the prodigious number of 500,000, having,
on an average, about 7.8 dwellers to a house.  For our own
part we are somewhat sceptical as to this average.  But we
quote it as given by a professedly good authority.

The Post-Office officials ascertained that there was built in
one year alone, as long ago as 1864, no fewer than 9,000 new
houses.
p.
12
Though, by comparison with the houses of Edinburgh and
some other parts of the kingdom, many of these are small
structures, with but two rooms, often communicating, on a floor,
a visitor to London will find no difficulty in seeing acres of
substantial residences around him as he strolls along through the
wide, quiet squares of Bloomsbury, the stuccoed and more
aristocratic quarters of Belgravia and South Kensington, or by
the old family mansions of the nobility and gentry in, say,
Cavendish, Grosvenor, or Portman Squares, and the large and more
modern houses of many of our wealthy citizens in Tyburnia and
Westburnia, farther westward of the Marble Arch.  But of
this more anon.

We have often heard foreigners laughingly remark of sundry
London houses—apropos of the deep, open, sunk areas,
bordered by iron railings, of many of them—that they
illustrate, in some sense, our English reserve, and love of
carrying out our island proverb—viz., that “every
Englishman’s house is his castle,”—in its
entirety, by each man barricading himself off from his neighbours
advances by a fortified
fosse
!

Without particular reference to municipal distinctions, London
may (to convey a general idea to strangers) be divided into four
principal portions—the
City
, which is the centre of
corporate influence, and where the greatest part of the business
is conducted; the
East End
, in which are the docks, and
various commercial arrangements for shipping; the
West
End
, in which are the palaces of the Queen and Royal family,
the Houses of Parliament, Westminster Abbey, and the residences
of most of the nobility and gentry; and the
Southwark and
Lambeth
division, lying on the south side of the Thames,
containing many manufacturing establishments, but few public
buildings of interest.  Besides these, the northern suburbs,
which include the once detached villages of Hampstead, Highgate,
Stoke Newington, Islington, Kingsland, Hackney, Hornsey,
Holloway, &c., and consist chiefly of private dwellings for
the mercantile and middle classes, may be considered a peculiar
and distinct division.  It is, however, nowhere possible to
say (except when separated by the river) exactly where any one
division begins or ends; throughout the vast compass of the city
and
p.
13
suburbs, there is a blending of one division with that
contiguous to it.  The outskirts, on all sides, comprise
long rows or groups of villas, some detached or semi-detached,
with small lawns or gardens.

The poet Cowper, in his
Task
, more than a hundred years
ago, appreciatively spoke of

“The villas with which London stands
begirt,

Like a swarth Indian with his belt of beads.”

We wonder what he would think now of the many houses of this
kind which extend, in some directions, so far out of town, that
there seems to be no getting beyond them into the country.

From the Surrey division there extends southward and westward
a great number of those ranges of neat private dwellings, as, for
instance, towards Camberwell, Kennington, Clapham, Brixton,
Dulwich, Norwood, Sydenham, &c.; and in these directions lie
some of the most pleasant spots in the environs of the
metropolis.

The flowing of the Thames from west to east through the
metropolis has given a general direction to the lines of street;
the principal thoroughfares being, in some measure, parallel to
the river, with the inferior, or at least shorter, streets
branching from them.  Intersecting the town lengthwise, or
from east to west, are three great leading thoroughfares at a
short distance from each other, but gradually diverging at their
western extremity.  One of these routes begins in the
eastern environs, near Blackwall, and extends along Whitechapel,
Leadenhall Street, Cornhill, the Poultry, Cheapside, Newgate
Street, Holborn, and Oxford Street.  The other may be
considered as starting at London Bridge, and passing up King
William Street into Cheapside, at the western end of which it
makes a bend round St. Paul’s Churchyard; thence proceeds
down Ludgate Hill, along Fleet Street and the Strand to Charing
Cross, where it sends a branch off to the left to Whitehall, and
another diagonally to the right, up Cockspur Street; this leads
forward into Pall Mall, and sends an offshoot up Waterloo Place
into Piccadilly, which proceeds westward to Hyde Park
Corner.  These two are the main lines in the metropolis, and
are among the first traversed by strangers.  It will be
observed that they unite in Cheapside, which therefore becomes an
excessively crowded
p.
14
thoroughfare, particularly at the busy hours of the
day.  More than 1000 vehicles
per hour
pass through
this street in the business period of an average day, besides
foot-passengers!  To ease the traffic in Cheapside, a
spacious new thoroughfare, New Cannon Street, has been opened,
from near London Bridge westward to St. Paul’s
Churchyard.  The third main line of route is not so much
thronged, nor so interesting to strangers.  It may be
considered as beginning at the Bank, and passing through the City
Road and the New Road to Paddington and Westbourne.  The New
Road here mentioned has been re-named in three
sections—Pentonville Road, from Islington to King’s
Cross; Euston Road, from King’s Cross to Regent’s
Park; and Marylebone Road, from Regent’s Park to
Paddington.  The main cross branches in the metropolis
are—Farringdon Street, leading from Blackfriars Bridge to
Holborn, and thence by Victoria Street to the King’s Cross
Station; the Haymarket, leading from Cockspur Street; and Regent
Street, already mentioned.  There are several important
streets leading northward from the Holborn and Oxford Street
line—such as Portland Place, Tottenham Court Road, King
Street, and Gray’s Inn Lane.  The principal one in the
east is St. Martin’s-le-Grand and Aldersgate Street, which,
by Goswell Street, lead to Islington; others
are—Bishopsgate Street, leading to Shoreditch and Hackney;
and Moorgate Street, leading northwards.  A route stretching
somewhat north-east—Whitechapel and Mile End
Roads—connects the metropolis with Essex.  It is a
matter of general complaint that there are so few great channels
of communication through London both lengthwise and crosswise;
for the inferior streets, independently of their complex
bearings, are much too narrow for regular traffic.  But this
grievance, let us hope, is in a fair way of abatement, thanks to
sundry fine new streets, and to the Thames Embankment, which,
proceeding along the northern shore of the river, now furnishes a
splendid thoroughfare right away from Westminster Bridge to
Blackfriars Bridge, by means of which the public are now enabled
to arrive at the Mansion House by a wide street—called
Queen Victoria Street, and, by the Metropolitan District Railway,
to save time on this route from the west.

p. 15
We
shall have occasion again to allude to the Thames Embankment some
pages on, and therefore, for the present, we will take

A FIRST GLANCE AT THE CITY.

London is too vast a place to be traversed in the limited time
which strangers usually have at their disposal.
Nevertheless, we may rapidly survey the main lines of route from
east to west, with some of the branching offshoots.  All the
more important buildings, and places of public interest, will be
found specially described under the headings to which they
properly belong.

The most striking view in the interior of the city is at the
open central space whence Threadneedle Street, Cornhill, Lombard
Street, King William Street, Walbrook, Cheapside, and Princes
Street, radiate in seven different directions.  (See
illustration.)  While the corner of the Bank of England
abuts on this space on the north, it is flanked on the south by
the Mansion House, and on the east by the Royal Exchange.
It would be a curious speculation to inquire how much money has
been spent in constructions and reconstructions in and around
this spot during half a century.  The sum must be
stupendous.  Before new London Bridge was opened, the
present King William Street did not exist; to construct it,
houses by the score, perhaps by the hundred, had to be pulled
down.  Many years earlier, when the Bank of England was
rebuilt, and a few years later, when the Royal Exchange was
rebuilt, vast destructions of property took place, to make room
for structures larger than those which had previously existed for
the same purposes.  For some distance up all the radii of
which we have spoken, the arteries which lead from this heart of
the commercial world, a similar process has been going on to a
greater or less extent.  Banking-houses, insurance-offices,
and commercial buildings, have been built or rebuilt at an
immense cost, the outlay depending rather on the rapidly
increasing value of the ground than on the actual charge for
building.  If this particular portion of the city, this busy
centre of wealth, should ever be invaded by such railway schemes
as 1864, 1865, and 1866 produced, it is difficult to imagine what
amounts would have to be
p. 16
paid for the purchase and removal of
property.  Time was when a hundred thousand pounds per mile
was a frightful sum for railways; but railway directors (in
London at least) do not now look aghast at a million sterling per
mile—as witness the South-Eastern and the Chatham and Dover
Companies, concerning which we shall have to say more in a future
page.

[16]

The seven radii of which we have spoken may be thus briefly
described, as a preliminary guide to visitors: 1.  Leaving
this wonderfully-busy centre by the north, with the Poultry on
one hand and the Bank of England on the other, we pass in front
of many fine new commercial buildings in Princes and Moorgate
p. 17
Streets;
indeed, there is not an old house here, for both are entirely
modern streets, penetrating through what used to be a close mass
of small streets and alleys.  Other fine banking and
commercial buildings may be seen stretching along either side in
Lothbury and Gresham Streets.  Farther towards the north, a
visitor would reach the Finsbury Square region, beyond which the
establishments are of less important character.  2. If,
instead of leaving this centre by the north, he turns north-east,
he will pass through Threadneedle Street between the Bank and the
Royal Exchange;

next will be found the Stock Exchange, on the left hand;
then the Sun Fire Office, and the Bank of London (formerly the
Hall of Commerce); on the opposite side the City Bank, Merchant
Taylor’s School, and the building that was once the South
Sea House; beyond these is the great centre for foreign merchants
in Broad Street, Winchester Street, Austin Friars, and the
vicinity.  3. If,
p. 18
again, the route be selected due
east, there will come into view the famous Cornhill, with its
Royal Exchange, its well-stored shops, and its alleys on either
side crowded with merchants, brokers, bankers, coffee-houses, and
chop-houses; beyond this, Bishopsgate Street branches out on the
left, and Gracechurch Street on the right, both full of memorials
of commercial London; and farther east still, Leadenhall Street,
with new buildings on the site of the late East India House,
leads to the Jews’ Quarter around Aldgate and
Houndsditch—a strange region, which few visitors to London
think of exploring.  “Petticoat Lane,” perhaps
one of the most extraordinary marts for old clothes, &c., is
on the left of Aldgate High Street.  It is well worth a
visit by connoisseurs of queer life and character, who are able
to take care of themselves, and remember to leave their valuables
at home.  4. The fourth route from the great city centre
leads through Lombard Street and Fenchurch Street—the one
the head-quarters of the great banking firms of London; the other
exhibiting many commercial buildings of late erection: while
Mincing Lane and Mark Lane are the head-quarters for many
branches of the foreign, colonial, and corn trades.  5. The
fifth route takes the visitor through King William Street to the
Monument, Fish Street Hill, Billingsgate, the Corn Exchange, the
Custom House, the Thames Subway, the Tower, the Docks, the Thames
Tunnel, London Bridge, and a host of interesting places, the
proper examination of which would require something more than
merely a brief visit to London.  Opposite this quarter, on
the Surrey side of the river, are numerous shipping wharfs,
warehouses, porter breweries, and granaries.  The fire that
occurred at Cotton’s wharf and depôt and other wharfs
near Tooley Street, in June, 1861, illustrated the vast scale on
which merchandise is collected in the warehouses and wharfs
hereabout.
[18]
Of the dense mass of streets
lying away from
p.
19
the river, and eastward of the city proper, comprising
Spitalfields, Bethnal Green, Whitechapel, Stepney, &c.,
little need be said here; the population is immense, but,
excepting the Bethnal Green Museum and Victoria Park, there are
few objects interesting; nevertheless the observers of social
life in its humbler phases would find much to learn here.
6. The southern route from the great city centre takes the
visitor, by the side of the Mansion House, through the new
thoroughfare, Queen Victoria Street—referred to at a
previous page—to the river-side.

It will therefore be useful for a stranger to bear in mind,
that the best centre of observation in the city is the open spot
between the Bank, the Mansion House, and the Royal Exchange;
where more omnibuses assemble than at any other spot in the
world; and whence he can ramble in any one of seven different
directions, sure of meeting with something illustrative of city
life.  The 7th route, not yet noticed, we will now follow,
as it proceeds towards the West End.

The great central thoroughfare of Cheapside, which is closely
lined with the shops of silversmiths and other wealthy tradesmen,
is one of the oldest and most famous streets in the
city—intimately associated with the municipal glories of
London for centuries past.  Many of the houses in Cheapside
and Cornhill have lately been rebuilt on a scale of much
grandeur.  Some small plots of ground in this vicinity have
been sold at the rate of nearly
one million sterling
per
acre!  On each side of Cheapside, narrow streets diverge
into the dense mass behind—Ironmonger Lane, King Street,
Milk Street, and Wood Street, on the north; and among others,
Queen Street, Bread Street, where Milton was born, and where
stood the famous Mermaid Tavern, where Shakespeare and Raleigh,
Ben Jonson and his young friends, Beaumont and Fletcher, those
twin-dramatists, loved to meet, to enjoy “the feast of
reason and the flow of soul,” to say nothing of a few
flagons of good Canary wine, Bow Lane, and Old ’Change, on
the south.  The greater part of these back streets, with the
lanes adjoining, are occupied by the offices or warehouses of
wholesale dealers in cloth, silk, hosiery, lace, &c., and are
resorted to by London and country shopkeepers for
p.
20
supplies.  Across the north end of King Street
stands the Guildhall; and a little west, the City of London
School and Goldsmiths’ Hall.  At the western end of
Cheapside is a statue of the late Sir Robert Peel, by
Behnes.  Northward of this point, in St.
Martin’s-le-Grand, are the buildings of the Post and
Telegraph Offices; beyond this the curious old Charter House; and
then a line of business streets leading towards Islington.
Westward are two streets, parallel with each other, and both too
narrow for the trade to be accommodated in them—Newgate
Street, celebrated for its Blue Coat Boys and, till the recent
removal of the market to Smithfield, for its carcass butchers;
and Paternoster Row, still more celebrated for its publishers and
booksellers.  In Panyer Alley, leading out of Newgate
Street, is an old stone bearing the inscription:

When y
e
have sovgh
t
the
citty rovnd,

Yet stil this is the highs
t
grovnd.

Avgvst the 27, 1688.
[20]

At the west end of Newgate Street a turning to the right gives
access to the once celebrated Smithfield and St. John’s
Gate.  South-west of Cheapside stands St. Paul’s
Cathedral, that first and greatest of all the landmarks of
London.  In the immediate vicinity of St. Paul’s, the
names of many streets and lanes (Paternoster Row, Amen Corner,
Ave Maria Lane, Creed Lane, Godliman Street, &c.) give token
of their former connection with the religious structure and its
clerical attendants.  The enclosed churchyard is surrounded
by a street closely hemmed in with houses, now chiefly dedicated
to trade: those on the south side being mostly wholesale, those
on the north retail.  An open arched passage on the south
side of the churchyard leads to Doctors’ Commons, once the
headquarters of the ecclesiastical lawyers.

p. 21

Starting from St. Paul’s Churchyard westward, we proceed
down Ludgate Street and Ludgate Hill, places named from the old
Lud-gate, which once formed one of the entrances to the city
‘within the walls.’  The Old Bailey, on the
right, contains the Central Criminal Court and Newgate Prison,
noted places in connection with the trial and punishment of
criminals.  On the left of Ludgate Hill is a maze of narrow
streets; among which the chief buildings are the new Ludgate Hill
Railway Station, Apothecaries’ Hall, and the printing
office of the all-powerful
Times
newspaper, in
Printing-House Square.  The printer of the
Times
, Mr.
Goodlake, if applied to by letter, enclosing card of any
respectable person, will grant an order to go over it, at 11
o’clock only, when the second edition of “the
Thunderer” is going to press.  At the bottom of
Ludgate Hill we come to the valley in which the once celebrated
Fleet River, now only a covered sewer, ran north and
p. 22
south from
St. Pancras to Blackfriars, where it entered the Thames.  A
new street, called Victoria Street, formed by pulling down many
poor and dilapidated houses, marks part of this valley; while
Farringdon Street, where a market, mostly for green stuff, is
held, occupies another part.  Newgate Street and Ludgate
Hill are on the east of the Fleet Valley; Holborn and Fleet
Street on the west.  The Holborn Valley Viaduct crosses at
this spot.  And of this wonderful triumph of engineering
skill we have now to speak.

It was an eventful day in the annals of the Corporation of the
City of London, when Queen Victoria, on November 6, 1869,
declared Blackfriars Bridge—about which more
hereafter—and Holborn Valley Viaduct formally open.
The Holborn Valley improvements, it should be remembered, were
nothing short of the actual demolition and reconstruction of a
whole district, formerly either squalid, over-blocked, and
dilapidated in some parts, or over-steep and dangerous to traffic
in others.  But a short time ago that same Holborn Valley
was one of the most heart-breaking
p. 23
impediments to horse-traffic in
London.  Imagine Holborn Hill sloping at a gradient of 1 in
18, while the opposite rising ground of Skinner Street—now
happily done away—rose at about 1 in 20.  Figure to
yourself the fact, that everything on wheels, and every foot
passenger entering the City by the Holborn route, had to descend
26 feet to the Valley of the Fleet, and then ascend a like number
to Newgate, and you will at once see the grand utility of
levelling up so objectionable a hollow.  To attempt to give
a stranger to London even a faint idea of what has been
accomplished by Mr. Haywood’s engineering skill, by a
necessarily brief description here, is an invidious task.
Nevertheless, we must essay it; premising, by-the-by, that if our
readers while in London do not go to see the Viaduct for
themselves, our trouble will be three parte thrown away.
The whole structure is cellular, to begin with.  To strip
the subject of crabbed technicalities, imagine for a moment a
long succession of—let us call them—railway-like
arches supporting the carriage-way: these large vaults being
available for other purposes.  Outside this carriage-way,
and under the edge of the foot-paths on either side, is a subway,
some 7 feet wide and 11 feet or so high.  Against the walls
of this sub-way are fixed, readily connectable, gas mains and
water mains and telegraph tubes.  This was the first time
all these important pipes had been so cleverly arranged in one
easily accessible place.  They are ventilated and partially
lighted through the pavement, and by gas.  Under each
sub-way goes a sewer, with a path beside it for the sewer men
when at work.  Outside the sub-way are ordinary house vaults
of two or three storeys high, according to the height of the
Viaduct.  These are divided by transverse walls; and, when
houses are built against it, the Holborn Valley Viaduct will be
shut out from sight, except in the case of the simple iron girder
bridge over Shoe Lane, and the London, Chatham, and Dover bridge,
with its sub-ways for gas and water pipes, and the fine bridge
over Farringdon Street.  You will, we trust, now see how
marvellously every yard of space has been utilized by the
engineer, from the roadway down to the very foundations.  A
few words must now be said about the splendid bridge over
Farringdon Street.  This has public staircases running
p. 24
up inside
handsome stone buildings—the upper parts of which have been
let for business purposes.  It is a handsome skew bridge of
iron, toned to a deep bronze green by enamel paint, and richly
ornamented; its plinths above ground, its moulded bases, and its
shafts, are respectively of grey, black, and exquisitely polished
red granite.  Its capitals are of grey granite, also
polished, and set off by bronze foliage.  Bronze lions, and
four statues of Fine Art, Science, Commerce, and Agriculture,
stand on the parapet-line on handsome plinths.  These, and
the projecting balconies and dormer window of the stone buildings
just named, with their four statues of bygone civic
worthies,—Fitz Aylwin, Sir William Walworth, Sir Thomas
Gresham, and Sir Hugh Myddleton,—enhance the effect of the
whole.

Poor Chatterton, “the marvellous boy, the sleepless soul
that perished in his pride,” after poisoning himself, in
1770, ere he was eighteen years of age, in Brooke Street, on the
north side of Holborn, was laid in a pauper’s grave, in
what was then the burying-ground of Shoe Lane Workhouse, and is
now converted to very different purposes.

Let us now come to Fleet Street.  This
thoroughfare—the main artery from St. Paul’s to the
west—for many years has been emphatically one of literary
associations, full as it is of newspaper and
printing-offices.  The late Angus B. Reach used humorously
to call it, “The march of intellect.”  Wynkyn de
Worde, the early printer, lived here, and two of his books were
“fynysshed and emprynted in Flete Streete, in ye syne of ye
Sonne.”  The
Devil
tavern, which stood near
Temple Bar, on the south side, was a favourite hostelrie of Ben
Jonson.  At the
Mitre
, near Mitre Court, Dr. Johnson,
Goldsmith, and Boswell, held frequent rendezvous.  The

Cock
was one of the oldest and least altered taverns in
Fleet Street.  The present poet-laureate, in one of his
early poems, “A Monologue of Will Waterproof,” has
immortalized it, in the lines beginning—

“Thou plump head waiter at the

Cock
,

To which I most resort,

How goes the time?  Is ’t nine o’clock?

Then fetch a pint of port!”

p. 25

Dr. Johnson lived many years either in Fleet Street, in Gough
Square, in the Temple, in Johnson’s Court, in Bolt Court,
&c., &c.; and in Bolt Court he died.  William
Cobbett, and Ferguson the astronomer, were also among the
dwellers in that court.  John Murray (the elder) began the
publishing business in Falcon Court.  Some of the early
meetings of the Royal Society and of the Society of Arts took
place in Crane Court.  Dryden and Richardson both lived in
Salisbury Court.  Shire Lane (now Lower Serle’s
Place), close to Temple Bar on the north, can count the names of
Steele and Ashmole among its former inhabitants.  Izaak
Walton lived a little way up Chancery Lane.  At the
confectioner’s shop, nearly opposite that lane, Pope and
Warburton first met.  Sir Symonds
p. 26
D’Ewes, ‘Praise-God
Barebones,’ Michael Drayton, and Cowley the poet, all lived
in this street.  Many of the courts, about a dozen in
number, branching out of Fleet Street on the north and south, are
so narrow that a stranger would miss them unless on the
alert.  Child’s Banking House, the oldest in London,
is at the western extremity of Fleet Street, on the south side,
and also occupies the room over the arch of Temple Bar.  St.
Bride’s Church exhibits one of Wren’s best
steeples.  St. Dunstan’s Church, before it was
modernized, had two wooden giants in front, that struck the hours
with clubs on two bells—a duty which they still fulfil in
the gardens belonging to the mansion of the Marquis of Hertford
in the Regent’s Park.  North of Fleet Street are
several of the
Inns of Court
, where lawyers congregate;
and southward is the most famous of all such Inns, the large
group of buildings constituting the
Temple
.  In the
cluster of buildings lying east from the Temple once existed the
sanctuary of Whitefriars, or
Alsatia
, as it was sometimes
called, a description of which is given by Scott in the

Fortunes of Nigel
.  The streets here are still narrow
and of an inferior order, but all appearance of Alsatians and
their pranks is gone.  The boundary of the city, at the
western termination of Fleet Street, is marked by Temple Bar,
consisting of a wide central archway, and a smaller archway at
each side for foot-passengers.  There are doors in the main
avenue which can be shut at pleasure; but, practically, they are
never closed, except on the occasion of some state ceremonial,
when the lord mayor affects an act of grace in opening them to
royalty.  The structure was designed by Sir Christopher
Wren, and erected in 1672.  The heads of decapitated
criminals, after being boiled in pitch to preserve them, were
exposed on iron spikes on the top of the Bar.  Horace
Walpole, in his
Letters
to Montague, mentions the fact of
a man in Fleet Street letting out “spy-glasses,” at a
penny a peep, to passers-by, when the heads of some of the
hapless Jacobites were so exposed.  The last heads exhibited
there were those of two Jacobite gentlemen who took part in the
rebellion of 1745, and were executed in that year.  Their
heads remained a ghastly spectacle to the citizens till 1772,
when they were blown down one night in a gale of wind.

p. 27
Having
thus noticed some of the interesting objects east of Temple Bar,
we will now take

A FIRST GLANCE AT THE WEST END.

The Strand—so called because it lies along the bank of
the river, now hidden by houses—is a long, somewhat
irregularly built street, in continuation westward from Temple
Bar; the thoroughfare being incommoded by two churches—St.
Clement Dane’s and St. Mary’s—in the middle of
the road.  On the site of the latter church once stood the
old Strand Maypole.  The new
Palace of Justice
, about
whose site there have been so many Parliamentary discussions,
will stand on what is at present a huge unsightly space of
boarded-in waste ground, formerly occupied by a few good houses,
between Temple Bar and Clement’s Inn, and many wretched
back-slums.  Not having the gift of prophecy as to its
future, and warned by so many long delays in its case, we hazard
no conjecture as to the time when it will gladden our eyes.
In the seventeenth century the Strand was a species of country
road, connecting the city with Westminster; and on its southern
side stood a number of noblemen’s residences, with gardens
towards the river.  The pleasant days are long since past
when mansions and personages, political events and holiday
festivities, marked the spots now denoted by Essex, Norfolk,
Howard, Arundel, Surrey, Cecil, Salisbury, Buckingham, Villiers,
Craven, and Northumberland Streets—a very galaxy of
aristocratic names.  The most conspicuous building on the
left-hand side is Somerset House, a vast range of government
offices.  Adjoining this on the east (occupying the site
once intended for an east wing to that structure), and entering
by a passage from the Strand, is a range of rather plain, but
massive brick buildings, erected about thirty years ago for the
accommodation of King’s College; and adjoining it on the
west, abutting on the street leading to Waterloo Bridge, is a
still newer range of buildings appropriated to government
offices—forming a west wing to the whole mass.  The
Strand contains no other public structure of architectural
importance, except the spacious new Charing Cross Railway Station
and Hotel on the south side.  The eastern half of
p. 28
the Strand,
however, is thickly surrounded by theatres—Drury Lane,
Covent Garden, the Olympic, the Charing Cross, the Adelphi, the
Vaudeville, the Lyceum, the Gaiety (built on the site of Exeter
’Change and the late Strand Music Hall, as is the
Queen’s on that of St. Martin’s Hall in Long Acre),
the Globe, and the Strand Theatres, are all situated
hereabouts.  Exeter Hall is close by, and—pardon the
contrast of ideas—so is Evans’s Hotel and Supper
Rooms, long famous for old English glees, madrigals, chops and
steaks, and as a place for friendly re-unions, without the
objectionable features of many musical halls.

Northumberland House, the large mansion with the lion on the
summit, overlooking Charing Cross, is the ancestral town
residence of the Percies, Dukes of Northumberland.  Over the
way is St. Martin’s Church, where lie the bones of many
famous London watermen—the churchyard used to be called
“The Waterman’s Churchyard”—and those of
that too celebrated scoundrel and housebreaker, Jack Sheppard,
hanged in 1724.  There also lies the once famous sculptor,
Roubilac, several monuments from whose chisel you can see in
Westminster Abbey.  Here, too, are interred the witty, but
somewhat licentious dramatist, Farquhar, author of
The
Beau’s Stratagem
; the illustrious Robert Boyle, a
philosopher not altogether unworthy to be named in the same
category with Lord Bacon and Sir Isaac Newton; and John Hunter,
the distinguished anatomist.

The open space is called Charing Cross, from the old village
of Charing, where stood a cross erected by Edward the First, in
memory of his Queen Eleanor.  Wherever her bier rested,
there her sorrowful husband erected a cross, or, as Hood
whimsically said, in his usual punning vein, apropos of the cross
at Tottenham,

“A Royal game of Fox and Goose

To play for such a loss;

Wherever she put down her orts,

There he—set up a
cross
!”

At the time of the Reformation you could have walked with
fields all the way on the north side of you from the city to
Charing Cross.  The history of the fine statue of Charles
the First, by Le Sœur, is
p. 29
curious.  It was made in Charles
the First’s reign, but, on the civil war breaking out ere
it could be erected, was sold by the Parliament to a brazier, who
was ordered to demolish it.  He, however, buried it, and it
remained underground till after the Restoration, when it was
erected in 1674.  It marks a central point for the West
End.

Southward are Whitehall and the Palace of Westminster; to the
west, Spring Gardens, leading into St. James’s Park;
north-west lie Pall Mall and Regent Street.  By-the-way, it
just occurs to us that the old game
Paille Maille
, from
which Pall Mall took its name, was a sort of antique forerunner
of croquet!  The former game, much beloved by Charles the
Second, was played by striking a wooden ball with a mallet
through hoops of iron, one of which stood at each end of an
alley.  Eastward is the Strand.  On the north,
Trafalgar Square, with Nelson’s statue and Landseer’s
four noble lions couchant—which alone are worth a
visit—at its base.  There are also statues to George
IV., Sir Charles James Napier,
p. 30
and Sir Henry Havelock.  A
statue of George the Third—with, we think, in an equestrian
sense, one of the best “seats” for a horseman in
London—is close by.  The National Gallery bounds the
northern side.  Of the two wells which supply the fountains
in this square, one is no less than 400 feet deep.

Turning southward from this important western centre, the
visitor will come upon the range of national and government
buildings—the Admiralty, the Horse Guards, the Treasury,
the Home Office, &c., &c.—in Whitehall, particulars
of which will be given a few pages further on under
Government
Offices
.  Then there are the fine Banqueting House at
Whitehall, and some rather majestic mansions in and near
Whitehall Gardens—especially one just erected by the Duke
of Buccleuch.  Beyond these, in the same general direction,
are the magnificent Houses of Parliament, Marochetti’s
equestrian statue of Richard Cœur de Lion, Westminster
Abbey, Westminster Hall, Mr. Page’s beautiful new
Westminster Bridge, and a number of other objects well worthy of
attention.

Returning to Charing Cross, the stranger may pursue his tour
through Cockspur Street to Pall Mall, and thence proceed up
Regent Street.  As he enters this new line of route, he will
perceive that the buildings assume a more important aspect.
They are for the most part stucco-fronted, and being frequently
re-painted, they have a light and cheerful appearance.  In
the Haymarket are Her Majesty’s Theatre and the Haymarket
Theatre; and near at hand are many club-houses and
Exhibition-rooms.  Pall Mall displays a range of
stone-fronted club-houses of great magnificence.  At the
foot of Regent Street is the short broad thoroughfare of Waterloo
Place, lined with noble houses, and leading southwards to St.
James’s Park.  Here stands the column dedicated to the
late Duke of York; not far from which is the Guards’
Memorial, having reference to troops who fell in the
Crimea.  From this point, for about a mile in a northerly
direction, is the line of Waterloo Place, Regent Street, and
Portland Place, forming the handsomest street in London.  At
a point a short way up we cross Piccadilly, and enter a curve in
the thoroughfare, called the Quadrant; at the corners of which,
and also in Upper Regent Street, are some of the
p. 31
most splendid
shops in London, several being decorated in a style of great
magnificence.  Regent Street, during the busy season in May
and June, and during the day from one till six o’clock,
exhibits an extraordinary concourse of fashionable vehicles and
foot-passengers; while groups of carriages are drawn up at the
doors of the more elegant shops.  Towards its upper
extremity Regent Street crosses Oxford Street.  The mass of
streets west from it consist almost entirely of private
residences, with the special exception of Bond Street.  In
this quarter are St. James’s, Hanover, Berkeley, Grosvenor,
Cavendish, Bryanstone, Manchester, and Portman Squares—the
last four being north of Oxford Street; and in connection with
these squares are long, quiet streets, lined with houses suited
for an affluent order of inhabitants.  In and north from
Oxford Street, there are few public buildings deserving
particular attention; but a visitor may like to know that
hereabouts are the Soho, Baker Street, and London Crystal Palace
Bazaars.  The once well-known Pantheon is now a wine
merchant’s stores.

The residences of the nobility and gentry are chiefly, as has
been said, in the western part of the metropolis.  In this
quarter there have been large additions of handsome streets,
squares, and terraces within the last thirty years.  First
may be mentioned the district around Belgrave Square, usually
called
Belgravia
, which includes the highest class
houses.  North-east from this, near Hyde Park, is the older,
but still fashionable quarter, comprehending Park Lane and May
Fair.  Still farther north is the modern district, sometimes
called
Tyburnia
, being built on the ground adjacent to
what once was “Tyburn,” the place of public
executions.  This district, including Hyde Park Square and
Westbourne Terrace, is a favourite place of residence for city
merchants and other wealthy persons.  Lying north and
north-east from Tyburnia are an extensive series of suburban rows
of buildings and detached villas, which are ordinarily spoken of
under the collective name St. John’s Wood: Regent’s
Park forming a kind of rural centre to the group.  Standing
higher and more airy than Belgravia, and being easily accessible
from Oxford Street, this is one of the most agreeable of the
suburban districts.

p. 32

If, instead of the Strand and Piccadilly route, or the Holborn
and Oxford Street route, a visitor takes the northernmost main
route, he will find less to interest him.  The New Road, in
its several parts of City Road, Pentonville Road, Euston Road,
and Marylebone Road, forms a broad line of communication from the
city to Paddington, four miles in length.  Though very
important as one of the arteries of the metropolis, it is
singularly deficient in public buildings.  In going from the
Bank to Paddington, we pass by or near Finsbury Square and
Circus, the buildings and grounds of the Artillery Company at
Moorfields, the once famous old Burial-ground at Bunhill Fields,
St. Luke’s Lunatic Asylum, the Chapel in the City Road
associated with the memory of John Wesley, the old works of the
New River Company at Pentonville, the Railway stations at
King’s Cross (Great Northern), and St. Pancras
(Midland),—the vast span of this station’s roof is
noteworthy,—and Euston Square (L. and N. Western), several
stations
p.
33
of the Metropolitan Underground Railway, St. Pancras and
Marylebone churches, and the entrance to the beautiful
Regent’s Park.  But beyond these little is presented
to reward the pedestrian.

It is well for a visitor to bear in mind, however, that all
the routes we have here sketched have undergone, or are
undergoing, rapid changes, owing chiefly to the wonderful
extension of railways.  Cannon Street, Finsbury,
Blackfriars, Snow Hill, Ludgate Hill, Smithfield, Charing Cross,
Pimlico, &c., have been stripped of hundreds, nay, thousands
of houses.

PALACES AND MANSIONS, ROYAL AND NOBLE.

These two preliminary glances at the City and the West End
having (as we will suppose) given the visitor some general idea
of the Metropolis, we now proceed to describe the chief buildings

p. 34
and places
of interest, conveniently grouped according to their
character—beginning with
Palatial Residences
.

St. James’s Palace
.—This is an inelegant
brick structure, having its front towards Pall Mall.  Henry
VIII. built it in 1530, on the site of what was once an hospital
for lepers.  The interior consists of several spacious
levée and drawing rooms, besides other state and domestic
apartments.  This palace is only used occasionally by the
Queen for levées and drawing-rooms; for which purposes,
notwithstanding its awkwardness, the building is better adapted
than Buckingham Palace.  The fine bands of the Foot Guards
play daily at eleven, in the Colour Court, or in an open
quadrangle on the east side.  The Chapel Royal and the
German Chapel are open on Sundays—the one with an English
service, and the other with service in German.

Buckingham Palace
.—This edifice stands at the
west end of the Mall in St. James’s Park, in a situation
much too low in reference to the adjacent grounds on the
north.  The site was occupied formerly by a brick mansion,
which was pulled down by order of George IV.  The present
palace (except the front towards the park) was planned and
erected by Mr. Nash.  When completed, after various
capricious alterations, about 1831–2, it is said to have
cost about £700,000.  The edifice is of stone, with a
main centre, and a wing of similar architecture projecting on
each side, forming originally an open court in front; but the
palace being too small for the family and retinue of the present
sovereign, a new frontage has been built, forming an eastern side
to the open court.  There is, however, little harmony of
style between the old and new portions.  The interior
contains many magnificent apartments, both for state and domestic
purposes.  Among them are the Grand Staircase, the
Ball-room, the Library, the Sculpture Gallery, the Green
Drawing-room, the Throne Room, and the Grand Saloon.  The
Queen has a collection of very fine pictures in the various
rooms, among which is a
Rembrandt
, for which George IV.
gave 5000 guineas.  In the garden is an elegant
summer-house, adorned with frescoes by Eastlake, Maclise,
Landseer, Stanfield, and other distinguished painters.  This
costly palace, however, with all its
p. 35
grandeur, was so badly planned, that
in a number of the passages lamps are required to be kept lighted
even during the day.  Strangers are not admitted to
Buckingham Palace except by special permission of the Lord
Chamberlain, which is not easily obtained.  In the front was
once the
Marble Arch
, which formed an entry to the Palace,
and which cost £70,000; but it was removed to the
north-east corner of Hyde Park in 1851.

Marlborough House
.—This building, the residence
of the Prince and Princess of Wales, is immediately east of St.
James’s Palace, being separated from it only by a
carriage-road.  It was built by Sir Christopher Wren, in
1709, as a residence for the great Duke
p. 36
of
Marlborough.  The house was bought from the Marlborough
family by the Crown in 1817, as a residence for the Princess
Charlotte.  It was afterwards occupied in succession by
Leopold (the late king of the Belgians) and the Dowager Queen
Adelaide.  More recently it was given up to the Government
School of Design; and the Vernon and Turner pictures were for
some time kept there.  The building underwent various
alterations preparatory to its occupation by the Prince of
Wales.

Kensington Palace
.—This is a royal palace, though
no longer inhabited by royalty, occupying a pleasant situation
west of Hyde Park.  It was built by Lord Chancellor Finch
late in the 17th century; and soon afterwards sold to William
III.  Additions were made to it from time to time.
Certain portions of the exterior are regarded as fine specimens
of brickwork; and the whole, though somewhat heavy in appearance,
is not without points of interest.  During the last century
Kensington Palace was constantly occupied by members of the royal
family.  Many of them were born there, and many died there
also.  The present Queen was born in the palace in
1819.  The Prince and Princess of Teck reside there at
present.  This, like the other royal palaces, is maintained
at the expense of the nation; though not now used as a royal
residence, pensioned or favoured families occupy it.

Lambeth Palace
.—This curious and interesting
building, situated in a part of the metropolis seldom visited by
strangers, is the official residence of the archbishops of
Canterbury.  It is on the south bank of the Thames, between
Westminster and Vauxhall Bridges.  The structure has grown
up by degrees during the six centuries that Lambeth has been the
archiepiscopal residence; and on that account exhibits great
diversities of style.  Leaving unnoticed the private and
domestic apartments, the following are the portions of the
irregular cluster possessing most interest.  The

Chapel
, some say, was erected in the year 1196; it is in
early English, with lancet windows and a crypt; but the roof,
stained windows, and carved screens, are much more recent.
The archbishops are always consecrated in this chapel.  The

Lollard’s Tower
, at the western end of the chapel,
was named from some Lollards or Wickliffites supposed
p. 37
to have been
imprisoned there.  It is about 400 years old.  The
uppermost room, with strong iron rings in the walls, appears to

p. 38
have been
the actual place of confinement; there are many names and
inscriptions cut in the thick oak wainscoting.  The

Hall
, about 200 years old, is 93 feet long by 78 feet
wide; it is noticeable for the oak roof, the bay windows, and the
arms of several of the archbishops.  The
Library
, 250
years old, contains about 15,000 volumes and numerous
manuscripts, many of them rare and curious.  The

Gatehouse
is a red brick structure, with stone
dressings.  The
Church
, near it, is one of the most
ancient in the neighbourhood of London; it has been recently
restored in good taste.  Simon of Sudbury, Archbishop of
Canterbury, was murdered here, in 1381, by Wat Tyler’s mob,
who stormed the palace, burned its contents, and destroyed all
the registers and public papers.  Lambeth Palace is not, as
a rule, shewn to strangers.

Mansions of the Nobility
.—London is not well
supplied with noble mansions of an attractive character; they
possess every comfort interiorly, but only a few of them have
architectural pretensions.
Northumberland House
,
lately alluded to, at the Charing Cross extremity of the south
side of the Strand, looks more like a nobleman’s mansion
than most others in London.  It was built, in about 1600, by
the Earl of Northampton, and came into the hands of the Percies
in 1642.
Stafford House
is perhaps the most finely
situated mansion in the metropolis, occupying the corner of St.
James’s and the Green Parks, and presenting four complete
fronts, each having its own architectural character.  The
interior, too, is said to be the first of its kind in
London.  The mansion was built by the Duke of York, with
money lent by the Marquis of Stafford, afterwards Duke of
Sutherland; but the Stafford family became owners of it, and have
spent at least a quarter of a million sterling on the house and
its decorations.
Apsley House
, at the corner of
Piccadilly and Hyde Park, is the residence of the Dukes of
Wellington, and is closely associated with the memory of

the
Duke.  The shell of the house, of brick, is old;
but stone frontages, enlargements, and decorations, were
afterwards made.  The principal room facing Hyde Park, with
seven windows, is that in which the Great Duke held the
celebrated Waterloo Banquet, on the 18th of June in every year,
from 1816 to 1852.
p. 39
The windows were blocked up with
bullet-proof iron blinds from 1831 to the day of his death in
1852; a rabble had shattered them during the Reform excitement,
and he never afterwards would trust King Mob.

Devonshire House
, in Piccadilly, faces the Green Park,
and has a screen in front.  It has no particular
architectural character; but the wealthy Dukes of Devonshire have
collected within it valuable pictures, books, gems, and treasures
of various kinds.
Grosvenor House
, the residence of
the Marquis of Westminster, is situated in Upper Grosvenor
Street, and is celebrated for the magnificent collection of
pictures known as the
Grosvenor Gallery
;
p. 40
a set of four
of these pictures, by Rubens, cost £10,000.

Bridgewater House
, facing the Green Park, is a costly
modern structure, built by Sir Charles Barry for the Earl of
Ellesmere, and finished in 1851.  It is in the Italian
Palazzo style.  Its chief attraction is the magnificent

Bridgewater Gallery
of pictures, a most rare and choice
assemblage.  This gallery contains no fewer than 320
pictures, valued at £150,000 many years ago—though
they would now, doubtless, sell for a much higher sum.
[40]

Holland House
, Kensington,
is certainly the most picturesque mansion in the metropolis; it
has an old English look about it, both in the house and its
grounds.  The mansion was built in 1607, and was celebrated
as being the residence, at one time of Addison, at another of the
late Lord Holland.  The stone gateway on the east of the
house was designed by Inigo Jones.
Chesterfield
House
, in South Audley Street, was built for that Earl of
Chesterfield whose “Advice to his Son” has run
through so many editions; the library and the garden are
especially noted.
Buccleuch House
, in Whitehall
Gardens, is recently finished.
Lansdowne House
, in
Berkeley Square, the town residence of the Marquis of Lansdowne,
contains some fine sculptures and pictures, ancient and
modern.  Scarcely less magnificent, either as buildings or
in respect of their contents, than the mansions of the nobility,
are some of those belonging to wealthy commoners—such as
Mr. Holford’s, a splendid structure in Park Lane; Mr.
Hope’s, in Piccadilly, now the
Junior Athenæum
Club
; and Baron Rothschild’s, near Apsley House, lately
rebuilt.

HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT; WESTMINSTER HALL; GOVERNMENT
OFFICES.

Houses of Parliament
.—This is the name usually
given to the
New Palace of Westminster
, which is not only
Sir Charles Barry’s greatest work, but is in all respects
one of the most remarkable structures of the age.  The
building, which occupies a site close to
p. 41
the river,
and close also to the beautiful new Westminster Bridge, was
constructed in consequence of the burning of the old Houses of
Parliament in 1834.  It is perhaps the finest modern Gothic
structure in the world—at least for civil purposes; but is
unfortunately composed of a stone liable to decay; and, to be
critical, its ornaments and details generally are on too minute a
scale for the magnitude of the building.  The entire
structure covers nearly eight acres.

Certain old plain law courts on the north are intended to be
removed.  The chief public entrance is by Westminster Hall,
which forms a vestibule to the Houses of Parliament and their
numerous committee-rooms.  The rooms and staircases are
almost inconceivably numerous; and there are said to be two miles
of passages and corridors!  The river front, raised upon a
fine terrace of Aberdeen granite, is 900 feet in length, and
profusely adorned with statues, heraldic shields, and tracery,
carved in stone.  The other façades are nearly as
elaborate, but are not so well seen.  It is a gorgeous
structure, which, so long ago as 1859, had cost over two
millions.  A further cost of £107,000, for frescoes,
statuary,
p.
42
&c., &c., had been incurred by the end of March,
1860; and the constant outgoings for maintenance of the fabric,
and additions thereto, must every year represent a heavy
sum.  Nevertheless, the two main chambers in which
Parliament meets are ill adapted for sight and hearing.  On
Saturdays, both Houses can be seen free, by order from the Lord
Chamberlain, easily obtained at a neighbouring office; and
certain corridors and chambers are open on other days of the
week.  Admission to the sittings of the two Houses can only
be obtained by members’ orders; as the benches appropriated
in this way are few in number, such admissions are highly prized,
especially when any important debate is expected.  On the
occasion when the Queen visits the House of Lords, to open or
prorogue Parliament, visitors are only admitted by special
arrangements.

Among the multitude of interesting objects in this stupendous
structure, the following may be briefly mentioned.  The

House of Peers
is 97 feet long, 45 wide, and 45
high.  It is so profusely painted and gilt, and the windows
are so darkened by deep-tinted stained glass, that the eye can
with difficulty make out the details.  At the southern end
is the gorgeously gilt and canopied throne; near the centre is
the woolsack, on which the Lord Chancellor sits; at the end and
sides are galleries for peeresses, reporters, and strangers; and
on the floor of the house are the cushioned benches for the
peers.  At either end are three frescoes—three behind
the throne, and three over the strangers’ gallery.
The three behind the throne are—“Edward III.
conferring the Order of the Garter on the Black Prince,” by
C. W. Cope; “The Baptism of Ethelbert,” by Dyce; and
“Henry Prince of Wales committed to Prison for assaulting
Judge Gascoigne,” by C. W. Cope.  The three at the
other end are—“The Spirit of Justice,” by D.
Maclise; “The Spirit of Chivalry,” by the same; and
“The Spirit of Religion,” by J. C. Horsley.  In
niches between the windows and at the ends are eighteen statues
of Barons who signed Magna Charta.  The
House of
Commons
, 62 feet long, 45 broad, and 45 high, is much less
elaborate than the House of Peers.  The Speaker’s
Chair is at the north end; and there are galleries along the
sides and ends.  In a gallery behind
p. 43
the Speaker
the reporters for the newspapers sit.  Over them is the
Ladies’ Gallery, where the view is ungallantly obstructed
by a grating.  The present ceiling is many feet below the
original one: the room having been to this extent spoiled because
the former proportions were bad for hearing.

Strangers might infer, from the name, that these two chambers,
the Houses of Peers and of Commons, constitute nearly the whole
building; but, in truth, they occupy only a small part of the
area.  On the side nearest to Westminster Abbey are
St.
Stephen’s Porch
,
St. Stephen’s Corridor
,
the
Chancellor’s Corridor
, the
Victoria
Tower
, the
Royal Staircase
, and numerous courts and
corridors.  At the south end, nearest Millbank, are the

Guard Room
, the
Queen’s Robing Room
, the

Royal Gallery
, the
Royal Court
, and the

Prince’s Chamber
.  The river front is mostly
occupied by
Libraries
and
Committee Rooms
.
The northern or Bridge Street end displays the
Clock Tower

and the
Speaker’s Residence
.  In the interior
of the structure are vast numbers of
lobbies
,

corridors
,
halls
, and
courts
.  The
Saturday tickets, already mentioned, admit visitors to the

Prince’s Chamber
, the
House of Peers
, the

Peers’ Lobby
, the
Peers’ Corridor
, the

Octagonal Hall
, the
Commons’ Corridor
, the

Commons’ Lobby
, the
House of Commons
,
St.
Stephen’s Hall
, and
St. Stephen’s
Porch
.  All these places are crowded with rich
adornments.  The
Victoria Tower
, at the south-west
angle of the entire structure, is one of the finest in the world:
it is 75 feet square and 340 feet high; the Queen’s state
entrance is in a noble arch at the base.  The
Clock
Tower
, at the north end, is 40 feet square and 320 feet high,
profusely gilt near the top.  After two attempts made to
supply this tower with a bell of 14 tons weight, and after both
failed, one of the so-called ‘Big Bens,’ the weight
of which is about 8 tons, (the official name being ‘St.
Stephen,’) now tells the hour in deep tones.  There
are, likewise, eight smaller bells to chime the quarters.
The
Clock
is by far the largest and finest in this
country.  There are four dials on the four faces of the
tower, each 22½ feet in diameter; the hour-figures are 2
feet high and 6 feet apart; the minute-marks are 14 inches apart;
the hands weigh more than 2 cwt. the pair; the minute-hand is 16
feet long, and the hour-hand
p. 44
9 feet; the pendulum is 15 feet long,
and weighs 680 lbs.; the weights hang down a shaft 160 feet
deep.  Besides this fine Clock Tower, there is a
Central
Tower
, over the Octagonal Hall, rising to a height of 300
feet; and there are smaller towers for ventilation and other
purposes.

Considering that there are nearly 500 carved stone statues in
and about this sumptuous building, besides stained-glass windows,
and oil and fresco paintings in great number, it is obvious that
a volume would be required to describe them all.  In the

Queen’s Robing Room
are painted frescoes from the
story of King Arthur; and in the
Peers’ Robing Room
,
subjects from Biblical history.  The
Royal Gallery
is
in the course of being filled with frescoes and stained windows
illustrative of English history.  Here, among others,
specially note the late D. Maclise’s stupendous fresco, 45
feet long by 12 feet high, representing “The Meeting of
Wellington and Blucher after the Battle of Waterloo;” and
the companion fresco, “The Death of Nelson.”

Westminster Hall
.—Although now made, in a most
ingenious manner, to form part of the sumptuous edifice just
described,
Westminster Hall
is really a distinct
building.  It was the old hall of the original palace of
Westminster, built in the time of William Rufus, but partly
re-constructed in 1398.  The carved timber roof is regarded
as one of the finest in England.  The hall is 290 feet long,
68 wide, and 110 high.  There are very few buildings in the
world so large as this unsupported by pillars.  The southern
end, both within and without, has been admirably brought into
harmony with the general architecture of the Palace of
Parliament.  Doors on the east side lead to the House of
Commons; doors on the west lead to the
Courts of Chancery
,

Queen’s Bench
,
Common Pleas
,

Exchequer
,
Probate
,
and Divorce
,
&c.  No building in England is richer in associations
with events relating to kings, queens, and princes, than
Westminster Hall.
St. Stephen’s Crypt
, lately
restored with great splendour, is entered from the south end of
the Hall.

Somerset House
, in the Strand, was built in 1549 by the
Protector Somerset; and, on his attainder and execution, fell to
the Crown.
p.
45
Old Somerset House was pulled down in 1775, and the
present building erected in 1780, after the designs of Sir Wm.
Chambers.  The rear of the building faces the Thames, its
river frontage being 600 feet long, and an excellent specimen of
Palladian architecture.  In Somerset House are several
Government offices—among the rest, a branch of the
Admiralty, the Inland Revenue, and the Registrar-General’s
department.  More than 900 clerks are employed in the
various offices.  The rooms in which Newspaper Stamps are
produced by ingenious processes, and those in which the
Registrar-General keeps his voluminous returns of births,
marriages, and deaths, are full of interest; but they are not
accessible for mere curiosity.  The learned Societies are
removed to Burlington House, Piccadilly.

Government Offices
.—A few words will suffice for
the other
p.
46
West-End Government offices.  The
Admiralty
,
in Whitehall, is the head-quarters of the Naval Department.
The front of the building was constructed about 1726; and the
screen, by the brothers Adam, about half-a-century later.
Most of the heads of the Admiralty have official residences
connected with the building.  The
Horse Guards
, a
little farther down Whitehall, is the head-quarters of the
commander-in-chief.  It was built about 1753, and has an
arched entrance leading into St. James’s Park.

The two cavalry sentries, belonging either to the Life
Guards or to the Oxford Blues, always attract the notice of
country visitors, to whom such showy horsemen are a rarity.
The
Treasury
, the
Office of the
p. 47
Chancellor
of the Exchequer
, the
Home Office
, the

Privy-council Office
, and the
Board of Trade
,
together occupy the handsome range of buildings at the corner of
Whitehall and Downing Street.  The interior of this building
is in great part old; after many alterations and additions, the
present front, in the Italian Palazzo style, was built by Sir
Charles Barry in 1847.  The
Foreign Office
, the

India Office
, and the
Colonial Office
, occupy the
handsome new buildings southward of Downing Street.  The

War Office
in Pall Mall is a makeshift arrangement: it
occupies the old quarters of the Ordnance Office, and some
private houses converted to public use.  After many
discussions as to architectural designs, &c., the so-called
“Battle of the Styles” ended in a compromise: the
Gothic architect (Mr. G. G. Scott, R.A.) was employed; but an
Italian design was adopted for the new Foreign and India
Offices.

ST. PAUL’S; WESTMINSTER ABBEY; CHURCHES; CHAPELS;
CEMETERIES.

St. Paul’s Cathedral
.—This is the most
prominent object in the metropolis.  The lofty dome, seen
for miles around, stands in the centre of an enclosed churchyard
of limited dimensions, at the head of Ludgate Hill.  A
church is said to have existed here four hundred years before the
Norman conquest; and, under various shapes and extensions, it
remained till destroyed by the Great Fire of London in
1666.  An entirely new edifice was then erected in its
stead, the important work being committed to Sir Christopher
Wren.  It was opened for divine service in 1697, and
finished in 1710—one architect and one master-mason having
been engaged on it for 35 years.
[47a]
The
cathedral is built in the form of a cross, 514 feet in length by
286 in breadth.
[47b]
Outwardly, the
p. 48
walls, which
have a dark sooty appearance, except where bleached by the
weather, exhibit a double range of windows.  There are three
porticos at as many entrances on the north, west, and
south.  That on the west is the principal, with twelve lofty
Corinthian pillars below, and a second order carrying the
pediment above; the angles are crowned with handsome bell-towers,
much larger than ordinary church steeples, and 222 feet
high.

But this entrance,
p. 49
which fronts Ludgate Hill, is not
much used; the common entrance is by the north portico and flight
of steps.  On entering, the impression produced by the
vastness of the internal space is great, although the walls want
something in tone and relief.  (Subscriptions are being
gradually raised for richly adorning the interior.)  There
are two domes, an outer and an inner, having a brick cone between
them.  The inner dome has six paintings relating to events
in the life of St. Paul: they were painted by Sir James
Thornhill, and have recently been renovated.  In the choir
is much beautiful carving, by Grinling Gibbons.  In various
parts of the cathedral are statues and monuments of John Howard,
Dr. Johnson, Sir Joshua Reynolds, Bishop Heber, Nelson,
Cornwallis, Abercrombie, Sir John Moore, Lord Heathfield, Howe,
Rodney,
p.
50
Collingwood, St. Vincent, Picton, Ponsonby, and
others.  In the
Crypt
beneath are the tombs of
Wellington, Nelson, Wren, Collingwood, Picton, Reynolds,
Lawrence, Opie, West, Fuseli, Turner, Rennie, and other eminent
men.  Service is performed on Sundays at 10.30
a.m.
and 3.15
p.m.
; on week-days at 8.0, 10.0, and
4.0.  A screen, on which the organ stood, has lately been
removed, throwing open the beautiful choir to view from the
nave.  The organ has been placed on the north side of the
choir.  Several times in the year service is performed under
the dome on Sunday evenings by gaslight; and an additional organ
for this service has been set up in the south transept.  The
appearance of the dome at these times, with a soft light shed
around it, is extremely beautiful; and the congregation generally
assembled is enormous.  If the stranger pleases to pay the
required fees, he may mount, by means of stairs and ladders, to
the top of the dome; and he will be amply repaid by the extensive
view from the balcony or gallery, which comprehends the whole of
London, with the country beyond its outskirts, and the Thames
rolling placidly in its winding course between dense masses of
houses.  The
Whispering Gallery
, at the bottom of the
inner dome, renders audible the slightest whisper from side to
side.  The
Library
contains chiefly ecclesiastical
works for the use of the Chapter.  The two
Golden
Galleries
are at the top of the inner and outer domes.
The
Ball
and
Cross
, reached by more than 600 steps,
are at the summit of the building; the ball, about 6 feet in
diameter, is reached with some difficulty.  The

Clock-work
and
Great Bell
always attract the notice
of visitors.  The pendulum measures 14 feet in length, while
the mass at its extremity is one hundredweight.  The great
bell, which is only tolled when a member of the royal family
dies, is placed in the southern turret above the western portico;
it weighs 4½ tons, and is 10 feet in diameter.  The
fine deep tones of this mighty bell, on which the hours are
struck, sweep solemnly, in a quiet evening, across the
metropolis, and are at times heard distinctly by families at
their firesides far out in the suburbs.  Altogether, St.
Paul’s is a magnificent structure; and though it cost a
million and a-half of money in the erection—a great sum in
the seventeenth century—
p. 51
the amount was well spent on so
worthy an object.  St. Paul’s is open, during the
greater part of the day, free to the public, but no place is
exhibited during divine service.—Fee for admission to the
whispering gallery and the two outer galleries, 6d.; the ball,
1s. 6d.; the clock, great bell, library, and geometrical
staircase, 6d.; and the crypt, 6d.

Westminster Abbey
.—Nearly opposite the Houses of
Parliament stands Westminster Abbey, open to inspection on the
north, west, and east, but much crowded upon by private dwellings
on the south.  In very early times this spot of ground was a
small insular tract, surrounded by the waters of the Thames, and
called Thorney Island.  Here a monastic institution was
founded on the introduction of Christianity into Britain.
Under Edward the Confessor an abbey was raised upon the site of
the ruined monastic building.  The ground-plan, as usual,
bore the form of the cross.  Rights and endowments were
granted; and the edifice assumed a great degree of architectural
grandeur.  It had become the place for the inauguration of
the English monarchs; and William the Conqueror was crowned here
with great pomp in 1066.  Henry III. and Edward I. enlarged
the abbey; and the building continued nearly in the state in
which they left it, until Henry VII. added a chapel, built in the
perpendicular style, on which the greatest skill of the architect
and the sculptor was displayed; exhibiting one of the most
splendid structures of the age, and so highly esteemed, that it
was enjoined that the remains of royalty alone should be interred
within its walls.  During the reign of Henry VIII., the
abbey was considerably defaced; but on the surrender of its
revenues, Henry raised Westminster to the dignity of a city, and
its abbey was constituted a cathedral.  It was, however,
afterwards re-united to the see of London, in 1550.  (An
archbishopric of Westminster, created by the Pope a few years
ago, is connected only with Roman Catholic matters, and is not
recognised by the English law.)  Westminster Abbey, during
the reign of William and Mary, was thoroughly repaired, and the
towers added at the western entrance, under the direction of Sir
Christopher Wren.  These towers, however, though good in
outline and general mass, are not in harmony
p. 52
with the rest
of the building.  The length of the abbey is 416 feet;
breadth at the transept, 203 feet; and at the nave, 102 feet;
height of the west towers, 225 feet.  The exterior
measurement, including Henry VII.’s Chapel, is 530
feet.

On entering at the great western door between the towers, the
magnificence of the abbey soon becomes apparent.  The
interior displays grand masses of marble columns separating the
nave from the side aisles.  A screen, surmounted by a noble
organ, divides the nave from the choir; while beyond the eye
soars, amid graceful columns, tracery, and decorated windows, to
the summit of the eastern arch that overlooks the adjacent
chapels.  The walls on both sides display a great profusion
of sepulchral monuments, among which are some finely executed
pieces of sculpture, and touching memorials of those whose
exploits or exertions have deserved the notice of posterity; but
too many, unfortunately, are in very bad taste.  Above the
line of tombs are chambers and galleries, once occupied by
ecclesiastics; solemn and dreary in their
p. 53
antiquity,
though relieved by occasional sunbeams glancing across the misty
height of the nave.  The northern window is richly
ornamented with stained glass.

The Chapel of Edward the Confessor is at the eastern end of
the choir, and contains the shrine of St. Edward: that it was an
exquisite piece of workmanship, is evident even in its
decay.  Here also is the coronation-chair, under which is
placed the celebrated stone brought from Scone, in Scotland, by
Edward I. in 1297.  The Chapel of Henry VII. is also at the
eastern end; and among the ashes of many royal personages
interred here are those of Mary and Elizabeth.  The ascent
to this splendid work of Gothic art is by
p. 54
steps of
black marble.  The entrance gates display workmanship of
extraordinary richness in brass.  The effect produced on
entering this chapel is striking: the roof is wrought in stone
into an astonishing variety of figures and devices; the stalls
are of oak, having the deep tone of age, with Gothic canopies,
all elaborately carved.  Here, before the remodelling of the
order, used to be installed the knights of the Order of the
Bath.  In their stalls are placed brass plates of their
armorial insignia, and above are suspended their banners, swords,
and helmets; beneath the stalls are seats for the esquires.
The pavement is composed of black and white marble; beneath which
is the royal vault.  The magnificent tomb of Henry VII. and
his queen stands in the body of this chapel, in a curious chantry
of cast brass, admirably executed, and interspersed with
effigies, armorial bearings, and devices relating to the union of
the red and white roses.

The number of statues and monuments in Westminster Abbey is
very great.  Most of them are contained in side-chapels, of
which there are several: viz., St. Benedict’s, St.
Edmund’s, St. Nicholas’s, St. Paul’s, St.
Erasmus’s, John the Baptist’s, and Bishop
Islip’s; besides Henry VII.’s and Edward the
Confessor’s Chapels, already mentioned.  These Chapels
contain about ninety monuments and shrines, some of great
beauty.  The Choir, the Transept, and the Nave, also contain
a large amount of sculpture—many specimens in wretched
taste, by the side of some of the first works of Flaxman,
Chantrey, Roubiliac, Nollekins, Bacon, Westmacott, Gibson,
Behnes, and others.
Poets’ Corner
, occupying
about half of the south transept, is a famous place for the busts
and monuments of eminent men—including Chaucer, Spencer,
Shakespeare, Drayton, Ben Jonson, Milton, Butler, Davenant,
Cowley, Dryden, Prior, Rowe, Gay, Addison, Thomson, Goldsmith,
Gray, Mason, Sheridan, Southey, Campbell, &c.  Lord
Macaulay and Lord Palmerston were recently buried in the
Abbey—the one in January, 1860; the other in October,
1865.  William Makepeace Thackeray does not lie there, but
at Kensal Green, though his bust is placed next to the statue of
Joseph Addison.  On the 14th June, 1870, Charles Dickens was
interred there.  His grave is situated at the foot of
p. 55
the coffin of
Handel, and at the head of the coffin of R. B. Sheridan, and
between the coffins of Lord Macaulay and Cumberland the
dramatist.  Near to England’s great humorist, towards
his feet, lie Dr. Johnson and Garrick, while near them lies
Thomas Campbell.  Shakespeare’s monument is not far
from the foot of the grave.  Goldsmith’s is on the
left.  A monumental brass, to the memory of Robert
Stephenson, has recently been inlaid in the floor of the
nave.  The
Cloisters
and the
Chapter House

contain some curious old effigies.

Westminster Abbey is a collegiate church, with a dean and
chapter, who possess a considerable authority over the adjoining
district, and a revenue of about £30,000 per annum.
The abbey may be considered as sub-divided into chapels; but in
the present day divine service (at 7.45,10, and 3) is performed
only in a large enclosed space near the eastern extremity of the
building—except on Sunday evenings during a portion of the
year, when service is performed in the nave, in a similar way to
the Sunday evening services under the dome of St.
Paul’s.  This evening service, at 7 o’clock, is
very striking in effect.  There are usually a considerable
number of strangers present at the services, particularly at that
on Sunday evenings.  The entrance chiefly used is that at
Poets’ Corner, nearly opposite the royal entrance to the
Houses of Parliament; but on Sunday evenings the great western
entrance is used.  There is admittance every week-day free
to the chief parts of the building, and to other parts on payment
of a fee of 6d.

Parish and District Churches
.—When we consider
that the metropolis contains nearly 1000 churches and chapels, it
may well be conceived that only a few of them can be noticed
here.  In addition to St. Paul’s and the Abbey, the
following are worth the notice of strangers.
St.
Michael’s
, Cornhill, has lately been restored and
re-decorated in an elaborate manner by Mr. Gilbert Scott.

St. Bartholomew’s
, Smithfield, which has been lately
restored, was once the choir and transepts of a priory church; it
is interesting, not only for some of its monuments, but for the
varieties of Norman and Gothic styles which it exhibits.

St. Stephen’s
, Walbrook, close to the Mansion House,
is especially worthy of attention; as the
p. 56
interior is
considered to be one of Wren’s happiest conceptions.

Bow Church
, or the Church of St. Mary-le-Bow, occupies a
conspicuous position on the south side of Cheapside, and has a
spire of great elegance, designed by Sir Christopher Wren.
The clock projects over the street from the lower part of the
tower.  Standing as this church does, in the centre of the
city, those who are born within the sound of its bells are
jocularly called
Cockneys
, a name equivalent to genuine
citizens.

The consecration of the Bishop of London takes place at Bow
Church.
St. Bride’s
, Fleet Street, is adorned
with one of the most beautiful of Sir Christopher Wren’s
steeples.
The Temple Church
is described in the
section relating to the Temple and other Inns of Court.

St. Saviour’s
is by far the most important parish
church on the Surrey side of the water.  It is
p. 57
near the foot
of London Bridge, on the west side of High Street,
Southwark.  It originally belonged to the Priory of St. Mary
Overy, but was made a parish church in 1540.  The Choir and
the Lady Chapel are parts of the original structure, and are
excellent examples of the early English style; they have been
restored in the present century.  Many other parts of the
building deserve notice.  The
Savoy Church
, between
the Strand and the Thames, near Waterloo Bridge, was once the
Chapel of the Hospital of St. John the Baptist; it was destroyed
by fire in 1864, and re-built in 1866.
St.
Paul’s
, Covent Garden, built by Inigo Jones, is
noticeable for its massive Doric portico.
St.
James’s
, Piccadilly, one of the least sightly of brick
churches outside, has an interior which exhibits Wren’s
skill in a striking degree.
St.
Martin’s-in-the-Fields
, at the north-east corner of
Trafalgar Square, has always been admired for its elegant spire
and portico, constructed by Gibbs.
St.
George’s
, Hanover Square, is chiefly celebrated for the
fashionable marriages that take place there; the exterior, is,
however, picturesque.
Whitehall Chapel
was
originally intended as part of a royal residence.  It is, in
fact, the Banqueting House of the palace of Whitehall, the only
remaining portion of what was once an extensive pile.  The
former brick structure is entirely gone.  The present
edifice, built by Inigo Jones in the time of James I., is
considered to be one of the finest specimens of Italian
architecture in England.  Charles I. was executed on a
scaffold erected in front of one of the windows.  The
interior of Whitehall is about 112 feet long, 56 wide, and 56
high, forming exactly a double cube; the ceiling is painted by
Rubens, with mythological designs in honour of James I.  The
building, being appropriated to no other use, was converted into
a chapel in the time of George I., and was modernized in the
interior, about 30 years ago, by Sir Robert Smirke.
Old
St. Pancras Church
, in Pancras Road, a small but venerable
structure, has in recent years been altered and adapted as a
District Church.  Its churchyard was remarkable for the
number of artists and other eminent persons interred in it; at
one time it was the great metropolitan burial-place for Roman
Catholics, and consequently an unusual number of foreigners of
celebrity, French
emigrés

p. 58
during the
Reign of Terror, &c., were buried there.  Recently,
however, the old graveyard has been sadly cut about by the
pickaxes and shovels of railway excavators, engaged by the
Midland Railway, which passes thereby.

It is worthy of note, that Sir Christopher Wren built the
large number of
fifty-three
churches in London after the
Great Fire.  Nearly all of them are still standing.
Among the most noted are St. Paul’s; Bow Church; St.
Stephen’s, Walbrook; St. Bride’s; St. Andrew’s,
Holborn; St. Sepulchre’s; St. Antholin’s, Watling
Street; Christ Church, Newgate; St. Clement Danes; St.
Dunstan’s-in-the-East; St. James’s, Piccadilly; St.
Lawrence, Jewry; St. Magnus, London Bridge; St. Martin’s,
Ludgate; and St. Mary, Aldermanbury.

Among churches and chapels of the Establishment, of more
recent date, the following are worth looking at:—
New St.
Pancras
, near the Euston Railway Station, is the most notable
example in London of an imitative Greek temple; it was built by
Messrs. Inwood, in 1822, and cost nearly £80,000.

St. Marylebone
, in the Marylebone Road, built by Mr.
Hardwick in 1817, cost £60,000; the interior is heavy in
appearance, having two tiers of galleries; in few London
churches, however, is divine service, according to the
established ritual, performed on a more impressive scale.

St. Stephen’s
, Westminster, in Rochester Row, was
built wholly at the expense of Miss Burdett Coutts, and is a fine
example of revived Gothic; the choral service on Sundays is grand
and complete.
St. Paul’s
, at Knightsbridge,
and
St. Barnabas
, at Pimlico, especially the latter, are
noticeable for the mediæval revivals, in arrangements and
in service, which belong to what is called the high-church
party.
All Saints’ Church
, Margaret Street,
is, perhaps, the most sumptuous of modern London churches.
Although small, it cost £60,000.  Mr. Butterfield was
the architect.  The exterior is of red and black brick, very
mediæval in appearance.  The interior is ornate, with
polished granite piers, alabaster capitals, coloured marble
decorations, stained-glass windows, and frescoes by Dyce.

St. James the Less
, in Garden Street, Westminster, is a
truly remarkable specimen of coloured-brick
p. 59
architecture,
both within and without; Mr. Street was the architect; and the
cost was defrayed by the daughters of the late Dr. Monk, Bishop
of Gloucester.  A very noteworthy and costly brick church
has been constructed in Baldwin’s Gardens, Gray’s Inn
Lane, from the designs of Mr. Butterfield, and at the sole cost
of Mr. J. G. Hubbard.  It is dedicated to
St.
Alban
.  The Rev. A. Mackonochie, whose extreme
ritualistic views have several times brought his name prominently
before the public, was the incumbent.

Catholic, Dissenting, and Jewish Places of
Worship
.—It is almost impossible to give an exact
enumeration of the places of worship in London, seeing that so
many new ones are in the course of building.  But the
following figures, based on information supplied by the London
Post-Office Directory, and otherwise, will, it is hoped, be found
to convey a very fair approximate notion on the subject.  In
that Directory, then, there will be found the names of about 100
city parishes.  But of these, some 40 have, of late years,
been united to other parishes.  Thus, All Hallow’s,
Honey Lane, is united with St. Mary-le-Bow; St. Mary Magdalen, in
Milk Street, is united with St. Lawrence, Jewry; and so
forth.  Many of the parishes so united have their own
churches now closed, or in course of demolition, and worship is
provided for them at the churches of the particular parishes into
which they have been merged.  Without counting the city
proper, there are, in London, 50 parish churches, and at least
300 district churches and chapels belonging to the Church of
England.  The Roman Catholics have 41 churches and chapels,
without reckoning sundry religious houses.  The Wesleyans
have 152.  The recognised Dissenters from the Wesleyan body
have 4; the Baptists, 109; the Independents, 109; the United
Methodist Free Church, 27; Primitive Methodists, 16; the
Unitarians, 8; Methodist New Connexion, 8; the Quakers, 5; the
Presbyterians (English) 15; the Church of Scotland, 5; the
Calvinists have 2; the Calvinistic Methodists, 3; the Welsh
Calvinistic Methodists, 4.  The Jews have 12 Synagogues;
there are 3 French Protestant churches; 9 German (Reformed)
churches and chapels; Swiss Protestant, 1; Swedenborgians, 2;
Plymouth
p.
60
Brethren, 3; Catholic Apostolic (not Roman) 6; 1
Swedish, and 1 Greek church; 1 Russian chapel, and 3
meeting-houses of Free Christians; 1 Moravian; and some 40 other
places for public worship, belonging to miscellaneous
denominations.  Of Roman Catholic churches, the chief is

St. George’s Cathedral
, near Bethlehem
Hospital—a very large, but heavy Gothic structure; the
tower has never been finished for want of funds.

The service here is more complete than at any other Roman
Catholic structure in England.
St. Mary’s
,
near Moorfields; the
Spanish Chapel
, near Manchester
Square; and the
Italian Church
, in Hatton Wall—are
three other Roman Catholic chapels that attract many strangers by
their excellent music.  The
Catholic and Apostolic
Church
, in Gordon Square, may be regarded as the cathedral of
the so-called Irvingites (a designation, however, which they
repudiate); it is one of the best modern examples of early
English, but there are no funds available
p. 61
for finishing
the tower.  The minister of the National Scotch Church, in
Crown Court, Drury Lane, is the celebrated Rev. J. Cumming, D.D.,
whose preaching attracts large congregations.  Of the
dissenting chapels in London, by far the most remarkable is Mr.
Spurgeon’s
Tabernacle
, built at a cost of about
£30,000, at Newington, near the Elephant and Castle;
everything, within and without, has been made subservient to the
accommodating of 4000 or 5000 persons, all of whom can hear, and
nearly all see, the celebrated preacher.  The principal

Jews’ Synagogue
is in Great St. Helen’s, near
Leadenhall Street—remarkable rather for the ceremonies, at
certain seasons of the year, than for anything in the building
itself.  A synagogue exists for the Jews residing in the
western half of the metropolis, in Great Portland Street.

Cemeteries
.—Intramural burial is now forbidden in
London.  The chief cemeteries are those at Highgate,
Finchley, Abney Park, Mile-End, Kensal Green, Bethnal Green,
Ilford, Brompton, Norwood, Nunhead, and Camberwell.  There
is a very fine view of London, on a clear day, from the
first-named.  Kensal Green contains the graves of many
distinguished persons.  Princess Sophia was buried at the
last-named cemetery; and a sedulous visitor would discover the
tombs and graves of Sydney Smith, the daughters and a grandchild
of Sir Walter Scott, Allan Cunningham, John Murray, Thomas Hood,
Liston, Loudon, Callcott, Birkbeck, Brunel, Thackeray, and other
persons of note.  Cardinal Wiseman lies interred in the
Catholic Cemetery adjacent to Kensal Green.  The
Great
Northern Cemetery
, near Colney Hatch, lately opened, has
special railway facilities from the King’s Cross
Station.  The
Woking Necropolis
, in Surrey, is too
far distant to be included within London; nevertheless, the
admirable railway arrangements, from a station of the
South-Western, in the Westminster Road, make it, in effect, one
of the metropolitan cemeteries.  If the old burial-grounds
are no longer attended to for funerals, many of them are deeply
interesting for their memorials of the past.
Old St.
Pancras Churchyard
has already been named; and another worthy
of attention is
Bunhill Fields
burying-ground.  It
has been called the ‘Campo Santo’ of Dissenters, for

p. 62
there lie
the remains of Daniel Defoe, John Bunyan, John Owen, George Fox,
(who founded the sect of the Quakers about 1646,) Dr. Isaac
Watts, and many a stout defender of nonconformity.

BRITISH AND SOUTH KENSINGTON MUSEUMS; SCIENTIFIC
ESTABLISHMENTS.

British Museum
.—This is a great national
establishment, containing a vast and constantly-increasing
collection of books, maps, drawings, prints, sculptures,
antiquities, and natural curiosities.  It occupies a most
extensive suite of buildings in Great Russell Street, Bloomsbury,
commenced in 1823, and not even now finished.  The sum spent
on them is little less than £1,000,000.  Sir Richard
Smirke was the architect.  The principal, or south front,
370 feet long, presents a range of 44 columns, the centre being a
majestic portico, with sculptures in the pediment.  Since
its commencement, in 1755, the collection has been prodigiously
increased by gifts, bequests, and purchases; and now it is,
perhaps, the largest of the kind in the world.  The library
contains more than
eight hundred thousand
volumes, and is
increasing enormously in extent every year.  The
Reading-Room is open only to persons who proceed thither for
study, or for consulting authorities.  A reading order is
readily procured on written application, enclosing the
recommendation of two respectable householders, to “the
Principal Librarian.”  It is open nearly 300 days in
the year, and for an average of eight hours each day.  No
general inspection of this room by strangers is allowed, except
by a written order from the secretary, which can, however,
readily be obtained on three days in the week.  The porters
in the hall will direct to the secretary’s office; and
strangers must be careful to observe the conditions on which the
order is given.  The present reading-room, opened in 1857,
and built at a cost of £150,000, is one of the finest
apartments in the world; it is circular, 140 feet in diameter,
and open to a dome-roof 106 feet high, supported without
pillars.  This beautiful room, and the fireproof galleries
for books which surround it, were planned by Mr. Panizzi, the
late chief librarian.

The portions of the British Museum open to ordinary visitors

p. 63
consist of
an extensive series of galleries and saloons on the ground and
upper floors, each devoted to the exhibition of a distinct class
of objects.  Among others are—terracottas, Roman
sculptures and sepulchral antiquities, Sir T. Lawrence’s
collection of casts, British antiquities, ethnological specimens,
Egyptian antiquities, several saloons containing the Elgin and
Phigalian Marbles, Nineveh and Lycian sculptures, &c.
The rooms containing objects in natural history and artificial
curiosities are handsomely fitted up with glass-cases on the
walls and tables.  Days may be spent in examining this vast
assemblage of objects; and to assist in the inspection,
catalogues for the entire Museum may be purchased at the door at
a cheap price.

The following will convey an idea of the order in which the
general contents of the Museum meet the eye.  Outside the
building, in unsightly glass sheds under the porticos and
colonnades, are ancient Greek sculptures from Asia Minor, chiefly
from the famous Mausoleum of Halicarnassus; they are temporarily
so
p. 64
placed
until room can be found for them elsewhere.  On entering the
hall or vestibule, and ascending the staircase, the galleries of
natural history are reached—stuffed quadrupeds, including a

gorilla
purchased from M. Chaillu; stuffed birds;
birds’ eggs; shells in immense variety and of surpassing
beauty; minerals; and fossils.  These occupy the eastern,
northern, and part of the southern galleries.  The western,
and the rest of the southern galleries, are occupied by numerous
antiquarian and ethnological collections—including Egyptian
mummies and ornaments, Greek and Etruscan vases, Greek and Roman
bronzes, ancient and mediæval porcelain, ivory carvings,
and specimens of the dresses, weapons, instruments, &c., of
various nations.  On the ground-floor, to the right of the
hall, visitors are admitted to a room containing a curious
collection of manuscripts, autographs, and early printed books;
and to the King’s Library, a beautiful apartment,
containing the books presented by George IV.  This room also
possesses a small but extremely choice display of Italian,
German, and Flemish drawings and engravings; together with a few

nielli
, (black engravings on silver plates.)  The
west side of the ground-floor is occupied by the ancient
sculptures—Egyptian, Greek, Assyrian, Lycian, Roman,
&c.—A refreshment-room for visitors was opened in 1866,
and is situated in the western basement.

The British Museum is open on Mondays, Wednesdays, and
Fridays, and the whole of Christmas, Easter, and Whitsun
weeks.  It is closed on the first week in January, May, and
September, and on Christmas-day, Good-Friday, and
Ash-Wednesday.  The hour of opening is 10 o’clock;
that of closing varies from 4 till 6 o’clock, according to
the season of the year.  During many years past there have
been newspaper controversies and parliamentary debates touching
the disposal of the rich contents of the Museum.  Almost
every part is filled to overflowing; but much diversity of
opinion exists as to which portion, if any, shall be removed to
another locality.  Burlington House and the South Kensington
Museum, each has its advocates.  Immediate removal of part
of the contents has been decided on.

South Kensington Museum
.—This very interesting
national establishment
p. 65
is situated at South Kensington, near
the Cromwell and Exhibition Roads, on ground bought out of the
profits of the Great Exhibition of 1851.  The varied
contents have been either presented to, or purchased by, the
nation, with the exception of a few collections which have been
lent for temporary periods.  They consist of illustrations
of manufactures and the useful arts; models of patented
inventions; collections of raw produce, derived from the animal,
vegetable, and mineral kingdoms; a museum of educational
appliances; casts from sculptures and architectural ornaments;
objects of ornamental art, both mediæval and modern; naval
models, &c.  Besides these, there are the fine
collections of paintings presented to the nation by Mr.
Sheepshanks, and other liberal donors; and a portion of the
Vernon collection, the rest being at the National Gallery.
Turner’s pictures, bequeathed to the nation in his will,
were kept here for some years, but were removed to the National
Gallery in 1861.  There are, among the group of buildings,
some devoted to the Government Department
p. 66
of Science
and Art; but the Museum generally is, so far as concerns the
public, distinct.  The Gallery of British Art contains many
hundred pictures, including choice specimens by Turner, Wilkie,
Mulready, Landseer, Leslie, Hogarth, Wilson, Gainsborough,
Reynolds, Lawrence, Constable, Loutherbourg, Callcott, Collins,
Etty, Stanfield, Roberts, Uwins, Creswick, Maclise, Webster,
Eastlake, Ward, Cooke, Cooper, Danby, Goodall, &c.  The
rooms containing these pictures, planned by Captain Fowke, are
remarkable for the admirable mode of lighting, both by day and in
the evening.  On Mondays, Tuesdays, and Saturdays, the
admission is free from 10
a.m.
till 10

p.m.
; on the other three days, called

students’
days, 6d. is charged from 10
a.m.
till 4, 5, or 6, according to the
season.  This is one of the very few free exhibitions open
in the evening (thrice a-week) as well as the daytime.

Bethnal Green Museum
.—This is really a branch of
the South Kensington Museum, and is situated not far from
Shoreditch Church.  It is accessible by omnibus from most
parts of the City and the West End, and is not far distant from
Victoria Park.  It was formally opened, in 1872, by the
Prince and Princess of Wales.  At the present, its great
attraction is the picture gallery; but it promises to become as
popular as any museum in London, especially as technical
information will become an essential feature of its future
existence.  It is open under the same regulations as are
observed at the South Kensington Museum.

Museum of Economic Geology
.—This small but
interesting establishment, having an entrance in Jermyn Street,
is a national museum for the exhibition of all such articles as
belong to the mineral kingdom.  It was built from the
designs of Mr. Pennethorne, and was opened in 1851.  Though
less extensive than the British and South Kensington Museums, it
is of a very instructive character.  Besides the mineral
specimens, raw and manufactured, it contains models, sections,
and diagrams, illustrative of mining, metallurgy, and various
manufactures.  It is open,
free
, every day, except
Friday.

p.
67
Museum of the College of Surgeons
.—This
building, on the south side of Lincoln’s Inn Fields, can be
visited by strangers only through the introduction of members of
the College.  The Government, about seventy years ago,
bought John Hunter’s Anatomical Museum, and presented it to
the College.  The contents of the museum are illustrative of
the structure and functions of the human body, both in the
healthy and the diseased state; they have been classified and
arranged with great skill by Professor Owen.

United Service Museum
.—This is situated in
Whitehall Yard.  Admission is obtained through the members
of the United Service Institution.  The contents of the
museum consist of models, weapons, and implements interesting to
military men.  Here see the robe worn by Tippoo Sahib, when
killed at Seringapatam, in 1799.  Also observe
Siborne’s extraordinary model of the battle of Waterloo;
and notice the skeleton of the horse which Napoleon rode at that
battle.

East India Museum
.—Near the building last
noticed, in Fife House, Whitehall, is deposited the collection
known as the East India Museum, formerly deposited at the India
House, in Leadenhall Street, and now belonging to the
nation.  It comprises a very curious assemblage of Oriental
dresses, jewels, ornaments, furniture, musical instruments,
models, paintings, tools, implements, idols, trinkets,
&c.  Among the rest is the barbaric toy known as

Tippoo’s Tiger
.  It consists of a figure of a
tiger trampling on a prostrate man, whom he is just about to
seize with his teeth; the interior contains pipes and other
mechanism, which, when wound up by a key, cause the figure of the
man to utter cries of distress, and the tiger to roar.  Such
was one of the amusements of Tippoo Sahib!  The museum is
open free on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays, from 10 till
4.

Royal Institution
.—This building, in Albemarle
Street, is devoted to the prosecution of science, by means of
lectures, experiments, discussions, and a scientific
library.  It has been rendered famous by the brilliant
labours of Davy and Faraday.  Admission is only obtainable
by membership, or by fees for courses of lectures.

Society of Arts
.—This institution has existed in
John Street,
p.
68
Adelphi, for a long series of years.  Its object is
the encouragement of arts, manufactures, agriculture, and
commerce.  Under the auspices of the late Prince Consort, it
was mainly instrumental in bringing about the two great
International Exhibitions of 1851 and 1862.  The
lecture-room contains six remarkable pictures by Barry,
illustrative of ‘Human Culture.’  Every year
there are free exhibitions of manufactures and new mechanical
inventions.

Scientific Societies
.—There are many other
Scientific Societies which hold their meetings in London; but
only a few of them possess buildings worthy of much attention, or
contain collections that would interest a mere casual
visitor.  The
Royal
, the
Astronomical
, the

Geological
, the
Chemical
, and the

Linnæan
Societies, the
College of Physicians
,
the
Institution of Civil Engineers
, and others of like
kind, are those to which we here refer.  Many of these
societies are at present accommodated with the use of apartments
at the public expense, in Burlington House, Piccadilly.

NATIONAL GALLERY; ROYAL ACADEMY; ART EXHIBITIONS.

National Gallery
.—This building, in Trafalgar
Square, is the chief depository of the pictures belonging to the
nation.  In 1824, the Government purchased the Angerstein
collection of 38 pictures, for £57,000, and exhibited it
for a time at a house in Pall Mall.  The present structure
was finished in 1838, at a cost of about £100,000, from the
designs of Mr. Wilkins.  Since that year till 1869, the
Royal Academy occupied the eastern half, and the National Gallery
the western.  In the last-named year, the Royal Academy was
removed to Burlington House; and the whole of the building is now
what its name denotes.  This National Gallery now comprises
the Angerstein collection, together with numerous pictures
presented to the nation by Lord Farnborough, Sir George Beaumont,
the Rev. Holwell Carr, Mr. Vernon, and other persons; and, most
recent of all, the Turner collection, bequeathed to the nation by
that greatest of our landscape painters.  Every year,
likewise, witnesses the purchase of choice old pictures out of
funds provided by Parliament.  The grant annually is about
£10,000.  To accommodate the constantly increasing
collection, the centre of
p. 69
the building was re-constructed in
1861, and a very handsome new saloon built, in which are
deposited the choicest examples of the Italian Schools of
Painting: forming, with its contents, one of the noblest rooms of
the kind in Europe.  To name the pictures in this collection
would be to name some of the finest works of the Italian,
Spanish, Flemish, and French schools of painters.  Some of
the most costly of the pictures are the
following:—Murillo’s ‘Holy Family,’
£3000; Rubens’s ‘Rape of the Sabines,’
£3000; Francia’s ‘Virgin and Child,’
£3500; Sebastian del Piombo’s ‘Raising of
Lazarus,’ 3500 guineas; Coreggio’s ‘Holy
Family,’ £3800; Perugino’s ‘Virgin and
Child,’ £4000; Claude’s ‘Seaport,’
£4000; Rubens’s ‘Judgment of Paris,’
£4200; Raffaelle’s ‘St. Catherine,’
£5000; Rembrandt’s ‘Woman taken in
Adultery,’ £5250; Correggio’s ‘Ecce
Homo,’ and ‘Mercury instructing Cupid,’ 10,000
guineas; and Paul Veronese’s ‘Family of
Darius,’ £14,000.

Royal Academy
,
Burlington House
.—The
Academy was established in 1768, for the encouragement of the
fine arts.  Until the finishing of Mr. Wilkin’s
building, the Academy held its meetings and exhibitions in a
small number of rooms at Somerset House.  Students are
admitted on evidence of sufficient preliminary training, and
taught gratuitously; but so far as the public is concerned, the
Royal Academy is chiefly known by its famous Annual Exhibition of
modern English pictures and sculptures, from May to July.
This Exhibition is a very profitable affair to the Academy.
Royal commissions and parliamentary committees find a difficulty
in investigating the revenues, privileges, and claims of the
Academy; it is known, however, that the schools are maintained
out of the profits.  Concerning the building in Trafalgar
Square, most persons agree that the main front is too much cut up
in petty detail, and that one of the finest sites in Europe has
thus been comparatively neglected.  Some have humorously
nicknamed it “The National Cruet Stand.”

National Portrait Gallery
.—This infant gallery,
established by the nation in 1857, is now at Exhibition Road,
South Kensington.  The object is to be strictly confined to
the collecting of a series of national portraits of persons of
any note, whether of early or of late
p. 70
days.  A sum of £2000
a-year is voted for this purpose.  The collection is yet
only small, but very interesting, and is yearly increasing.
Open free on Wednesdays and Saturdays.

Soane Museum
.—This closely-packed collection,
presented to the nation by the late Sir John Soane, the
architect, occupies the house which he used to inhabit, at No.
13, on the north side of Lincoln’s Inn Fields.  Every
nook and corner of about 24 rooms is crowded with works of
art—sarcophagi, ancient gems and intaglios, medals and
coins, sculptures, sketches and models of sculptures, books of
prints, portfolios of drawings, Hogarth’s famous series of
pictures of the ‘Rake’s Progress,’ and numerous
other examples of
vertu
, some of which cost large sums of
money.  The place is open every Wednesday from February to
August inclusive, and every Thursday and Friday in April, May,
and June, from 10 till 4.  Still, these are very
insufficient facilities (only 56 days out of the 365 in the year)
for seeing a fine collection of treasures.  Orders for
admission are sent, on application, by post.

Art Exhibitions
.—There are always numerous
picture exhibitions open in the summer months—such as those
formed by the
British Institution
, the
Society of
British Artists
, the
Society of Painters in Water
Colours
, &c.; concerning which information can be seen in
the advertisement columns of the newspapers.  At the British
Institution there is a spring exhibition of modern pictures, and
a summer exhibition of ancient.  The price of admission to
such places is almost invariably One Shilling.  Other
exhibitions, pertaining more to entertainment than to fine arts,
are briefly noticed in a later section.

COLLEGES; SCHOOLS; HOSPITALS; CHARITIES.

London, as may well be imagined, is largely supplied with
institutions tending to the proper care of the young, the aged,
the sick, and the impoverished.  A few of the more important
among them are worthy of the attention of strangers.

Colleges
.—The two chief colleges in London are
connected with the
London University
.  This
University is a body of persons, not (as many suppose) a
building.  The body was established in 1837,
p. 71
to confer
degrees on the students or graduates of many different colleges
in and about London.  It occupies apartments at Burlington
House, Piccadilly, lent by the government for examining purposes;
but it neither teaches nor gives lectures.
University
College
, in Gower Street, was originally called
London
University
; but since 1837, the more limited designation has
been given to it.

It was founded in 1828, on the proprietary system, to afford
a good middle-class education at a moderate expense, without
limitation as to religious tests.  Hence it is much
frequented by Jews, Parsees, Hindoos, &c.  The whole
range of college tuition is given, except divinity; with the
addition of much fuller instruction in science and in modern
languages than was before given in colleges.  The building,
with its lofty portico, might possibly have presented a good
appearance
p.
72
if the plans of the architect had been carried out; but,
through want of funds, the wings have never been built, and the
structure is ridiculously incomplete.  The college possesses
a fine collection of casts from Flaxman’s sculptures,
usually open to inspection by strangers.
King’s
College
, in the Strand, has been already mentioned as
adjoining Somerset House on the east.  It was founded in the
same year as University College, expressly in connection with the
Established Church of England.  There was some sectarian
bitterness between the two establishments at first, but both have
settled down into a steady career of usefulness.  The
teaching of divinity, and the observance of church-service as
part of the routine, are maintained at King’s
College.
Gordon College
, or
University Hall
,
in Gordon Square, is an establishment mainly supported by
Unitarians; the building itself, as a modern imitation of the old
red-brick style, is worthy of a passing glance.
New
College
, at St. John’s Wood, for Congregationalists or
Independents; the
Baptist College
, in the Regent’s
Park; the
English Presbyterian Theological College
,
Guildford Street, W.C.; the
Wesleyan College
, in the
Horseferry Road;
Hackney College
; and a few others of less
note—are establishments maintained by various bodies of
dissenters; some for educating ministers for the pulpit; some for
training schoolmasters and schoolmistresses.  Of the
buildings so occupied, the handsomest is New College.  This
was established, a few years ago, as a substitute for

Highbury
,
Homerton
, and
Coward
Colleges, all
belonging to the Congregationalists.
Gresham
College
: this is not a college in the modern sense of the
term; it is only a lecture-room.  Sir Thomas Gresham left an
endowment for an annual series of lectures, and residences and
stipends for the lecturers.  The charity was greatly misused
during the 17th and 18th centuries.  Public attention having
been called to the subject, a new lecture hall was built, a few
years ago, at the corner of Basinghall and Gresham Streets, out
of the accumulated fund; and lectures are delivered here at
certain periods of each year.  The subjects are divinity,
physic, astronomy, geometry, law, rhetoric, and music.  The
lectures take place in the middle of the day, some in Latin, some
in English; they are freely open to the public; but
p. 73
the auditors,
at such an hour and in such a place—surrounded by the busy
hum of commerce—are very few in number.  Among the
training colleges for schoolmasters and mistresses may be named
the
National Society’s
at Battersea;
St.
Mark’s Training College
, Fulham Road; the
Training
Institution
for schoolmistresses, King’s Road, Chelsea;
the
British and Foreign
in the Borough Road; and the

Home and Colonial
in Gray’s Inn Road.  At
Islington is a Church of England Training College for
missionaries.  The
College of Preceptors
, in Queen
Square, resembles the London University in this, that it confers
a sort of degree, or academical rank, but does not teach.
Many so-called colleges are either proprietary or private
schools.

Great Public Schools
.—The chief of these in
London is
Westminster School
, not for the building itself,
but for the celebrity of the institution; although the college
hall, once the refectory of the old abbots of Westminster, is
interesting from its very antiquity.  The school, which was
founded in 1560, lies south-west of Westminster Abbey, but very
near it.  Some of our greatest statesmen and scholars have
been educated here.
St. Paul’s School
,
situated on the eastern side of St. Paul’s Churchyard, was
founded in 1521, by Dean Colet, for the education of ‘poor
men’s children.’  Like many others of the older
schools, the benefits are not conferred so fully as they ought to
be on the class designated.  The presentations are wholly in
the hands of the Mercers’ Company.  The now existing
school-house, the third on the same site, was built in
1823.  The
Charter House School
, near Aldersgate
Street, is part of a charity established by Thomas Sutton in
1611.  Among other great men here educated were the late Sir
Henry Havelock, and W. M. Thackeray.  There is an Hospital
or Almshouse for about 80 ‘poor Brethren,’ men who
have seen better days; and there is a school for the free
education of 40 ‘poor Boys,’ with many more whose
parents pay for their schooling.  The chapel and
ante-chapel, the great hall and staircase, and the
governor’s room, are interesting parts of the
building.
Christ’s Hospital
, or the
Blue
Coat School
—as it is commonly called from the colour of
the boys’ dress—is situated within an enclosure on
the north side of Newgate Street, and is one of the most splendid
among the charitable foundations of
p. 74
London.  The buildings stand on
the site of a monastery of Grey-friars, which was granted by
Henry VIII. to the city for the use of the poor; and his son and
successor, Edward VI., greatly extended the value of the gift by
granting a charter for its foundation as a charity school, and at
the same time endowing it with sundry benefactions.  The
hospital was opened, for the reception and education of boys, in
1552.  Charles II. added an endowment for a mathematical
class; and with various augmentations of endowment, the annual
revenue is now understood to be no less than £40,000.
This income supports and educates nearly 1200 children, 500 of
whom, including girls, are boarded at the town of Hertford, for
the sake of country air.  The management of the institution
is vested in a body of governors, composed of the lord mayor and
aldermen, twelve common-councilmen chosen by lot, and all
benefactors to the amount of £400 and upwards.  The
children are admitted without reference to the City privileges of
parents; about one hundred and fifty are entered annually.
It is undeniable, however, that many children are admitted rather
through interest than on account of the poverty of their
parents.  After instruction in the elementary branches of
schooling, the greater number of the boys leave the hospital at
the age of fifteen; those only remaining longer who intend to
proceed to the university, or to go to sea after completing a
course of mathematics.  There are seven presentations at
Cambridge, and one at Oxford, open to the scholars.  The
buildings of the institution embrace several structures of large
dimensions, chiefly ranged round open courts, with cloisters
beneath; and a Church, which also serves as a parochial place of
worship.  The only part of the establishment, however, worth
examining for its architecture is the Great Hall, occupying the
first floor of a building of modern date, designed by Mr. Shaw,
in the Gothic style.  It measures 187 feet long, 51 feet
broad, and 47 high, and possesses an organ-gallery at the east
end.  In this magnificent apartment the boys breakfast,
dine, and sup.  Before meals, one of the elder inmates
repeats a long grace or prayer, at the commencement of which the
whole of the boys, in lines at their respective tables, fall on
their knees.  The boys are dressed in the costume selected
for
p. 75
them
in Edward VI.’s reign; the outer garments consisting of a
long dark-blue coat, breeches, and yellow worsted
stockings.  The ‘public suppers,’ on Thursdays
in Lent, are worth the attention of strangers: (tickets from
governors.)
Merchant Taylors’ School
, situated
in a close part of the City behind the Mansion House, was founded
in 1561 by the Merchant Taylors’ Company.  The present
structure was built in 1673, with the exception of some of the
classrooms, which are much more modern.  About 260 boys are
educated, wholly on the presentation of members of the Company;
and there are numerous fellowships at St. John’s College,
Oxford, open to the scholars.
Mercers’ Free
Grammar School
, in College Hill, is a small establishment of
similar kind.  The
City of London School
, in Milk
Street, Cheapside, is one of the most modern of these

Grammar
Schools, as they are called.  It was founded
in 1835, and possesses several Exhibitions for successful senior
scholars.

Other Schools
.—The schools established under the
auspices of the National Society, called
National
Schools,
are very numerous, but need hardly be noticed here.  The

British and Foreign School Society
, in the Borough Road,
and the
Home and Colonial School Society
, in Gray’s
Inn Road, train up teachers without reference to religious tests;
whereas the
National Society
is in connection with the
Church of England.  Many very superior schools for girls,
under the designation of
Ladies’ Colleges
, have been
established in the metropolis within the last few years, in
Harley Street and in Bedford Square, &c.  The

Government School of Art for Ladies
is in Queen Square,
Bloomsbury.  The
National Art Training School
is at
South Kensington.

The London School Board
, elected in 1870, under the new
Education Act, has its
locale
at 33 New Bridge Street,
Blackfriars.  It has, practically speaking, almost entire
control of the educational systems of the metropolis, and is
armed with inquisitorial powers that remind us of the ancient
Star Chamber.  Still, the system of election of the members
of the Board gives a certain guarantee of responsibility, that
makes its prestige, at least, without suspicion.

Schools of Telegraphy
are established at 138 Regent
Street, W., and 24 City Road, E.C., where the art is fully
instructed, to resident and non-resident pupils.

p.
76
Hospitals and Charitable Institutions
.—A
small volume might readily be filled with a list of
London’s charitable institutions.  The charities
connected in some way with the corporation of London are

Christ’s Hospital
, for boarding and educating youth,
already mentioned;
Bethlehem Hospital
, Lambeth, for insane
patients;
St. Thomas’s Hospital
, for treating poor
patients diseased and hurt; and
St. Bartholomew’s
Hospital
, West Smithfield, for the same purpose.  The
City companies likewise support a number of beneficiary
institutions, such as the
Ironmongers’ Almhouses
at
Kingsland, and others of like kind.  The following hospitals
are the most important among the large number founded and
supported by private benevolence:—
Guy’s
Hospital
, Southwark;
London Hospital
, Whitechapel
Road;
Westminster Hospital
, near the Abbey;
St.
George’s Hospital
, Hyde Park Corner;
Middlesex
Hospital
, Charles Street, Oxford Street;
University
College Hospital
, Gower Street;
St. Luke’s
Hospital
, for the insane, City Road;
King’s College
Hospital
, near Clare Market;
Small-Pox Hospital
,
Highgate Rise; the
Foundling Hospital
, Great Guildford
Street; the
Consumption Hospital
, Brompton;
Charing
Cross Hospital
, Agar Street; the
Lock Hospital
, Harrow
Road; and the
Royal Free Hospital
, Gray’s Inn
Road.  Besides these, there are several Lying-in hospitals,
a Floating hospital on the Thames, now substituted by a part of
Greenwich Hospital being devoted to a similar use; various
Ophthalmic hospitals, and numerous Dispensaries and Infirmaries
for particular diseases.  Institutions for the relief of
indigent persons, Deaf and Dumb asylums, Blind asylums, and
Orphan asylums, are far too numerous to be specified.  In
short, there are in this great metropolis about 250 hospitals,
dispensaries, infirmaries, asylums, and almshouses; besides at
least 400 religious, visiting, and benevolent institutions for
ministering to the various ills, mental and moral, bodily or
worldly, to which an immense population is always subject.
It is supposed that these several institutions receive in
subscriptions considerably over £2,000,000 annually.
Some of the hospital buildings above named are large and majestic
in appearance.  When, for the Charing Cross extension of the
South-Eastern Railway, St. Thomas’s Hospital and site,
p. 77
which
formerly stood close to London Bridge Station, were purchased for
a sum not very much under £300,000, it was arranged to
rebuild the hospital between the south end of Westminster Bridge
and Lambeth Palace.  This hospital, which is now completed,
affords a fine object from a steamboat passing up the river, and
is certainly one of the noblest buildings of its class in
Europe.

THE TOWER; THE MINT; THE CUSTOM HOUSE; THE GENERAL POST
OFFICE.

This section treats of four important government buildings
situated in the eastern half of the metropolis.

The Tower of London
.—This famous structure, or
rather group of structures, is a cluster of houses, towers,
barracks, armouries, warehouses, and prison-like edifices,
situated on the north bank of the Thames, and separated from the
crowded narrow streets of the city by an open space of ground
called Tower-hill.  The Tower was founded by William the
Conqueror, probably on the site of an older fortress, to secure
his authority over the inhabitants of London; but the original
fort which he established on the spot was greatly extended by
subsequent monarchs; and in the twelfth century it was surrounded
by a wet ditch, which was improved in the reign of Charles
II.  This ditch or moat was drained in 1843.  Within
the outer wall the ground measures upwards of twelve acres.
Next the river there is a broad quay; and on this side also there
was a channel (now closed) by which boats formerly passed into
the main body of the place.  This water-entrance is known by
the name of Traitors’ Gate, being that by which, in former
days, state prisoners were brought in boats after their trial at
Westminster.  There are three other entrances or
postern-gates—Lion Gate, Iron Gate, and Water
Gate—only two of which, however, are now used.  The
interior of the Tower is an irregular assemblage of short streets
and courtyards, bounded by various structures.  The
White
Tower
, or
Keep
, is the oldest of these buildings; and
the
Chapel
in it is a fine specimen of a small Norman
church.  Other towers are the
Lion Tower
, near the
principal entrance; the
Middle Tower
, the first seen
p. 78
on passing
the ditch; the
Bell Tower
, adjacent to it; the
Bloody
Tower
, nearly opposite
Traitors’ Gate
; the

Salt Tower
, near the Iron Gate;
Brick Tower
, where
Lady Jane Grey was confined;
Bowyer Tower
, where the Duke
of Clarence is said to have been

drowned in the butt of malmsey; and
Beauchamp Tower
,
where Anne Boleyn was imprisoned.  These old towers are very
curious, but few of them are open to the public.  The
principal objects of interest are a collection of cannon, being
trophies of war; the horse armoury, a most interesting collection
of suits of mail on stuffed figures; and the crown and other
insignia of royalty.  In the
Horse Armoury
, a long
gallery built in 1826, is an extensive collection of armour,
arranged by Sir Samuel Meyrick, a great authority on this
subject.  It comprises whole suits of armour, consisting of
hauberks, chausses, surcoats, baldricks, breast-plates,
back-plates, chain-mail sleeves and skirts, gauntlets, helmets,
frontlets, vamplates, flanchards,
p. 79
and other pieces known to the old
armourers.  About twenty complete suits of armour are placed
upon stuffed figures of men, mostly on stuffed horses.  Four
of the suits belonged to Henry VIII., Dudley Earl of Leicester,
Henry Prince of Wales, and Charles I.; the others are merely
intended to illustrate the kinds of armour in vogue at certain
periods.  One suit, of the time of Richard III.,

was worn by the Marquis of Waterford at the Eglinton
tournament in 1839.  The gallery also contains some other
curiosities relating to the armour of past days.
Queen
Elizabeth’s Armoury
is in the White Tower, the walls of
which are 13 feet thick, and still contain traces of inscriptions
by state prisoners in troubled times: the armoury contains many
curious old shields, bows, Spanish instruments of torture,
petronels, partisans, beheading axe and
p. 80
block,
thumb-screws, Lochaber axes, matchlocks, arquebuses, swords,
&c.  Immediately outside these Armouries, in the open
air, are some curious cannon and mortars belonging to different
ages and different countries.  The new
Barracks

occupy the site of the Small Arms Armoury, destroyed by fire in
1841, when 280,000 stand of arms were destroyed.  The

Lions
in the Tower were among the sights of the place for
nearly 600 years; they were in a building near the present
ticket-office, but were given to the Zoological Society in
1834.  The
Jewel House
, a well-guarded room to the
east of the Armouries, contains a valuable collection of state
jewels.  Among them are the following:—
St.
Edward’s Crown
, used at all the coronations from
Charles II. to William IV.; the
New State Crown
, made for
the coronation of Queen Victoria, and valued at more than
£100,000; the
Prince of Wales’s
and the

Queen Consort’s Crowns
(the most recent wearer of
the last was Queen Adelaide); the
Queen’s Diadem
;
the
Royal Sceptre
,
Queen’s Sceptre
, and

Queen’s Ivory Sceptre
; the
Orb
and the

Queen’s Orb
;
St. Edward’s Staff
and the

Rod of Equity
; the
Swords of Mercy and of Justice
;
the
Coronation Bracelets
and
Royal Spurs
; the

Ampulla
for the holy oil, and the
Coronation Spoon
;
the silver-gilt
Baptismal Font
, used at the christening of
royal children; and the famous
Koh-i-noor
, or
‘Mountain of Light,’ the wonderful diamond once
belonging to Runjeet Singh, chief of Lahore, but now the property
of Queen Victoria,—it was an object of great interest at
the two great Exhibitions in 1851 and 1862.  Strangers, on
applying at an office at the entrance from Tower-hill, are
conducted through a portion of the buildings by warders, who wear
a curious costume of Henry VIII.’s time—some years
ago rendered incongruous by the substitution of black trousers
for scarlet hose.  These warders, or
beef-eaters
(as
they are often called), go their rounds with visitors every
half-hour from 10 till 4.  The word
“beef-eaters” was a vulgar corruption of

beaufetiers
, battle-axe guards, who were first raised by
Henry VII. in 1485.  They were originally attendants upon
the king’s buffet.  A fee of 6d. is charged for seeing
the Armouries, and 6d. for the Jewel House.  From time to
time, when foreign politics look threatening, the Tower undergoes
alterations and renovations
p. 81
to increase its utility as a
fortress; and it is at all times under strict military
government.

The Mint
.—This structure, situated a little
north-east of the Tower, is the establishment in which the
coinage is in great part made, and wholly regulated.  The
rooms, the machinery, and the processes for coining, are all full
of interest.  The assaying of the gold and silver for
coinage; the alloying and melting; the casting into ingots; the
flattening, rolling, and laminating of the ingots to the proper
thickness; the cutting into strips, and the strips into circular
blanks; the stamping of those blanks on both surfaces; and the
testing to ascertain that every coin is of the proper
weight—are all processes in which very beautiful and
perfect apparatus is needed.  Copper and bronze coins are
mostly made for the government at Birmingham.  From a
statement made in parliament, in August, 1869, by the Right Hon.
Robert Lowe, we gathered that
98 millions of sovereigns

had been coined in the Mint since 1850.  But of these no
fewer than 44 millions had been lost to our coinage, because many
of the sovereigns, being overweight, had been sent to the
Continent to be melted down as bullion!  There are nearly
500 millions of copper coin in circulation; and of silver coin,
from crown pieces down to threepenny pieces, something like the
astounding number of 286,220,000.  Permission to view this
interesting establishment could at one time only be obtained by
special application to the Master of the Mint, who has an
official residence at the spot; but since the death of the late
Master, Dr. Graham, that office will not in future be filled
up.  A letter to the Deputy Master will probably obtain the
required order to view.  We should add that the removal of
the Mint to Somerset House is now seriously contemplated.
It is urged that the price of its present site, if sold, would
readily defray cost of removal.

Custom House
.—This important building, situated
on the north bank of the Thames, between London Bridge and the
Tower, occupies a site on which other and smaller custom houses
had previously stood.  The east and west ends of the present
structure were finished in 1817 by Mr. Laing; but the central
portion was rebuilt afterwards from the designs of Sir Robert
Smirke.  The
p.
82
river front is extensive, and although not
architecturally fine, the general appearance is effective.
One of the few broad terraces on the banks of the Thames is that
in front of the Custom House; it is a good position from whence
strangers can view the shipping in the river.  The
‘Long Room’ in this building is 190 feet long by 66
broad.  By way of illustrating the enormous amount of
business done here, we may mention, that in the years
1867–68, the amount of Customs’ receipts collected in
the port of London was
more
than

that of all the
other ports
of
Great Britain

taken together, and five times that of the whole of
Ireland.  In 1867, the port of London gross receipts were
£10,819,711; and in 1868, £10,694,494.  The vast
Customs’ duties for the port of London, amounting to nearly
half of those for the whole United Kingdom, are managed here.

p. 83

General Poet Office
.—This large building, at the
corner of Cheapside and St. Martin’s-le-Grand, was finished
in 1829, from the designs of Sir Robert Smirke.  It is in
the Ionic style, with a lofty central portico; beneath which is
the entrance to the spacious hall (80 feet long, 60 feet wide,
and 53 feet high), having also an entrance at the opposite
extremity; but the central Hall is now entirely enclosed, owing
to the recent great extension of the Postal business.  A
Money-order Office has been built on the opposite side of the
street; and the Post Office has been added to in various ways, to
make room for increased business.  The main building, which
contains a vast number of rooms, is enclosed by a railing; and at
the north end is a courtyard, in which mail-vans range up and
depart with their load of bags, at certain hours in the morning
and evening, for the several railway termini.  At other
portions
p.
84
of the building the foreign, colonial, and India mails
are despatched.  From six to seven o’clock in the
evening a prodigious bustle prevails in putting letters into the
Post Office; and on Saturday evening, when the Sunday newspapers
are posted, the excitement is still further
increased—especially just before six, by which hour the
newspapers must be posted.  The establishment, some four
years ago, employed 20,000 clerks, sorters, and letter-carriers
in the various parts of the United Kingdom; and since the Post
Office took over the business of the Telegraph Companies, the
number of its employés is greatly increased.  The
postage charged on foreign and colonial letters is too small to
pay for the mail-packets and other expenses; profit is derived
only from the inland letters.  There are now in London and
the suburbs about 730 pillar-boxes and wall-boxes; without
counting receiving houses.  Newspapers and book packets must
not be put in town pillar-boxes.  A very useful novelty,

Post Office Savings’ Banks
, was introduced in
1861.  In the year 1840, in which the uniform rate of one
penny per letter of half an ounce weight, &c., commenced, the
revenue of the Post Office was only £471,000.  Its
revenue received during the year 1871–72 was no less than
£6,102,900, and every year the receipts are
increasing.  New postal buildings of great extent have been
erected on the opposite side of the street.

THE CORPORATION; MANSION HOUSE; GUILDHALL; MONUMENT; ROYAL
EXCHANGE.

It will be convenient to group here certain buildings
belonging to the Corporation of London; and to prefix to a notice
of them some account of the mode in which the city of London is
governed.

The Corporation
.—With respect to civic
jurisdiction, the city of London is governed in a peculiar
manner.  In virtue of ancient charters and privileges, the
city is a species of independent community, governed by its own
laws and functionaries.  While all other boroughs have been
reformed in their constitution, London has been suffered to
remain, as yet, in the enjoyment of nearly all its
p. 85
old
usages.  The city is civilly divided into twenty-five wards,
each of which has an alderman; and with one alderman without a
ward, the number of aldermen is 26.  Each is chosen for
life, and acts as magistrate within his division.  The
freemen of the various wards elect representatives annually to
the common-council, to the number of 206 members.  The lord
mayor, aldermen, and common-council, compose the legislative body
for the city.  The lord mayor is chosen by a numerous and
respectable constituency, called
the livery
, or liverymen;
these are certain qualified members of trading corporations, who,
except in electing the lord mayor, sheriffs, members of
parliament, &c., do not directly interfere in city
management.  The Court of Aldermen and the Court of
Common-council have certain legislative and executive duties,
partly with and partly without the immediate aid of the lord
mayor.  The revenue of the city corporation is derived from
sundry dues, rents, interest of bequests, fines for leases,
&c.  The magistracy, police, and prisons cost about
£40,000 annually; but this is exclusive of large sums
disbursed by the court of aldermen.  The lord mayor is
elected annually, on the 29th of September, from among the body
of aldermen.  The livery send a list of two candidates to
the court of aldermen, and one of these, generally the senior, is
chosen by them.  He enters office, with much pomp, on the
9th of November, which is hence called Lord Mayor’s
Day.  The procession through the streets on this occasion
attracts citizens as well as strangers.  The advocate and
legal adviser of the corporation is an official with the title of
Recorder.  The lord mayor and corporation exercise a
jurisdiction over Southwark and other precincts.
Westminster, which is not connected in civic matters with London
Proper, is under the jurisdiction of a high-bailiff.  The
city returns 4 members to Parliament, besides the 16 returned by
Westminster, Southwark, Marylebone, Tower Hamlets, Finsbury,
Lambeth, Chelsea, and Greenwich.

In 1829, the old mode of protection by
Watchmen
was
abolished in all parts of the metropolis except the city, and a
new
Police Force
established by Act of Parliament.
This has been a highly successful and beneficial
improvement.  The new police is under
p. 86
the
management of commissioners, who are in direct communication with
the Secretary of State for the Home Department; under the
commissioners are superintendents, inspectors, sergeants, and
constables.  The district under their care includes the
whole metropolis and environs, with the exception of the city,
grouped into 21 divisions, each denoted by a letter.  The
constables wear a blue uniform, and are on duty at all times of
the day and night.  Three-fourths of the expenses are paid
out of the parish rates, but limited to an assessment of 8d. per
pound on the rental; the remainder is contributed from the public
purse.  The corporation have since established a Police
Force for the city on the model of that above mentioned.  In
addition to two Police Offices for the city, at the Mansion House
and Guildhall, there are eleven for the remaining parts of the
metropolis,—viz., Bow Street, Clerkenwell, Great
Marlborough Street, Thames, Worship Street, Southwark,
Marylebone, Westminster, Lambeth, Greenwich and Woolwich, and
Hammersmith and Wandsworth.  The Thames Police have a
peculiar jurisdiction over the river.  In 1836, a horse
patrol was added to the Bow Street establishment, consisting of
inspectors and patrols, whose sphere of action is the less
frequented roads around the metropolis.  With all these
means of preserving the peace and preventing crime, the
metropolis is now one of the most orderly cities in the world;
and provided strangers do not seek the haunts of vice, but pursue
their way steadily, they run little or no risk of
molestation.  The number of metropolitan police in 1872 was
about 9,000; of city police, 700—including, in both cases,
superintendents, inspectors, &c., &c.  The
commissioner of metropolitan police is Lieutenant-Colonel E. Y.
W. Henderson, C.B., 4 Whitehall Place, S.W.; the commissioner of
city police is Colonel James Fraser, C.B., 26 Old Jewry, E.C.

The
Drainage
of London was a matter barely understood
at all, and in no wholesome sense practised, till some time after
the Board of Works was formed, in 1855, when their best efforts
to check a rapidly growing evil—viz., the casting of
London’s poisonous sewage into the Thames at our very
doors—were called into play.  The estimated cost of
one of the most colossal schemes of modern times was,
p. 87
at its
outset, put down at something over three millions; and when the
vast plan for main drainage was commenced, in 1859, a sanitary
revolution began.  A far greater sum, however, must be
expended ere the idea is wholly carried out.  It is
obviously out of our power, in our limited space, to do anything
more than give the reader a mere rough notion of the good to be
done and the difficulties to be overcome.  The plan was to
construct some 70 odd miles of gigantic sewers on either side of
the Thames.  The north side of the river has three different
lines of sewers, which meet at the river Lea, and thereafter go
along, in one huge embankment, to Barking Creek, on the Thames,
14 miles below London Bridge.  With certain differences, the
sewage of the south side of the Thames is amenable to the same
kind of treatment.  By some returns, furnished in June,
1870, by the engineer of the Metropolitan Board of Works, it
appears that the average daily quantity of sewage pumped into the
river Thames at Crossness was 170,934 cubic metres, and at
Barking 152,808 cubic metres—equivalent to about as many
tons by weight.  That quantity, of course, will every year,
as London grows, increase.  As the sewers on the north side
of the river get more near to the sea, they can be seen.
The south side sewers are nearly all out of sight.  As the
tide flows, the filth of London, by their means, is poured into
the water.  As it ebbs, the sewage is carried out to
sea.  Powerful steam-engines, for pumping up sewage from low
levels, are used as they are required.  The clerk of the
Metropolitan Board of Works, who may be seen at Spring Gardens,
Charing Cross, will, we should fancy, oblige any gentleman with
engineering proclivities with an order to view what has already
been accomplished by marvellous ability and
enterprise,—whose results can in no fair sense gain
anything like fair appreciation without personal inspection.

London is
Lighted
by sundry joint-stock gas companies;
the parishes contract with them for street lights, and
individuals for the house and shop lights.  Gas was first
introduced into London, in Golden Lane, in 1807; in Pall Mall in
1809; and generally through London in 1814.  There are
something like 2,500 miles of gas-pipes in and about London.

p. 88
The
first of the public
Baths
and
Wash-houses
was
established near the London Docks in 1844.  The number, of
course, has vastly increased.  Many of them are maintained
by the parish authorities, and are very cheap.

The first public
Drinking Fountain
in London was
erected, near St. Sepulchre’s Church, close to Newgate, in
1859.  There are now nearly 200 such fountains and troughs
for animals in London.

In 1833, by an agreement among the Fire Insurance offices,
there was established a regular fire-suppression police, or

Fire Brigade
, consisting of a superintendent, foremen,
engineers, sub-engineers, and firemen; numerous engines are in
constant readiness at fifty-four different stations.  (The
brigade is now placed under public control, supported by a
house-rate.)  The fires in London exceed 1,500 annually, on
an average.

Mansion House
.—This is a tall square mass of dark
stone building, nearly opposite the Bank and the Royal Exchange,
with a portico of six Corinthian columns in front, resting on a
low rustic basement.  This edifice, which extends a
considerable depth behind, is the official residence of the Lord
Mayor of London, provided by the city corporation.  Besides
an extensive suite of domestic apartments, it contains a number
of state-rooms, in which company is received and
entertained.  The chief of these rooms are the Egyptian hall
and the ball-room, which have a grand appearance.  Some fine
sculptures by British artists—the best of which are
Foley’s ‘Caractacus and Egeria,’ and
Bailey’s ‘Genius and the Morning
Star’—have recently been added; the corporation
having voted a sum of money for this purpose.  The lord
mayor’s annual stipend is £5,997 8s. 4d., with
certain allowances, we believe, not stated; and in the Mansion
House he has the use of a superb collection of plate: he is
likewise allowed the use of a state-coach, &c.  Every
lord mayor, however, expends more than this sum during his year
of office in grand banquets.

Guildhall
.—This may be regarded as the

Town-hall
, or what the French would call the
Hotel de
Ville
, of London; where are held meetings of the livery to
elect members of parliament, lord mayor,
p. 89
sheriffs, and
others, and where the grandest civic entertainments are
given.  It is situated at the end of King Street,
Cheapside.  The building is old, but received a new front,
in a strange kind of Gothic, in 1789.  The interior of the
grand hall is 153 feet long, 48 feet broad, and 55 feet high; it
is one of the largest rooms in London, and can accommodate about
3,500 persons at dinner.  Two clumsy colossal figures,
called Gog and Magog, the history of which has never clearly been
made out, are placed at the west end of the hall.  Around it
are some fine marble monuments to Lord Mayor Beckford, Lord
Nelson, the Duke of Wellington, the Earl of Chatham, and his son,
William Pitt.  Note the stained glass with the armorial
bearings of the twelve great city companies; also observe, in the
passage leading to the common-council chamber, the portrait of
General Sir W. F. Williams, the heroic defender of Kars in
1855.  At the top of the council chamber will be seen
Chantrey’s statue of George III.; a picture of the siege of
Gibraltar, by Copley; and Northcote’s ‘Wat Tyler
slain by Lord Mayor Walworth,’ with other pictures and
portraits.  Near by are several offices for corporate and
law courts.  The
Library
contains many valuable
antiquities, books, coins, pottery, &c., and some interesting
autographs.  Note that of Shakespere, on a deed of purchase
of a house in Blackfriars.  The
Crypt
is a curious
underground vault.  On Lord Mayor’s Day the grand
dinner usually costs about £2,200.  On the 18th June,
1814, when the Allied Sovereigns dined here, the gold plate was
valued at £200,000.

The Monument
.—This may be regarded as a corporate
structure, although it answers no useful purpose.  It is a
fluted Doric column, situated in a small space of ground
adjoining the southern extremity of King William Street, on the
descent to Lower Thames Street.  It was begun in 1671, and
finished in 1677, at a cost of about £14,500, in
commemoration of the Great Fire of London, which began at the
distance of 202 feet eastward from the spot, in 1666; and its
height has on that account (so we are told) been made 202
feet.  It is a handsome column, with a gilt finial intended
to represent flames of fire.  Visitors are allowed to ascend
by a winding stair of 345 steps to the top; fee, 3d.  No
better place can be
p.
90
chosen from which to view the river, the shipping, and
the city generally.

The Royal Exchange
.—This is a handsome
quadrangular building on the north side of Cornhill, having in
the centre an open court with colonnades.  The chief
entrance faces an open paved space on the west, on which is
placed an equestrian statue of the Duke of Wellington.  The
building was erected from plans by Mr. Tite, and was opened in
1844; it occupies the site of the former Exchange, which was
accidentally destroyed by fire.  The pediment contains
sculptures by Sir R. Westmacott, R.A.  The lower part of the
exterior is laid out as shops, which greatly injure the
architectural effect; the upper rooms are occupied as public
offices, one of which is
Lloyd’s
, or, more properly,

Lloyd’s Subscription Rooms
, where merchants,
shipowners, shippers, and underwriters congregate.  A statue
of the Queen is in the centre of the quadrangular area.  The
busy time on ’Change is from 3 till 4 o’clock,
Tuesday and Friday being the principal days.

THE TEMPLE; INNS OF COURT; COURTS OF JUSTICE; PRISONS.

The buildings noticed in this section belong partly to the
crown, partly to the corporation of London, and partly to other
bodies.

The Temple
.—Contiguous to the south side of Fleet
Street is a most extensive series of buildings, comprising
several squares and rows, called the
Temple
; belonging to
the members of two societies, the
Inner
and
Middle
Temple
, consisting of benchers, barristers, and
students.  This famous old place, taken in its completeness,
was, in 1184, the metropolitan residence of the Knights Templars,
who held it until their downfall in 1313; soon afterwards it was
occupied by students of the law; and in 1608 James I. presented
the entire group of structures to the benchers of the two
societies, who have ever since been the absolute owners.
The entrance to Inner Temple, from Fleet Street, consists of
nothing more than a mere gateway; the entrance to Middle Temple
was designed by Sir Christopher Wren.
Middle Temple
Hall
, 100 feet long, 42 wide, and 47 high, is considered to
have one of the finest Elizabethan
p. 91
roofs in London.  A group of
chambers, called
Paper Buildings
, built near the river, is
a good example of revived Elizabethan.  A new
Inner
Temple Hall
was formally opened, in 1870, by the Princess
Louise.  In October, 1861, when the Prince of Wales was
elected a bencher of the Middle Temple, a new
Library
was
formally opened, which had been constructed at a cost of
£13,000; it is a beautiful ornament to the place, as seen
from the river.  The
Temple Church
, a few yards only
down from Fleet Street, is one of the most interesting churches
in London.  All the main parts of the structure are as old
as the time of the Knights Templars; but the munificent sum of
£70,000 was spent, about twenty years ago, in restoring and
adorning it.  There are two portions, the
Round
Church
and the
Choir
, the one nearly 700 years old,
and the other more than 600.  The monumental effigies, the
original sculptured heads in the Round Church, the triforium, and
the fittings of the Choir, are all worthy of attention.  The
north side of the church has recently been laid open by the
removal of adjoining buildings; and in their place some handsome
chambers are erected.  Hard by, in the churchyard, is the
grave of Oliver Goldsmith, who died in chambers (since pulled
down) in Brick Court.  The Sunday services are very fine,
and always attract many strangers.  The
Temple
Gardens
, fronting the river, are probably the best in the
city.

Lincoln’s Inn
was once the property of the De
Lacie, Earl of Lincoln.  It became an Inn of Court in
1310.  The fine new hall—worth seeing—was opened
in 1845.  The Chapel was built in 1621–3, by Inigo
Jones.  He also laid out the large garden in Lincoln’s
Inn Fields, close by, in 1620.  Lord William Russell was
beheaded here in 1683.  In Lincoln’s Inn are the
Chancery and Equity Courts.

Graves Inn
, nearly opposite the north end of Chancery
Lane, once belonged to the Lords Gray of Wilton.  It was
founded in 1357.  Most of its buildings—except its
hall, with black oak roof—are of comparatively modern
date.  In Gray’s Inn lived the great Lord Bacon, a
tree planted by whom, in the quaint old garden of the Inn, can
yet be seen propped up by iron stays.  Charles the
p. 92
First, when
Prince Charles, was an honorary member of Gray’s Inn, and
Bradshaw, who tried him, was one of its benchers.

Sergeant’s Inn
, Chancery Lane, is what its name
denotes—the Inn of the sergeants-at-law.
Sergeants
Inn
, Fleet Street, is let out in chambers to barristers,
solicitors, and the general public.  The last remark applies
to the other small Inns of Chancery in and about Holborn and
Fleet Street.

Till the new
Law
Courts are erected in Central Strand,
London has no Courts of Law well built or convenient.  The

Westminster Courts
are little better than wooden
sheds.  So are the
Lincoln’s Inn Courts
.
But they still are worth a visit.  At the
Old Bailey
,
near Newgate, is the
Central Criminal Court
, for the trial
of prisoners accused of crimes committed within ten miles of St.
Paul’s.  Nominally, this court is free; but
practically, a small
douceur
is always extorted by the
ushers for a place.  In the other courts this practice of
‘tipping’ is less common.  The
Bankruptcy
Court
, in Basinghall Street, the
Clerkenwell Sessions
House
, the
County Courts
, and the
Police
Courts
, are other establishments connected with the
administration of justice; but the business of the first will
shortly be transferred westward.

The Record Office
.—Connected in some degree with
the Courts of Law and Equity, is the
New Record Office
,
Fetter Lane, where is deposited a vast body of unprinted
documents belonging to the state, of priceless value, including
the far-famed
Doomsday Book
; they having been previously
scattered in various buildings about the metropolis.  Apply
to the deputy-keeper for an order to inspect any but state papers
of later date than 1688, for which the Home Secretary’s
special order is requisite.

Prisons
.—
Newgate
, the chief criminal
prison for the city and county, in the Old Bailey, was a prison
in the
new gate
of the city as early as 1218.  Two
centuries after it was re-built, and in the Great Fire (1666)
burnt down.  It was re-constructed in 1778–80; its
interior burnt in the Gordon ‘No Popery’ riots in
1780; and its interior again re-constructed in 1857.
Debtors are no longer confined here; the few who come under the
new law—which has almost abolished imprisonment for
debt—being sent to
Holloway Prison

p. 93
under the new
law.  Till public executions were abolished, criminals came
out for execution in the middle of the Old Bailey, through the
small iron door over which is suspended a grim festoon of
fetters.  They are now hanged privately inside the
jail.  The condemned cells are on the north-east side of
Newgate.  To view the prison, apply to the sheriff or the
lord mayor.  The chief debtors’ prison
was
the

Queen’s Bench
, in Southwark.  It is now a

Military Prison
.  The
City Prison
, Holloway, a
castellated structure, was built in 1855, as a substitute for
other and overcrowded jails in London.  Other prisons are
the
House of Correction
, Cold Bath Fields, capable of
holding 1,200 prisoners; the
House of Correction
, at
Wandsworth; the
House of Correction
, Westminster;

Millbank Penitentiary
, near the Middlesex end of Vauxhall
Bridge, which could, if wanted, hold 1,200 prisoners, and cost
£500,000;
Pentonville Model Prison
;
Female
Prison
, Brixton;
Surrey County Jail
, Horsemonger Lane,
on the top of which the infamous Mannings were hanged in 1849;
and the
House of Detention
, Clerkenwell, which the Fenians
tried to blow up.  The last prison is for persons not
convicted.

BANKS; INSURANCE OFFICES; STOCK EXCHANGE; CITY
COMPANIES.

Bank of England
.—This large establishment is
situated north of the Royal Exchange; the narrow thoroughfare
between being
Threadneedle Street
, in which is the
principal front.  This is unquestionably the greatest bank
in the world.  The present structure was mostly the work of
Sir John Soane, at various periods between 1788 and 1829.
About 1,000 clerks, messengers, &c., are employed here, at
salaries varying from £50 to £1,200 per annum.
The buildings of the Bank are low, but remarkable in
appearance.  In the centre is the principal entrance, which
conducts to an inner open court, and thence to the main
building.  The Dividend and Transfer Offices, with which
fund-holders are most concerned, lie in the eastern part of the
building.  Thus far the place is freely open to
visitors.  The whole buildings and courts include an area of
about eight acres.  The teller’s room shews a scene of
great activity—
p. 94
clerks counting and weighing gold and
silver, porters going to and fro, and crowds of tradesmen and
others negotiating business at the counters.  The other and
more private parts of the Bank can be seen only by an order from
a director.  The most interesting departments are the
bullion-office, in a vaulted chamber beneath—where there
commonly are some 14 to 17 millions in bullion, as a
reserve—entering from one of the many open courts; the
treasury; the apartments in which the notes of the Bank are
printed; and the weighing-office, where coin-balances of
exquisite construction are used.  In the printing department
there is a large steam-engine, which moves printing-machines,
plate-presses, and other mechanism—the whole being in
beautiful order, and forming a very interesting sight.  The
Bank is guarded at night by its own watchmen, and a detachment of
Foot Guards.

Joint-Stock and Private Banks
.—Some of the
handsomest modern buildings in London are those belonging to the
Banking Companies.  The
London and Westminster
, the

London Joint-Stock
, the
Union
, the
City
, the

Australian
, and numerous other Companies, have two or more
establishments each, some as many as half-a-dozen—the head
bank always being in the busy centre of trade, the
‘City.’  Some of these are elegant structures;
and all are planned with great skill in reference to interior
arrangements.  The private bankers, such as Glyn, Barclays,
Lubbocks, Coutts, &c., rival the companies in the
architectural character of their banks; and some of their
establishments, such as Child’s, near Temple Bar, are
curious old places.  Many have lately been rebuilt in a
substantial and handsome style.

Insurance Offices
.—These form another extensive
group, which has conduced much to the improved street appearance
of modern London.  All the best conducted Life and Fire
Insurance Companies are wealthy; and they have devoted part of
their wealth to the construction of commodious and often elegant
offices.  The
County
, the
Royal Exchange
, the

Sun
, the
Phœnix
, the
Amicable
, the

Equitable
, the
Imperial
, are among the most noted
of these insurance offices.  The chief buildings are within
a small circle, of which the Royal Exchange is the centre;
another group is about
p. 95
Fleet Street and Blackfriars; and a
western group lies in and near the Regent Street line.

Stock Exchange
.—This building, of which scarcely
anything can be seen on the outside, lies up a paved passage
called Capel Court, in Bartholomew Lane, on the east side of the
Bank of England.  Dealers and brokers in the public funds,
and in all kinds of joint-stock shares and debentures, meet and
transact business here.  They buy and sell, not only for
themselves, but for the public generally; and the amount of
business transacted every day is enormous.  The
establishment is maintained by about 900 members, who pay
£10 a-year each.  They endeavour to enforce strict
honesty in each other’s dealings; but they sedulously
refuse to allow a stranger even to pass the threshold of their
Temple of Wealth.

Various Commercial Buildings
.—A stranger has only
to look at a detailed map or a directory, to see how numerous are
the buildings, especially in the city, applied in various ways to
commerce and trading on a large scale.  The
Trinity
House
on
Tower Hill
; the chambers of the building that
was once the
South Sea House
, near Leadenhall Street;
those of the large but irregular structure called
Gresham
House
, in Bishopsgate Street—are all worthy of a
glance, some for their architectural character, and all for the
importance of the work transacted in them.  The
East
India House
, in Leadenhall Street, has been pulled down;
commercial chambers in great number, and let at enormous rentals,
have been built on the site.

City Companies
.—In nothing is the past history of
the metropolis, the memory of
Old
London, kept alive in a
more remarkable way than by the
City Companies
, or

Trading Guilds
, which are still very numerous.  All
were established with a good purpose, and all rendered service in
their day; but at the present time few have any important duties
to fulfil.  The age for such things is nearly past; but the
companies have revenues which none but themselves can touch; and
out of these revenues many excellent charities are
supported.  Several of the companies have halls of great
architectural beauty, or curious on account of their
antiquity.
p.
96
Twelve, from their wealth and importance, are called the

Great
Companies; and all of these have halls worthy of
note.  They are the
Mercers’
,

Drapers’
,
Fishmongers’
,

Goldsmiths’
,
Skinners’
,
Merchant
Taylors’
,
Haberdashers’
,

Salters’
,
Ironmongers’
,

Vintners’
,
Grocers’
, and

Clothworkers’
.  Every year banquets are given
in the halls of these great companies—often under such
circumstances as to give political importance to them.

Mercers’ Hall
, on the north side of Cheapside, has a
richly ornamental entrance.
Grocers’ Hall
, in
the Poultry, is remarkable rather for the age of the company
(more than 500 years) than for the beauty of the building; it is
interesting to note that the Long Parliament was entertained at
city-dinners in this hall.
Drapers’ Hall
, in
Throgmorton Street, built in 1667, replaced a structure which had
belonged to Thomas Cromwell, Earl of Essex, in the time of Henry
VIII., and which was destroyed by the Great Fire.

Fishmongers’ Hall
, the most majestic of the whole,
stands at the northern end of London Bridge, on the west side; it
was built in 1831, as part of the improvements consequent on the
opening of New London Bridge, on a site that had been occupied by
an older hall since the time of the Great Fire.

Goldsmiths’ Hall
, just behind the General
Post-Office, is too closely hemmed in with other buildings to be
seen well; it is one of Mr. Hardwick’s best productions,
and was finished by him in 1835, on the site of an older
hall.
Skinners’ Hall
, Dowgate Hill, was built
(like so many others of the city halls) just after the Great Fire
in 1666; but was newly fronted in 1808.
Merchant
Taylors’ Hall
, Threadneedle Street, is the largest of
the city halls.  It was rebuilt after the Great Fire, and
has long been celebrated for the political banquets occasionally
given there—this being considered the leading Tory Company,
and the Fishmongers’ the leading Whig Company.

Haberdashers’ Hall
, near Goldsmiths’ Hall, is
quite modern; the present building having been constructed in
1855.
Salters’ Hall
, St. Swithen’s Lane,
was rebuilt in 1827.
Ironmongers’ Hall
,
Fenchurch Street, was erected in 1748, on the site of an older
structure; the banqueting-room was remodelled a few years ago
with great richness.  In 1861 this company held an

Exhibition of Art
, notable for the rarity and beauty of
the objects
p.
97
collected; it was the first thing of the kind organized
among these companies, and was in all respects creditable to
those who planned and managed it.
Vintners’
Hall
, Upper Thames Street, is small and unpretentious.

Clothworkers’ Hall
, Mincing Lane, is an elegant
Italian Renaissance edifice, erected in 1858, from the designs of
Mr. Angell.

Among the minor halls are the
Apothecaries’
,
Blackfriars;
Stationers’
, behind Ludgate Hill;

Armourers’
, Coleman Street;
Barber
Surgeons’
, Monkwell Street, (which contains some fine
paintings;)
Weavers’
, Basinghall Street;

Saddlers’
, Cheapside; and
Paper
Stainers’
, Little Trinity Lane.  At the last-named
hall an interesting exhibition of specimens of decorative
painting was held in 1864.  The city companies are about
eighty altogether.  Some, which tell most singularly of past
times, and of the difference between the past and the present,
are the
Cooks’
, the
Bowyers’
, the

Fletchers’
, the
Woolmen’s
, the

Scriveners’
, the
Broderers’
, the

Horners’
, the
Loriners’
, the

Spectacle Makers’
, the
Felt Makers’
,
the
Patten Makers’
, the
Parish Clerks’
,
and the
Fan Makers’
companies.  All these,
except the
Spectacle Makers’
and the
Parish
Clerks’
, have now no halls.  Eight others,
formerly existing, have become extinct.  The only three
which are actually trading companies at the present day are the

Goldsmiths’
, the
Apothecaries’
, and the

Stationers’
.  The Goldsmiths’ company
assay all the gold and silver plate manufactured in the
metropolis, stamp it with the ‘Hall-mark,’ and
collect the excise duty upon it for the Government; the
Apothecaries’ sell medicines, and have a certain
jurisdiction in relation to medical practice; the
Stationers’ publish almanacs, and register all copyright
books.

THE RIVER; DOCKS; THAMES TUNNEL; BRIDGES; PIERS.

We shall next describe certain features connected with traffic

on
,
under
, and
over
the Thames.

The River and its Shipping
.—The Thames stream
rises in the interior of the country, at the distance of 138
miles above London, and enters the sea on the east coast about
sixty miles below it.  It comes flowing between low,
fertile, and village-clad banks, out
p. 98
of a richly ornamented country on the
west; and, arriving at the outmost suburbs of the metropolis, it
pursues a winding course, between banks thickly lined with
dwelling-houses, warehouses, manufactories, and wharfs, for a
space of several miles, its breadth being here from an eighth to
a-third of a mile.  The tides affect it for fifteen or
sixteen miles above the city; but the salt water comes no farther
than Gravesend, or perhaps Greenhithe.  However, such is the
volume and depth of water, that vessels of great magnitude can
sail or steam up to London.  Most unfortunately, the beauty
of this noble stream is much hidden from the spectator, there
being very few quays or promenades along its banks.  With
the exception of the summit of St. Paul’s or the Monument,
and the Custom House quay, the only good points for viewing the
river are the bridges, which cross it at convenient distances,
and by their length convey an accurate idea of the breadth of the
channel.  Formerly there were many light and fanciful boats
for hire on the Thames; but these are now greatly superseded by
small steamers, which convey crowds of passengers up and down the
river.

The part of the river between London Bridge and Blackwall, an
interval of several miles, constitutes the
Port
; and here
are constantly seen lying at anchor great numbers of
vessels.  The portion immediately below the bridge is called
the
Pool
, where coal-ships are usually ranged in great
number.  It is curious to watch, while passing up and down
the river, the way in which coals are transferred, by labourers
called
coal-whippers
, from the ships into barges, in which
they are conveyed to the wharfs of the several
coal-merchants.  At wharfs between the Custom House and the
bridge lie numerous steam-vessels which ply to Greenwich,
Woolwich, Gravesend, Margate, and other places of resort down the
Thames; also steamers for continental ports.  London, as has
already been observed, possesses no line of quays on the
river.  The trade with the ships is carried on at wharfs
jutting upon the water.  The Thames is placed under strict
police regulations with respect to trade; certain places being
assigned to different classes of vessels, including those which
arrive from the Tyne, Wear, and Tees with coal, and all
coasters.  The trade connected with the
p. 99
Port is
mostly carried on in the closely built part of the metropolis
adjacent to the Thames.  Almost the whole of this district
consists of narrow streets, environed by warehouses and offices,
making no external show, but in which an incalculable amount of
trade is transacted.

The Docks
.—As a relief to the river, and for
other reasons, there are several very large
Docks
.
The lowest or most eastern are the
Victoria Docks
, in
Essex, just beyond the river Lea.  They cover an area of 200
acres, and have been the means of introducing many improvements
in the accommodation of shipping.  The
hydraulic lift

at these docks, for raising and supporting ships during repair,
is well worth looking at.  Next are the
East India
Docks
, constructed in 1806; they consist of two docks and a
basin, covering 32 acres.  Near these are the
West India
Docks
, the entrances to
p. 100
which are at Blackwall and
Limehouse; in these large
depôts
of shipping
connected with the West India and other trade may at all times be
seen some hundreds of vessels, loading or unloading in connection
with the warehouses around.  The largest of these docks is
24 feet deep, 510 feet long, and 498 wide; and, with a basin,
they cover nearly 300 acres.  Farther up the river, and near
the Tower, in the district called Wapping, are the
London
Docks
and
St. Katharine’s Docks
.  The
London Docks consist of one enclosure to the extent of 20 acres,
another of smaller dimensions, a basin, and three entrances from
the river.  These are surrounded by warehouses for the
reception of bonded goods, and beneath the warehouses are vaults
for bonded liquors.  The principal warehouse for the storing
of tobacco in bond till it is purchased and the duties paid, is
situated close beside a special dock called the Tobacco
Dock.  The Tobacco Warehouse occupies no less than five
acres of ground, and has accommodation for 24,000 hogsheads of
tobacco.  The sight of this extraordinary warehouse, and of
the Wine-Vaults, is not soon to be forgotten.  The vaults
are arched with brick, and extend east and west to a great
distance, with diverging lines also of great length, the whole
being like the streets of an underground town.  Along the
sides are ranged casks of wine to an amount apparently without
limit.  There is accommodation for 65,000 pipes.  These
cellars being dark, all who enter and go through them carry
lights.  Admission may be had by procuring an order from a
wine-merchant to taste and examine any pipes he may have in bond:
a cooper accompanies the visitor to pierce the casks.
Besides this large vault, which principally contains port and
sherry, there are other vaults for French wines, &c.

St. Katharine’s Docks
, between the Tower and the
London Docks, were formed in 1828, on a site which required the
removal of more than 1,200 houses and 13,000 inhabitants; the
earth obtained by the excavation was employed in raising the site
for some of the new streets and squares of Pimlico.  There
are twelve acres of water area, and about as much of quays and
warehouses.  On the south of the Thames are the

Commercial
and the
Grand Surrey Docks
, the great
centre of the timber trade.  The various docks are the
property of
p.
101
joint-stock companies, who receive rents and dues of
various kinds for their use.

Thames Tunnel
.—With the view of effecting a ready
communication for wagons and other carriages, and
foot-passengers, between the Surrey and Middlesex sides of the
river, at a point where, from the constant passage of shipping,
it would be inconvenient to rear a bridge, a
tunnel
or
sub-river passage was designed by a joint-stock company.
The idea of tunnelling under the river, by the way, was not a
novel one.  In 1802 a company was got up with a similar
notion, Trevethick, the inventor of the high-pressure engine,
being its engineer.  It came to nought; and in 1825 Mr.
(afterwards Sir) Marc Isambard Brunel began his tunnel, at a
point about two miles below London Bridge, entering on the
southern shore at Rotherhithe, and issuing at Wapping on the
other.  The water broke in in 1827, and again in 1828, when
six men perished.  After all the funds were exhausted, and
the Government had advanced no less than £246,000 by way of
loan, the work, after many delays, was opened in 1843.  The
total, cost was £468,000.  The tunnel consisted of two
archways, 1,300 feet long, the thickness of the earth being about
15 feet between the crown of the tunnel and the river’s
bed.  As a speculation—toll 1d.—it never
paid.  The descent was by a deep, dirty staircase; and only
one arch was open for foot-passengers.  But now that the
East London Railway Company have purchased it, a wholesome change
has come.  Some 40 trains are now running backwards and
forwards through it, from Wapping to Rotherhithe, and thence to
Deptford and New Cross, and
vice versâ
.  And
so, at last, the once well-nigh useless scheme, which wore out
Brunel’s heart, has been, some twenty-two years after his
death, made of great service to that part of London.

The Tower Subway
.—In the neighbourhood of the
Tunnel a subway has been formed, consisting of an iron tube, 7
feet in diameter, laid below the bed of the Thames.  It
belongs to a Limited Liability Company.  It was commenced in
February, 1869, and opened for tramway traffic on 12th April,
1870.  Being a losing speculation, the tramway cars ceased
to run on 7th December,
p. 102
1870; but it was opened for
foot-passengers on the 24th of that month, and it is the
intention of the Company to continue it only as such.  It is
reached at each end by a spiral staircase of 96 steps.  Its
whole length is 1225 feet.  A charge of ½d. is made
for each person passing through this Tunnel.  The Tunnel is
well lighted up with gas, and the average heat by the thermometer
is 65 degrees.

Bridges
.—The communication between the northern
and southern sections of the metropolis is maintained by means of
various bridges.  Excluding
Albert Suspension Bridge
,
(between Cadogan Pier, Chelsea, and Albert Road, leading into
Battersea Park,) commenced in 1865, and not yet open, the number
is 14—as follow: 1.
London Bridge
, built by
Rennie, and opened in 1831; it is 928 feet long, and 54 wide; it
has 5 arches, of which the centre is 152 feet span, and cost,
with the approaches, £2,000,000.  This is regarded as
one of the finest granite bridges in the world.
p. 103
2.

South-Eastern Railway Bridge
, to connect the London Bridge
Station with a new terminus in Cannon Street; this bridge, having
five lines of railway, is midway between London Bridge and the
one next to be named.  3.
Southwark Bridge
, by
Rennie, was opened in 1819; it is of iron, 708 feet long, with
three magnificent arches, the centre one of 402 feet span; it was
a toll bridge, and cost £800,000.  In 1865, it was
made free, and remains so, by arrangement between the Company and
the Corporation.  4.
Blackfriars Railway
Bridge
, with four lines of rail, connects the Metropolitan
Railway north of the Thames with the Chatham and Dover Railway on
the south.

5.
Old Blackfriars Bridge
, by Mylne, was opened
in 1769; it consisted of 19 arches, and was 995 feet long.
The foundations, however, having become decayed, the bridge was
pulled down, and a magnificent new one, by Mr. Cubitt, built its
place.  A wooden bridge of remarkable construction, with a
foot-way
over
the carriage-way, did duty for traffic till
the opening of Mr. Cubitt’s present structure.  This
was formally done by the
p. 104
Queen in person, November 6,
1869.  The entire width of the new bridge is 75 feet, the
foot-paths being 15 feet each, with a fine road between them, 45
feet in breadth from kerb to kerb.  The entire length of the
bridge, including approaches, is 1,272 feet, and its centre arch
has a span of 185 feet in the clear.  It has four
piers.  All its iron (except the ornamental portion, which
is of cast metal) is hammered.  With its handsome polished
red granite piers, Portland stone capitals, and florid Venetian
Gothic ornamentation, light-looking yet massive iron arches,
spandrils, and parapets, and its general
tout ensemble
,
new Blackfriars is, bearing all things in mind, one of the
cheapest permanent bridges thrown across the Thames.  Its
total cost is under £400,000.  6.
Waterloo
Bridge
, one of the most magnificent in the world, was built
by Rennie, and was opened in 1817; it is flat from end to end,
1,380 feet long, or 2,456 with the approaches; it consists of
nine beautiful arches of 120 feet span, and cost
£1,000,000; a toll of one halfpenny per passenger yields a
very poor return on this outlay.  7.
Hungerford
Suspension Bridge
has been replaced by a fine new bridge,
partly for foot-passengers, and partly for the Charing Cross
extension of the South-Eastern Railway.  8.
Old
Westminster Bridge
, opened in 1750, is now all removed, to
make way for a beautiful new bridge of iron, with granite piers,
built by Mr. Page, opened for traffic in 1862.  It is about
1,160 feet long by 85 feet wide.  9.
Lambeth
Bridge
, a wire-rope suspension bridge of economical
construction, from Westminster to near Lambeth Church, was opened
in 1862.  10.
Vauxhall Bridge
, built by Walker,
was opened in 1816; it is of iron, 798 feet long, and consists of
nine equal arches.  11.
Pimlico Railway Bridge
,
from Pimlico to the commencement of Battersea Park, connects the
Victoria Station with the Brighton and other railways.
12.
Chelsea Suspension Bridge
, very near the bridge
last named, gives easy access from Chelsea to Battersea, and is a
light and elegant structure.  13.
Battersea
Bridge
is an old wooden structure, unsightly in appearance,
inconvenient to passengers over it, and still more so to
steamboats under it.  14.
West London Extension
Railway Bridge
, opened in 1863, crosses the Thames from a
point a little above
p. 105
Cremorne Gardens to Battersea town;
it is a link to connect various railways on the north of the
river with others on the south.
Putney Bridge
,

Hammersmith Suspension Bridge
,
Barnes Railway
Bridge
, and
Kew Bridge
, may or may not be included in
this series, according to the acceptation of the indefinite word
‘Metropolis.’

Steam-boat Piers
.—If you wish to go eastward of
London Bridge, on the north side of the river, you will find
steam-boats at London Bridge to take you to Thames Tunnel Pier,
Limehouse, Blackwall, and North Woolwich.  On the south
side, at the Surrey end of London Bridge, you can take boat for
Rotherhithe, Commercial Docks, Greenwich, Charlton, and
Woolwich.  If you wish to go westward from London Bridge, on
the north side, you can take boat thence for the following
piers:—Bridge, Paul’s Wharf, Temple Stairs, Waterloo
Bridge, Hungerford Bridge, Westminster Bridge, Millbank, Pimlico,
Thames Bank, Chelsea, and Battersea; and on the south side, at
Westminster Bridge, Lambeth Stairs, Vauxhall, Battersea Park,
Wandsworth, Putney, Hammersmith Bridge, and Kew.  The
steamers make an amazing number of trips each way daily, between
these several piers, at intervals varying with the season, and at
fares ranging from one penny to fourpence.  For example, the
fare by the
Citizen
boats from London Bridge to
Westminster is 1d.; to Pimlico, 2d.; Chelsea and Battersea,
3d.  If you wish to go
quickly
from Westminster
Bridge to London Bridge, you will avoid delays at piers by
getting one of the penny boats which run every ten minutes from
Westminster to London Bridge, only calling at Hungerford.
Steamers for Kew, in the summer, run about every half-hour from
London Bridge, calling at intermediate up-river
piers—return ticket, 1s.  From Cadogan Pier, Chelsea,
you can go to Kew for 4d.  And on Sundays and Mondays you
can go up as far as Richmond, if the tide allow, at half-past 10
a.m. from Hungerford—return ticket, about 1s. 6d.  For
more distant journeys, such as to Erith, Gravesend, Sheerness,
Southend, &c., by excursion steam-boats.  To Gravesend
and back, the fare is 1s. 6d.; Sheerness and Southend and back,
2s. 6d.  Boats generally leave Hungerford Bridge for
Gravesend and Erith
p. 106
every half-hour up to 12, and leave
London Bridge at 2 and half-past 4 p.m.; they leave Hungerford
Bridge for Southend and Sheerness at various times from half-past
8, calling at London Bridge, returning in the afternoon or early
evening.

The Thames Embankment
is one of the noblest works in
the metropolis.  As long ago as 1666 Sir Christopher Wren
advocated such a scheme.  Till Mr. Bazalgette, the engineer
to the Metropolitan Board of Works, (who, by the way, planned the
main drainage,) came forward with his plans, there had been
scores of others, all over-costly and few practicable.  The
work was virtually begun in 1862.  Both south and north
embankments are now open.  The former (or
Albert
Embankment
) was opened the entire length, from Westminster
Bridge to Vauxhall, on the 1st September, 1869; the latter, (or

Victoria Embankment
,) from Westminster Bridge to
Blackfriars, in the middle of July, 1870.  What the ultimate
cost will be of both these gigantic works it is for us here
p. 107
impossible
to tell.  Already the metropolitan public hare paid for
their new Thames boulevard £1,650,000.

And now—in the case of the northern embankment, for
example—let us consider what vast difficulties have had to
be surmounted.  The words of an excellent authority put the
matter very concisely as follows:—“The river had to
be dammed out for some thirty-eight acres—the mud had to be
dredged out down to the London clay—the granite walls had
to be built below low-water mark; behind these the low-level
sewer had to be constructed.  Over this, again, had to come
the subway, and behind all the District Railway, which runs at an
average of about eighteen feet below the surface.  It is not
known what materials were required for the railway; but what was
used for the Embankment is known.  It was:—Granite,
650,000 cubic feet; brickwork, 80,000 cubic yards; concrete,
140,000 cubic yards; timber, (for cofferdam, &c.,) 500,000
cubic feet; caissons, (for ditto,) 2,500 tons; earth filling,
900,000 cubic feet; excavation, 144,000 cubic feet; York paving,
90,000 superficial feet; broken granite, 50,000 yards
superficial.  The railway works would make these totals
still more formidable.  London is now the metropolis of
engineering works, but there is no part of it in which so many
and such varied and difficult kinds centre as in the Thames
Embankment.  A section of it would be a study for engineers
for all time.”

The public foot-way had been open since July, 1868.  It
was for the formal opening of the carriage-way that the Prince of
Wales, on 13th July, 1870, drove from Westminster Bridge to
Blackfriars along the Northern Embankment’s
carriage-way.  This is sixty-four feet wide, and the
foot-way on the land-side is sixteen feet wide, and that on the
river-side is twenty feet wide.  Along the river-side are
planted rows of trees, which in a few years will afford an
unbroken line of shade, doubtless.  As the railway works
were completed sufficiently to admit of it, this main roadway has
been extended to the Mansion-House, by means of a new
street—
Queen Victoria Street
—referred to in a
former page.  There is thus one broad, airy thoroughfare
between the Houses of Parliament, and the West End, and the heart
of the city.

p. 108
It
will be obvious that though so much has been done, much yet
remains to be accomplished ere the Thames Northern Embankment is
regularly completed.  The carriage-way, for the present, has
only been gravelled and macadamized.  The reason is, that in
newly-made rotten earth its sinking down must be allowed for, for
some time, ere it can all be paved, like London Bridge, with
“granite pitching.”  Four regular approaches
into the Strand—by way of Villiers, Norfolk, Surrey, and
Arundel Streets—have been made; and there are three other
ways which go from Westminster, Whitehall, and Blackfriars;
another is in progress from Charing Cross.

Starting from the western end, the Metropolitan District
Railway has already open, along this embankment, five stations,
called Westminster, Charing Cross, Temple, Blackfriars, and
Mansion House.

The wall of the Thames Northern Embankment just alluded to is,
to quote once more, “constructed generally of brickwork
faced with granite, and is carried down to a depth of 32½
feet below Trinity high-water mark, the foundation being of
Portland cement concrete.  The level of the roadway
generally is four feet above Trinity high-water mark, except at
the two extremities, where it rises to Westminster and
Blackfriars Bridges to an extreme height of about 20 feet above
high-water.  The rising ground for both these approaches is
retained by a granite faced wall, similar in character to the
general Embankment wall.

“The face of the Embankment forms a graceful curve,
having a plane face to about mean high-water level, and being
ornamented above that level with mouldings, which are stopped at
intervals of about seventy feet with plain blocks of granite,
intended to carry lamp standards of cast-iron, and relieved on
the river face by bronze lions’ heads carrying mooring
rings.  The uniform line of the Embankment is broken at
intervals by massive piers of granite, flanking recesses for
pontoons or landing stages for steamboats, and at other places by
stairs projecting into the river, and intended as landing-piers
for small craft.  The steamboat piers occur at Westminster,
Charing Cross, and Waterloo Bridges; and those for boats midway
between Westminster and Charing Cross, and between Charing Cross
and Waterloo Bridge; and both are combined
p. 109
opposite
Essex Street.  It is intended eventually to surmount the
several blocks and pedestals with groups of statuary.”

FOOD SUPPLY; MARKETS; BAZAARS; SHOPS.

Food Supply
.—The
Quarterly Review
, on one
occasion, illustrated, in a whimsical way, the vastness of the
system.  The following is described as the supply of meat,
poultry, bread, and beer, for one year:—72 miles of oxen,
10 abreast; 120 miles of sheep, do.; 7 miles of calves, do.; 9
miles of pigs, do.; 50 acres of poultry, close together; 20 miles
of hares and rabbits, 100 abreast; a pyramid of loaves of bread,
600 feet square, and thrice the height of St. Paul’s; 1000
columns of hogsheads of beer, each 1 mile high.

Water and Coal Supply
.—The
water
used in
the metropolis is chiefly supplied by the Thames, and by an
artificial channel called the
New River
, which enters on
the north side of the metropolis.  The water is naturally
good and soft.  The spots at which it is raised from the
Thames used to be within the bounds of the metropolis, at no
great distance from the mouths of common sewers; but it is now
obtained from parts of the river much higher up, and undergoes a
very extensive filtration.  Nine companies are concerned in
the supply of water,—viz., the
New River
,
East
London
,
Southwark and Vauxhall
,
West Middlesex
,

Lambeth
,
Chelsea
,
Grand Junction
,

Kent
, and
Hampstead Water Companies
.  Some of
the works, within the last few years, constructed by these
companies, up the river, are very fine.  Returns furnished
to the Registrar-General by the London Water Companies shewed
that the average daily supply of water for all purposes to the
London population, during the month of May, 1870, was 107,540,811
gallons, of which it is estimated the supply for domestic
purposes amounted to about 88,381,700 gallons, or 26 gallons per
day per head of population.  The metropolis is supplied with

coal
principally from the neighbourhood of Newcastle, but
partly also from certain inland counties; the import from the
latter being by railway.  Newcastle coal is preferred.
It arrives in vessels devoted exclusively to the trade; and so
many and so excessive are the duties and profits affecting the
article, that a ton of coal, which can be
p. 110
purchased
at Newcastle for 6s. or 7s., costs, to a consumer in London, from
22s. to 27s.  The quantity of coal brought to London
annually much exceeds 5,000,000 tons, of which considerably more
than 2,000,000 come by railway.  The wholesale dealings in
this commodity are managed chiefly at the
Coal Exchange
, a
remarkable building just opposite Billingsgate.

Markets
.—London contains nearly 40 markets for
cattle, meat, corn, coal, hay, vegetables, fish, and other
principal articles of consumption.  The meat-markets are of
various kinds—one for live animals, others for carcases in
bulk, and others for the retail of meat; some, also, are for
pork, and others principally for fowls.  The
New Cattle
Market
, Copenhagen Fields, near Pentonville, built, in 1854,
to replace old
Smithfield Market
, covers nearly 30 acres,
and, with outbuildings, slaughterhouses, &c., cost the City
Corporation about £400,000.  It is the finest live
stock market in the kingdom.  The present
Smithfield
Market
, near the Holborn Viaduct, for dead meat and poultry,
is a splendid building, 625 feet
p. 111
long, 240 feet wide, and 30 feet
high.  Wide roads on its north, east, and west sides,
accommodate its special traffic.  A carriage road runs right
through it from north to south, with spacious and well
ventilating avenues radiating from it.  There are in this
market no less than 100,000 feet of available space.  It has
cost upwards of £180,000 already.  There are
underground communication with several railways, to bring in,
right under the market, meat and poultry from the country, and
meat from the slaughterhouses of the Copenhagen Fields Cattle
Market.
Newgate Market
, as a market, no longer
exists.
Leadenhall Market
is a
depôt

for meat and poultry.  At Whitechapel there is a meat market
also.  The minor meat markets require no special note
here.
Billingsgate
, the principal fish market of
London, near the Custom House, was greatly extended and improved
in 1849.  It is well worth visiting any morning throughout
the year, save Sunday, at five o’clock.  Ladies,
however, will not care to encounter its noise, bustle, and
unsavoury odours.  The fish arriving in steamers, smacks,
and boats from the coast or more distant seas, are consigned to
salesmen who, during the early market hours, deal extensively
with the retail fishmongers from all parts of London.  The
inferior fish are bought by the costermongers, or
street-dealers.  When particular fish are in a prime state,
or very scarce, there are wealthy persons who will pay enormously
for the rarity; hence a struggle between the boats to reach the
market early.  At times, so many boats come laden with the
same kind of fish as to produce a glut; and instead of being sold
at a high price, as is usually the case, the fish are then
retailed for a mere trifle.  Fish is now brought largely to
London by railway, from various ports on the east and south
coasts.  The yearly sale of fish at Billingsgate has been
estimated at so high a sum as £2,000,000.

Covent Garden Market
(connected by Southampton Street
with the Strand) is the great vegetable, fruit, and flower
market.  This spot, which is exceedingly central to the
metropolis, was once the garden to the abbey and convent of
Westminster: hence the name
Convent
or

Covent
.  At the suppression of the religious houses
in Henry VIII.’s reign, it devolved to the Crown.
Edward VI. gave
p.
112
it to the Duke of Somerset; on his attainder it was
granted to the Earl of Bedford; and in the Russell family it has
since remained.  From a design of Inigo Jones, it was
intended to have surrounded it with a colonnade; but the north
and a part of the east sides only were completed.  The fruit
and vegetable markets were rebuilt in 1829–30.  The
west side is occupied by the parish church of St. Paul’s,
noticeable for its massive roof and portico.  Butler, author
of
Hudibras
, lies in its graveyard, without a stone to
mark the spot.  In 1721, however, a cenotaph was erected in
his honour in Westminster Abbey.  The election of members to
serve in Parliament for the city of Westminster was held in front
of this church: the hustings for receiving the votes being
temporary buildings.  The south side is occupied by a row of
brick dwellings.  Within the square thus enclosed fruit and
vegetables of the best quality are exposed for sale.  A
large paved space surrounding the interior square is occupied by
the market-gardeners, who, as early as four or five in the
morning, have carted the produce of their grounds, and wait to
dispose of it to dealers in fruit and vegetables residing in
different parts of London; any remainder is sold to persons who
have standings in the market, and they retail it to such
individuals as choose to attend to purchase in smaller
quantities.  Within this paved space rows of shops are
conveniently arranged for the display of the choicest fruits of
the season: the productions of the forcing-house, and the results
of horticultural skill, appear in all their beauty.  There
are also conservatories, in which every beauty of the
flower-garden may be obtained, from the rare exotic to the
simplest native flower.  The
Floral Hall
, close to
Covent Garden Opera House, has an entrance from the north-east
corner of the market, to which it is a sort of appendage as a
Flower Market.  Balls, concerts, &c., are occasionally
given here.  The
Farringdon
,
Borough
,

Portman
,
Spitalfields
, and other vegetable markets,
are small imitations of that at Covent Garden.

The cultivation of vegetables in the open ground within ten
miles surrounding London, has arrived at great perfection; and so
certain is the demand, that the whole is regularly conveyed by
land or water to the metropolis; insomuch that persons residing
in
p. 113
the
neighbourhood of those well-arranged gardens are really less
readily accommodated than the inhabitants of the metropolis, and
have no supply of vegetables but such as have already been sent
to London, and thence back to retailers in their own
locality.  There are also large supplies of foreign fruit
and vegetables.  The annual produce of the garden-grounds
cultivated to supply the London markets with fruit and vegetables
has been estimated at the enormous weight of 360,000 tons, or
1,000 tons
per day
.

Corn
.—The greater part of the
corn
used
for bread and other purposes in the metropolis is sold by
corn-factors at the
Corn Exchange
, Mark Lane; but the corn
itself is not taken to that place.  Enormous quantities of
flour are also brought in, ground at mills in the country and in
foreign parts.

Malt liquors
.—The
beer
and
ale

consumed in the metropolis is, of course, vast in quantity,
though there are no means of determining the amount.  If, by
a letter of introduction, a stranger could obtain admission to
Barclay & Perkins’s or Truman & Hanbury’s
breweries, he would there see vessels and operations astonishing
for their magnitude—bins that are filled with 2,000
quarters of malt every week; brewing-rooms nearly as large as
Westminster Hall; fermenting vessels holding 1,500 barrels each;
a beer-tank large enough to float an up-river steamer; vats
containing 100,000 gallons each; and 60,000 casks, with 200
horses to convey them in drays to the taverns of the
metropolis!

Shops and Bazaars
.—The better-class London retail
shops, for wealth, variety, and vast number, are among the
greatest wonders of the place.  They speak for
themselves.  The wholesale establishments with which New
Cannon Street, Wood Street, and the south side of St.
Paul’s Churchyard—noticeably the gigantic warehouses
of Messrs. Cook & Co.—abound, if, by a letter of
introduction, an order of admission can be obtained, would strike
a stranger—in spite of less external display, save as
regards size—as more wonderful still, so enormous is the
amount of their business operations, and of capital incoming and
outgoing.

There are about 7,400 streets, lanes, rows, &c., in the
metropolis.  From Charing Cross, within a six miles radius,
there are something
p. 114
over 2,600 miles of streets.
As regards trades generally, it is hard even to get anything like
an approximate notion of their numbers.  As the
Post
Office London Directory
says, new trades are being added to
the list every year.  Thus, we are told, 57 new trades were
so added in the year 1870.  But to specify a few, there are,
say, about 130,000 shopkeepers, or owners of commercial
establishments, who carry on more than 2,500 different
trades.  Loss of much of London’s shipping trade,
&c., has indeed driven hundreds of emigrants of late from our
east-end waterside neighbourhoods.  But London has gone on
growing all the same, and trade with it.  Among these trades
are, without counting purely wholesale dealers, about 2,847
grocers and tea dealers, 2,087 butchers, 2,461 bakers, 1,508
dairymen, &c., 2,370 greengrocers and fruiterers, more than
595 retail fishmongers, 891 cheesemongers, (this computation does
not include the small shops in poor neighbourhoods which sell
almost everything,) 2,755 tailors, (not including about 500
old-clothesmen, wardrobe-dealers, &c.,) about 3,347
bootmakers, about 450 hatters, and so forth.  All these are
master tradesmen or shopkeepers, irrespective of workmen,
foremen, shopmen, clerks, porters, apprentices, and
families.  We may add, that in the pages of that very large
book the
London Post Office Directory
, no less than 52
columns and over are occupied by the long list of London
publicans.

The principal Bazaars of London are the
Soho
,
London
Crystal Palace
, (Oxford Street,) and
Baker Street

bazaars, to which should be added the
Burlington Arcade
,
Piccadilly, and the
Lowther Arcade
, (famous for cheap
toys,) in the Strand.  The once celebrated
Pantheon
,
in Oxford Street, is now a wine merchant’s stores.
Many small bazaars exist.

The Bazaar system of oriental countries, in which all the
dealers in one kind of commodity are met with in one place, is
not observable in London; yet a stranger may usefully bear in
mind that, probably for the convenience both of buyers and
sellers, an approach to the system is made.  For instance,

coachmakers
congregate in considerable number in Long Acre
and Great Queen Street;
watchmakers
and
jewellers
,
in Clerkenwell;
tanners
and
p. 115
leather-dressers
, in
Bermondsey;
bird
and
bird-cage sellers
, in Seven
Dials;
statuaries
, in the Euston Road;

sugar-refiners
, in and near Whitechapel;

furniture-dealers
, in Tottenham Court Road;

hat-makers
, in Bermondsey and Southwark;
dentists
,
about St. Martin’s Lane; &c.  There is one bazaar,
if so we may term it, of a very remarkable
character—namely,
Paternoster Row
.  This street
is a continuation of Cheapside, but is not used much as a
thoroughfare, though it communicates by transverse alleys or
courts with St. Paul’s Churchyard, and, at its western
extremity, by means of Ave-Maria Lane, leads into Ludgate
Hill.  Paternoster Row, or ‘the Row,’ as it is
familiarly termed, is a dull street, only wide enough at certain
points to permit two vehicles to pass each other, with a narrow
pavement on each side.  The houses are tall and sombre in
their aspect, and the shops below have a dead look, in comparison
with those in the more animated streets.  But the deadness
is all on the outside.  For a considerable period this
street has been the head-quarters of booksellers and publishers,
who, till the present day, continue in such numbers as to leave
little room for other tradesmen—transacting business in the
book-trade to a prodigious amount.  At the western extremity
of Paternoster Row a passage leads from Amen Corner to
Stationers’ Hall Court, in which is situated
Stationers’ Hall, and also several publishing-houses.

Mudie’s Library
.—While on the subject of
books, we may remind the visitor that the most remarkable

lending library
in the world is situated in London.

Mudie’s
, at the corner of New Oxford Street and
Museum Street, affords a striking example of what the energy of
one man can accomplish.  At this vast establishment the
volumes are reckoned by hundreds of thousands; and the
circulation of them, on easy terms, extends to every part of the
kingdom.  The chief portion of the building is a lofty
central gallery, of considerable beauty.

p.
116
CLUBS; HOTELS; INNS; CHOP-HOUSES; TAVERNS;
COFFEE-HOUSES; COFFEE-SHOPS.

Club-houses
.—During the last forty or fifty years
new habits amongst the upper classes have led to the
establishment of a variety of
Club-houses
—places of
resort unknown to our ancestors.  There are at present,
including many fifth-rate clubs, about 84 clubs in London.
A London club-house is either the property of a private person,
who engages to furnish subscribers with certain accommodation, on
paying a fixed sum as entrance-money, and a specified annual
subscription; or else it belongs to a society of gentlemen who
associate for the purpose.  Of the first class, the most
noted are
Brookes’s
and
White’s
, both
situated in St. James’s Street, The second class of clubs
is most numerous: the principal among them being the

Carlton
,
Junior Carlton
,
Reform
,

Athenæum
,
Oriental
,
Conservative
,

Travellers’
,
United University
,
Oxford and
Cambridge
,
Army and Navy
,
Guards’
,

United Service
,
Junior United Service
,

Union
,
Arthur’s
, and
Windham

clubs.  The houses belonging to these clubs respectively are
among the finest at the West-end of London, and may easily be
distinguished in and about Pall Mall, St. James’s Street,
and Waterloo Place.  No member sleeps at his club; the
accommodation extends to furnishing all kinds of refreshments,
the use of a library, and an ample supply of newspapers and
periodicals in the reading-room.  The real object of these
institutions is to furnish a place of resort for a select number
of gentlemen, on what are really moderate terms.  The
Athenæum Club, (near the York Column,) which consists
chiefly of scientific and literary men, is one of the most
important.  It has 1,200 members, each of whom pays thirty
guineas entrance-money, and seven guineas yearly
subscription.  As in all other clubs, members are admitted
only by ballot.  The expense of the house in building was
£35,000, and £5,000 for furnishing; the plate, linen,
and glass cost £2,500; library, £5,000; and the stock
of wine in cellar is usually worth about £4,000.  The
other principal clubs vary from nine to thirty guineas
entrance-fee, from six to eleven guineas annual subscription, and
from 600 to 1,500 members.
p. 117
During part of the life of the late
M. Soyer, the
kitchen
of the Reform Club-house was one of
the sights of the West-end.  The
Garrick Club
, in
Garrick Street, W.C., consists chiefly of theatrical and literary
men.  The same remark applies to the
Arundel
, in
Salisbury Street, Strand.  The
Whittington Club
, in
the Strand, was the humblest of its class, and bore little
resemblance to the others; it was rather a literary and
scientific institution, with a refreshment department added.

The Albany
.—The
Albany
consists of a
series of chambers, or suites of apartments, intended for
‘West-end bachelors.’  No person carrying on a
trade or commercial occupation is allowed to live within its
limits.  There are two entrances, one in Piccadilly and one
in Burlington Gardens.  The chambers are placed in eleven
groups, denoted by letters of the alphabet, A to L.  There
are about 60 suites of apartments, many of which are occupied by
peers, members of parliament, honourables and right honourables,
and naval and military officers.  Canning, Byron, and
Macaulay, are named amongst those who have lived in this singular
place.

Hotels and Inns
.—It has been conjectured (though
probably in excess of the truth) that at all times there are
150,000 strangers residing for a few days only in the metropolis;
and to accommodate this numerous transient population, there is a
vast number of lodging and boarding-houses, hotels, and other
places of accommodation.  There are upwards of 500
better-class hotels, inns, and taverns.  There are about 120
private hotels not licensed, and therefore do not keep exciseable
liquors for sale.  There are about 5,200 public-houses
licensed to sell wines, spirits, and malt liquors.  There
are more than 1,964 beer-shops, where malt liquors only are
sold.

The fashionable hotels are situated west of Charing
Cross—as, for instance,
Claridge’s
, Brook
Street, Grosvenor Square;
Fenton’s
, St.
James’s Street;
Limmer’s
, George Street,
Hanover Square; the
Clarendon
, in New Bond Street; the

Burlington
, in Old Burlington Street;

Grillon’s
, in Albemarle Street;
Long’s
,
in Bond Street; the
Palace
, Pimlico;

Wright’s
, Dover Street;
Morley’s
,
Trafalgar Square;
Hatchett’s
, Dover Street;

Maurigy’s
, Regent Street;
p. 118
Marshall
Thompson’s
, Cavendish Square; the
Albemarle
,
Albemarle Street; the
Hyde Park
, near the Marble Arch; the

Alexandra
, Hyde Park Corner; &c.  In and about
Covent Garden there are several good hotels for single gentlemen;
among others, the
Cavendish
, the
Bedford
, the

New
and
Old Hummums
, and the

Tavistock
.  One or two others, in Bridge Street,
Blackfriars, are excellent hotels.  Foreign hotels of a
medium class are numerous in and about Leicester Square.
Another class of hotels or inns are those from which
stage-coaches at one time ran, and which were resorted to by
commercial and other gentlemen; for example, the
Golden
Cross
, (now renovated and extended,) near Charing Cross; the

White Horse Cellar
, Piccadilly; the
Bell and Crown
,
Holborn; the
Castle and Falcon
, Aldersgate Street; and the

Bull-in-Mouth
, (now called the
Queen’s
,)
opposite the General Post Office, in St.
Martin’s-le-Grand.  These have all become comfortable
middle-class hotels, with railway booking-offices attached; but
the fall of the stage-coach trade has lessened their importance
to a great extent.  To these we may add certain large inn
and tavern establishments at other parts of the town—such
as the
Bridge House Hotel
, at London Bridge; the

Angel
, at Islington; and the
Elephant and Castle
,
Newington Causeway.

The almost universal defect of the older class of hotels in
London is, that they are too often private dwellings extemporized
for purposes of public accommodation—not buildings erected
with the distinct object for which they are used.  Hence the
London hotels, generally, are confined and awkward in their
arrangements—a huddle of apartments on different levels,
narrow passages, and the offensive odour of cookery being
common.  Rarely is there anything to parallel the larger
hotels of New York, or the
Hotel du Louvre
at Paris.
The nearest approach to these foreign establishments is found in
certain hotels adjoining the railway termini, of recent
construction.  These are the
Euston
and
Victoria
Hotels
, near Euston terminus; the
Great Northern
Hotel
, adjoining the King’s Cross terminus; the

Great Western Hotel
, at the Paddington
terminus
;

the Grosvenor Hotel
, at the Pimlico terminus; the
p. 119
London
Bridge Terminus Hotel
, adjoining the Brighton Railway
terminus; the fine
South-Eastern Railway Hotel
, Cannon
Street; the
Westminster Palace Hotel
, Victoria Street,
Westminster; the
Midland
, at St. Pancras; and the

Charing Cross Railway Hotel
.  At these new and
extensive hotels the accommodation is on a better footing than in
the older and generally small houses.  But notwithstanding
these additions, it is indisputable that the amount of hotel
accommodation is still meagre and defective.  The want of
large good hotels in central situations, to give accommodation at
moderate charges, remains one of the conspicuous deficiencies of
the metropolis.  The
Langham
, however, in Portland
Place, is an excellent hotel.  So is the
Salisbury
Hotel
, Salisbury Square, Fleet Street.  The idea of
building a large hotel in the Strand, near St. Mary’s
Church, was, by-the-by, abandoned in favour of the new
Globe
Theatre
; while that handsome building, the
Inns of Court
Hotel
, in Holborn and Lincoln’s Inn Fields, has never
yet been properly finished, and is now (1873) a failure.

In and about London, we may mention, are sundry extensive and
highly-respectable taverns, which, though principally designed
for accommodating large dining and other festive gatherings,
lodge gentlemen with every comfort.  Among these may be
mentioned the
London Tavern
; the
Albion
, in
Aldersgate Street; several in Fleet Street, near Blackfriars
Bridge; the
Freemasons’ Tavern
, Great Queen Street,
Lincoln’s Inn Fields; and so forth.  There is,
besides, a class of taverns whose chief business is supplying
dinners and slight refreshments, also the accommodation of
newspapers, and which are resorted to chiefly by commercial
men.  Each of these has a distinct character.

Garraway’s
and
Lloyd’s
, at the Royal
Exchange, were once coffee-houses, but now are associated with
marine intelligence, stock-trading, and auctions; and in
Cornhill, opposite, the
North and South American
Coffee-house
supplies American newspapers; and here also are
to be seen the captains of vessels who are preparing to sail to
different ports in the western continent and islands.  At
the
Jerusalem
and
East India Coffee-house
,
Cowper’s Court, Cornhill, information relating to East
India shipping and captains may be obtained.

Peele’s
p. 120
Coffee-house
, in Fleet
Street, is celebrated for keeping files of newspapers, which may
be consulted; this accommodation, as respects London papers, may
also be had at some other places.  Other economical
Reading-Rooms are noticed in the
Appendix
.

Chop-houses
,
Coffee-shops
,
and
Dining-rooms
.—The next class of houses of this nature
comprises
Chop-houses
, but also doing the business of
taverns, and resorted to chiefly by business-men—as the

Chapter
, in Paternoster Row; the
Mitre
, the

Cock
, the
Cheshire Cheese
, and the
Rainbow
,
in Fleet Street.  Many such houses are to be met with near
the Bank of England, in Cheapside, Bucklersbury, Threadneedle
Street, Bishopsgate Street, and the alleys turning out of
Cornhill.  The
Ship and Turtle
, in Leadenhall Street,
was a famous turtle-house; and others are noted for some
specialty.

London contains a very numerous class of
Coffee-shops
,
of a much more humble, though perhaps more useful nature, at
which coffee, cocoa, tea, bread and butter, toast, chops and
steaks, bacon and eggs, and cold meat, may be obtained at very
moderate prices; a few pence will purchase a morning or evening
meal at such places; and many working-men dine there also.
There are about 1,500 houses of this class in London.  There
is another class of
Eating-houses
or
Dining-rooms
,
resorted to for dinners by large numbers of persons.

Lake’s
,
His Lordship’s Larder
, and one
or two others, in Cheapside;
Izant’s
, and several
others in and near Bucklersbury; the
Chancery
Dining-rooms
, in Chancery Lane; the
Fish Ordinary
at
the
Three Tuns
in Billingsgate, and at

Simpson’s
in Cheapside; and several dining-rooms in
and near the Haymarket and Rupert Street—may be reckoned
among the number.  A good but simple dinner may be had at
these houses for from 1s. 6d. to 2s. 6d.  At the
St.
James’s Hall Restaurant
, in Regent Street;

Blanchard’s
, Regent Street, corner of Burlington
Street; the
Albion
, Russell Street, near Drury Lane
Theatre; the
London
, Fleet Street, nearly opposite the
Inner Temple gate;
Simpson’s
, in the Strand,
opposite Exeter Hall; and last, but by no means least, at

Speirs and Pond’s Restaurant
, at Ludgate Station of
the London, Chatham, and Dover Railway; a very fair dinner may be
had, at prices varying
p. 121
from, say, a minimum of half-a-crown
up to a greater cost, according to the state of the diner’s
tastes and finances.  At the
Gaiety Restaurant
,
adjoining the Gaiety Theatre, a good dinner may be had.  At
Cremorne Gardens, too, there used to be a good
table
d’hôte
for 2s. 6d.

Temperance Hotels
.—There are several good houses
of this character.  Among others may be named
The
Waverley
, King Street, Cheapside;
Angus’s
,
Bridge Street, Blackfriars;
Anderson’s
, Theobald
Road; and
Ling’s
, South Street, Finsbury.

THEATRES, CONCERTS, AND OTHER PLACES OF AMUSEMENT.

Theatres
.—There are altogether in London a large
number.  Of these the following are the
principal:—
Her Majesty’s Theatre
, on the
western side of the Haymarket, is the original of the two Italian
Opera Houses in London; it was built in 1790, on the site of an
older theatre, burnt down in 1867, and re-built in 1869.  It
is occasionally unoccupied.  The freehold of some of the
boxes has been sold for as much as £8,000 each.  The
Opera Season is generally from March to August; but the main
attractions and the largest audiences are from May to July.
The
Royal Italian Opera House
, occupying the site of the
former Covent Garden Theatre, was built in 1858, on the ruins of
one destroyed by fire.  The building is very remarkable,
both within and without.  Under the lesseeship of Mr. Gye,
and the conductorship of Mr. (now Sir Michael) Costa, operas have
been produced here with a completeness scarcely paralleled in
Europe.  When not required for
Italian Operas
, the
building is occupied usually by an
English Opera
Company,
or occasionally for miscellaneous concerts.  The
Floral
Hall
, adjoining this theatre, is occasionally engaged for
concerts.
Drury Lane Theatre
, the fourth on the same
site, was built in 1812; its glories live in the past, for the
legitimate drama now alternates there with entertainments of a
more spectacular and melodramatic character.  The

Haymarket Theatre
, exactly opposite Her Majesty’s,
was built in 1821; under Mr. Buckstone’s management, comedy
and farce are chiefly performed.  The
Adelphi
Theatre
, in the
p. 122
Strand, near Southampton Street, was
rebuilt in 1858; it has for forty years been celebrated for
melodramas, and for the attractiveness of its comic actors.
The present lessee, Mr. Webster, has the merit of having
introduced many improvements for the comfort of the
audience.  The
Lyceum Theatre
, or
English Opera
House
, at the corner of Wellington Street, Strand, was built
in 1834; it was intended as an English Opera House, but its
fortunes have been fluctuating, and the performances are not of a
definite kind.  The
Princess’s Theatre
, on the
north side of Oxford Street, was built in 1830; after a few years
of opera and miscellaneous dramas, it became the scene of Mr.
Charles Kean’s Shakspearian revivals, and now resembles
most of the other theatres.
St. James’s
Theatre
, in King Street, St. James’s, was built for
Braham, the celebrated singer; it was a losing speculation to
him; and although a really beautiful theatre inside, its
managerial arrangements have been very changeable of late
years.  The
Olympic Theatre
, in Wych Street, Drury
Lane, is small, but well conducted and successful.  The

Strand Theatre
, near the Olympic, has been remarkable for
its burlesque extravaganzes.  The
New Globe Theatre
,
Newcastle Street, Strand, and the
Gaiety
, 345 Strand, and
lastly the
Vaudeville
, (for comedy, farce, and burlesque,)
near the
Adelphi
, are all of comparatively recent
erection; so are the
Court Theatre
, near Sloane Square;
the
Charing Cross Theatre
, King William Street; the

Queen’s Theatre
, Long Acre, late
St.
Martin’s Hall
; and the
Holborn Theatre
.
The
New Royalty
, or
Soho Theatre
, in Dean Street,
Soho, was once a private theatre, belonging to Miss Kelly, the
celebrated actress.  The
Prince of Wales’s
Theatre
, in Tottenham Street, is the old Tottenham Theatre in
a renovated and greatly improved condition.  Some of Mr. T.
W. Robertson’s best comedies have been produced here within
the last few years.
Sadler’s Wells
, near the
New River Head, was at one time remarkable for the ‘real
water’ displayed in melodramas.  The
Marylebone
Theatre
, between Regent’s Park and the Edgeware Road;
the
Grecian
, in the City Road; the
Britannia
, at
Hoxton; the
City of London
, in Norton Folgate; the

Standard
, in Shoreditch; and the
Pavilion
, in
Whitechapel, are Theatres noticeable for the large numbers of
p. 123
persons
accommodated, and the lowness of the prices of admission.
On the Surrey side of the Thames are
Astley’s
Amphitheatre
, in the Westminster Road, (the Circus is now
removed;) the
Victoria Theatre
, in the Waterloo Road; and
the
Surrey Theatre
, in Blackfriars Road.  The
performances at these several theatres commence at an hour
varying from half-past six (some of the minors) to half-past
eight (two Opera houses) in the evening, but the most usual hour
is seven; and, as a general rule, there is half-price at a later
hour in the evening.  During the run of the Christmas
pantomimes there are a few additional performances at two in the
afternoon.  It has recently been estimated that 4,000
persons are employed at the London theatres, earning daily food
for probably 12,000; and that the public spend about
£350,000 at those places annually.

Concerts
.—The principal Concert Rooms in London
are,
Exeter Hall
,
St. James’s Hall
,

Hanover Square Rooms
, the
Music Hall
, in Store
Street, the
Floral Hall
,
Willis’ Rooms
, and
the
Queen’s Concert Room
, attached to Her
Majesty’s Theatre.  All these places are engaged for
single concerts; but there are also musical societies and choral
bodies which give series of concerts every year.  Among
these are the
Sacred Harmonic Society
, (Exeter Hall,) the

National Choral Society
, (same place,) the
Philharmonic
Society
, (Hanover Square Rooms,)
Mr. Henry Leslie’s
Choir
, the
New Philharmonic
, (St. James’s Hall,)
the
Musical Society
, the
Musical Union
, the
Glee
and Madrigal Society
, the
Beethoven Society
, the

Monday Popular Concerts
, &c.  The
Oratorio

performances at Exeter Hall, by the Sacred Harmonic and National
Choral Societies, are considered to be the finest of the kind in
Europe.  There are occasional
Handel Choral Meetings

at the same place, under Sir Michael Costa, supported by 1,600
singers.

Tavern Music Halls
.—Numerous Rooms connected with
taverns have been opened in London, within the last few years,
for musical performances.  The music is a singular compound
of Italian, English, and German operatic compositions, fairly
executed, with comic songs of the most extravagant kind; to these
are added what the performers please to term ‘nigger’
dances, and athletic and rope-dancing feats—the whole
accompanied by drinking and
p. 124
smoking on the part of the
audience.  The chief among these places are,
Canterbury
Hall
, near the Westminster Road; the
Oxford
, in Oxford
Street; the
Royal Music Hall
, late
Weston’s
,
in Holborn; the
Alhambra
, in Leicester Square; the

Philharmonic
, Islington, near the
Angel
.

Evans’
, in Covent Garden, does not as a rule admit
females, though ladies, friends of the proprietor, &c., are
occasionally allowed to look down on the proceedings from
wired-in private boxes above the line of the stage.

Evans’
has long been honourably known for its old
English glees, catches, madrigals, &c., good supper, and
gentlemanly arrangements and audiences.  The
Raglan
,
the
Winchester
, the
South London
, and others, are
of plainer character.  Charge, usually 6d. to 1s.  Mr.
Morton, the former proprietor of
Canterbury Hall
, provided
a capital gallery of pictures, (
Punch’s
‘Royal
Academy over the Water,’) placed freely open to the
visitors to the Music Hall.

Entertainments
.—There is a class of London
amusements, called
Entertainments
, which has come much
into fashion within a few years.  They generally last about
two hours, from eight till ten in the evening.  The late Mr.
Albert Smith was one of the first to commence these
entertainments, with his ‘
Overland Route
,’
‘
Mont Blanc
,’ and ‘
China
;’
and the names of other well known entertainers are, Mr. Woodin,
Mr. and Mrs. German Reed, Mr. John Parry, Mr. A. Sketchley, Mr.
and Mrs. Howard Paul, &c.  Delineation of character,
painted scenery, descriptive sketches, singing, music,
ventriloquism—some or all of these supply the materials
from which these entertainments are got up.  Sometimes the

programme
of performances is of a less rational character,
depending on the incongruities of so-called negro melodists;
while occasionally a higher tone is adopted, as in
‘
Readings
,’ by various persons.  The
principal halls or rooms in which these entertainments are held
are the
Egyptian Hall
, Piccadilly; the
Gallery of
Illustration
, Regent Street; the minor rooms at
St.
James’s Hall
; and the
Music Hall
, in Store
Street.  The prices of admission generally vary from 1s. to
3s.  The leading pages of the daily newspapers, and more
especially of the
Times
, will always shew which of these
entertainments are open at any particular time.

p.
125
Miscellaneous Amusements
.—The sources of
information just mentioned will also notify particulars of
numerous other places of amusement, which need not be separately
classified.  Among these are the
Polytechnic
Institution
, Regent Street, (famous for Mr. Pepper’s
‘Ghosts;’) and
Madame Tussaud’s Waxwork
,
Baker Street, Portman Square, (a favourite exhibition with
country visitors.)  To all such places the charge of
admission is 1s.  Among
Pleasure Gardens
, for music,
dancing, tight and slack rope performances, &c.,
Cremorne
Gardens
, at Chelsea,
St. Helena Gardens
, at
Rotherhithe, the
Riverside Gardens
, at North Woolwich, and
the
Surrey Gardens
, near Walworth, are the principal;

Vauxhall Gardens
have disappeared as places of amusement,
and have been supplanted by bricks and mortar.  The
so-called
Tea Gardens
are much more numerous, and are
supported rather by the profit on the beverages sold, than by the
fee charged for admission.

A few additional particulars concerning
Free
Exhibitions
,
Shilling Exhibitions
, and Exhibitions
available only by Introduction, are given in the

Appendix
.

PARKS AND PUBLIC GROUNDS; ZOOLOGICAL, BOTANICAL, AND
HORTICULTURAL GARDENS.

Much has been done within the last few years towards adorning
the metropolis with health-giving parks and grounds freely open
to the public.  The gardens of three scientific societies,
gradually brought into a very attractive state, are also
accessible, though not without payment.

St. James’s Park
.—This is so called from
St. James’s Palace, which partly bounds it on the
north.  Originally these grounds were a marshy waste, which
was drained and otherwise improved by Henry VIII.; who also took
down an ancient hospital dedicated to St. James, and built on its
site the palace now called St. James’s.  Charles II.
improved the grounds by planting the avenues of lime-trees on the
north and south sides of the park; and by forming the

Mall
, which was a hollowed, smooth, gravelled space, half
a mile long, skirted with a wooden border, for playing at
ball.  The southern avenue was appropriated to aviaries;
p. 126
hence it
derived the appellation Birdcage Walk.  The centre of the
park was occupied by canals and ponds for aquatic birds.
William III. threw the park open to the public for their
recreation.  Within the last thirty years the park has been
greatly improved.  It is nearly a mile and a-half in
circumference, and covers about 90 acres; and the avenues form
delightful shady promenades.  In the centre is a fine piece
of water, interspersed with islands, and dotted with swans and
water-fowl; a bridge was built across this water in 1857.
On each side are spacious lawns, enriched with lofty trees and
flowering shrubs.  The lawns are separated from the avenues
by iron railings, and at different parts are keepers’
lodges.  There are nine or ten entrances to the park, the
Queen’s Guard doing duty at each, day and night.  At
the east side is a large gravelled space, called the

Parade
, on which, about ten o’clock every morning,
the body-guards required for the day are mustered—and here
the regimental bands perform for a time in fine weather.
Here also guns are fired on state occasions.  At the south
side of the parade is placed a huge mortar, brought from Spain,
where it was used during the Peninsular war; it can propel a
bombshell nearly four miles.  At the north end of the parade
is a piece of Turkish ordnance, of great length, brought from
Alexandria, in Egypt.  A little farther north from the
parade is a broad flight of steps, giving entrance to the park
from Waterloo Place, constructed by order of William IV.; these
steps are surmounted by a lofty column, commemorative of the late
Duke of York, which occupies the spot where formerly stood
Carlton House, the favourite residence of George IV. while Prince
Regent.  (Near here the band of the Commissionaires plays on
summer evenings.)  Farther along the Mall, or avenue, is
Marlborough House; next to which is St. James’s Palace,
separated by Stafford House from the Green Park.  At the
western end is Buckingham Palace; and on the southern side,
Birdcage Walk, and the Wellington Barracks.  This park, all
things considered, is one of the greatest ornaments to the
metropolis.  The lake or water is a famous skating-place in
winter; and having been brought to a maximum and nearly uniform
depth of four feet, there is little danger of drowning by the
breakage of the ice.

p.
127
The Green Park
.—This park, less attractive
than St. James’s, and occupying about 60 acres, rises with
a gentle slope to the north of Buckingham Palace, and is bounded
on its east side by many fine mansions of the
nobility—including those of the Duke of Sutherland, and the
Earls Spencer, Ellesmere, and Yarborough.  In a
north-westerly direction from the palace is a broad road called
Constitution Hill, connecting St. James’s Park with Hyde
Park Corner.  On the north is the line of terrace-like
street forming the western portion of Piccadilly.  The whole
of the Green Park is surrounded by iron railings, and is
interesting from its undulating grassy surface, which rises
considerably on the north side.  From the highest ground
there is a pleasing prospect of Buckingham Palace, and of St.
James’s Park, with its ornamental grounds and avenues of
tall trees; and behind these Westminster Abbey and the new Houses
of Parliament majestically rise, accompanied by the turrets of
other buildings.  At the north-west angle of the park, where
Constitution Hill joins Piccadilly, is a triumphal arch of the
reign of George IV., elaborately decorated, but possessing little
general effect.  The largest equestrian statue in England,
that of the Duke of Wellington, stands on this arch; where it was
placed in defiance of the opinion of persons of taste, who
protested against the incongruity of such an arrangement.
Across the way is the handsome entrance to Hyde Park, close to
Apsley House, the great Duke’s residence; and here, in the
after-part of the day, in fine weather, may be seen an
extraordinary concourse of foot-passengers, vehicles, and
equestrians, going to and returning from Hyde Park; also the
general traffic between Piccadilly and Kensington, Brompton, and
other places in a westerly direction.

Hyde Park
.—This fine open place is part of the
ancient manor of Hida, which belonged to the monastery of St.
Peter, at Westminster, till Henry VIII. appropriated it
differently.  Its extent is about 390 acres, part of which
is considerably elevated.  The whole is intersected with
noble roads and paths, and luxuriant trees, planted singly or in
groups, presenting very diversified prospects.  Near the
south-east corner, the entrance from Piccadilly, on an elevated
pedestal, stands a colossal bronze statue of Achilles, cast
p. 128
from the
cannon taken at the battles of Salamanca and Waterloo, weighing
thirty tons, and (as the inscription informs us) ‘erected
to the Duke of Wellington and his companions in arms by their
countrywomen.’

It cost £10,000, and was the work of Sir R.
Westmacott.  The south-east entrance to the park, near
Apsley House, is marked by a handsome series of arches and
balustrades, from the designs of Mr. Decimus Burton.  The
north-east entrance, at the end of Oxford Street, now comprises
the
Marble Arch
, removed from the front of Buckingham
Palace.  The other entrances, of which there are several,
are less ornate.  The long sheet of water
p. 129
called the

Serpentine
enriches the scenery of Hyde Park.  Near
its western extremity is a stone bridge, of five large and two
smaller arches, erected in 1826, giving access to the gardens of
Kensington Palace; and the portion of the Serpentine contained
within the gardens has lately been rendered very attractive, by
the formation, at its head, of a small Italian garden, with
fountains, statuary, &c.  The carriage-drive on the
northern bank of the Serpentine is called the
Ladies’
Mile
.  On the level space of Hyde Park troops of the
line and volunteers are occasionally reviewed.  There is a
well-stored magazine near the western side.  The broad road
through the park to Kensington is denominated Rotten Row, and is
a fashionable resort for equestrians of both sexes, but is not
open to wheel-carriages.  Other roads display countless
elegant equipages of wealth and fashion; while the footpaths,
which are railed off from the roads, are favourite places of
resort for visitors, who enjoy the salubrity of the air, and the
gaiety of the scene, more particularly between five and seven on
a summer afternoon.  There are several entrances open from
early morning till ten at night.  No stage or hackney
coaches, carts, or waggons, are permitted within the gates of
Hyde Park—with the exception of a road-way, made at the
time of the International Exhibition in 1862, and since kept up,
across the park, near Kensington Gardens, for
passenger-vehicles.  The Serpentine is much frequented for
bathing and skating.  It has been recently cleaned out, and
drained to that end; the Royal Humane Society have a
receiving-house near at hand, to aid those whose lives may be
endangered.  The morning and evening hours for bathing are
defined by regulations placarded in various places.  The
Great Exhibition of 1851, the first of its kind, was held in a
Crystal Palace near the south-west corner of the park.  The
Exhibition building of 1862 was beyond the limits of the
park.  The
Albert Memorial
is at the Kensington end
of Hyde Park.

London International Exhibition
.—Not far beyond
Prince’s Gate, Hyde Park, is the London International
Exhibition of 1873, which opened on the 1st May, and will
continue open till the 30th September of this year.  The
ground plan and the view of the building which we give will save
unnecessary expenditure of our
p. 130
space, which is obviously
limited.

Among the many objects of interest are shewn selected
specimens as follows:—Pictures, Oil and Water Colour;
Sculpture; Decorative Furniture, Plate, Designs, Mosaics,
&c.; Stained Glass; Architecture and Models; Engravings;
Lithography; Photography as a Fine Art; Porcelain; Earthenware of
all kinds; Terra-Cotta and Stoneware; Machinery used for Pottery
of all kinds; Woollen Manufactures; Carpets; Worsted
Manufactures; Machinery, in motion, used in Woollen and Worsted

p.
131
Manufactures; Live Alpacas, remarkable for their hair
and wool, and other animals; Educational Works and Appliances;
Scientific Inventions and Discoveries; Horticulture.  In the
Royal Albert Hall musical art is represented daily.

Kensington Gardens
.—At the western extremity of
Hyde Park lie Kensington Gardens, a large piece of ground laid
out in the ornamental park style, interspersed with walks, and
ornamented with rows and clumps of noble trees.  Besides
entrances from Hyde Park, there are others from the Knightsbridge
and Bayswater Roads.  Near the west end of the grounds
stands Kensington Palace.  The gardens have been more than
once considerably extended, so that they now measure about two
and a-half miles in circumference.  There are some beautiful
gates on the south side, which were contributed by the Coalbrook
Dale Company to the Great Exhibition of 1851.  These grounds
form a most delightful public promenade during fine weather;
especially on summer evenings, when one of the Guards’
bands frequently plays near the south-east corner.

p.
132
Regent’s Park
.—This beautiful park
is situated considerably away from the other parks, in a
northerly direction from the Marylebone Road.  It consists
of a nearly circular enclosure of about 470 acres, laid out on
the approved principles of landscape gardening; its centre is
enriched with lakes, plantations, shrubberies, and beds of
flowers.  Many of the Metropolitan Volunteer Rifle Corps
exercise and drill in this park, in all except the winter
months.  The park is surrounded by extensive ranges of
buildings, forming terraces, variously designated, and decorated
with sculpture in agreement with their respective orders of
architecture: producing an effect of much grandeur, though, in
some instances, of questionable taste.  Three or four
isolated mansions occupy sites within the park.  The outer
drive is two miles in circuit; the inner drive is a perfect
circle, with two outlets.  At Mr. Bishop’s
Observatory, near this inner circle, Mr. Hind made most of his
important discoveries of asteroids and comets.  Near the
south-eastern corner of the park the
Colosseum
stands
conspicuous.  It is now closed.  The Zoological and
Botanical Gardens will be described presently.  Some
distance north of the Colosseum are St. Katharine’s
Hospital and Chapel—a very luxurious provision for
‘six poor bachelors and six poor spinsters.’
Near the Colosseum was the once celebrated exhibition called the

Diorama
, which was some years ago converted into a Baptist
chapel, at the cost of Sir Morton Peto.

Primrose Hill
.—This spot now deserves to be
ranked among the public parks of London.  It is immediately
north of the Regent’s Park.  The Crown owned part of
it, and obtained the rest by purchase from Eton College.
The hill-top, the grassy slopes, and the gravelled paths are kept
in excellent order; and a stranger should not lose an opportunity
of viewing the ‘world of London’ from this spot in
early morning.  By permission of the authorities, a
refreshment-room has been established for visitors; and a
‘Shakspeare Oak’ planted, April 23, 1864, which,
however, “came to grief.”

Victoria Park
.—This, the only park in the east or
poorer division of London, consists of about 270 acres.
Having been formed only a few years, the trees have not yet grown
to a full size; but it is gradually becoming a pleasant spot,
with flower-beds, lakes, walks,
p. 133
and shady avenues.  This park
is especially distinguished by possessing the most magnificent

Public Fountain
yet constructed in the metropolis; it was
provided by the munificence of Miss Burdett Coutts, at a cost of
£5,000; the design, due to Mr. Darbyshire, is that of a
Gothic structure, crowned by a cupola 60 feet high.  Being
near the densely populated districts of Bethnal Green and Mile
End, the park is a great boon to the inhabitants.  It lies
between those districts and Hackney, and easy access to it can be
obtained from two stations on the North London
Railway—those of Hackney and Hackney Wick, or Victoria
Park.  The fountain just mentioned is near the Hackney
entrance.  Improved access is also opened from Whitechapel,
from Mile End, and from Bow.

Battersea Park
.—This park, of about 180 acres, on
which £300,000 has been spent, lies between Vauxhall and
Battersea, and is the only public park which comes down to the
Thames.  Nothing can exceed the change exhibited on this
spot.  Until recently it was a miserable swamp, called
Battersea Fields; now it is a fine park, interesting to look at,
and healthful to walk in.  A beautiful suspension bridge,
from the designs of Mr. Page, connects this park with Chelsea, on
the other side of the river; and near it is another bridge for
railway traffic.

Kennington Park
.—A few years ago there was an
open common at Kennington, dirty and neglected, and mostly held
in favour by such classes as those which held the Chartist
meeting in 1848.  It is now a prettily laid-out public
park—small, but well kept.

Finsbury Park
, Stoke Newington, near Alexandra Park,
was opened in August, 1869.

Southwark Park
was opened about the same time.
Though small, they are great boons to the working classes.

Zoological Gardens
.—At the northern extremity of
the Regent’s Park are the
Zoological Gardens
, the
property of the Zoological Society, and established in
1826.  These gardens are very extensive; and being removed
from the dingy atmosphere, noise, and bustle of London, present
an agreeable and country-like aspect.  The grounds have been
disposed in picturesque style—here a clump of shrubby trees
and border of flowers, indigenous and exotic; there
p. 134
a pretty
miniature lake; and at intervals a neat rustic cottage, with
straw-thatched roof and honeysuckled porch.  Much of the
ground, also, is occupied as green meadows, either subdivided
into small paddocks for deer and other quadrupeds, or dotted with
movable trellis-houses, the abodes of different kinds of birds
which require the refreshing exercise of walking on the green
turf.  Throughout the whole, neat gravel-walks wind their
serpentine course, and conduct the visitor to the
carnivora-house, reptile-house, bear-pit, monkey-house, aviaries,
aquaria, and other departments of the establishment.  The
collection of animals is unquestionably the finest in
England.  The gardens are open every week-day, from 9 till
sunset, for the admission of visitors, who pay 1s. each at the
gate, or 6d. on Mondays.  On Saturday afternoon, in summer,
one of the Guards’ bands generally plays for an hour or
two.  On Sunday Fellows are admitted, and non-Fellows by a
Fellow’s order.

Botanical Gardens
.—These are also situated in the
Regent’s Park, occupying the chief portion of the space
within the inner circle.
p. 135
They belong to the Botanical
Society, and contain a very choice collection of trees, shrubs,
flowers, and plants generally.  Admission by strangers can
only be obtained through the medium of the members, or
occasionally on the payment of rather a high fee.  On the
days of the principal flower and plant shows, these gardens are
especially distinguished by the display of aristocratic fashion
and beauty.

Horticultural Gardens
.—These beautiful new
grounds are objects of attraction on many accounts—their
merit in connection with garden architecture, the interest
attending the flower-shows there held, and the special relation
existing between the grounds and the Exhibitions at
Brompton.  You can enter them by the gates in Exhibition
Road and Prince Albert Road, South Kensington.  A few years
ago, besides an office in London, the society had only facilities
at Chiswick for holding the great flower-shows.  The present
arrangement is in all respects a superior one.  Twenty acres
of land were purchased or rented from the Commissioners of
p. 136
the Great
Exhibition of 1851, between the Kensington and Brompton Roads;
the subscribers of the purchase-money being admitted to
membership on favourable conditions.  The ground is laid out
in three terraces, rising successively in elevation, and
surrounded by Italian arcades open to the gardens.  There
are also cascades and waterworks.  The highest terrace has a
spacious conservatory, to form a winter-garden.  Mr. Sidney
Smith is the architect.  The last Great Exhibition building
was so planned as to form a vast southern background to the
gardens; and the latter were spread out in all their beauty, as
seen from certain points in the former.  During the summer
months the gardens are open on certain occasions to the public by
paying, the days and terms being duly advertised in the
newspapers and journals.  Near these gardens is the towering

Royal Albert Hall of Science and Art
, which was formally
opened by Queen Victoria, on the 29th of March, 1871.  The
fact of 8,000 people attending within one building to witness the
opening of it, will shew its vast size.  The sum of
£200,000, up to that date, had been expended on it.
The Hall, in some sense, has been erected in memory of the late
Prince Consort, whose aspirations, during his honourable life
here, were always towards whatever tended to the moral and
intellectual culture of the people of this country.  The
management of the undertaking is entrusted to the energetic
attention of the scientific men to whom we owe the South
Kensington Museum.

OMNIBUSES; TRAMWAYS; CABS; RAILWAYS; STEAMERS.

Omnibuses
.—Very few indeed of the regular
old-fashioned coaches are now to be seen in London.  Most of
the places within twenty miles of the metropolis, on every side,
are supplied with omnibuses instead.  The first omnibus was
started by Mr. Shillibeer, from Paddington to the Bank, July 4,
1829.  From a return with which, by the courtesy of Colonel
Henderson, C.B., Commissioner of the Metropolitan Police,
Scotland Yard, we were kindly favoured, we gathered, that up to
date of the communication in question,—viz., 28th June,
1870,—the number of such vehicles licensed in the
Metropolitan district was 1,218.  Every omnibus and hackney

p. 137
carriage
within the Metropolitan district and the City of London, and the
liberties thereof, has to take out a yearly license, in full
force for one year, unless revoked or suspended; and all such
licenses are to be granted by the Commissioners of Police, whose
officers are constantly inspecting these public vehicles.
Generally speaking, each
omnibus
travels over the same
route, and exactly the same number of times, day after day, with
the exception of some few of the omnibuses which go longer
journeys than the rest, and run not quite so often in winter as
in summer.  Hence the former class of omnibus comes to be
associated with a particular route.  It is known to the
passengers by its colour, the name of its owner, the name given
to the omnibus itself, or the places to and from which it runs,
according to circumstances.  The designations given to the
omnibuses, whether meaning or unmeaning in themselves, are found
to be very convenient, because they are generally written in
large conspicuous characters.  This being an important
matter to strangers, we shall give a condensed list of some of
the chief omnibus routes in London in the
Appendix
.

Large omnibuses, to work on
street tramways
, after
having been tried within the last few years, having evoked angry
discussion between opponents and defenders, and having been
entirely withdrawn, have now been revived, from Brixton Church to
Kennington Gate, on the Mile End and Whitechapel Roads, City
Road, Kingsland, &c., &c., and are rapidly extending.

There are, to a male visitor, few better ways of getting a
bird’s-eye view of London than by riding outside an omnibus
from one end of London to the other, as, according to the omnibus
taken, the route can be greatly varied.

Cabs
.—These convenient vehicles have completely
superseded the old pair-horse hackney-coaches in London; no
vehicle of the kind being now ever seen.  There are,
according to the return above quoted, 6,793 of the modern
single-horse hackney-coaches in the metropolis
altogether—of two different kinds,
‘four-wheelers’ and ‘Hansoms,’ (named
after the patentee.)  The ‘four-wheelers’ are
the more numerous; they have two seats and two doors; they carry
four persons, and are entirely enclosed.  The
‘Hansoms’ have two
p. 138
very large wheels, one seat to
accommodate two persons, and are open in front; the driver is
perched up behind, and drives his vehicle at a rapid rate.

Railways
.—If omnibuses and cabs are more
important than railways to strangers while
in
London,
railways are obviously the most important of the three when
coming to or departing from London.  The following are a few
particulars concerning such railways as enter the metropolis.

London and North-Western Railway
has its terminus just
behind Euston Square.  The noble portico in front—by
far the finest thing of the kind connected with railway
architecture—has been rendered ridiculous by the
alterations in the buildings behind it; for it is now at one
corner of an enclosed court, instead of being in the centre of
the frontage.  A new hall leading to the booking-offices,
finished in 1849, is worthy of the great company to which it
belongs; the vast dimensions, the fine statue of George
Stephenson, and the
bassi-rilievi
by Thomas, render it an
object deserving of a visit.  This station is the London
terminus of a system exceeding 1,446 miles.

The
Midland Railway
has a magnificent terminus in the
Euston Road, and a junction with the Metropolitan line.  It
has already more than 800 miles open.

Great Northern Railway
has its terminus at King’s
Cross—a building more remarkable for novelty than for
beauty.  This company, a severe competitor to some of older
date, has few stations near London; but the directness of the
line of railway renders it important as an outlet to the
north.  A good hotel is contiguous to the terminus.
The goods’ depôt has become famous for the vast
quantity of coal brought to the metropolis.

Great Western Railway
has its terminus at Paddington,
where a fine new station was built a few years ago.  A style
of arabesque polychrome decoration has been adopted, not seen at
other metropolitan stations.  Paddington is the
head-quarters of the broad-gauge system, which extends to
Weymouth in one direction, to Truro in a second, to Milford Haven
in a third, and to Wolverhampton in a fourth; but some of the
broad-gauge lines belong to
p. 139
other companies; while, on the other
hand, this company has adopted the double-gauge on about 400
miles of its line.  The terminus has a splendid new hotel
adjoining it.

West London Railway
(now better known as the
West
London Extension Railway
) can hardly be said to have an
independent commercial existence.  It was an old and
unsuccessful affair, till taken up by four of the great
companies, and enlarged in an important way.  It now
includes a railway bridge over the Thames at Battersea; it is
connected with the London and North-Western, the Great Western,
and the Metropolitan, on the north, and with the South-Western,
the Brighton, and the Chatham and Dover, on the south.
There are stations at Kensington, Chelsea, and Battersea.

Hammersmith and City Junction Railway
crosses the
last-named line at Shepherds’ Bush, and joins the Great
Western at Kensal New Town, a mile or two beyond Paddington.

North and South-Western Junction Railway
is, perhaps,
valuable rather as a link between the greater railways, than as
an independent line.  It joins the North London at Camden
Town, and the South-Western at Kew; and has stations at Kentish
Town, Hampstead, Finchley New Road, Edgeware Road, Kensal Green,
Acton, and Hammersmith.  It establishes through trains with
other companies; and although it has no actual London terminus of
its own, it is a great convenience to the western margin of the
metropolis, for the fares are low.

South-Western Railway
has its terminus in the Waterloo
Road, which has been placed in connection with the London Bridge
Station.  The main lines of the company extend to Portsmouth
in one direction, Dorchester in another, and Exeter in a third;
while there is a multitude of branches—from Wimbledon to
Croydon, from Wimbledon to Epsom and Leatherhead, from Wandsworth
to Richmond and Windsor, from Barnes to Hounslow, from Staines to
Reading, &c.  There is no good hotel whatever near the
Waterloo or Vauxhall Stations—a defect which seems to need
a remedy.

Victoria and Crystal Palace Railway
is a concern in
which so
p.
140
many companies have an interest, that it is not easy to
define the ownership.  The Victoria Station, within a
quarter of a mile of the Queen’s Palace, Pimlico, is very
large, but certainly not very handsome.  The
Grosvenor
Hotel
, attached to it, may rank among the finest in the
metropolis.  The Brighton, the Chatham and Dover, and the
Great Western, are accommodated at this station, where both the
broad and narrow gauges are laid down.  The railway leads
thence, to join the Brighton at Sydenham and Norwood, by a
railway-bridge across the Thames; it has stations at Battersea,
Wandsworth, Balham, Streatham, Norwood, and the Crystal Palace;
and throws off branches to meet the lines of the other three
companies above named.

London
,
Brighton
,
and South Coast Railway

has for its terminus a portion of the great London Bridge
Station, contiguous to which a hotel has been constructed.
It also has termini at Victoria and Kensington.  The line
leads nearly due south to the sea at Brighton, and then along the
sea-coast, from Hastings in the east to Portsmouth in the
west.  There are also several branches to accommodate Surrey
and Sussex.  Taken altogether, this is the most remarkable

pleasure-line
in England,—the traffic of this kind
between London and Brighton being something marvellous.

South-Eastern Railway
has another portion of the large
but incongruous London Bridge Station in its possession.
The seaside termini of the line are at Margate, Ramsgate, Deal,
Dover, and Hastings.  The Greenwich and North Kent branches
are important feeders; while there are others of less
value.  The company have spent a vast sum of money in
extending their line to the north of the Thames—by forming
a city station in Cannon Street, with a bridge over the river
midway between London and Southwark Bridges; and a West-end
Station at Charing Cross, with a bridge over the river at (what
was till lately) Hungerford Market.  There is also a
connection with the South-Western terminus in the Waterloo
Road.  The company have been forced to pay a sum of
£300,000 for St. Thomas’s Hospital, as the only means
of insuring a convenient course for this extension—a
striking instance of the stupendous scale on which railway
operations are now conducted.

p.
141
London
,
Chatham
,
and Dover Railway

is a very costly enterprise.  It may be said to start from
two junctions with the Metropolitan, has a large station near
Ludgate Hill, (involving great destruction of property,) crosses
the Thames a little eastward of Blackfriars Bridge, and proceeds
through Surrey and Kent to Sydenham, Bromley, Crays, Sevenoaks,
Chatham, Sheerness, Faversham, Herne Bay, Margate, Ramsgate,
Canterbury, Dover Pier, &c.  It also comprises a
curvilinear line from Ludgate to Pimlico, with stations at
Blackfriars, Newington, Walworth, Camberwell, Loughborough Road,
Brixton, Clapham, Wandsworth Road, and Battersea; and a branch to
Peckham, Nunhead, and the Crystal Palace.

Blackwall Railway
, with which is associated the

Tilbury and Southend
, has its terminus in Fenchurch
Street.  The station is small and unattractive; but it
accommodates a wonderful amount of passenger traffic.  The
original line extended only from London to Blackwall, with
intermediate stations at Shadwell, Stepney, Limehouse, West India
Docks, and Poplar.  An important branch from Stepney to Bow
establishes a connection with the Great Eastern Railway valuable
to both companies.  At Stepney also begins the Tilbury and
Southend line, passing through Bromley, Barking, and numerous
other places.  Accommodation is provided, a little way from
the Fenchurch Street Station, for a large amount of goods
traffic.  The line is now leased in perpetuity to the Great
Eastern Company.

Great Eastern Railway
has its terminus in Bishopsgate
Street, or rather Shoreditch, and a large depôt and station
at Stratford.  The Shoreditch station is large.  This
terminus, however, will shortly be removed to Broad Street,
City.  The lines of this company are numerous, and ramify in
many directions towards the east, north-east, and north.
Its terminal points (with those of the associated companies) at
present are—Peterborough, Hunstanton, Wells, Yarmouth,
Aldborough, and Harwich; with less distant termini at Ongar and
North Woolwich.

North London Railway
, consisting wholly of viaduct and
cutting, has its terminus at Broad Street, Finsbury.  All
its stations are considered to be in London.  It joins the
London and North-Western
p. 142
near Primrose Hill, and the
Blackwall at Stepney.  It has intermediate stations at
Camden Road, Caledonian Road, Islington, Cannonbury, Kingsland,
Dalston, Hackney, Victoria Park, and Bow.  Trains run every
quarter of an hour, in both directions, at fares varying from 2d.
to 4d.; and the number of passengers is immense.

Metropolitan Railway
, from Finsbury to Paddington, is a
very remarkable one, nearly all tunnel, and requiring the
carriages to be constantly lighted with gas.  It runs from
Westminster Bridge,
viâ
Pimlico, Brompton,
Kensington, Notting Hill, and Bayswater, to Paddington, where it
joins the Great Western.  It then goes under Praed Street
and the New Road to King’s Cross.  There it joins the
Great Northern, and thence goes on to Holborn Bridge, Smithfield
Dead Meat Market, and Moorgate Street.  Since the opening of
the Metropolitan District Extension Railway, you can go at
present (July, 1870) from the Mansion House, under the Northern
Thames Embankment, before described, to Westminster Bridge,
&c.  There are stations near the Mansion House, the
terminus; at Blackfriars, the Temple, Charing Cross, and
Westminster.

Steamers
and
Steamboat Piers
have been already
referred to.

p.
143
SHORT EXCURSIONS.

We
shall now direct the
stranger’s attention to a few places of interest easily
accessible from the metropolis—beginning with those
situated westward, or up the river.

UP THE RIVER.

Chelsea
.—Chelsea, once a village, is now a part
of the metropolis, Pimlico and Belgravia having supplied the
intervening link.  During the last century a pleasant ramble
across the fields was much in favour to the
Chelsea
bunhouse
; but no one thinks of Chelsea now, except as part of
London.  Sloane Square and Street, and Hans Place, were
named after Sir Hans Sloane, who lived in that
neighbourhood.  The chief place of interest at Chelsea is
the
Hospital
for retired invalid soldiers, an institution
similar to the asylum for old seamen at Greenwich.  The
hospital, which is situated on a flat stretch of ground bordering
the Thames, and was
p. 144
planned by Sir Christopher Wren,
consists chiefly of one large edifice of red brick, several
stories in height, forming a centre and two wings, or three sides
of a square, with the open side towards the bank of the
Thames.  On the north, in which is the main entrance, the
style of architecture is simple, being ornamented with only a
plain portico.  The inner part of the centre building is
more decorated, there being here a piazza of good proportions,
forming a sheltered walk for the veteran inmates.  In the
centre of the open square stands a statue, by Grinling Gibbons,
of Charles II., in whose time the hospital took its rise.
The only parts of the structure considered worthy to be shewn to
strangers are the chapel and old dining-hall, both in the central
building.  The chapel is neat and plain in appearance; the
rows of benches being furnished with prayer-books and hassocks,
and the floor being paved with chequered marble.  Above the
communion-table is a painting of the Ascension, by Sebastian
Ricci.  The dining-hall is equally spacious, but is now
disused as a refectory.  In the hall and chapel are about
100 flags, taken by British troops in various battles.  The
usual number of in-pensioners is about 500, and of out-pensioners
not fewer than 60,000 to 70,000, who reside in all parts of the
United Kingdom.  The former are provided with all
necessaries, while the latter have each pensions varying
according to their grade.  The inmates wear an antique garb
of red cloth, in which they may be seen loitering about the
neighbourhood.

Near Sloane Square is situated a large building forming the

Royal Military Asylum
, familiarly called the
Duke of
York’s School
, for the support and education of about
500 poor children, whose fathers were non-commissioned officers
and privates in the army.  Each regiment of the British army
contributes annually one day’s pay, to aid in supporting
the institution.  Between Sloane Square and Chelsea Bridge
is the fine new Barracks for the Foot Guards: the only handsome
barrack structure in the metropolis.

Chelsea to Chiswick
.—
Battersea Park
,
elsewhere described, is just opposite Chelsea.  Beyond the
park are
Battersea
and
Wandsworth
, places
containing very few objects of interest; and backed by

Clapham
and
Wimbledon
, where many London merchants
and
p.
145
tradesmen have their private residences.  Beyond
Wandsworth lie
Putney
,
Barnes
, and
Mortlake
,
where the river makes a great bend towards Kew.  Between
Putney and Kew many
Regattas
, or boat-races, take place
during the summer; especially the famous annual contest, from
Putney to Mortlake, between the universities of Oxford and
Cambridge: these are among the most pleasant of the up-river
scenes.  Omnibuses, steamboats, and the South-Western
Railway, give abundant accommodation to the places here
named.  On the Middlesex side of the river, just beyond
Chelsea, are
Cremorne Gardens
.  Next, we get into a
region of Market-Gardens, from which London is supplied with vast
quantities of fruit and vegetables.
Walham Green
,

Parson’s Green
, and
Fulham
, lie in the
immediate vicinity of these gardens.  Strangers would find
an hour or two pleasantly spent hereabouts.  The bishops of
London have their palace at Fulham, a picturesque old
structure.  After passing
Hammersmith
, where there is
a pretty suspension bridge, we come to
Chiswick
, noted for
its market-gardens; here is the house in which Hogarth died; and
in the churchyard is his tomb, with an
p. 146
inscription
by David Garrick.  The Duke of Sutherland has a fine mansion
at Chiswick; and near at hand are the old gardens of the
Horticultural Society.

Kew Gardens
.—
Kew
is one of the pleasantest
villages near London.  When we have crossed the Thames from
Brentford, by the bridge, we come upon the green, bounded on
three sides by countryfied-looking houses, and on the fourth by
the splendid gardens.  The place is very easily
reached—by omnibuses from the city to the Middlesex end of
the bridge; by steamers every half-hour during summer; and by
trains from the Waterloo and the North London Stations.  It
may be well to remember, however, that the so-called Kew Station
is not actually at Kew.  There is another, however, near the
Gardens.  By far the most interesting object at Kew is the
famous
Botanic Gardens
.  This is a very beautiful
establishment, maintained at the public expense.  It
contains a rare collection of plants, obtained from all parts of
the world, arranged and labelled in admirable order by Dr. Dalton
Hooker.  The flower-beds, hot-houses, and conservatories,
are very numerous.  The
great palm
p.
147
house
, with its exotics, reaching to a height of
60 feet, and constructed at a cost of £30,000, forms a
grand object.  The new
temperate-house
was
constructed from the designs of Mr. Burton; 212 feet long, 137
wide, and 60 high, with two wings 112 feet by 62.  Extensive
new works have been added—including a lake having a
communication with the Thames by a tunnel under the
river-terrace, and a winter-garden, or enclosed conservatory,
more than twice as large as the palm-house.  Three detached
buildings have been fitted up as a
Museum of Economic
Botany
.  The
Pleasure Grounds
form a kind of Park
contiguous to the Botanic Gardens; the gardens are 75 acres in
extent, and the grounds 240 acres.  This beautiful place is
freely open to the public in the afternoon, on Sundays as well as
week-days, after one o’clock.

Richmond
.—
Richmond
is a village situated
on the south bank of the Thames, at about 9 miles by land from
Hyde Park Corner, and 16 miles by following the windings of the
river.  The most pleasant mode of conveyance to it used to
be by one of the small steamboats from Hungerford Pier; for then
an opportunity was afforded of
p. 148
seeing numerous beautiful and
interesting spots on both banks of the river.  The river is
now, however, so shallow, that steamers can seldom reach this
spot; and the trip is usually made by railway—from the
Waterloo and Vauxhall Stations, and from all stations on the
Blackwall, North London, and North and South Western lines.
Omnibuses also run very frequently from the City and West
End.  Richmond stands on a slope overhanging the
river.  Opposite the village is a stone bridge crossing the
Thames.  South from the village, a pretty steep bank ascends
to the green and bushy eminence called
Richmond Hill
; and
from the terrace on its summit a view is obtained of the
beautifully wooded country up the river, stretching away to
Windsor.  Among numerous villas, ornamental grounds, and
other attractive objects, may be seen
Twickenham
, situated
in the immediate vicinity, on the left bank of the Thames.
In the house for which the present was erected as a substitute,
lived Pope the poet, and his body is entombed in the
church.

Close by
p.
149
Twickenham is
Strawberry Mill
, once the seat of
Horace Walpole, and now belonging to Lady Waldegrave.
Moving onwards along the brow of the eminence, and passing the
well known but expensive hotel called the
Star and Garter
,
we enter the famous
Richmond Park
, which is eight miles in
circumference, and enriched with magnificent trees.  These
extensive grounds were at one time connected with a royal palace,
but there is now no such edifice—one or two hunting-lodges
excepted; the park is, however, still a domain of the Crown, and
freely open to the public.  Foreigners are great admirers of
this vicinity.

Hampton Court
.—
Hampton
is about 13 miles
from London by railway, and 24 by water.  Trains run there
very frequently, and at low fares, from Waterloo Station.
The village is unimportant, but rendered pleasant by its large
and open green.  The chief object of attraction is

Hampton Court Palace
, situated within an enclosed garden
near the north bank of the Thames.  The palace
p. 150
was
originally built by Cardinal Wolsey, and a portion of the
structure which he reared is still extant in the northern
quadrangle.  Here was the scene of the humiliation and
forfeiture of that favourite of Henry VIII., who at this place
often held his court, and made it the scene of his Christmas
festivities; there Edward VI. was born; here were held the
masques, mummeries, and tournaments of Philip and Mary, and
Elizabeth; here James I. held his court and famous meeting of
controversialists; here Charles I. was immured as a state
prisoner, and took leave of his children; here was celebrated the
marriage of Cromwell’s daughter and Lord Falconberg; here
Charles II. sojourned occasionally with his dissolute courtiers;
here lived William and Mary after the revolution of 1688; and
here, till the reign of George II., royal courts were sometimes
held.  The palace, in external appearance, is a lofty and
magnificent structure of red brick, with stone cornices and
dressings.  The older part, including the famous Great Hall,
the scene of the court masques and revels, is of the time of
Henry VIII.; the eastern part, including the public rooms and the
long garden front, was built by Wren for William III.
Altogether, the edifice consists of three quadrangles.
Entering by the grand staircase, which is decorated with
paintings by Antonio Verrio, the visitor is conducted through a
suite of lofty and large apartments, furnished in an
old-fashioned style.  The guard-room, which is first in
order, contains, besides a series of English admirals by Kneller
and Dahl, a variety of ancient warlike instruments.  In the
next apartment are portraits of various beauties of Charles
II.’s court, painted by Sir Peter Lely, who has here
depicted several lovely countenances, though a sensual character
is common to them all.  In the third room, or
audience-chamber, is seen what is generally regarded as the
finest painting in the palace—a portrait of Charles I. on
horseback, by Vandyck.  The third room has also some good
pictures; among others, a painting of the family of Louis
Cornaro, a person celebrated for his extraordinary
temperance.  The picture, which is from an original by
Titian, shews Cornaro and three generations of descendants, who
appear in the act of adoration at a shrine.  There are
likewise portraits of Titian and his uncle, painted by
p. 151
Titian
himself, and a spirited battle-piece by Giulio Romano.  The
fourth apartment, or Queen’s drawing-room, is enriched with
an exceedingly fine painting of Charles I., a whole length, by
Vandyck, esteemed the best likeness we have of that
monarch.  There is a well known and beautiful print from it
by Sir Robert Strange, the prince of English
line-engravers.  In the next room, or state bedchamber, the
visitor will see a portrait of Ann Hyde, daughter of Hyde, Earl
of Clarendon, and mother of the successive queens, Mary and
Anne.  The Queen’s dressing-room and writing-closet,
and Queen Mary’s state bedchamber, which follow, contain
many fine pictures, by Holbein, Sir Peter Lely, Sebastian del
Piombo, Leonardo da Vinci, Albert Durer, and others.  A
series known as the Beauties of the Court of William and Mary
comprises portraits (by Kneller) more staid than those of the
court of Charles II., and, it must be admitted, more tame and
dull.  After having traversed these stately and silent
halls, one of which contains a valuable collection of historical
portraits, the visitor is led out through the gallery lately
containing the famous Cartoons of Raphael—which were
transferred in 1865 to the South Kensington Museum.  Another
room contains a fine series of Cartoons by Andrea Mantegna.
The whole of the pictures at Hampton Court are little less than
1000 in number.

The palace garden has a
Vinery
, where there is a grape
vine ninety years old, which has sometimes yielded 3000 bunches
of grapes in one year.  The garden also possesses a

Maze
, a source of great delight to holiday
juveniles.  On the opposite side of the Hampton Wick Road
from the palace gardens, is
Bushy Park
, a royal domain,
embellished with an avenue of horse-chestnut trees, which present
a splendid sight when in full bloom.  The palace grounds are
also exceedingly beautiful.  Bushy Park is open for
omnibuses and other vehicles, as well as for pedestrians.
The palace is open free every day except Friday, from 10 till 4
or 6, according to the season; and the grounds or gardens till
dusk.  This is one of the very few public buildings in or
near the metropolis open on Sundays.

Windsor
.—Passing over the country between Hampton
and
p.
152
Windsor, which does not comprise many spots interesting
to strangers, we come to the famous royal domain.

Windsor
is situated in the county of Berks, at the
distance of 22 miles west from London by the road through
Brentford; but it may now be reached in an hour or less by the
Great Western Railway from Paddington, or the South-Western from
Waterloo Bridge.  Windsor occupies a rising-ground on the
south bank of the Thames, and is interesting for its ancient and
extensive castle, the grandest royal residence in this
country.  The gates of the castle are close upon the main
street of the town, and lead to enclosures containing a number of
quadrangles, towers, gates, mansions, barracks, and other
structures.

The principal portion of the castle occupies two courts, an
upper and lower, of spacious dimensions, and having between them
a large round tower or keep, in which the governor resides.
The top of
p.
153
this keep is 220 feet above the Thames, and twelve
counties can be seen from it in fine weather.  In the lower
court is St. George’s Chapel, an elegant Gothic edifice, in
which service is performed on Sundays, occasionally in presence
of the royal residents.  Besides the chapel and keep, the
chief parts of the castle attractive to strangers are the state
apartments in the upper or northern court; these are exhibited

free
to visitors on Mondays, Tuesdays, Thursdays, and
Fridays.  Tickets can be obtained of Messrs. Colnaghi, 13
and 14 Pall Mall East.  The days, hours, and conditions of
visiting are notified on the tickets.  The apartments here
meant are the
old
state rooms, not those actually occupied
by the Queen, her family, and retinue.

Outside the castle, facing the north, is the famed

terrace
, from which a view is obtained over a most
beautiful expanse of country.  On another side are the new
royal stables, the finest in England, having, with the Riding
House, cost £70,000.  In the gardens immediately
adjoining the Queen’s apartments, the royal family,
p. 154
before the
death of the Prince Consort, were wont occasionally to promenade,
at an hour when the public might see them.  The
Home
Park
, bounding the palace on two sides, is not open to the
public; but the
Great Park
is freely open, to persons on
foot, on horseback, or in vehicles.  The
Long Walk

through this park, extending 3 miles, is one of the finest things
of the kind in England.

Eton College
, with its school-rooms for 900 boys,
chapel, quadrangles, and playing-fields, lies beautifully
situated opposite Windsor Castle.

A ramble from the Slough Station, near Eton, would take a
visitor to the scenes rendered memorable by Gray’s

Elegy
.

DOWN THE RIVER.

Deptford
.—This was once of some importance as a
shipbuilding place, a dockyard having been established here ever
since the time of Henry VIII.; but the government establishments
have recently been given up to the victualling and store
departments.  Deptford
p. 155
may now be considered part of the
metropolis—and a very dirty part it is, containing few
objects that would interest a stranger.  Peter the Great of
Russia studied as a shipwright at Deptford dockyard in 1698, to
fit himself for creating a Russian navy.

Greenwich
.—This favourite place lies on the south
bank of the Thames, a little below Deptford, about six miles
below London Bridge, following the windings of the river, but
only about four miles by railway, from the London Bridge
Station.  It is noted for the
Trafalgar
,
Ship
,

Crown and Sceptre
, and other taverns, where
whitebait
dinners
have become celebrated.  Diners at these places,
however, will require long purses.  Greenwich is chiefly
interesting, however, for its national establishments.
Towards its eastern extremity stands the
Hospital
, which
faces the Thames, and has a command of all that passes on the
river.  This superb hospital consists of four edifices,
unconnected with each other, but apparently forming an entire
structure, lining three sides of an open square, the fourth side
being next the water.  It is mostly built of stone,
p. 156
in majestic
style; and along nearly the greater part are lofty colonnades,
with handsome pillars, and covered overhead, to protect those
underneath from the weather.  The square interval in the
centre, which is 273 feet wide, has in the middle a statue of
George II., by Rysbrach.  A portion of these beautiful
buildings was originally planned by Inigo Jones, another portion
by Sir C. Wren, and the rest by later architects.  It was
William and Mary who, in the year 1694, here established an
hospital for superannuated and disabled seamen, to which purpose
the buildings were till lately devoted.  The institution is
supported by the interest on £2,800,000, funded property,
the rental of estates in the north of England, and a national
grant.  In 1865 it accommodated about 1300 pensioners, 150
nurses, and a variety of officers for the government of the
place.  The inmates were old sailors, with countenances well
browned by tropical suns, or bleached by the tempests of the
ocean; here one hobbling on a wooden leg, there one with an empty
sleeve, and occasionally one with only one eye.  Their
clothes were of a dark-blue colour, of an antiquated
fashion.  Their old cocked-hats had been superseded by hats
of more modern shape; the boatswains, or other warrant-officers,
being allowed a yellow trimming or lace to their garments.
An abundance of food was allowed, the clothing warm and
comfortable, the accommodations in the rooms good; and each man,
according to his rank, had from three to five shillings a-week,
as an allowance for pocket-money.  The outer gateway, and
the interior parts of this establishment, were under the care of
the pensioners themselves, who shewed the utmost attention to
strangers, manifesting a frankness and good-nature characteristic
of the profession of the sailor.  Small sums were taken for
exhibiting some of the buildings, but the money went to the
general fund, or for the board and education of the children of
seamen.  The visitor did not fail to glance into the

refectory
and
kitchen
, which were freely open, and
see the old men at their meals.

It may seem singular thus to speak of this famous
establishment in the
past
tense; but in truth the purpose
of Greenwich Hospital is changed.  By an arrangement made in
1865, nearly all the pensioners (except sick and decrepit) have
left the building, with a
p. 157
greatly increased money-allowance;
most of them now living with their relations or friends.

One attractive part of the establishment is the
Painted
Hall
, in the west wing.  It consists of a great room and
one smaller, a vestibule, and a flight of steps.  The
appearance of the whole interior, on entering, is very imposing,
the ceiling and one end being covered with paintings; and
although these paintings, exhibiting a mixture of fantastic
heathen gods and goddesses with royal and other portraits, are
not in judicious taste, they serve to give a good general effect
to the noble apartment.  Along the walls are hung a
collection of pictures, partly portraits of celebrated navigators
and admirals, and partly depicting distinguished naval victories:
each being a present to the institution by some benefactor.
A good portrait of Captain Cook, by Dance, presented by Sir
Joseph Banks, adorns the vestibule.
p. 158
A number of
portraits, by Sir Peter Lely, Dahl, Sir Godfrey Kneller, and
others, were presented by George IV.  There are also several
by Sir Joshua Reynolds.  The painted ceiling of the great
room was executed by Sir James Thornhill in 1703 and subsequent
years.  It is related that, in consequence of the length of
time he had to lie on his back painting the ceiling, the artist
could never afterwards sit upright.  In the smaller
apartment are shewn several models of ships of war, admirably
executed; the coat worn by Nelson at the battle of the Nile; the
astrolabe of Sir Francis Drake, a curious brass instrument of
antique fashion, used for nautical observation; and some
interesting relics of the ill-fated voyage of Sir John
Franklin.  The Hall is open free to the public on Monday and
Friday; on other days the charge is 4d.  On Sunday it may be
seen after morning-service.  The
Chapel
is also worth
a visit; it contains a fine picture by Benjamin West, the
‘Shipwreck of St. Paul;’ and monuments to two
admirals, by Chantrey and Behnes.  A monument or obelisk to
the memory of Lieutenant Bellot, who perished in one of the
Arctic Expeditions, has been placed on the noble
Hospital-terrace, fronting the river.

The
Park
, extending behind the hospital—open free
to the public until dusk—comprehends a considerable space
of ground, nearly 200 acres, of great natural and artificial
beauty.  A pathway amidst lines of tall trees leads to a
piece of rising-ground or mount, which, on holidays, generally
exhibits a mirthful scene, in which ‘running down Greenwich
hill’ plays a great part.  On the summit is the

Royal Observatory
, founded by George III. for the
promotion of astronomical science, and the scene of the labours
of some men of distinguished ability.  An astronomer-royal,
supported by a parliamentary grant, constantly resides and
pursues investigations in the Observatory.  From this spot
British geographers measure the longitude.  The collection
of instruments kept and used in this building is superb and
costly; but the public are not admitted to see them.  An
electric
time-ball
falls every day at one o’clock
precisely; and an
electric clock
, a
standard
barometer
, and
standard measures of length
, (of
rigorous accuracy,) are placed for public use by the side of the
entrance-gates.

p.
159
Limehouse to North Woolwich
.—If a stranger
be willing to lay aside the ideas of mere
pleasure
spots,
he will find much to look at and think about in the stretch of
river margin here denoted.  First comes the
Isle of
Dogs
, joining Limehouse on the east.  This strange
horseshoe-shaped piece of ground is almost wholly below the level
of the river, the inroads of which are only prevented by
embankments.  The northern neck of the peninsula (for it is
not strictly an island) is occupied by the West India Docks; the
middle portion is not much appropriated to any useful purpose, on
account of the lowness of the site; the river edge is fringed
with shipbuilding and factory establishments.  The
Great
Eastern
was here built at Messrs. Scott Russell’s
works.  A new church has been built at
Cubitt Town
,
the name now given to the eastern part of the Isle.  Next
below the Isle of Dogs are
Poplar
and
Blackwall
,
now forming one town—observable for the shipyard of Messrs.
Green, the terminus of the Blackwall Railway, the East India
Docks, and two or three river-side taverns where
whitebait
dinners
are much in fashion during the season.  Then
comes the spot, Bow Creek, at which the River Lea enters the
Thames, so closely hemmed in by shipyards and engine-factories,
that the Lea itself can barely be seen.  The great shipyard
of the Thames Company, late Messrs. Mare’s, is situated
here.  Next we come to the extensive and convenient

Victoria Docks
, occupying ground which was previously mere
waste.  Beyond the Docks are new centres of population
gradually springing up, called
Silvertown
and
North
Woolwich
, with large factories and a railway station.
Still farther east, near
Barking Creek
, there may be seen
the vast outfall of the great system of drainage for the northern
half of the metropolis.

Woolwich
.—Taking the south side of the river
instead of the north, and availing himself of steamers or of
trains, (from Charing Cross, Fenchurch Street, or Shoreditch,)
the stranger finds the next place of importance below Greenwich
to be
Woolwich
.  This is a busy town in Kent, eight
miles from London by land, and ten following the course of the
river.  Here, in the reign of Henry VIII., a dockyard for
the construction of vessels of the royal navy was established;
and ever since that time the place has been
p.
160
distinguished as an arsenal for naval and military
stores.  The dockyard was closed 1st October, 1869.
From the river, a view is obtained of the arsenal, now greatly
improved.  The ground of the arsenal, for nearly a mile in
length, is bounded on the river side by a stone quay, and is
occupied in part by prodigious ranges of storehouses and
workshops.  Among these is included a laboratory for the
preparation of cartridges, bombs, grenades, and shot; a splendid
manufactory for shells and guns; a gun-carriage factory of vast
extent; and a store of warlike material that never fails to fill
a stranger with amazement.  Adjoining are barracks for
artillery and marines, military hospitals, &c.  On the
upper part of Woolwich Common is situated a royal military
academy for the education of young gentlemen designed for the
army.  Strangers (if not foreigners) are admitted to the
arsenal only by a written order from the War Office.  The
number of government establishments in and near Woolwich is very
large; and there is generally something or other going on which a
stranger would be interested in seeing.

p.
161
Below Woolwich
.—Numerous steamers during
the day, trains on the Tilbury Railway, and others on the North
Kent Railway, give easy access to a number of pleasant places
lower down the river than Woolwich.  On the Essex side are

Rainham
, near which onion gardens are kept up;

Purfleet
, where vast stores of government gunpowder are
kept;
Grays
, where immense quantities of chalk are dug,
and where copious springs of very pure water are found in the
chalk beds; and
Tilbury
, where there is a regular
fortification for the defence of the river, and a steam-ferry
over to Gravesend.

On the Kent side are
Plumstead Marshes
, where
artillery practice by Woolwich officers is carried on;

Crossness Point
, where the fine buildings connected with
the Southern Outfall Sewer are situated, (and near which were the
great Powder Magazines that blew up in October, 1864;)

Erith
, with its pretty wooded heights;
Greenhithe
,
where the late General Havelock passed some of his early years,
and where Alderman Harmer built a mansion with the stones of old
London Bridge; and
Northfleet
, where much shipbuilding is
carried on.  Beyond Northfleet is
Gravesend
, a famous
place for Cockney picnics, but fast losing its rural
character.  Commercially, Gravesend is important as being
p. 162
the place
where the customs’ authorities recognise the port of London
to begin; all ships, incoming and outgoing, are visited by the
officers here, pilots embark and disembark, and much trade
accrues to the town in consequence.

CRYSTAL PALACE, &c.

There are many pretty spots in different directions in the
vicinity of London, away from the river, worthy of a visit.
On the north-west are
Hampstead
, with its noble Heath and
its charming variety of landscape scenery; and
Harrow
,
with its famous old school, associated with the memory of Byron,
Peel, and many other eminent men.  To its churchyard Byron
was a frequent visitor: “There is,” he wrote to a
friend in after years, “a spot in the churchyard, near the
footpath on the brow of the hill looking towards Windsor, and a
tomb (bearing the name of Peachey) under a large tree, where I
used to sit for hours and hours when a boy.”  Nearly
northward are
Highgate
, with its fringe of woods, and its
remarkable series of ponds;
Finchley
, once celebrated for
its highwaymen, but now for its cemeteries;
Hornsey
, with
its ivy-clad church, and its pretty winding New River; and

Barnet
, with its great annual fair.
p. 163
On the
north-east are
Edmonton
, which the readers of
‘
John Gilpin
’ will of course never forget;

Enfield
, where the government manufacture rifles on a vast
scale;
Waltham
, notable for its abbey and its gunpowder
mills; and
Epping Forest
—a boon to picnic parties
from the eastern half of London.  ‘Fairlop Oak’
(Hainault Forest) has disappeared.

South of the Thames, likewise, there are many pretty spots,
quite distinct from those on the river’s bank.

Wimbledon
, where volunteers assemble;
Mitcham
, near
which are some interesting herb-gardens;
Norwood
, a
pleasant spot, from which London can be well seen;

Lewisham
and
Bromley
, surrounded by many pretty
bits of scenery;
Blackheath
, a famous place for golf and
other outdoor games;
Eltham
, where a bit of King
John’s palace is still to be seen; the
Crays
, a
string of picturesque villages on the banks of the river Cray;
&c.
Dulwich
is a village about 5 miles south of
London Bridge.  Here Edward Alleyn, or Allen, a
distinguished actor in the reign of James I., founded and endowed
an hospital or college, called
Dulwich College
, for the
residence and support of poor persons, under certain
limitations.  On 21st June, 1870, a new college, a modern
development and extension of the old charity, was formally opened
by the Prince and Princess of Wales.  The new buildings are
entirely devoted to educational purposes, and they have
accommodation for 600 or 700 boys.  The founder bequeathed
some pictures to the institution, and the collection was vastly
increased by the addition of a large number, chiefly of the Dutch
and Flemish schools, bequeathed in 1810 by Sir Francis
Bourgeois.  A gallery, designed by Sir John Soane, was
opened in 1817; and this now forms a most attractive sight to all
who delight in the fine arts.  The gallery is open free
every week-day from 10 to 5 in summer, and from 10 to 4 in
winter.

Crystal Palace
.—One especial object of interest
in the southern vicinity of London is the far-famed
Crystal
Palace
.  This structure, in many respects one of the
most remarkable in the world, owed its existence to the Great
Exhibition of 1851 in Hyde Park.  The materials of that
building being sold to a new company towards the close of that
year, were transferred to an elevated spot near Sydenham,
p. 164
about 7
miles from London.  The intention was to found a palace and
park for the exhibition of objects in art and science, and to
make it self-paying.  The original estimate was
£500,000, but the expenditure reached nearly
£1,500,000—too great to render a profitable return
likely.  The palace and grounds were opened in 1854; the
water-towers and great fountains some time afterwards.  The
marvels of this unparalleled structure cannot be described within
a limited space.

The building is about 1600 feet long, 380 wide, and, at the
centre transept, nearly 200 high.  It consists of a nave and
three transepts, all with arched roofs, and all made chiefly of
iron and glass.  Within, the building consists of a central
nave, having marble fountains near the two ends, and lined with
statues and plants throughout its whole length.  On each
side of the nave are compartments to illustrate the sculpture and
architecture of different ages and countries; such as Greek,
Roman, Assyrian, Pompeian, Egyptian, Alhambraic or Saracenic,
Romanesque, Byzantine,
p. 165
Mediæval, in its English,
French, and German varieties, Renaissance, Palladian, and
Elizabethan.  Other compartments illustrate certain
industrial groups, such as cutlery, porcelain, paper, encaustic
tiles, &c.  On the first gallery are large collections
of pictures, photographs, and casts from medallions and small
works of art.  Near the centre transept are all the
necessary arrangements for two concert-rooms—one on a
stupendous scale, in which 5000 singers and instrumentalists can
sometimes be heard at once.

An orchestra of unparalleled dimensions is constructed here
for great festival commemorations, and similar musical
meetings.  The botanical collection within the building is
very fine; and to preserve the exotic plants, one end of the
building is maintained at a high temperature all the year
round.  Some portions of the galleries are let out as stalls
or bazaars to shopkeepers; and very extensive arrangements are
made for supplying refreshments.  In an upper gallery is a
museum of raw produce.  In long galleries in the basement
p. 166
are
exhibited agricultural implements, and cotton and other machinery
in motion.

The park and gardens are extensive, occupying nearly 200
acres; they are beautifully arranged, and contain an extremely
fine collection of flowers and other plants, occupying parterres
separated by broad gravel-walks.  The terraces, stone
balustrades, wide steps, and sculptures, are all on a very grand
scale.  The fountains are perhaps the finest in the world,
some of them sending up magnificent streams of water to a great
height, and some displaying thousands of minute glittering jets
interlacing in the most graceful manner.  A portion of the
water is made to imitate cascades and waterfalls.  The jet
from the central basin rises to 150 feet; and those from the two
great basins to 250 feet.  There are two cascades, each 450
feet long, 100 wide, and having a tall of 12 feet.  When the
whole of the waterworks are playing, there are 12,000 jets in
all; and when this continues for the length of time customary on
some of the ‘grand days,’ the water consumed is said
to amount to 6,000,000
p. 167
gallons.  Two water-towers of
enormous height, (nearly 300 feet from the foundations,) to which
water is pumped up by steam-engines, supply the water-pressure by
which the fountains are fed.  The illustrations of extinct
animals and of geology, in the lower part of the grounds, are
curious and instructive.

Railway trains, running frequently during the day, give access
to the Crystal Palace, from the Pimlico and London Bridge
stations of the Brighton Company, from the Kensington and Chelsea
stations of the West London Railway, from the Waterloo station of
the South-Western
viâ
Wimbledon, and from the
Ludgate Hill and other stations of the Chatham and Dover.
The last-named company have built an elegant and convenient
‘high-level’ station, in front of the main centre
transept.  The Crystal Palace is a shilling exhibition; but
the greater number of visitors only pay 1s. 6d. each for a ticket
(third class) which insures admission to the palace and grounds,
and the railway journey there and back; first and second class
tickets are higher; and there are days on which admission to the
palace is also higher.  A whole week might be spent in
examining the various treasures; for the Crystal Palace and
grounds are interesting in each of the following
features:—Sculpture; Illustrations of Architecture;
Pictures and Photographs; Illustrations of Mechanics and
Manufactures; Botany; Ethnology, or Illustrations of National
Characteristics; Palæontology, or Extinct Animals; Geology;
Hydraulic skill in the Fountains; and Musical facilities of an
unprecedented kind.  There are also facilities in the
grounds for Cricket, Archery, Boating, Athletic Exercises, and
Sports of other kinds, either regularly or occasionally.
The directors must be credited with the undoubted excellence of
their Choral Festivals and Orchestral Concerts.  For great
holiday demonstrations, too, there is nothing else at all equal
to the Crystal Palace in the kingdom; and railways give access to
it from almost every part of the metropolis.

Alexandra Park and Palace
.—This is situated on
the north side of London, near Hornsey, and is reached by means
of the Great Northern Railway.  It has long remained closed
for want of funds, but is expected to be opened in June.
Its objects, &c., are similar
p. 168
to those of the Crystal
Palace.  The building was erected from the remains of the
Exhibition of 1862.

p.
169
APPENDIX.

TABLES, LISTS, AND USEFUL
HINTS.

Suburban Towns and Villages within Twelve Miles’
Railway-distance.

The
distances are measured from the
terminal stations of the great Companies’ lines.  The
names of these stations are abbreviated thus:

Padd.
—Paddington; Great Western.

Eust.
—Euston Square; London and North
Western.

K. C.
—King’s Cross; Great Northern.

Shore.
—Shoreditch; Great Eastern.

Fen.
—Fenchurch Street; London and Blackwall.

L. B.
—London Bridge; South-Eastern, and London
and Brighton.

Wat.
—Waterloo; London and South-Western.

Vic.
—Victoria or Pimlico; Crystal Palace and
other railways.

N. L.
—North London.

Lud.
—Ludgate Hill; London, Chatham, and
Dover.

St. Panc.
—St. Pancras; Midland.

The places accommodated by the North London Railway have no
mileage distances named; for all the stations on that line are
equally within the metropolitan limits.  The Metropolitan
Railway is not here mentioned at all, for a similar reason.
For all stations on the South-Eastern, the distance from Charing
Cross is about 1¾ miles farther than from London
Bridge.  On the Chatham and Dover, most of the stations are
about equidistant from the Ludgate and Victoria termini.
The places reached by steamers are marked
St.
; while

Om.
signifies Omnibus, in cases where there is no very
available railway route.  When a town is some little
distance from the nearest station, two mileages are named: thus,
‘Beddington, 10½ Croydon + 2½,’ implies
that after a railway journey of 10½ miles to Croydon,
there are 2½ miles of road.

Abbey Wood, Kent

L. B.

12

Acton, Midd. from all N. L. Stations.

Anerley, Surrey

L. B.

7½

Balham, Surrey

Vic.

5

—

L. B.

11

Barking, Essex

Shore. & Fen.

7

Barking Road, Essex

Shore. & Fen.

5

Barnes, Surrey

Wat.

7

—, from all N. L Stations.

Barnet, Herts.

K. C.

10½

Battersea, Surrey

St. & Om.

Battersea Park

Vic.

1

Beckenham, Kent

L. B.

9

—

Lud. & Vic.

10

Beddington, Surr.

L. B.

10½ Croydon +2½

Bickley, Kent

Lud. & Vic.

13

—

L. B.

12

Blackheath, Kent

L. B.

6

p.
170
Blackwall, Middlesex

Fen.

4½

—

St. & Om.

Bow, Middlesex

Fen. & Shore

4

Brentford, Middlesex

Wat.

10

—

Padd.

13

Brixton, Surrey

Vic.

3

—

Lud.

4

Bromley, Kent

L. B.

10

—

Lud. & Vic.

11

—, Middlesex

Fen.

4

Buckhurst Hill, Essex

Fen. & Shore.

10

Bushey Park, Midd.

Wat.

13

Camberwell, Surrey

Lud. & Vic.

4

Carshalton, Surrey

L. B.

12

Catford Bridge, Kent

L. B.

6

Charlton, Kent

L. B.

7

—

St.

Chelsea, Middlesex

St. & Om.

Chigwell, Essex

Fen. & Shore, to Ilford or Woodford.

Chiswick, Middlesex

Wat.

8

Clapham, Surrey

Wat.

4

—

Vic.

2½

Clapton, Midd., from all N. L. Stations to
Hackney.

Colney Hatch, Midd.

K. C.

6

Crouch End, Midd.

K. C.

4 Hornsey + 1½

Croydon, Surrey

L. B.

10½

—

Vic.

12

Crystal Palace, Surrey

L. B.

7

—

Vic.

9

—

Lud.

9

Dalston, Middlesex, all N. L. Stations.

Deptford, Kent

L. B.

3½

Ditton, Surrey

Wat.

12 Kingston + 2

Dulwich, Surrey

Lud. & Vic.

5

Ealing, Middlesex

Padd.

6

East Ham, Essex

Fen.

6

Edgeware, Middlesex

K. C. & Om.

8½

Edmonton, Middlesex

Shore.

9½

Elstree, Herts

St. Panc. & Om.

11

Eltham, Kent

L. B.

6 Blackheath + 2

Enfield, Middlesex

Shore.

12

Finchley, Middlesex, from all N. L. Stations
to Finchley Road.

—

K. C.

7¼

Forest Gate, Essex

Shore.

5

Forest Hill, Surrey

Vic.

11

—

L. B.

5

Fulham, Middlesex

Wat.

6 Putney + ½

—

St. & Om.

Gipsy Hill, Surrey

L. B.

8

—

Vic.

8

Greenwich, Kent

L. B.

4½

—

St. & Om.

Hackney, Midd., from all N. L. Stations.

Hadley, Midd.

K. C.

10 Barnet + 1

Ham, Surrey,

Wat.

12 Kingston + 2

Hammersmith, Midd., from all N. L. and
Metropolitan Stations.

—

St. & Om.

Hampstead, Midd., from all N. L. Stations.

Hanwell, Middlesex

Padd.

7½

Harlington, Midd.

Padd.

9 Southall + 3½

Harrow, Middlesex

Eust.

12

Hatcham, Kent

L. B.

4

Hayes, Kent

L. B.

10 Bromley + 2

—, Midd.

Padd.

7 Hanwell + 3

Hendon, Midd.

St. Panc. & Om

7

Herne Hill, Surrey

Lud. & Vic.

6

Highgate, Middlesex

K. C.

4¾

—

Om.

Holloway, Middlesex

K. C.

2

Homerton, Midd., from all N. L. Stations to
Hackney.

Hornsey, Middlesex

K. C.

4

Hounslow, Middlesex

Wat.

12

Ilford, Essex

Shore.

7

Isleworth, Middlesex

Wat.

12

Kensal Green, Midd., from N. L. Stations.

Kensington, Midd., from Metrop Stats.

Kentish Town, Middlesex from all N. L.
Stations.

Keston, Kent

L. B.

10 Bromley + 4

Kew, Surrey

Wat.

9

—, from all N. L. Stations.

—

St. & Om.

Kilburn, Middlesex

Eust.

3

Kingsland, Midd., from all N. L. Stations.

Kingston, Surrey

Wat.

12

Lady Well, Kent

L. B.

5

Lea Bridge, Essex

Shore.

5½

Lee, Kent

L. B.

6 Blackheath + 1

Lewisham, Kent

L B.

5

Leytonstone, Essex

Shore. & Fen.

6

Loughton, Essex

Shore. & Fen.

12

Low Leyton, Essex

Shore. & Fen.

5

Maldon, Surrey

Wat.

10

Merton, Surrey

Wat.

9

Mill Hill, Middlesex

K. C.

8¼; Om. 7

Mims, Midd.

K. C.

12 Potter’s Bar + 2

Mitcham, Surrey

Wat.

10

—

L. B.

10½ Croydon + 4

Morden, Surrey

Wat.

8 Wimbledon + 2

Mortlake, Surrey

Wat.

8

Muswell Hill, Midd.

K. C.

4 Hornsey + 1½

New Cross, Kent

L. B.

3

North Woolwich, Ess.

Shore. & Fen.

7

—

St.

Norwood, Surrey

L. B.

8½

—

Vic.

8

Parson’s Green, Middlesex

Om.

4

Peckham, Surrey

Lud.

5

Penge, Surrey

L. B.

7

—

Lud. & Vic.

9

Plaistow, Essex.

Fen.

5

Plumstead, Kent

L. B.

10

p.
171
Ponders’s End, Midd.

Shore.

12

Poplar, Middlesex

Fen.

4

Potters’s Bar, Midd.

K. C.

12

Putney, Surrey

Wat.

6

—

St. & Om.

Richmond, Surrey

Wat.

10

— from all N. L. Stations.

—

St. & Om.

Roehampton, Surr.

Wat.

6 Putney + 1½

Romford, Essex

Shore.

12

Shacklewell, Midd.

Om.

3

Shepherd’s Bush, Midd.

Metrop.  Stats.

Shooter’s Hill, Kent

L. B.

9 Woolwich + 2

Shortlands, Kent

L. B.

10

—

Lud. & Vic.

10

Snaresbrook, Essex

Fen. & Shore.

7

Southall, Middlesex

Padd.

9

Southgate, Middlesex

K. C.

7

Stamford Hill, Midd.

Om.

4

Stanmore, Middlesex

Om.

10

Stepney, Midd. from all N. L. Stations.

Stockwell, Surrey

Om.

4

Stoke Newington, Midd. from all N. L.
Stations.

Stratford, Essex

Shore. & Fen.

4

Streatham, Surrey

L. B.

10

—

Vic.

6

Teddington, and Bushey Park

Wat.

13

Thornton Heath, Surr.

Vic.

9

Tooting, Surrey

L. B., Vic. & Lud.

8

Tottenham, Middlesex

Shore.

8

Totteridge, Herts.

K. C.

10½ Barnet + 2

Turnham Green, Midd.

Om.

5

— from all N. L. Stations, Wat. and
Lud.

Twickenham, Midd.

Wat.

11¼

— from all N. L. Stations.

Vauxhall, Surrey

Wat.

1½

—

St.

Walham Green, Midd.

Om.

3

Walthamstow, Essex

Shore., Station at Lea Bridge

5¾, and Om.

Wandsworth, Surrey

Wat.

5

—

Vic.

2

Wanstead, Essex

Shore. & Fen, Snaresbrook Station.

Welling, Kent

L. B.

9 Woolwich + 2½

West Ham, Essex

Fen.

4

West Wickham, Surr.

L. B.

10½ Croydon + 4

Whetstone, Midd.

K. C.

6 Colney Hatch + 2

Willesden, Middlesex

Eust.

6½

Wimbledon, Surrey,

Wat.

7

Woodford, Essex

Shore. & Fen.

9

Wood Green, Midd.

K. C.

5

Woolwich Dockyard, Kent

L. B.

8

— Arsenal

L. B.

9

——Dockyard and Arsenal

St.

CHIEF OMNIBUS ROUTES.

There are few better ways for a man to see London, on a fine
day, than by riding through it on an omnibus.  These
vehicles mostly begin to run about 8.30–9 a.m., and cease
about 12 p.m.  To give more than a mere general notion as
regards a few of the chief omnibus routes, is impossible in our
limited space here.  The fares range, for the most part,
from a minimum of 2d. to a maximum of 6d.  They are painted
inside the omnibus: the main localities passed on the way,
outside.  The groups of these conveyances known by
distinctive
names
, (all the omnibuses of each group having
one common name,) are chiefly the following:—

Atlas
—colour, green—running between St.
John’s Wood and Camberwell Gate, and
vice versa
,

via
Oxford Street, and over Westminster Bridge—every
5 minutes.

City Atlas
—green—between Swiss Cottage, St.
John’s Wood, and London Bridge Station, and
vice
versa
,
via
Oxford St., Holborn, Bank—every 7
minutes.

Bayswater
—light green—from Notting Hill and
Bayswater to Mile-End
p. 172
Gate,
via
Oxford Street,
Holborn, Cornhill, Whitechapel—every 6 minutes.

Bayswater
to
London Bridge Station
,
via

Oxford Street, Holborn, Cheapside—every few minutes.

Bayswater
to
Shoreditch Station
—Oxford
Street, Holborn, Cheapside, Threadneedle Street, Bishopsgate
Street—every hour.

Citizen
—
Paddington
to
London Bridge
Station
—Edgeware Road, (only,) Oxford Street, Holborn,
Bank—every 8 minutes.

Other omnibuses also run to and from Paddington, as
follows:—

Paddington
to
London Bridge
Station
—green—Royal Oak, Edgeware Road, New Road,
City Road, Bank—every 10 minutes.

Paddington
to
Fenchurch Station
—Some of
the above go to Fenchurch instead of London Bridge Station.

Paddington
to
Whitechapel
—green—as
above to Bank, then Cornhill and Aldgate—frequent.

Paddington
to
Charing
Cross
—red—Edgeware Road, Oxford and Regent
Streets, Charing Cross—every 8 minutes.

Favorite
—green—Holloway to London Bridge,

via
Highbury, Islington, City Road, Bank, King William
Street—about every 8 minutes.

Favorite
—green—Holloway to Westminster,
Islington, Exmouth Street, Chancery Lane, Westminster Abbey,
Victoria Street.

Favorite
—blue—Holloway Road, Caledonian
Road, King’s Cross, Euston Road, Portland Road, Regent
Street, Piccadilly, Knightsbridge, South Kensington, Museum,
“Queen’s Elm”—every 9 minutes.

Havelock
—Kingsland Gate to “Elephant and
Castle,”
via
Shoreditch, Bishopsgate Street, London
Bridge, Borough—at frequent intervals.

Paragon
—green—Brixton to Gracechurch
Street, Kensington, “Elephant and Castle,” London
Bridge—every 10 minutes.

Buxton
to
Oxford Street
—Kensington,
Westminster Bridge, Charing Cross, Regent Street—every half
hour.

Royal Blue
—blue—Pimlico, Piccadilly,
Strand, Cheapside, Fenchurch Street Station—every 8 or 10
minutes.

Waterloo
—blue—from “York and
Albany,” Regent’s Park, by Albany Street, Regent
Street, Westminster Bridge, “Elephant and Castle” to
Camberwell Gate—every 6 minutes.

Westminster
—brown—Pimlico to Bank,

via
Lupus Street, Vauxhall Bridge Road, Westminster,
Strand, &c.—every 6 minutes.

Such are a few of the numerous omnibus routes of London.
From such places as Charing Cross and the London Bridge Stations,
you can get an omnibus for almost any part of London, up till
nearly midnight; while, by the aid of a map, no matter in what
quarter you may be, you will speedily
p. 173
find out how best to consult your
particular tastes in the way of locomotion and
sight-seeing.  In the case of gross incivility or
overcharge, you have a simple remedy by taking the
conductor’s number and applying for a summons at the
nearest police office.  If you are curious in the matter of
social contrasts, say, you might do worse than by getting up
outside a
Stratford and Bow
(green) omnibus, at the Oxford
Street Circus, and riding—for sixpence all the
way—
via
Regent Street, Pall Mall, Trafalgar Square,
Strand, Fleet Street, St. Paul’s, past the Mansion House
and the Bank, Royal Exchange, Cornhill, Leadenhall Street,
Aldgate, Whitechapel Road, Mile End, to Stratford.  If your
tastes should lead you westward, an enjoyable shilling’s
worth may be obtained by riding on the
Richmond
(white)
omnibus, from St. Paul’s Churchyard to that prettily
situated little town.

LONDON TRAMWAYS.

There are now
three
Tramway Companies in
London:—1.
The Metropolitan Street Tramways
Company
, (
Limited
.)  They run regularly from
Westminster Bridge to Clapham and Brixton, at about every 5
minutes from each terminus, Fare 3d.  2.
North
Metropolitan Tramways Company
: (1) From Aldgate, along
Whitechapel and Mile End Road (through Bow) to Stratford Church;
(2) From Moorgate Street to the Angel, Islington, thence to
Kingsland, Stoke Newington, &c.  Both running every 5
minutes, Fares 2d.; (3) another route is by Old Street to Stoke
Newington and Clapton.  3.
Southall
,

Ealing
,
and Shepherd’s Bush Tram Railway
Company
, (
Limited
.)  This company is constructing
lines in the western suburbs of London.  There are tramways
in the north-west of town.

CLUBS AND CLUB HOUSES.

There are, in all, in London, about ninety.  The
following is a list of the principal club-houses:—

Alpine

8

St. Martin’s Place, Trafalgar Square.

Army and Navy

36 to 39

Pall Mall, S. W.

Arthur’s

69 and 70

St. James’s Street.

Arundel

12

Salisbury Street, Strand.

Athenæum

107

Pall Mall.

Brooks’s

59

St. James’s Street.

Carlton

94

Pall Mall.

City Carlton

83

King William Street, E.C.

Cavendish

307

Regent Street.

City of London

19

Old Broad Street, City.

p.
174
Conservative

74

St. James’s Street.

East India United Service

14

St. James’s Square.

Garrick

13–15

Garrick Street, Covent Garden.

Gresham

1

Gresham Place, City.

Guards’

70

Pall Mall.

Junior Athenæum

29

King Street, St. James’s.

Junior Carlton

30 to 35

Pall Mall.

Junior United Service

11 and 12

Charles Street, St. James’s.

Junior Army and Navy

13

Grafton Street, Bond Street.

Naval and Military

94

Piccadilly.

New University

57

St. James’s Street.

Oriental

18

Hanover Square.

Oxford and Cambridge University

71 to 76

Pall Mall.

Portland

1

Stratford Place, Oxford Street.

Pratt’s

14

Park Place, St. James’s.

Reform

104

Pall Mall.

Smithfield

47

Halfmoon Street, Piccadilly.

St. James’s

106

Piccadilly.

Travellers’

106

Pall Mall.

Union

Trafalgar Square, (S.W. Corner.)

United Service

116 and 117

Pall Mall.

United University

5

Pall Mall, East.

Westminster

23

Albemarle Street.

Whitehall

Parliament Street.

White’s

37 and 38

St. James’s Street.

Windham

11

St. James’s Square.

THE LONDON PARCELS DELIVERY COMPANY.

This Company—whose chief office is in Roll’s
Buildings, Fetter Lane, Fleet Street, and whose minor receiving
houses, at shops, &c., are very numerous—delivers
parcels at a tariff of 4d. if under 4 lbs. weight, and within
three miles distance; under 14 lbs. within a like range, 6d.; and
so on up to a cwt., which will be delivered for 1s. 2d., subject
to the aforesaid condition.  Over three miles distance, the
charge for delivering a parcel under 1 lb. to any part of London
and its environs will be 4d., under 7 lbs., 6d., and so
forth.  For a parcel under 112 lbs., if carried beyond three
miles, sender will be charged 1s. 6d.  To more distant
places, minimum charge is 6d.  Light but bulky packages
charged for by measurement.  The Company does not undertake
to
collect
parcels from the houses of the senders.

p.
175
MONEY-ORDER OFFICES, AND POST-OFFICE
SAVINGS-BANKS.

The
London Postal District
, to which special rules
relate, includes every town and village within twelve miles of
the General Post-office.  Reference has already been made to
the number of post-offices, receiving-houses, and pillar-boxes,
in this area.  There are 500
Money-order Offices
, the
whole of which (with a very few exceptions) have within a recent
period been made
Post-office Savings-banks
also.  The
facilities thus afforded to strangers visiting London for a few
days, for receiving or transmitting money, are very great.
A Post-office Money-order will convey sums of a few pounds
without risk of loss, at a cost of a few pence, either from the
visitor to his country friends, or from them to him.  The
Post-office Savings-banks are even still more convenient; for a
person residing in the country, and having money in the
savings-banks,
can draw it out in London
during his visit,
or any part of it, with a delay of a day or two, free of
expense.  In whatever part of London a visitor may be, he is
within five or ten minutes’ walk of a Money-order Office;
and at any such office he can, for six hours a day, (10 till 4,)
obtain the requisite information concerning both of these kinds
of economical monetary facilities.

LONDON LETTERS, POSTAL AND TELEGRAPH SYSTEM.

As just stated, the
London District Post
operates
within twelve miles of the General Post-office: that is, within a
circle of twenty-four miles in diameter.  There are a few
outlying patches beyond this circle, but they need not here be
taken into account.  This large area is now divided into
eight
Postal Districts
, each of which has a name, an
initial abbreviation, and a chief office.  They are as
follows:—

E. C.

Eastern Central

St. Martin’s-le-Grand, (head office.)

W. C.

Western Central

126 High Holborn.

N.

Northern

Packington Street, Islington.

E.

Eastern

Nassau Place, Commercial Road, East.

S. E.

South-Eastern

9 Blackman Street, Borough.

S. W.

South-Western

8 Buckingham Gate.

W.

Western

3 Vere Street, Oxford Street.

N. W.

North-Western

28 Eversholt Street, Oakley Square.

The use of the district system is, that if a letter, arriving
from the country, has on the outside the
district initials

as well as the address, it has a fair chance of
earlier
delivery
; and if sent from one part of London to another,
such chance is the greater.  The reason for this is, that
much of the sorting is effected at the eight chief district
offices, if the initials are given, to the great saving of
time.  An official list of a vast number of
p. 176
streets,
&c., with their district initials, within the London District
Post, is published at 1d., and is obtainable at most of the
principal receiving-houses.

The portion of each district within about three miles of the
General Post-office is called the Town Delivery, and the
remainder the Suburban Delivery.  Within the town limits
there are twelve deliveries daily: the first, or General Post,
commencing about 7.30, and mostly over in London about 9; the
second commencing about 8.15, and the third at 10.30.  The
next nine are made hourly.  The last delivery begins about
7.45.  There are seven despatches daily to the suburban
districts.  The first, at 6.30 a.m., to all places within
the London District limits.  A second, at 9.30, to suburbs
within about four miles of the General Post-office.  The
third, at 11.30, takes in almost all the London district.
The fourth despatch, at 2.30 p.m., goes to spots within about six
miles of the General Post-office.  The fifth, at 4.30,
comprises the whole of the suburban districts, and, except in the
more outlying country spots, letters are delivered same
evening.  The sixth, at 6 p.m., goes to places under four
miles from the General Post-office.  The last despatch is at
7 p.m.  Letters to go by it should be posted at the town
post-offices or pillar-boxes by 6 p.m., or at the
chief

office of the district to which they are addressed.  They
will thus probably be delivered the same night, within about six
miles of the General Office.  The suburban deliveries begin
one to two hours after despatch, according to distance.

It is always well to remember, that for any given delivery, a
letter may be posted rather later at the chief office than at any
of the minor offices of each district; that
letters
only,
not newspapers, book-parcels, manuscripts, &c., may be put in
pillar-boxes; and that letters posted during the night, (from 9
p.m. to 5 a.m.,) have a chance of earlier delivery than
otherwise, seeing that the pillar-boxes are cleared at 5 in the
morning, and, as a rule, we believe, earlier than the
receiving-houses.  Outgoing letters for the evening mails
are received at most offices till 5.30, and at the chief office
of each district till 6.  By affixing an extra penny stamp,
the letter is receivable till 6 at the minor, and till 7 at the
chief offices.

Telegraph Offices
.—Telegrams may be sent from all
Postal Offices within the London district.  The charge for
20 words, not including address, is 1s.

READING AND NEWS-ROOMS.

Jerusalem Coffee-house, Cowper’s Court, Cornhill,
(Indian, China, and Australian newspapers.)

3 Wallbrook.

154 Leadenhall Street, (Deacon’s.)

13 Philpot Lane.

Royal Exchange, Lloyds’, (Subscribers only.)

King’s Head, Fenchurch Street.

p. 177
26
Fore Street, Cripplegate.

88 Park Street, Camden Town.

83 Lower Thames Street.

177, 178 Fleet Street, (Peele’s—files of the

Times
for many years.)

24 King William Street, (Wild’s.)

34 Mount Street, Grosvenor Square, (St. George’s.)

22 Paddington Green, (Working Men’s.)

Patent Museum Library, Southampton Buildings, Chancery Lane,
(free.)

British Museum Library, (apply for ticket; enclosing letter of
introduction from respectable householder.)

There are Reading and News Rooms belonging to a large number
of learned societies and public institutions; but these are for
the most part accessible only to members.

CHESS ROOMS.

A chess player may meet with competitors at any one of the
several chess rooms.  The best are Simpson’s, (Limited
Co.,) late Ries’s,
Divan
, opposite Exeter Hall,
Strand; Kilpack’s, Covent Garden, (also an American Bowling
Saloon;) and Pursell’s, Cornhill.  Many Coffee-shops
are provided with chess-boards and men, and many dining and chop
houses have chess-rooms up-stairs.

THEATRES.

There are at present about thirty-seven London Theatres, but
those named below are all that need here be considered.

Adelphi

Strand.

Alhambra

Leicester Square.

Astley’s Amphitheatre

6½ Bridge Road, Lambeth.

Royal Amphitheatre

Holborn.

Britannia Theatre

Hoxton Old Town.

Charing Cross

King William Street, Strand.

City of London

36 Norton Folgate.

Covent Garden, (Opera House)

Bow Street.

Court Theatre

Sloane Square.

Drury Lane

Brydges Street.

Gaiety

Strand.

Garrick

Leman Street, Goodman’s Fields.

Globe

Strand.

Grecian

City Road.

Great Eastern

Whitechapel Road.

p.
178
Haymarket

East side of Haymarket.

Holborn

Holborn.

King’s Cross

Liverpool Street, King’s Cross.

Her Majesty’s, (Opera House)

West side of Haymarket.

Lyceum

Wellington Street, Strand.

Marylebone

New Church Street, Lisson Grove.

Olympic

Wych Street, Drury Lane.

Opera Comique

Strand.

Pavilion

85 Whitechapel Road.

Philharmonic

Islington.

Princess’s

73 Oxford Street.

Prince of Wales’s

4 and 5 Tottenham Street.

Queen’s, (late St. Martin’s Hall)

Longacre.

Royalty, or Soho

73 Dean Street, Soho.

Sadler’s Wells

St. John’s Street Road.

St. James’s

23 King Street, St. James’s.

Standard

204 Shoreditch, High Street.

Strand

Between 168 and 169 Strand.

Surrey

124 Blackfriars Road.

Vaudeville

Strand.

Victoria

135 Waterloo Road.

CONCERT ROOMS.

Willis’s Rooms, King Street, St. James’s.

Hanover Square Rooms.

Exeter Hall, 372 Strand, Choral Societies, Sacred Harmonic,
&c.

St. James’s Hall, Quadrant and
Piccadilly,—Concerts occasionally.

16 Store Street, Bedford Square, „ „

St. George’s Hall, Langham Place.

Princess’s Concert Room, Princess’s
Theatre,—Concerts occasionally.

Queen’s Concert Room, (attached to Her Majesty’s
Theatre,)—Concerts occasionally.

Myddleton Hall, Upper Street, Islington.

Agricultural Hall, Islington,—Concerts occasionally.

MUSIC HALLS.

Alhambra
[178]

Leicester Square, (east side.)

Alhambra (Temperance) Music Hall

Shoreditch.

Borough Music Hall

170 Union Street.

Cambridge Music Hall

Commercial Street.

Canterbury Hall

Lambeth Upper Marsh.

p.
179
Deacon’s

Sadler’s Wells.

Evans’

Covent Garden.

Islington Philharmonic Hall
[179]

High Street, Islington.

Marylebone

High Street

Metropolitan Music Hall

125 Edgeware Road.

Middlesex

Drury Lane.

The Oxford

6 Oxford Street, (east end.)

Pavilion Music Hall

Tichborne Street, Haymarket.

Raglan Music Hall

26 Theobald’s Road.

Regent

Vincent Square, Westminster.

South London Music Hall

92 London Rd., St. George’s Fields.

Royal (late Weston’s) Music Hall

242 High Holborn.

Wilton’s Music Hall

Wellclose Square.

Winchester Hall

Southwark Bridge Road.

MODES OF ADMISSION TO VARIOUS INTERESTING PLACES.

Free.

British Museum
.—
Chelsea
Hospital
.—
Courts of Law and Justice
(at the
Criminal Court and the Police Courts a fee is often
needed.)—
Docks
, (but not the vaults and warehouses
without an introduction.)—
Dulwich
Gallery
.—
East India Museum
, Fife House,
Whitehall.—
Greenwich Hospital
, (a small fee for some
parts.)—
Hampton Court Palace
, (Sundays as well as
week-days).—
Houses of Parliament
, (some portions
every day; more on Saturdays.)—
Kew Botanic Garden and
Pleasure Grounds
, (Sundays as well as
week-days.)—
Museum of Economic Geology
, Jermyn
Street.—
National Gallery
.—
National Portrait
Gallery
.—
Patent Museum
, (adjoining the South
Kensington Museum.)—
Soane’s Museum
,
Lincoln’s Inn Fields.—
Society of Arts

Exhibition of Inventions, (in the spring of each
year.)—
St. Paul’s Cathedral
, (fees for Crypt
and all above stairs.)—
Westminster Abbey
, (a fee for
some of the Chapels.)—
Westminster
Hall
.—
Windsor Castle
, (at periods notified from
time to time.)—
Woolwich Repository
, (the Dockyard
was closed in October, 1869, and a letter of introduction is
needed for the Arsenal.)  Private Picture Galleries are
sometimes opened free; of which notice is given in the
newspapers.

Shilling Admissions.

The number of Shilling Exhibitions open in London is at all
times very large, but more especially in the summer months.
The first page of the
Times
contains advertisements
relating to the whole of them; while the
p. 180
penny
papers contain a considerable number.  As the list varies
from time to time, we cannot print it here; but the following are
the chief places where the exhibitions or entertainments are
held.  (Theatres and Music Halls are not included; because
the terms of admission vary to different parts of those
buildings.  We may here add that
Burford’s
and
the
Colosseum
have long been closed.)—
Cremorne
Gardens
, Chelsea.—
Crystal Palace
, Sydenham, (2s.
6d. on Saturday, 1s. on other days.)—
Egyptian Hall
,
Piccadilly, (sometimes two or three exhibitions at once, in
different parts of the building.)—
Gallery of
Illustration
, Regent Street.—Various temporary
exhibitions in large rooms situated in the Haymarket, Pall Mall,
Regent Street, Piccadilly, and Bond Street.—
Picture
Exhibitions
, (such as the
Royal Academy
, the

British Institution
, the
Society of British
Artists
, two
Water Colour Societies
,
&c.)—
Polytechnic Institution
, Regent
Street.—
Polygraphic Hall
,
Strand.—
Tussaud’s Waxwork
, Baker Street
Bazaar.—
Zoological Gardens
, (sixpence on
Mondays.)

Admit by Introduction.

Among the places to which admission may be obtained by
personal introduction, or by letter, the following may be
named:—
Antiquarian Society’s Museum
, Somerset
House.—
Armourer’s Museum
, (ancient armour,) 81
Coleman Street.—
Asiatic Society’s Museum
, 5
New Burlington Street.—
Bank of England Museum
,
(collection of coins.)—
Botanical Society’s Gardens
and Museum
, Regent’s Park.—
College of
Surgeons’ Museum
, Lincoln’s Inn
Fields.—
Guildhall Museum
, (old London
antiquities.)—
Linnæan Society’s Museum
,
Burlington House.—
Mint
, (process of coining,) Tower
Hill.—
Missionary Museum
, (idols, rude implements,
&c.,) Bloomfield Street, Finsbury.—
Naval Museum
,
(formerly, now at South Kensington.)—
Private Picture
Galleries
, (several.)—
Royal Institution Museum
,
Albemarle Street.—
Trinity House Museum
, (models of
lighthouses, &c.,) Tower Hill.—
United Service
Museum
, Scotland Yard.—
Woolwich Arsenal
.

N.B.
—These lists are subject to constant
change.

PRINCIPAL PUBLIC AND TURKISH BATHS.

(Those printed in
italics
are public baths, established
rather for the benefit of the working and middle classes, than
for the sake of profit.  At most of them a third-class cold
bath can be obtained for 1d.; from which minimum the prices rise
to about 6d. or 8d.  Many of the so-called
Turkish

baths are ordinary baths in which the arrangements for the
Turkish or Oriental system have recently been introduced.
There are also a few
Medicated Baths
, kept by medical
practitioners for the use of invalids.)

p.
181
Bermondsey Baths

39
Spa Road
,
Bermondsey
.

Bloomsbury

Endell Street
,
St. Giles’s
.

Cadogan

155 Sloane Street, Chelsea.

Coldbath

25 Coldbath Square, Clerkenwell.

Culverwell’s

10 Argyll Place and 5 New Broad Street.

Islington

Cross Street.

Lambeth

8 Mount Street, Lambeth.

Mahomed’s

42 Somerset Street, Portman Square.

Metropolitan

23 Ashley Crescent, City Road.

Old Roman

5 Strand Lane.

Old Royal

10½ and 11 Bath Street, Newgate Street.

Pentonville

Pentonville Road, (south side.)

Poplar

East India Road
.

Portland

Great Portland Street, (east side.)

Royal York

54 York Terrace, Regent’s Park.

Russell

56 Great Coram Street, Russell Square.

Russian

16a Old Cavendish Street.

St. George’s

8
Davis Street
,
Berkeley Square
,
and

88
Buckingham Palace Road
.

—

22
Lower Belgrave Place
.

St. James’s

16
Marshall Street
,
Golden Square
.

St. Martin’s

Orange Street
,
Leicester Square
.

St. Marylebone

181
Marylebone Road
.

Wenlock

Wenlock Road, City Road.

Westminster

21
Great Smith Street
,
Westminster
.

Whitechapel

Goulston Square
,
Whitechapel
.

Turkish.

191

Blackfriars Road, S.E.

184

Euston Road, N.W.

155

Sloane Street, S.W.

282

Goswell Road, E.C.

7

Kennington Park Road, S.E.

1

Upper John Street, Golden Square, W.

55

Marylebone Road, N.W.

42

Somerset Street, Portman Square, N.W.

Medicated Baths.

Ballard’s

Chapel Place, Cavendish Square.

Campion’s

155 Sloane Street, Chelsea.

Mahomed’s

42 Somerset Street, Portman Square.

p.
182
CABS.

Practically speaking, the new law ordering cabmen to display a
flag, on which is painted their tariff per mile and per hour, is
a dead letter.  Few or none shew flags, and many have none
to shew.  Cab proprietors can now charge what they please,
provided they take out a license from the Commissioners of
Metropolitan Police, on which is endorsed the rate by distance or
by time intended to be charged, and the number of persons to be
carried.  No fare less than one shilling is to be
offered.  The driver is to give passenger a card which
specifies the licensed price per hour or per mile.  As
regards luggage, for each package carried outside 2d. extra is
charged.  For each person
above two
6d. extra on the
entire journey.  If such extra person be a child under 10
years of age, 3d.  Two children of such age to be reckoned
as one person.  If cab be discharged more than four miles
from Charing Cross by radius, an extra charge will be made for
such excess of distance, as per sum stated on cabman’s
card.  Every full mile of such excess will be charged for at
per tariff per mile stated on such card.  Driver is not
compelled to drive more than 6 miles.  For every quarter of
an hour he is kept waiting, if the cab be hired by time,
one-fourth of his tariff per hour.  If hired by distance,
for every quarter of an hour of waiting, the rate charged per
mile.  By time, for any period under one hour, the sum
stated on driver’s card as charged per hour.  As a
general rule, cabmen charge 2s. per hour for four-wheeled cabs,
and 2s. 6d. for “Hansom;” and by distance, 1s. for
the first mile, and 6d. for the second, and so on.  Property
left in hackney carriages should be asked for at the office for
property left in such carriages, at the office of the
Commissioners of Police, Great Scotland Yard, Charing
Cross.  Cabmen are bound, under a penalty, to take such lost
property to the nearest police station within 24 hours.  In
case of disagreement between a cabman and his passenger, the
latter can compel the cabman to drive to the nearest police
office; and if a Magistrate be then sitting, he will at once
settle the dispute.  If such office is closed, the cabman
may be required to drive to the nearest police station, where the
complaint will be entered, and adjudicated at the
magistrate’s next sitting.  Our readers cannot do
better than purchase (price 1s.) a little book on the subject of
Cab Fares and Regulations, published under the auspices of the
Commissioners of the Metropolitan Police.  It can be ordered
through any bookseller, or may be purchased direct, at the office
for its sale, a few doors north of the entrance to Great Scotland
Yard.  In it will be found a list of fares, and the
distances in yards, from many parts in London to others.
Its usefulness will amply repay our readers for their small
outlay in its purchase.

p.
183
HINTS TO STRANGERS.

Whether you know the proper cab-fare or not, always make a
bargain with the cabman when hiring his vehicle; and take a note
of his number.

Keep the right hand side of the pavement when walking.

If out with other country friends, keep well together.

Observe caution while crossing crowded thoroughfares.

In asking for information, apply to shopkeepers, or to
policemen, rather than to passers-by.

The London police are, for the most part, reliable men; and
strangers in any doubt or difficulty can generally obtain useful
aid from them.

Be on your guard against pickpockets in crowds, street
exhibitions, and omnibuses.

Beware of strangers who endeavour to force their acquaintance
on you, and affect to be unacquainted with London; they are often
low sharpers.

Keep no more cash about you than is needed for the day’s
supply.

Be cautious in opening your purse or looking at your watch in
the streets.

Avoid low neighbourhoods after dark; if there is anything
worth seeing there, see it in the daytime.

Disregard street-beggars; residents only (and not always even
they) can tell the deserving from the undeserving.

COMMISSIONAIRES OR MESSENGERS.

These are a body of retired soldiers of good character, who
were originally organized in 1859, by Captain Walter.  Their
central office, open day and night, is at Exchange Court,
419
a
Strand, where men can always be hired.  But they
are also to be seen, and are easily recognisable by their neat
dark green uniform and badge, in most large thoroughfares.
Their tariff is,—twopence for half-a-mile or under; and
threepence for any distance over half-a-mile to a mile.
Back fare, or charge for return, (unless bearing a return
message,) is not allowed.  A charge of one penny per mile
extra, if the parcel carried weighs more than 14 lbs.  If
engaged by time, sixpence per hour, twopence a quarter of an
hour, half-a-crown for a day of eight hours.  By special
arrangement, they may be hired at from 15s. to 20s. per week.

p. 184
THE
GREAT INTERCEPTS MAIN DRAINAGE SYSTEM OF LONDON.

North of the Thames are the
High Level
, the
Middle
Level
, the
Low Level
, and the
Western District
Sewers
, together with an
Outfall
at Barking
Creek.  The High Level drains Hampstead, Highgate, Kentish
Town, Highbury, Stoke Newington, Hackney, and passes under
Victoria Park to Old Ford; its length is about 9 miles.  The
Middle Level runs by way of Kensal Green, Kensington Park,
Notting Hill, Bayswater, Oxford Street, and so under a number of
minor streets, to Old Ford, being about 12 miles long.  The
Low Level commences near Pimlico, and passes along under the
Thames embankment to Blackfriars, whence it is to go through the
City and Whitechapel to West Ham.  The Western District
Sewers drain Acton, Hammersmith, Fulham, Chelsea, &c., on a
plan different from that of the main drainage in other
localities.  The Outfall, an immense work 6 miles long,
continues the Upper and Middle Level Sewers from Old Ford to West
Ham, and all the three sewers thence to Barking Creek, where
stupendous arrangements are made for conducting the flow of the
sewage into the Thames.  The drainage south of the Thames
comprises a
High Level Sewer
, a
Low Level Sewer
,
and an
Outflow
.  The High Level drains Clapham,
Brixton, Streatham, Dulwich, Camberwell, &c.; the Low Level
keeps nearer the Thames, by Wandsworth, Battersea, Vauxhall,
Lambeth, Southwark, Bermondsey, and Rotherhithe, to Deptford;
while the Outfall continues both these lines of sewers through
Deptford, Greenwich, Woolwich, and across Plumstead Marshes to
Crossness Point, where the works are situated for conveying the
sewage into the river.

p.
185
INDEX

Abney Park Cemetery,
61

Achilles’s Statue,
127

Adelphi Theatre,
28
,
121

Admiralty,
30
,
46

Admission to Places of Interest,
178

Albert Suspension Bridge,
102

Aldermen,
85

Aldgate,
18

Aldgate High Street,
18

Alexandra Park,
167

Alhambra,
124

Amusements,
125

Apothecaries’ Hall,
97

Apsley House,
38
,
39

Armouries, Tower,
78

Arsenal, Woolwich,
160

Art Exhibitions,
70

Artillery Ground,
32

Arundel Street,
27

Astley’s Amphith.,
123

Austin Friars,
17

Bank of England,
15
,
93

Bank of London,
17

Banks,
94

Baptist College,
72

Barclay & Perkins’s,
113

Barnes,
145

Barnet,
162

Baths,
180

Battersea,
104
,
144

— Bridge,
104

— Park,
133

Bazaars,
31
,
113

Belgrave Square,
31

Berkeley Square,
31

Bethnal Green,
19

Bethnal Green Cemetery,
61

Bethnal G. Museum,
66

Billingsgate,
18
,
111

Birdcage Walk,
126

Bishopsgate Street,
18

Blackfriars’ Bridge,
22
,
103

Blackheath,
163

Blackwall,
159

— Railway,
141

Blue Coat School,
73

Board of Trade Office,
47

Boat-races,
145

Bolt Court,
25

Bond Street,
31

Book-trade,
115

Botanical Gardens,
134

Bow Church,
56

Bow Lane,
19

Bread Street,
19

Breweries,
113

Bridges,
102

Bridgewater Gallery,
40

— House,
40

Brighton Railway,
140

Britannia Theatre,
122

British Institution,
70

— Museum,
62

Broad Street,
17

Bromley,
163

Brooke Street,
24

Bryanstone Square,
31

Buccleuch House,
40

Buckingham Palace,
34

Bunhill Fields,
32

Burlington House,
69

Cabs and Cab Fares,
137
,
182

Cannon Street,
14
,
33

Canterbury Hall,
124

Cattle Market,
110

Cavendish Square,
31

Cecil Street,
27

Cemeteries,
57
,
61

Central Criminal Court,
21

Chancery Lane,
25

Chapels,
55

Charing Cross,
28
,
30

— Railway Station and Hotel,
27

— Theatre,
28
,
122

Charitable Institutions,
76

Charles I.’s Statue,
28

Charter House,
20

Charter House School,
73

Chatham and Dover Railway,
141

Cheapside,
15
,
19

Chelsea,
144

— Bridge,
104

— Hospital,
143

Chess Rooms,
176

Chesterfield House,
40

Child’s Banking Ho.,
26

Chiswick,
145

Chop-houses,
120

Christ’s Hospital,
73

Churches,
55

City Bank,
17

—Companies,
97

—of Lond. School,
20
,
75

—Prison,
93

— Road,
32

—, the,
12
,
15

Clapham,
144

Clement’s Inn,
27

Clock, Westminster,
43

Clothworkers’ Hall,
97

Clubs and Club Houses,
116
,
173

Coal Exchange,
110

Cockspur Street,
30

Coffee-houses,
120

— shops,
120

Colleges,
70

Colonial Office,
47

Colosseum,
132

Commercial Docks,
100

Commissionaires,
183

Common Council,
85

Companies’ Halls,
96

Concert Rooms,
123
,
178

Constitution Hill,
127

Corn Exchange,
18
,
113

Cornhill,
15
,
18

Corporation,
84

Cotton’s Wharf,
18

p.
186
Courts of Law,
44
,
92

Court Theatre,
122

Covent G. Market,
111

— Theatre,
28

Crane Court,
25

Craven Street,
27

Crays,
163

Cremorne Gardens,
125

Crossness Point,
161

Crystal Palace,
163

— Railway,
139

Custom House,
18
,
81

Deptford,
154

Devonshire House,
39

Dining-rooms,
120

Dissenting Chapels,
59

Docks,
18
,
99

Doctors’ Commons,
20

Doomsday Book,
92

Downing Street,
47

Down River Excur.,
154

Drainage System,
86
,
184

Drapers’ Hall,
96

Drury Lane Theatre,
28
,
121

Duke of York’s Column,
30

Duke of York’s School,
144

Dulwich College,
163

East India Docks,
99

— Museum,
67

Edmonton,
163

Egyptian Hall,
124

Electric Time-ball,
158

Eltham,
163

Enfield,
163

English Presbyterian Theological Coll.,
72

Entertainments,
124

Environs of London,
169

Epping Forest,
163

Erith,
161

Essex Street,
27

Eton College,
154

Euston Road,
32

— Station,
32

Evans’s Hotel and Supper Rooms,
28
,
124

Exchequer Office,
47

Excursions,
143

Exeter Hall,
28

Exhibition, International,
129

Exhibitions, &c.,
179

Farringdon St.,
22

Fenchurch Station,
141

— Street,
18

Finchley,
162

— Cemetery,
61

Finsbury Park,
133

— Square,
32

Fire Brigade,
88

Fires, Great,
10
,
18
,
80

Fishmongers’ Hall,
96

Fish Street,
18

Fish-supply,
111

Fleet Street,
22
,
24

— Valley,
21

Floral Hall,
112

Food-supply,
109

Foreign Office,
47

Fountains,
88
,
133
,
166

Free Exhibitions,
179

Fulham,
145

Gaiety Theatre,
28
,
122

Gall. of Illustration,
12

George III.’s Statue,
30

George IV.’s Statue,
29

Globe Theatre,
28
,
122

Gog and Magog,
89

Goldsmiths’ Hall,
20
,
96

Gough Square,
25

Government Offices,
45

Gracechurch Street,
18

Grand Surrey Docks,
100

Gravesend,
161

Grays,
161

Gray’s Inn,
91

Great E. Railway,
141

— Nor. Railway,
138

— W. Railway,
138

Grecian Theatre,
122

Greenhithe,
161

Green Park,
38
,
127

Greenwich,
155

— Hospital,
155

— Park,
158

Gresham House,
95

— Lectures,
72

— Street,
17

Grocers’ Hall,
96

Grosvenor Gallery,
39

— Hotel,
118

— House,
39

— Square,
31

Guards’ Memorial,
30

Guildhall,
20
,
88

Haberdashers’ Hall,
96

Hackney College,
72

Hammersmith,
145

Hampstead,
162

Hampton Court Palace,
149

Hanover Square,
31

— Rooms,
123

Harrow,
162

Havelock’s Statue,
30

Haymarket Theatre,
30
,
121

Henry VII.’s Chapel,
51

H. M. Theatre,
30
,
121

Highest Ground in London,
20

Highgate,
162

— Cemetery,
61

Hints to Strangers,
183

Holborn,
22

— Hill,
23

— Theatre,
122

— Valley Viaduct,
22

Holford House,
40

Holland House,
40

Home Office,
30
,
47

Hornsey,
162

Horse Guards,
30
,
46

Horticultural Gardens,
135

Hospitals,
76

Hotel Charges,
viii

Hotels,
117

Houndsditch,
18

House of Correction,
93

p.
187
Houses and Streets,
11

— of Parl
t
.,
30
,
49

Howard Street,
27

Hudson’s Bay House,
18

Hungerford Bridge,
104

Hyde Park,
31
,
127

— Square,
31

India House,
95

— Office,
47

Inns,
117

— of Court,
26
,
91

Insurance Offices,
94

International Exhibition,
129

Ironmonger Lane,
19

Ironmongers’ Hall,
96

Isle of Dogs,
159

Jewel House, Tower,
80

Jewish Synagogues,
59

Jews’ Quarter,
18

Johnson’s Court,
25

Junior Athenæum Club,
40

Kennington Park,
133

Kensal Green,
61

Kensington Garden,
131

— Palace,
36

Kew Gardens,
146

King’s College,
27
,
45
,
72

— Cross Station,
138

King Street,
19

King William St.,
13
,
18

Koh-i-noor,
80

Lady’s Mile,
129

Lambeth Bridge,
104

— Palace,
36

Landseer’s four Lions,
29

Lansdowne House,
40

Leadenhall Market,
111

— Street,
18

Letter Deliveries,
175

Lewisham,
163

Lighting,
87

Limehouse,
159

Lincoln’s Inn,
91

Lloyd’s,
90

Lombard Street,
15
,
18

London and N.-W. Railway,
138

London Bridge,
15
,
18
,
102

— Hotel,
119

— Station,
140

London, Chatham, and Dover Bridge,
23

London Docks,
100

— in Roman times,
9

— Stone,
168

— University,
70

Long Walk, Windsor,
154

Lord Mayor’s Show,
85

Lothbury Street,
17

Lower Serle’s Place,
25

Ludgate Hill,
21

— Railway Station,
21

Ludgate Street,
21

Lyceum Theatre,
28
,
122

Maclise’s Great Picture,
44

Mall,
126

Malt Liquors,
113

Manchester Square,
31

Mansion House,
15
,
19
,
88

Markets,
110

Mark Lane,
18

Marlborough House,
35

Marylebone Road,
32

— Church,
33

— Theatre,
122

May Fair,
31

Medicated Baths,
181

Mercers’ Grammar School,
75

Mercers’ Hall,
96

Merchant Taylors’ Hall,
96

Merchant Taylors’ School,
75

Metropolitan Railway,
33

Mile-End Cemetery,
61

Military Prison,
93

Milk Street,
19

Millbank Prison,
93

Mincing Lane,
18

Mint,
81

Mitcham,
163

Mitre Court,
24

Model Prison,
93

Money-Order Office,
175

Monument,
18
,
89

Moorgate Street,
16

Mortlake,
145

Mudie’s Library,
115

Museum, British,
62

Museum of College of Surgeons,
67

Museum, Geological,
66

Music Halls,
123
,
178

Napier’s Statue,
29

National Gallery,
30
,
68

— Portrait Gallery,
69

Nelson’s Column,
29

— Tomb,
49

New College,
72

Newgate,
92

— Market,
111

— Prison,
21

— Street,
20
,
22

News Rooms,
176

Norfolk Street,
27

Northfleet,
161

N. and S.W. Junction,
139

North London Railway,
141

Northumberland House,
28
,
38

Northumberland Street,
27

North Woolwich,
159

Norwood,
163

Observatory, Greenwich,
158

Old Bailey,
21
,
92

Old ’Change,
19

Old Roman Wall,
9

p.
188
Omnibus Routes,
136
,
171

Open House,
121

Oratorios,
123

Oxford Music Hall,
124

— Street,
31

Paddington,
32

— Station,
138

Palace of Justice,
27

Pall Mall,
29

Pantheon,
114

Panyer Alley,
20

Parcels’ Delivery Co.,
174

Park Lane,
31

Parks,
125

Parson’s Green,
145

Paternoster Row,
20

Pavilion Gardens,
125

Peel’s Statue,
20

Penitentiary, Millbank,
93

Pentonville Road,
32

Petticoat Lane,
18

Philharmonic Music Hall and Theatre,
124

Piccadilly,
30

Pimlico,
33

— Station,
140

Plague, Great,
10

Plumstead Marshes,
161

Pneumatic Despatch,
101

Police,
85

Polytechnic Inst.,
125

Pool, the,
98

Pope’s Villa,
148

Poplar,
159

Population,
11

Portland Place,
30

Portman Square,
31

Port of London,
98

Postal System,
175

Post-office, General,
83
,
175

P.O. Savings Banks,
175

Poultry,
16

Primrose Hill,
132

Prince of Wales’ Theatre,
122

Prince’s Street,
15

Princess’s Theatre,
122

Printing House Sq.,
21

Prisons,
92

Privy Council Office,
47

Purfleet,
161

Putney,
145

Quadrant,
30

Queen’s Bench Prison,
93

Queen’s Theatre,
28
,
122

Queen Street,
19

Queen Victoria Street,
14
,
19
,
107

Railway Bridges,
104

— Distances,
169

— Hotels,
118

Railways,
138

Rainham,
161

Reading Rooms,
63
,
176

Record Office,
92

Regent’s Park,
132

Regent Street,
29
,
30

Registrar-General’s Office,
45

Richard Cœur de Lion’s Statue,
30

Richmond,
147

— Bridge,
147

— Hill,
148

— Park,
149

Roman Catholic Chapels,
59

Rotherhithe,
101

Rothschild’s House,
40

Rotten Row,
129

Routes through London,
13

Royal Academy,
69

— Albert Hall,
131

— Exchange,
15
,
19
,
90

— Humane Society,
129

Royal Institution,
67

— Military Asylum,
144

Royal Music Hall,
124

Sacred Harmonic Concerts,
123

Sadler’s Wells,
122

— Court,
25

Salisbury Street,
27

Savoy Chapel,
57

Schools, Public,
73

—, Various,
75

Scientific Societies,
68

Sergeant’s Inn,
92

Serpentine,
129

Sheepshanks’ Pictures,
65

Shilling Exhibitions,
179

Shoe Lane,
23

Shops,
113

Skinners’ Hall,
96

Shoreditch Station,
141

Smithfield,
20
,
110

Snow Hill,
33

Soane Museum,
70

Society of Arts,
67

— of British Artists,
70

Soho Bazaar,
114

— Theatre,
122

Somerset House,
27
,
44

South-Eastern Railway,
140

South-Eastern Railway Bridge,
103

South Kensington Museum,
64

South Sea House,
17
,
95

Southwark Bridge,
103

— Park,
133

South-Western Railway,
139

Spitalfields,
18

Spring Gardens,
29

Spurgeon’s Tabernacle,
60

St. Bride’s Church,
26

St. Clement Dane’s Church,
27

St. Dunstan’s Church,
26

St. George’s Cathedral,
60

St. Helena Gardens,
125

St. James’s Church,
58

— Hall,
124

—Palace,
33

p. 189
St.
James’s Park,
29
,
33
,
38
,
125

— Square,
31

— Theatre,
122

St. John’s Gate,
20

— Wood,
31

St. Katherine’s Docks,
100

— Hos.,
132

St. Martin’s Church,
28

St. Martin’s-le-Grand,
20

St. Mary’s Church,
27

St. Pancras’ Church,
33

— Station,
32

St. Paul’s Cathedral,
20
,
47

— Churchyard,
20
,
112

— School,
73

Stafford House,
38

Star and Garter, Putney,
145
,
149

State Paper Office,
92

Stationers’ Hall,
97

Steam-boat Piers,
105

Steamers,
142

Stepney,
19

Stock Exchange,
17

Strand,
27
,
29

— Theatre,
28
,
122

Strawberry Hill,
148

Streets,
113

Suburban Villages,
169

Sun Fire Office,
17

Surrey Gardens,
125

— Street,
27

— Theatre,
123

Taverns,
119

Tea Gardens,
125

Telegraphs,
175
,
176

Temperance Hotels,
121

Temple,
26
,
90

— Bar,
26
,
27

— Church,
91

— Gardens,
91

Thames, and Shipping,
97

Thames Embankment,
14
,
106

Thames Subway,
18

— Tunnel,
18
,
101

Theatres,
121
,
176

Threadneedle St.,
17
,
93

Tilbury,
161

— and Southend Railway,
141

Times’
Office,
21

Tobacco Dock,
100

Tooley Street,
18

Tower of London,
18
,
77

Tower Subway,
101

Trades, Number of,
114

Trafalgar Square,
29

Training Colleges,
73

Tramways,
173

Treasury,
30
,
46

Trinity House,
95

Turkish Baths,
180

Turner’s Pictures,
68

Tussaud’s Exhibition,
125

Twickenham,
148

Tyburnia,
31

United Service Museum,
67

University College,
71

— Hall,
72

Upper Regent Street,
30

Up River Excursions,
143

Vaudeville Theatre,
28
,
122

Vauxhall Bridge,
104

— Gardens,
125

Vegetable Markets,
111

Vernon Pictures,
68

Victoria Docks,
99

— Park,
132

— Station,
140

— Street,
22

— Theatre,
123

— Tower,
43

Villiers’ Street,
27

Vintners’ Hall,
97

Walbrook,
15

Walham Green,
145

Waltham,
163

— Abbey,
163

Wandsworth,
144

War Office,
47

Water-colour Exhib.,
70

— Supply,
109

Waterloo Bridge,
27
,
45
,
104

— Place,
30

— Station,
139

Wellington’s Statue,
39

Wesleyan College,
72

Westbourne Terrace,
31

West-End,
19
,
27

— India Docks,
99

— London Rail,
139

Westminster Abbey,
30
,
51

— Bridge,
30
,
41
,
104

— Hall,
30
,
41
,
44

— Palace,
29

— Palace Hotel,
119

— School,
73

Weston’s Music Hall,
124

Wharfs,
98

Whitebait Taverns,
155
,
159

Whitechapel,
19

— Market,
111

Whitecross Street Prison,
92

Whitehall,
29

— Banqueting House,
30

— Chapel,
57

— Gardens,
30

Wimbledon,
144
,
163

Winchester Street,
17

Windsor,
151

— Castle,
153

Wine Vaults, Docks,
100

Woking Necropolis,
61

Wood Street,
19

Woolwich,
159

Wren’s Churches,
58

Zoological Gardens,
133

p. 190
WILLIAM
COLLINS & CO., PRINTERS,

HERRIOT HILL WORKS, GLASGOW.

FOOTNOTES

[16]
Most of the illustrations are

bird’s-eye views
, taken from house-tops and
church-towers, in order to shew as many public buildings as
possible.  The reader will attribute to this cause any
apparent distortion of perspective, as compared with views taken
from level ground.

[18]
This tremendous conflagration was
one of the largest ever known in London since 1666, involving the
loss of property valued at two millions sterling.  The ruins
were still hot, steaming and smoking, seven weeks after the fire
commenced.  Mr. Braidwood, chief of the London Fire Brigade,
perished in the ruins; a public funeral testified to the esteem
in which he was held.

[20]
This is not what is called
London Stone
.  That famous stone will
be found on the side of St. Swithin’s Church, New Cannon
Street.  (See p. 168.)

[40]
Tickets of admission can
generally be obtained, during the season, of Messrs Smith, 137
New Bond Street.  Days of admission, from 10 till 5,
Mondays, Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays.

[47a]
The total cost, including 200
tons of iron-railing, was £1,511,202.

[47b]
It is strange that, in relation
to the best known building in London, great discordance reigns
concerning the total
height
.  Wren’s son, in
the
Parentalia
, simply states that the lantern is 330 feet
from the ground; Maitland gives the total height at 340 feet;
many authorities name 360 feet; while several Hand-books and
Guides, following the pamphlet sold in the cathedral, raise it to
404 feet.  This last statement agrees with the Cockney
tradition, that St. Paul’s is twice as high as the
Monument.  A careful examination of the vertical section,
however, shews that the height is about 356 feet above the marble
pavement of the cathedral, 375 above the level of the crypt, and
370 above the pavement of the churchyard.  It will thus be
sufficiently near the truth to say that St. Paul’s is 365
feet high—a familiar number, easy to remember.

[178]
Is also a theatre.

[179]
Is also a theatre.

***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COLLINS' ILLUSTRATED GUIDE TO LONDON

AND NEIGHBOURHOOD***

***** This file should be named 39379-h.htm or 39379-h.zip******

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/9/3/7/39379

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.

*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).

Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License.  You must require such a user to return or
destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.

Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.

Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.