The Project Gutenberg eBook, Eight Sermons on The Priesthood, Altar, and
Sacrifice, by Mayow Wynell Mayow

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Eight Sermons on The Priesthood, Altar, and Sacrifice

Author: Mayow Wynell Mayow

Release Date: June 2, 2015  [eBook #49115]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)

***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EIGHT SERMONS ON THE PRIESTHOOD,
ALTAR, AND SACRIFICE***

Transcribed from the 1867 James Parker and Co. edition by
David Price, email ccx074@pglaf.org

Eight Sermons

ON

THE PRIESTHOOD, ALTAR, AND

SACRIFICE.

BY

MAYOW WYNELL MAYOW, M.A.,

PERPETUAL
CURATE OF ST. MARY’S, WEST BROMPTON, AND LATE

STUDENT OF CHRIST CHURCH,
OXFORD.

“The principles of Christianity are now as
freely questioned as the most doubtful and controverted points;
the grounds of faith are as safely denied as the most unnecessary
superstructions; that religion hath the greatest advantage which
appeareth in the newest dress, as if we looked for another faith
to be delivered to the saints: whereas in Christianity there can
be no concerning truth which is not ancient, and whatsoever is
truly new, is certainly false.”—(
Bp. Pearson on the Creed
:
Epistle
Dedicatory
.)

Oxford and London
:

JAMES PARKER AND CO.

1867.

p. iii
TO
THE

RIGHT REV. FATHER IN GOD,

WALTER KERR,

LORD BISHOP OF SALISBURY,

IN GRATEFUL REMEMBRANCE OF A CONNECTION
WITH HIS

DIOCESE FOR NEARLY A QUARTER OF A
CENTURY,

AS A TOKEN OF REVERENCE FOR HIS OFFICE,
AND UNFEIGNED

RESPECT FOR HIS CHARACTER,

AS SOME LITTLE ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF
MANY

KINDNESSES RECEIVED,

AND AS A HUMBLE TRIBUTE TO HIS
CONSTANCY

IN DEFENDING THE FAITH IN

THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND,

This Volume

IS (BY
PERMISSION) INSCRIBED,

BY HIS LORDSHIP’S VERY FAITHFUL AND
GRATEFUL SERVANT,

M. W. MAYOW.

p.
v
ADVERTISEMENT.

The
following Sermons were preached
at St. Mary’s, West Brompton, in November and December,
1866.  They are now printed as a humble contribution towards
the defence of the Catholic doctrine of the priesthood, the
altar, and the sacrifice, in days when there seem no limits to
assault upon it, when there prevails every conceivable confusion
between what is Catholic and what is Roman, and when there is the
widest misapprehension of the principles of our
Reformation.  If this small volume should contribute in any
way to a better understanding of those principles, and to the
vindication of the loyalty to our own Church of such as,
maintaining its Catholic character, desire equally to be loyal to
the Church Universal, (and believe in truth that there is no
antagonism between them,) it will not, I trust, be wholly
useless.  If, further, it should lead any, in the spirit of
candour and of prayer, to give more consideration to this
doctrine than perhaps hitherto they have done, and especially to
consult larger and more learned works upon the subject, I shall
have great additional reason to be thankful.

It is, I hope, hardly necessary to add that there is no
intention or desire in anything here said to pass judgment upon
individuals, either within or without our own communion.  It
will be found
p.
vi
stated in the following discourses how readily we
believe that many receive the benefits of the Christian altar and
sacrifice who are yet unconscious of them; whilst it is also
willingly acknowledged, even as regards those who more directly
deny Catholic doctrine, that the present divided state of
Christendom, and the wide differences of teaching within our own
communion, make it a very different thing to be unable to see,
(or even to oppose,) the truth than would be the case if the
Church were still united, as of old, in one harmonious voice and
one external communion, or if there were a perfect unanimity
among ourselves.  When, alas, even priests are found to
repudiate their priesthood, it must be admitted, without reserve,
that there is too much excuse for the laity being uncertain and
perplexed.  Whilst this teaches us to award the largest
measure of charitable construction to those who differ from us,
it gives only the more urgent cause both to state and vindicate
the ancient faith, and to shew that it was in God’s mercy
preserved to us at the Reformation.

I must not omit to say that I am indebted to Mr.
Carter’s excellent treatise for many facts, suggestions,
and illustrations, even beyond those which the references given
explicitly acknowledge.

M. W. M.

St. Mary’s
,
West Brompton
.

February

7, 1867.

p.
vii
CONTENTS.

SERMON I.

(p.
1
.)

Treasure in Earthen
Vessels.—Faith, not Sight, the Recogniser of the
Priesthood.

“But we have this
treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power may
be of God, and not of us.”—2
Cor.
iv. 7.

SERMON II.

(p.
23
.)

The Witness of the World, before
Christ, to the Doctrine of Sacrifice.

“Thus did Job
continually.”—
Job
i. 5.

SERMON III.

(p.
45
.)

The Witness of the New Testament
to the Doctrine of Sacrifice.

“Are not they
which eat of the sacrifices partakers of the
altar?”—1
Cor.
x. 18.

SERMON IV.

(p.
63
.)

The Testimony of the Early
Church to the Doctrine of the Priesthood.

“Thus saith the
Lord, Stand ye in the ways, and see, and ask for the old paths,
where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest
for your souls.”—
Jer.
vi. 16.

p. viii
SERMON V.

(p.
79
.)

The Testimony of our Formularies
to the Doctrine of the Priesthood.

“And when He had said this, He breathed on
them, and saith unto them Receive ye the Holy Ghost: whose soever
sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whose soever sins
ye retain, they are retained.”—
St. John
xx.
22, 23.

SERMON VI.

(p.
97
.)

The Christian Altar.

“We have an
altar.”—
Heb.
xiii. 10.

SERMON VII.

(p.
113
.)

The Christian Altar.

“We have an
altar.”—
Heb.
xiii. 10.

SERMON VIII.

(p.
135
.)

God Incarnate our Great High
Priest.

“In whom are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge.”—
Coloss.

ii. 3.

p. 1
SERMON
I.

Treasure in Earthen Vessels.—Faith, not Sight, the
Recogniser of the Priesthood.

2 CORINTHIANS iv. 7.

“But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the
excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us.”

The
words rendered “in
earthen vessels,” are easy enough as to their general
sense.
Ἐν
ὀστρακίνοις
σκεύεσιν
,
(the Apostle says,) where

σκεύος
may stand
for any kind of utensil or household stuff.  It is the word
used in St. Matthew, “How can one enter a strong
man’s house and spoil his
goods
;”
[1]
any of his household stuff or
possessions; whilst

ὀστράκίνοιν
,
(the same word which gave its name to the well-known Grecian

ostracism
, from the mode of voting,) signifying in its
first sense that which is made of shell and therefore brittle, is
often used in a derived sense for anything frail and liable to
break, and when broken not to be re-joined.  Therefore,
again, it represents anything poor and mean, as compared with
other stronger or more precious material.  Thus, in his
second Epistle to Timothy, St. Paul uses the very same word to
denote those inferior vessels which are made for less honourable
use:
p.
2
“But in a great house, there are not only vessels
of gold and silver, but also of wood and of earth;

ὀστράκινα
;—and
some to honour, and some to dishonour.”
[2a]

We cannot, then, err as to the general meaning of the text, if
we take it to express the fact that great gifts of
God—treasure—may be, and are, according to His will,
and for good and wise reason, lodged in weak and frail tenements,
giving little outward sign of that which is hid within: great
riches enshrined in poor and mean caskets, even as the soul of
man dwells in the earthy tabernacle, (that red earth or clay
which gave its very name to Adam,) when “the Lord God
formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his
nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living soul.”

[2b]

But St. Paul’s application of the figure here is
somewhat different from the illustration just used.  It is
not life, or an immortal soul shrouded in a mortal body, of which
he speaks, but some special gift or gifts of God for the use of
His Church and people, which he declares had been entrusted to
vessels of little “form or comeliness.”  And it
will be of much interest and importance both to trace out what
this treasure is, and what are the vessels in which it is placed,
as well as to insist upon the fact that the treasure is not the
less, because thus shrouded or obscured; and that it gives no
cause to deny the existence of the treasure, that those who bear
it seem either so
p.
3
like other men as they do, or so little worthy in
themselves of what they bear.

Now, to see what the treasure is, we need turn back but a
little way.  In the preceding chapter, speaking of himself
and others charged with the ministry of the Gospel, the Apostle
says, deprecating all high thoughts in those so honoured:
“Not that we are sufficient of ourselves to think anything
as of ourselves, but our sufficiency is of God, who also hath
made us able ministers of the New Testament;” and then,
after thus disclaiming all personal merit or glory, he goes on
immediately to contrast the glory of the Gospel with the glories
of the earlier dispensation.  “For if the ministration
of death,” he says, “written and engraven in stones
was glorious, so that the children of Israel could not stedfastly
behold the face of Moses for the glory of his countenance; which
glory was to be done away: how shall not the ministration of the
Spirit be rather glorious?  For if the ministration of
condemnation be glory, much more doth the ministration of
righteousness exceed in glory.”
[3a]
Pursuing this
thought a little further, and enlarging upon the glories of the
ministration of the Spirit of the Lord which giveth life, he
comes back; at the opening of the fourth chapter, more closely to
the subject of his ministry, and says: “Therefore, as we
have received this ministry, we faint not;”
[3b]
and after a word on the effect of the
Gospel which he preached, that it
p. 4
led to the “renouncing the
hidden things of dishonesty;”
[4a]
and another, as to
its being sufficiently manifested to every willing heart, and so,
if hidden, hidden only “to them that are lost, whom the God
of this world hath blinded;”
[4b]
he returns once more
to what it was which he preached, and declares how this great
treasure,—“the unsearchable riches of Christ,”
as he elsewhere describes it,—was entrusted to poor and
weak instruments; “for we preach,” he says,
“not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord; and ourselves
your servants for Jesus’ sake.  For God, who commanded
the light to shine out of darkness,” (that is, in the
natural world when He said, “Let there be light:”)
“hath shined in our hearts,” (that is, in the new
creation of the spiritual world,) “to give the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus
Christ.”
[4c]
And then, in the text, he seems
to meet an objection, that if his call and ministry in the Gospel
were of so glorious a nature, the instruments thereof would bear
more or higher marks of glory themselves, he adds the words of
our text: “But we have this treasure in earthen vessels,
that the excellency of the power may be of God, and not of
us.”
[4d]

And now, brethren, again I ask, what is the treasure, and to
whom committed?  Surely the ministry of the glorious Gospel
of Jesus Christ, entrusted to human stewardship!

p. 5
And who
shall disparage this, or overlook it, or deny the gifts and
treasure of and in those who bear it, though they be but as
earthen vessels; though they look simply like other men; though
they are “men of like passions;” though they have few
or no high marks or tokens, to be discerned by man’s eye,
of the greatness of the treasure which nevertheless they
bear?

This thought, this warning against denying God’s gifts
when lodged in earthen vessels, and so speaking against them as
actually to make a new Gospel totally unlike to that which has
been from the beginning, is especially a danger of our day: a day
when men live so much by sight, and, alas, so little by faith;
when restless and free enquiry ranges over every subject, and men
pride themselves upon their refusal to submit to any authority
but their own reason, or their own mere opinion, or to receive
anything beyond that of which they can understand the mode and
assign the use.

Not, perhaps, the most unfrequent of these attacks of the
present time is directed against almost the very subject of our
text: the reality of the treasure or gifts bestowed upon the
ministers and stewards of Christ’s mysteries, because they
are contained in earthen vessels.  Whereas St. Paul fully
claims and asserts that there is this treasure, and gives as the
sufficient reason for its being so lowlily enshrined, that
thereby it would be seen indeed that “the excellency of the
power
p. 6
is of
God, and not of man;”
[6]
these objectors deny
there can be any such treasure as it is asserted there is,
because it is not to their eye exhibited in or by, glorious, or
sufficiently distinctive, instruments.

Take a case in illustration, very near indeed to the argument
of the Apostle in this place.  If our Christianity in our
beloved Church of England is, and is to be, the Christianity
which has been from the beginning, it cannot be without a
priesthood, and an altar, and a sacrifice.  I do not propose
at this moment to go into the proofs of this, but rather to
notice an objection which is sometimes triumphantly put forward,
by modern infidelity or ignorance, as fatal to all such
claims.  It is said, that if it were so that there is a
priesthood, (which it is intended to deny;—O sad and
fearful thought!  That any should be found to deny and
refuse the chiefest means of applying to us the pardon of the
Cross): but if it were so, then, it is said this priesthood must
be seen to be such by some peculiar exhibition of its powers, by
some glorious or distinctive appearance in the treasure-bearing
vessels.  So it is said, Whatever there may be elsewhere,
the Church of England at least has no priesthood, and no
priests.  No!  Can any one believe (it is added) that
they are priests who are young men, as others, one day; and are
ordained, with so little outward difference, the next?
p. 7
Can it be that
prayers and a laying on of hands, even by bishops, can effect
such a change when all looks so nearly the same?  No,
truly!  If such there were, if such there be, if we are to
believe in a power given of this kind, if the priest can
consecrate, and offer upon the altar of God, let us see the
difference.  Let the young, who are to fill such an office,
be educated, not as other young men are, living with them in
social life at our schools and Universities, but as set apart for
this from their earliest days.  Let them be known of all as
a separate kind or caste; let them have a distinctive dress; let
them give up social life; let them, above all, renounce the
married state, and give themselves up to pursue their avocation
in the single life; and then, perhaps, we may be more inclined to
believe in their sacrificial function; in their power to
officiate sacerdotally at the altar; in the committal to them of
the power of the keys, and all which is included in the idea of a
distinct order and a priestly authority.  Now all this,
brethren, is mere man’s wisdom, setting forth, in truth,
not what it really desires to find as the mark of a priesthood,
if it might have this in vessels of gold or silver, but simply,
if it may not disparage and deny a priesthood of Christianity
altogether, (which yet it desires to do), at least delighting to
deny it to
us
; to raise a prejudice against it, and to
drive from the Church of England (if it were possible) all those
who cleave to the statements of our formularies
p. 8
as they are,
and to the faith once for all delivered and handed down to
us.

But observe, brethren, what all this really amounts to.
I am not saying whether there should not be (unto the more
edification), a more distinctive theological education for the
future priesthood than very often there is among us.  I am
not saying whether there might not, with advantage, be some
greater distinction in outward appearance or dress, than we have
among us generally, for those who minister in holy things.
(Let it, however, here be remarked, that the greatest objection
and hindrance as to this proceeds, as we well know, from the
clamours of those who would first deny us all priestly character,
and then reproach any who, claiming it, are anxious to mark it
also by some outward difference.)  I am not, however, now
dwelling upon these things, nor even on what are the advantages
or disadvantages of a celibate clergy, but I say that to suppose
the presence or absence of these outward signs or marks should
affect the essence of the priesthood, and men being in reality
and truth ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of
God, in the full sense in which these words are understood in all
the primitive writings and liturgies of the Church of Christ,
shews, not only an ignorance of the very first principles of
Christian worship, but a strange overlooking of the truth taught
in the text, and confirmed to us in so many other places of Holy

p.
9
Scripture.  If St. Paul confessed that, even with
him, his ministry was confided to an earthen vessel; if there
were no need and no likelihood that any of the primitive stewards
of God’s mysteries should be distinguished as by a star
upon their breast, or any insignia of their rank in the Apostolic
band, then it can amount to nothing as a disproof of the
priesthood of the ministry of the Church of England, that those
who serve at her altars have but the outward look and bearing of
other men.

We may even carry this argument further, if it may be so done
with due reverence and humility.  We may take, not merely
prophets and Apostles, but our blessed Lord Himself,—our
King as well as our great High Priest,—and say of Him,
that, although of course it is not objectively true that He had
any of His gifts or powers in an earthen vessel, (save in the
sense that He took upon Him man’s nature, and so being of
Adam’s race—yet without sin—had His share of
the earth of which Adam was created); but though, I say, except
thus, He held not anything in an earthen vessel objectively,
still, on the other hand, subjectively, to man’s sight and
apprehension, He veiled His Godhead, He emptied Himself of His
glory, He obscured His greatness, so that nearly throughout His
life and ministry He was passed over as a common man, or His
claims denied, and Himself treated as an impostor.  In spite
of the
p.
10
holiness of His life, the tenderness of His compassion,
the purity of His precepts, the marvels of His teaching, the
abundance and power of His miracles, yet He was not received or
accepted generally as other than a common man.  The Jews
were offended at Him.  He was to them “a stumbling
block,” as He was to the Greeks
“foolishness.”  He came in no outward
manifestation of glory; He was not in kings’ courts; He had
no armies or numerous followers; He won no carnal victories; He
did nothing “to restore the kingdom to Israel,” in
any sense which the Jewish nation could observe or recognise;
nay, in His very priestly acts, and in that greatest of them in
which He did in truth offer up the great sacrifice of all, He
appeared to man’s eye in no such aspect.  Even as a
victim, He was only considered as a malefactor put to death,
whilst it may be well doubted whether even His own Apostles had
the least insight at the time into the nature of the sacrifice He
made; and none of them had a single thought or perception of the
priesthood which He exercised.  So, indeed, He seemed to
have “no form nor comeliness;”
[10a]
“His visage was so marred more
than any man, and His form more than the sons of men.”
[10b]
He seemed to have all He had in
an earthen vessel, undistinguished and undistinguishable by the
vulgar eye from others who were around Him, or who had preceded
Him,
p. 11
with
some pretensions to be teachers, or reformers of manners, but who
had disappeared and left no trace behind them.  Is it, then,
so certain that those who now “seek after a sign”
before they admit any claim to “the office of a priest in
the Church of God,” and who look for various marks and
distinctions in outward show or appearance before they will
entertain the doctrine as belonging to the Church of England; is
it, I say, so certain that they would not have rejected Christ
Himself, as not coming up to their mark and requirement, if they
had seen Him in the days of His ministration upon earth?

But let us pass on from the priesthood of our Lord and
Saviour, and turn again for a moment to the Apostles and their
fellow-labourers.  Observe, I am not engaged in proving now
their priestly character, nor the truth of the sacrifices, or
altars of the Christian religion; (we may come to this another
day;) but I am merely meeting the preliminary objection that
there can be no such things, at least, none such in the Church of
England, because our priesthood is not more manifestly set forth
in outward show to the eye of the world, by a more distinctive
priestly education, or a more distinctive priestly dress, or a
more distinctive (as is supposed) priestly life as separated from
social life; and this particularly by the exhibition of an
unmarried clergy.  As I have before said, I am not even
giving an opinion on the advantages or disadvantages of
p. 12
some of these
things; but I am asking the plain broad question, What right have
we, from Scripture and Scriptural example, to say these
differences are needful to the existence of a priesthood?
Be the priesthood and ministerial powers of St. Peter and St.
Paul, and others their companions, what they may, did they shew
them forth as in vessels of gold and silver, or were they not
what we may call obscured, undistinguished, not (in many
particulars at least) dissevered from social life, but just like
other men; in short, with their treasure borne in earthen
vessels, however really great and precious in itself?

Carry your mind back, brethren, to Simon Peter with Andrew his
brother, to James and John, the sons of Zebedee, fishing on the
sea of Galilee.  There is no reason, at I know of, to
suppose that they wholly gave up this their occupation
immediately upon their endowments at the day of Pentecost.
They certainly pursued them as long as their Lord was with them,
and after the Crucifixion.  Nay, after the Resurrection;
after Jesus had appeared unto the Eleven; after He had
“breathed on them and said, Receive ye the Holy
Ghost,” and conveyed to them, (if any thing could do so,)
the priestly power, saying, “Whose soever sins ye remit,
they are remitted unto them; and whose soever sins ye retain,
they are retained,”
[12]
still Simon Peter
said to the rest, “I go a fishing; and they said unto him,
We also
p. 13
go
with thee.”
[13a]
Will any one
dare to say, Had they been true priests of God, they must have
pursued another mode of life, and borne the marks of their office
more demonstratively and visibly before the eyes of men?
Will any say, We cannot receive it that the hands, engaged one
day in casting a hook into the sea, or spreading or mending nets,
can be those which exercise, the next, (or the same if so it be,)
the Christian ministerial office,—in breaking of bread, and
celebrating the most holy Christian mysteries?  Will any say
that the lips which called to their partners for help, or in
direction as to the safety or management of their boats and
fishing, must therefore be incapable of preaching the glad
tidings of the Gospel, or of exercising the commission given them
of binding and loosing in the name of Christ?  Or, think of
St. Paul, with his fellow-helper and companion in labour, Aquila,
working with their hands at their craft, “for by their
occupation they were tent-makers;”
[13b]
aye, even “working night and
day,” that they “might not be chargeable” to
others: and will any say, Herein they shewed themselves too like
to other men to put forward any pretence or claim to have or
exercise any priestly or sacerdotal function.  Will any
again call to mind that St. Peter was certainly a married man;
(“Peter’s wife’s mother,” we read at one
time, “was sick of a fever;”) as also certainly was
Aquila the companion
p. 14
in labour of St. Paul, (for he came
“with his wife Priscilla;”) or, once more, St.
Paul’s own claim to the right (though he did not exercise
it, but still the right) to marry if he thought fit; as he says,
“Have we not power to eat and to drink?  Have we not
power to lead about a sister, a wife, as well as other Apostles,
and as the brethren of the Lord, and Cephas?”
[14]
will any consider so much, and then
say, you must needs have a celibate priesthood, if you are to
have any priesthood at all in the Church of Christ; or, if there
be one, it must be one so separated from all earthly pursuit as
to be recognised at a glance as of a different order?

Nay, my brethren, such things are surely no arguments of even
a feather’s weight in the mouth of any man against a true
priesthood in the Church of England; and one can hardly see how
they can be supposed, by any sober-minded thinker, to be either
contained in, or deduced from, Holy Scripture.  They are, in
fact, objections merely playing with the prejudices of those who
have already come to a foregone conclusion, and intended rather
to point an unjust shaft at the Church of England, through a mock
admiration of the Church of Rome, than to advance the cause of
truth.  And this with no justice, even towards Rome herself,
either in praise or blame; for Rome herself may have something to
say in defence of her practice as to the distinctions
p. 15
with which
she marks her priesthood, if looked on merely as matters of
expediency and not of faith or doctrine; and at the same time, we
certainly have no little reason to maintain that in many of these
things, (and however there may be incidental disadvantages which
we need not deny, on the ground of expediency also,) yet we come
the nearer of the two to the following of the Apostles, in the
not making too broad an outward distinction between priests and
people, and in the not having laid a yoke hard to be borne,
perhaps, as a wide and extended rule, too hard to be borne, upon
our priesthood’s neck; and, in short, that we are at any
rate close upon the very type and pattern which St. Paul mentions
in our text, in that we too have our treasure in earthen vessels,
and may, in one sense at least, rejoice that it is so, inasmuch
as thereby it may be seen by all “that the excellency of
the power is of God, and not of us.”

Further, it needs surely no words to prove that such
objections and such line of argument in denial of our priesthood,
can have but one effect, if they have any, namely, to forward the
interests of the Church of Rome.  This, I presume, ought in
consistency to be the last wish of those who use them.  But
so it is, and in this way.  There is no more possibility of
any one, who has the knowledge of what Christianity has been from
the beginning, being moved by such assertions to disbelieve the
great doctrines of the
p. 16
priesthood, the altar, and the
sacrifice, as belonging, and necessarily belonging, to the Church
Universal, than there is of the words of the objectors moving
mountains or drying up seas.  We can no more unlearn the
very first elements of the appointed mode of our applying to
Christ for His intercession on high for us miserable
sinners,—no more believe the Catholic truths which we have
drunk in to be mere human figments and superstitious
inventions,—than we could return to the system of Ptolemy,
and believe the earth to be the centre round which the sun and
the stars revolve.  Nothing, therefore, can be gained in
this direction by those who propound such views.  But if it
should be that any, who know what the Church Universal holds and
has ever held on these points, should, by weakness or
inadvertence, be shaken in their belief that the Church of
England maintains these doctrines and preserves this sacerdotal
order,—if any should come to think that perhaps after all
she has not a priesthood, and an altar, and a sacrifice, then
such would no doubt begin to fail in their allegiance to her, and
be afraid longer to trust their souls to her teaching or her
keeping.  No well-instructed, patient, humble-minded member
of the Church of England can, I think, be deceived by so
sophistical an argument as that which we have been considering;
but, of course, all are not well instructed, nor, perchance, are
all patient or humble minded, and hence it may be, there

is
a danger.
p. 17
But if there be this danger, or if
any defections should follow upon such defamation of our Church,
those who put forth the libel must have upon their conscience the
weight of having aided the Church of Rome against their Mother
Church of England.

But to return; take but two brief illustrations further of our
subject.  You will remember the contention between St. Paul
and St. Barnabas concerning “Mark, sister’s son to
Barnabas,” whom “Paul thought not good to take with
them,” and how it “was so sharp between them that
they parted asunder one from the other.”
[17a]
Again, you will recollect the
occasion when at Antioch St. Paul (as he says),
“withstood” St. Peter “to the face because he
was to be blamed;” saying to him “before them all, If
thou, being a Jew, livest after the manner of the Gentiles, and
not as do the Jews, why compellest thou the Gentiles to live as
do the Jews?”  Consider that “the other Jews
dissembled likewise with him, insomuch that Barnabas also was
carried away with their dissimulation;” and to such a point
did this reach, that St. Paul declares he “saw that they
walked not uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel;”

[17b]
put all this together and then say
whether, upon the grounds of the objection urged, any one might
not far more plausibly have denied to the Apostles themselves any
just power or fitness to rule or teach authoritatively
p. 18
in the Church
of God, than any man can deny the priesthood of the Church of
England because its power is not more demonstratively shewn among
us.

Or, for a second point, note this:—Does, or did ever,
the admission to the Christian covenant, and the wondrous gift of
God, the new birth of water and of the Spirit, by which, as the
Apostle plainly teaches, Christians are made the temples of the
Holy Ghost; does it, or did it ever, make such outward show of
difference as will enable man to decide, immediately and
infallibly, who are Christ’s, and who are forfeiting or
have forfeited the gift bestowed?  Then, if there be not
this palpable manifestation as to the Christian life in each, why
should there be a more manifest and outward demonstration of the
treasure of the priesthood?  If the grace of Baptism be not
thus self-evident, and ever recognised by sight, why must the
grace of Orders be so either?  Oh! when shall we learn to
believe instead of to cavil; to use the blessings God gives us,
not to dispute about them; to judge, not according to appearance,
but to judge righteous judgment; to believe there is a treasure,
even the treasure which the Church has ever believed and declared
to be in her ministry and stewardship, though it be contained in
earthen vessels?

One word more, brethren, of most serious weight and import, as
to such objections and I objectors.  Carry your mind back to
the time
p.
19
of Christ, to the labours of Apostles and Evangelists,
and the infancy of the Church, and see of what Spirit they
are.  I am not speaking, remember, of all who may, from one
cause or other, not be able to receive the doctrine of the
Christian priesthood and altar, and who, we may well hope and
believe, many of them receive the blessing of these gifts of
Christ, though they know it not; but I speak of the particular
objection with which I have all along been dealing,—that
there cannot be a Priesthood, unless marked by striking outward
differences visible by all.  And I ask, what would have been
the part taken, if the framers of such a test, being consistent
in their objection, had lived in the days of Christ on
earth?  Surely we should have heard them saying, aye, in
spite of His mighty works and great High Priesthood, “Is
not this the carpenter’s Son?  Is not His mother
called Mary, and His brethren James, and Joses, and Simon, and
Judas?  And His sisters, are they not all with us?”
[19a]
What is He different from
another?  Or what more likely than that expecting something
different in show and demeanour in the great Apostle of the
Gentiles, they would have joined in the reproach: “His
bodily presence is weak and his speech contemptible!”
[19b]
and have rejected Him?

If these things shew us the dangers of such a line of
argument, let them keep us from any
p. 20
word said to countenance or support
it.  It is a solemn thought that we cannot, by even the most
careless word of levity, express approval of such assaults upon
the ancient faith, or sympathy with those who make them, without
becoming sharers in their responsibility.  For it is thus,
by a few words here and a few there, that public opinion is
formed or strengthened; and what can be more awful than to have
helped to form it adversely to the truth of God, and in
derogation of that “ministry of reconciliation,” and
those means of grace, which He has appointed.  Surely the
sin of such must be, like that of the sons of Eli, “very
great before the Lord,” when a prejudice is raised by which
men, if they do not “abhor,” are at least taught to
deny and despise, “the offering of the Lord.”
At the same time, let us pray earnestly for them, for, we will
hope and trust, “they know not what they do.”
Let us not wish that they went out from us, but let us hope and
pray that they may be turned to better things.  Let us
remember, too, as a ground of charity, that many fall into error
here because too much, for many years, the teaching of the
primitive Church and of Catholic antiquity has been overlooked as
a guide to the due understanding of the Scriptures; and again,
because the face of Christendom, alas, is not now so one and
undivided as to present all truth in due form, and mode, and
weight, to each man’s acceptance.  The glory
p. 21
of our
Reformation is, indeed, that it appeals to antiquity, and carries
us back to the early Church; but these later days have too much
overlooked this great principle of the Reformation.  So it
has happened, that what is, alas, the misfortune and the reproach
of Christendom—I mean its divided state—may be, and
we will hope is, some palliation before God for defect in those
who wish to follow the truth, but are unable at the present
moment to see or to accept it.  So let us above all pray to
the one great Lord of all, that in His good time the Church may
again be one, not only in its essence, which it must be, (we
believe in but “one holy Catholic and Apostolic
Church,”) but also in its life, and in a re-established
communion of the Saints; that being indeed, if it may be so, once
more one, our Lord’s own prayer for it may be fulfilled,
and His promise accomplished, and “the world believe that
God hath sent Him.”
[21a]
And let us
ourselves, brethren, ever remember that all we have in treasure
is indeed in earthen vessels, and let us for ourselves be content
to be reviled and threatened (yes, as the holy Apostle was, and
his Lord and Master before him), for “the disciple is not
above his Master, nor the servant above his Lord.”
[21b]
Neither, indeed, let us count it
a strange thing, “as though some strange thing happened
unto us,”
[21c]
if we have to “go forth bearing

p. 22
the
reproach of Christ”
[22a]
and His Apostles;
nay, rather, “being reviled, let us bless; being
persecuted” (if so it be), “let us suffer it; being
defamed, let us intreat;” yea, let us be willing to be
“made as the filth of the world, and the off-scouring of
all things,”
[22b]
so that we may but
do our Master’s work, and preserve His truth in the midst
of a crooked and perverse generation, and win souls to Christ,
and, if it may be so indeed, “finish our course with joy,
and the ministry, which we have received of the Lord Jesus, to
testify the Gospel of the grace of God.”
[22c]

p. 23
SERMON
II.

The Witness of the World, before Christ, to the Doctrine of
Sacrifice.

JOB i. 5.

“Thus did Job continually.”

That
which such a man as Job
“did continually,” we shall naturally conclude was
well-pleasing in the sight of God.  The Almighty’s own
witness to his character is given in His Word addressed to Satan:
“Hast thou considered My servant Job, that there is none
like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that
feareth God, and escheweth evil?”
[23]
And when we couple this with the
circumstances to which the text relates, and the tone of the
whole narrative, we shall find, I think, more than a
prima
facie
probability that the act so mentioned was not only
right in itself, but that it bore a significant import, not
merely to those who lived near Job’s own time or in his own
country, but to the world at large.

What then is it to which the text alludes?

Job, we read, was a man of great substance as well as great
integrity, living in a very early time
p. 24
in the land of Uz.  Moreover,
besides his great possessions, we are told that he had seven sons
and three daughters.  And we find that his sons were used,
“to feast in their houses, every one his day;” and
that on these occasions it was their custom to “send and
call for their three sisters to eat and to drink with
them;” a token, (as a well-known commentator has fairly
enough conjectured,) both of their harmonious family affection
and of the good order and conduct which prevailed in their
feastings, or so holy a man as Job would not have permitted his
daughters to join in their festivity.  But, nevertheless, we
read that Job in his anxious care was mindful to intercede for
them, even in case they might have erred or sinned in the fulness
of their rejoicing, or in the exuberance of their mirth.
“And it was so, when the days of their feasting were gone
about, that Job sent and sanctified them, and rose up early in
the morning, and offered burnt-offerings according to the number
of them all: for Job said, It may be that my sons have sinned,
and cursed God in their hearts.  Thus did Job
continually.”
[24]

Here, then, we have no doubtful witness, not merely to the
usage of sacrifice, but to its acceptableness also in the sight
of God, as a part of worship and intercession.  And this is
all the more, not merely curious, but important, when we reflect
upon the very early date almost universally
p. 25
assigned to
the events related in the Book of Job.  Whether the record
itself may have been composed at a somewhat later period, as some
have thought, yet all authorities are, I believe, agreed that the
time of Job’s life was contemporaneous with even the
earliest part of the life of Moses, and, therefore, that he did
not derive his knowledge of God from the institutions of the
Jews, or live under the Mosaic dispensation.  The consenting
witness, both of the Jews themselves and of the early Christian
writers accepting their testimony, is that Job is the same as
Jobab, mentioned in the first book of Chronicles, who is there
named as the third in descent from Esau; so that he, as well as
Moses, was the fifth in descent from Abraham,—the one in
the line of Esau, and the other in the line of Jacob.
Moreover, it would appear that this Job or Jobab was, if not
absolutely what may be termed a king, yet a ruler and a prince in
the land called Uz, or Ausitis, a country on the confines,
probably, of Idumæa and Arabia.  If this be so, he
would seem, from the summary given in the first book of
Chronicles, to have succeeded Balaam in the sovereignty or
chiefdom of that country.  “For,” (says that
narrative,) “these are the kings that reigned in the land
of Edom, before any king reigned over the children of Israel;
Bela the son of Beor,” (undoubtedly the same as Balaam);
“and the name of his city was Dinhabah.  And when Bela
was dead, Jobab the son
p. 26
of Zerah of Bozrah reigned in his
stead.”
[26a]
Now we find in the book of
Numbers, that Balaam the son of Beor was killed in battle,
fighting on the side of Midian in the last year of the
Israelites’ wandering in the wilderness,
[26b]
and supposing Job’s trial to
have taken place (as some ancient writers assert) some few years
after the Exodus, as he lived one hundred and forty years after
those events, he may very well have succeeded to the chief place
among the Idumæan or Uzzite people upon the death of
Balaam.  The importance of this to our present purpose lies
in the fact, that he is thus a witness to the antiquity and the
use of sacrifice and burnt-offering, quite independently of the
institutions and commands of the Mosaic law.  If Job were of
man’s estate, and had sons and daughters of like estate
also, (as the narrative unquestionably implies,) even before his
sufferings, he must have been born not far in time from the birth
of Moses, probably some little while before him; and what he
“did continually” in his own country, and apart from
Moses, is a witness to the practice and acceptableness of
sacrifice, anterior to the enactments of the law from Sinai; and
a witness, not merely, let us observe, to the use of sacrifice,
but to sacrifice by burnt-offering, when the victim was killed
and consumed upon the altar of God.

Now this leads us back to consider what is the probable origin
of sacrifice, and sacrifice of this
p. 27
kind, altogether; for it is thus
evident, that it was adopted into, and not originated by, the
peculiar institutions of the Jewish nation and law.

Now, of course we see at once where we must turn for the first
account of sacrifice.  The primal exercise of this mode of
approach to God, is that recorded in the fourth chapter of the
book of Genesis, which shews at once the need which the Fall had
brought upon man of drawing nigh to God, not without a
propitiation; and at the same time exhibits, in sad prominence,
the first-fruits of that corruption of nature entailed by it,
which provoked the eldest-born of the world, in malignant envy of
heart, to slay his next born brother.

Let us turn, then, to a brief consideration of those events,
as illustrative of the origin and nature of sacrifice.

Look first to St. John’s and St. Paul’s account of
the cause of Cain’s quarrel against his brother Abel.
“And wherefore slew he him?” (says St. John),
“Because his own works were evil, and his brother’s
righteous.”
[27a]
And St. Paul
tells us wherein Abel’s righteousness and superiority
consisted: “By faith he offered unto God a more excellent
sacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained witness that he was
righteous, God testifying of his gifts.”
[27b]
The narrative in the Book of
Genesis tells us the same thing as to the fact that Cain’s
offering was rejected and Abel’s accepted;
p. 28
but without
the Apostle’s comment we should not have precisely traced
the cause of this rejection and acceptance: but we know now that
it was
faith
in the one and a
want of faith
in the
other, in which the distinction lay; and also that somehow this
difference was exhibited in the gifts which they brought:
“God” (of Abel) “testifying of his
gifts.”  By this, too, St. Paul tells us, “He
being dead still speaketh;” a statement which brings the
whole matter home to ourselves.  The narrative then is this:
“And Abel was a keeper of sheep, but Cain was a tiller of
the ground.  And in process of time it came to pass, that
Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an offering unto the
Lord.  And Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his
flock and of the fat thereof.  And the Lord had respect unto
Abel and to his offering: but unto Cain and to his offering He
had not respect.”
[28]

This takes us back to the origin of sacrifice; and the first
remark which occurs is, that it would seem highly probable that
its institution was a matter of revelation from God to Adam; for
though mere reason and moral feeling might make the creature see
the propriety of offering to the Creator something of that which
His bounty had bestowed, and possibly might lead to the thought
that it should be not mean, but good and precious, yet there are
so many attendant circumstances in the institution, which it does
not
p. 29
appear
possible to account for upon the hypothesis of the mere dictates
of reason and feeling, that we can hardly ascribe the practice to
anything short of a communication of the divine will to
man.  However, be this as it may, it is plain that both Cain
and Abel were conscious of the duty of offering sacrifice or
oblation in some kind to God.  And each brought of that
which he had.  So far, it might be thought, Cain was not
behind his brother.  “Abel was a keeper of sheep, but
Cain was a tiller of the ground.”  Cain brought of the
fruit of the ground, but Abel brought of the firstlings of his
flock, and (it is added) “of the fat thereof.”
Now it may be we are intended to note a difference
here,—that Abel’s offering, the firstlings and the
fat, denotes the earliest and the best: as if he hastened to
acknowledge, in all thankfulness and humility, that he was not
worthy to touch or use anything he had, until he had sanctified
it by first offering of it to God; and this, the first he had,
and the best: whilst the more scanty narrative as to Cain, that
he merely brought of the fruit of the ground, may mark that he
took no heed to bring of the first, nor of the best.  He
would offer
something
as an acknowledgment of God’s
power,—perhaps, too, of His goodness,—but not in that
due spirit of unmeasured humility and thankfulness, which alone
was becoming in a son of Adam.  But this, if it were so,
does not seem to be all which is implied as to his lack of
faith.  To understand
p. 30
wherein this lay, we must remember
the promise made to our first parents after the Fall, of
“the seed of the woman” who should “bruise the
serpent’s head.”
[30a]
Faith in
this seed, the hope, the only hope of the world after
Adam’s transgression, seems to be the thing intended; and
if we suppose that God was pleased to reveal to our first parents
some further particulars as to the mode of the atonement to be
made by shedding of blood, by which this hope was to be
fulfilled, and the victory to be obtained, we shall be furnished,
not merely with a clue to the difference in the acceptableness of
the offerings of the two, but also with a key to a large part of
the Holy Scriptures, and an understanding what manner of faith
should be in every one of us, as well as to much that is
important as to the history and design of sacrifice.  Let it
be granted, then, as highly probable, that to Adam a revelation
was given that in him, as the federal head of mankind, and by his
transgression, as deteriorating the whole race to spring from
him, were all men lost by nature, and further, that
“without shedding of blood should be no remission;”

[30b]
but that by a worthy sacrifice and
blood-shedding should the promised seed of the woman in due time
effect a reconciliation for them and their descendants, and
reverse the evil and the curse of their transgression.
Surely, then, from that time
p. 31
forward, a faith in the efficacy of a
sacrifice by blood would be required, and would be acceptable to
God.  Cain, then, would be evidently one who had not this
faith, who denied, and disbelieved, and did not look forward to,
this sacrifice, or cast himself upon this mercy.  By
bringing of the fruits of the ground, he may be considered to
have made acknowledgment of the power and goodness of God, in
causing the seed to grow and the corn to ripen; he may have done
as much as we do, when we merely confess that we must look to God
for rain, and sunshine, and “fruitful seasons, filling our
hearts with food and gladness;” (therefore, by the way, let
us not think too highly of ourselves if we do confess so much; it
is right, but it is a very small part of religion:) he may have
meant to express thankfulness for blessing, but observe what he
did not express.  He made no acknowledgment of sin; he
exhibited no sense of unworthiness; he confessed no shortcomings;
he gave no sign of sorrow or repentance; he asked no mercy; above
all, he turned to no one out of himself—no intercessor, no
mediator between his God and him.  He shewed no sign of
looking to a Saviour to make atonement, atonement by blood: he
looked to no “Lamb of God to take away the sins of the
world” in general, and his own sins in particular.  He
ignored, then, the whole promise which was the sole hope of
man.  He may have said, “God, I thank Thee,” but
he shewed
p.
32
himself to be wholly without the feeling “God be
merciful to me a sinner.”

But, on the other hand, Abel brought of the sheep or goats
which were of his flock.  He offered up not an unbloody
sacrifice.  He laid the victim on the altar, and believing
God, as well as feeling his need of a Saviour, he looked forward
with the eye of faith to an expiation greater than that of kids,
or lambs, or bulls, or goats, to take away sin.  Nay more,
he shewed his sense of the need of an atonement out of and beyond
himself; for the blood of the victim offered described at once
the sense of his own blood being required as a penalty, if
justice only held its course and no expiatory sacrifice were
found, and represented also, in true type and figure, that better
sacrifice, that more precious blood, which should be shed in the
fulness of the time to make such an expiation, even that of
“the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sins of the
world.”

Now I have gone through this history with what I think is its
probable and satisfactory explanation, because not merely does it
serve to shew what the Apostle means when he tells us it was by
faith that Abel pleased God, and that God testified of his gifts,
but also because the very same remarks seem to apply to the whole
history and intention of sacrifice, as either commanded or
accepted, or both, by Almighty God from the beginning.  Take
such to be the origin of propitiary sacrifice, and I think
nothing can
p.
33
more fully agree with, or illustrate, or be illustrated
by, the further progress both of the fact and doctrine as we find
them, first in the Holy Scripture, and, secondly, in the world at
large, even though by the world’s wickedness so fearfully
perverted.  In perfect accordance with such beginning of
acceptable sacrifice we have the same used and practised, and
with the like acceptance, by Noah, Abraham, Melchizedek, Isaac,
and Jacob,
[33a]
and, indeed, by all the patriarchs
until the institution was embodied in the law of Moses.  As
we know, also, it was practised by all the heathen nations of
antiquity of whom we have any record, though with them its true
meaning and intention were fearfully lost and perverted.
Nor does the difference in the instance of Abraham on one
occasion, as to his being ready to offer a human sacrifice in the
person of his son (which was of course a wholly exceptional case
as regards the sacrifices of those knowing the true God), make
any difference as to the witness of the acceptableness of
sacrifice by blood, or the consuming the victim upon the
altar.  It has, indeed, been disputed whether Abraham were
not the more easily reconciled to the idea of sacrificing his
son, or even incited to it, by the customary “fierce
ritual” of the Syrians around him; but independently of the
utter contradiction which this view would give to the account in
Holy
p.
34
Scripture, by the attribution of any other motive for
Abraham’s conduct than the command of God, received in all
faith, and leading to all obedience, it may well be doubted
whether a perverse misinterpretation of the sacrifice which
Abraham was thus ready to make, and an utter inattention to the
real circumstances of that case, may not have been, instead of in
any way the
consequence
, rather the
cause
of the
nations around falling into the practice of human
sacrifice.  But, be this as it may, we have the plain
witness to the usage of sacrifice, and its efficacy when
performed according to the will of God.  Also, that it
prefigured the great sacrifice by the blood of a pure victim, as
well as in itself taught the lesson that (as afterwards expressed
by the Apostle to the Hebrews) “without shedding of blood
is no remission.”
[34]

And all this we see consolidated and confirmed, as well as
more fully expanded and defined, under the Law.  And
especially there, a certain new element in its administration is
introduced, in the appointment of a particular order for the
performance of the service.  In all the earlier usage, it
would seem that the head of the family or tribe acted as the
ministering priest.  And there is no disproof of this, as
far as I see, in the account of even the first sacrifice of
all.  For there is nothing in the narrative in the Book of
Genesis to shew that Cain and Abel were themselves the
p. 35
acting
priests (if we may so term it) in the sacrifice.  They may
each, for aught that appears to the contrary, have brought their
offering to Adam, and it may have been by his hand that the
different oblations were placed before God, and presented or
devoted to Him.  Such as the office and privilege of the
head or chief, would seem to have been the recognised right and
duty of such persons throughout the patriarchal age; but as the
rule of patriarchs in secular matters merged in that of kings, as
nations grew out of families, so the office of chiefs as priests,
however thus exercised by Noah, Abraham, Melchizedek, or Job,
seems to have been afterwards restricted to a tribe, or family,
or other persons, set apart for the special service, and
denominated priests,
ἱερεῖς, or

sacerdotes
; names implying their dedication to holy
things, and their exclusive rights in many particulars to deal
with them.  And this theory of worship, if we may so call
it, was not merely reduced to a system by God’s law among
the Jews, but also prevailed universally among the heathen world
from the very earliest times of which any records are
preserved.  Hesiod, Homer, Herodotus, bear witness to it,
and the universal practice of all nations substantiates it,
whether in the barbarian forms of the ancient Druidical or other
worship in the ruder peoples of the world, or in the more refined
practice of Greece and Rome, or in the grotesque or cruel rites
of the eastern countries, or absolutely barbarian tribes.

p. 36
They all
have their altars, their priests, and their sacrifices, and in
most, if not in all, the notion of propitiation by the blood of
the victim has prevailed.

It need hardly be added that in the provisions of the Mosaic
Law all these principles were embodied, so that, with every
safeguard introduced against the perversions, the sensuality, the
materialism, and the cruelty, which pervaded all forms and
systems of idol worship, yet the true worship of Jehovah, as
established by Himself, embraced, and contained, and stereotyped
under the mark of His own approval, nay, of His absolute command,
the same three points, of an altar, a priesthood, and a
sacrifice; yes, a sacrifice in the sense of more than a mere
oblation or offering,—a sacrifice by blood of a victim
slain, and consumed in the very act of the commanded
worship.  For it ought never to be forgotten that amid all
other offerings that were permitted,—nay, for certain
purposes enjoined, as, for instance, for thank-offerings, or for
mere legal purification,—yet, under the Jewish Law, the
particular sacrifice which was appointed for expiation of any
moral offence was the burnt-offering, where the victim, as I have
said, was killed, and afterwards consumed by fire upon the altar;

[36]
and this appears to have no exception,
unless it were in the case of the extremely poor, who might offer
the tenth part of an ephah of meal; but even then, I believe, it
is considered
p.
37
that this was placed upon a victim offered by others, or
by the priest, for the sins of the people, and so may be deemed
to have made a part of a sacrifice with blood.  So that, in
truth, as St. Paul says to the Hebrews, “almost all things
are by the law purged with blood, and without shedding of blood
is no remission.”

We might say much on this head, and more particularly upon the
appointment of the Passover, and the light thrown by this
institution upon the typical character of sacrifice generally,
and its relation to the great sacrifice of all,—the Lamb
slain, once for all upon the cross, for the sins of the world;
but the outline already given of the doctrine taught by the
sacrifice of Abel will readily suggest a key to the true
intention of the ever-recurring sacrifices of the Jews, and to
the manner in which they (although “the blood of bulls and
of goats could never take away sin,” yet) pointed to, and
prepared the way for, our understanding the nature of the
sacrifice of Christ, and, indeed, were the great means to elicit
and foster faith in Him who should come, and to teach all the
world daily and continually to look to Him who alone is its
salvation, without whom, and whose mercy, no flesh should be
saved at all.

We have brought, then, our statement, and I may say our
argument, to this point; first, generally that the whole world,
with one consent, bears witness to the usage of sacrifice.
The
p. 38
whole
world from Adam to Christ,—Patriarchal, Jewish, Gentile,
Barbarian, Civilized, North, South, East, and West, together (for
the new world when discovered was found herein not to be
divergent from the old),—testifies, I say, with one mind
and one mouth, as to the Being of a God, so likewise to this
usage of sacrifice.  And again, secondly, and more
particularly, the witness agrees, that the sacrifice is made, (to
speak generally,) not without blood, and made for the purpose of
reconciliation, after sin committed, with the supernatural being
or beings invoked, or for propitiation and intercession in cases
of favour sought.  Even, still further is there accordant
and consenting witness; that there will be, as necessary
accompaniments to the sacrifice, an altar on which it is to be
made, and a specially set apart order of men: priests
(ίερεῖς,

sacerdotes
, or however particularly designated), by whom
these sacrifices should be offered up, and intercessions made on
behalf of the people.  So much the whole world testifies
generally, in spite of certain differences of usage, and the
fearful abominations which prevailed amongst those who did not
retain the true God in their knowledge:—the cruelty,
licentiousness, and abhorrent vice into which this worship, when
it degenerated into idol worship, everywhere sunk; which,
however, it is plain, is no more an argument against sacrifice,
holily and obediently offered in accordance with God’s
appointment, than the superstitions of heathen
p. 39
invocation
are an argument against godly prayer and intercession.  And
thus, too, we see that this very idea of sacrifice, (without the
vicious accompaniments,) prevailed among God’s children
from the first,—as with Abel, Noah, Melchisedek, Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, and Job; whilst by God’s own sanction and
special command, and, with what in human affairs we should call
the most laborious care and pains, the whole system was, under
Moses, recognised, enlarged, defined, and embodied in a whole
code of laws, to be in their very minutest details carried out
until the Mediator of a new covenant should come, when that which
was old should be ready to vanish away.

But it is well worthy of all our care in examination, to see
whether it is the essence of this idea, and even mode, of worship
which is done away, or only its ceremonial and local detail, as
established in the Jewish Church and polity; whether—as all
sacrifices before Christ were intended to look forward to Him,
and His precious, inestimable, expiation, to be once made by
blood and suffering upon the altar of the cross—whether, I
say, so it has not been His will to continue an altar and a
priesthood, and therewith and thereby a sacrifice
commemorative—but, though commemorative, nevertheless
perfectly real and true—by which the Christian Church may
both look back to Him, then dying once for all, and ever plead
afresh the merits of
p. 40
His death before the throne of God on
high.  As Abraham looked forward, and “rejoiced to see
His day, and saw it, and was glad;”
[40a]
what if, so likewise, the Christian
Church is to look back on Him, and to rejoice; not merely to see
Him and be glad, but to be allowed also, according to His own
will and ordinance,—(aye, brethren, observe, of and by His
own very appointment, whereby His very body and blood are truly
offered up to God,)—allowed thus to plead, week by week and
day by day, the very all-prevailing merits of that same sacrifice
upon the cross; yea, and be the means of Himself graciously
pleading it for His people ever afresh before the mercy-seat of
His Father.  O, my brethren, if this be so, who can
undervalue this great thing, or disparage it, or attempt to throw
it off, or deny it, or trample it under foot, without a sacrilege
fearful to think of?  But, again, if this be so, how is the
Lamb of God, and His precious blood-shedding, made, more than in
any other way which we can conceive, the centre towards which the
whole world looks, from its earliest to its latest day; from the
moment of the promise that the seed of the woman should bruise
the serpent’s head,
[40b]
until that awful
hour when that same seed of the woman, the Son of Man, shall come
in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory?  I do
not say, it is not conceivable that
p. 41
the whole system and machinery (so to
call it), of priest, and altar, and sacrifice, might have
fulfilled its purpose at the hour of the crucifixion, and nothing
remain of it, or like it, in the Christian Church; nothing in the
Christian ministry to answer to the previous priesthood; nothing
in it, but a set of teachers or expounders of the Christian
faith; a faith, however, be it remarked, in that case, a very
different thing from that which the Church has ever supposed it
to be, or (as I think) the Holy Scripture sets before us.
But even if all this be conceivable, I do say, and I think no
unprejudiced person should dispute it, that the whole testimony
and usage of all previous time in this matter, the whole of what
holy men “did continually” in relation to it, not
merely with God’s manifest approval, but even with His
especial sanction, and by His positive command, raises a very
strong
prima facie
presumption, that all this was not
intended to be, and was not, thus abrogated and done away; and
that, at the very least, we ought to have shewn us the most
express and distinct proofs of its being thus abrogated, before
we can accept its abrogation.  We have been accustomed to
see, rather, that instead of being abrogated, the usage is
changed and glorified; changed from the shadow to the image, from
wood and stone to silver and gold, from a comparatively dead
state to a glorious living one, from the ministration of death to
the ministration of life; but, if this be not so, then, indeed,

p. 42
we may
surely ask to see this reversal of all which the economy of
God’s dealings would seem to lead us to, expressly
promulgated and proved by the word of Christ or His Apostles; so
plainly set down as to need no explanation further; or else, so
explained by those who immediately followed them, and had the
best means of understanding their sense and design, as to leave
us no ground for reasonable doubt, or we must be excused if we
cannot accept the mere assertion of so improbable a thing as
true, or believe the unchangeable God to be so like a Man that He
should thus repent.

A fair examination into this question is most important, but
we cannot enter upon it at the present moment.  We must
necessarily defer it to another day.  I trust, with
God’s help and guidance, to resume our subject on Sunday
next, and endeavour further to see how the doctrine really
stands, taking, briefly but carefully, into consideration these
three points:—

1.  What is the testimony of the Holy Scripture as to the
doctrine of the Christian priesthood, altar, and sacrifice?

2.  How this has been understood by the Church from the
beginning? and,

3.  How it has been received by our own branch of the
Church Catholic, the Church of England?

And I will only add now, whilst I pray that we may all strive
simply to know the will of God
p. 43
that we may do it, that there can be
no more practical matter than this to engage our thoughts and
hearts.  For, if it be so, that Christ has left Him no
priests now on earth to minister at His altars, and no sacrifice
with which His people are concerned, a great part of what so many
believe, I might say, of what the Church of God for eighteen
hundred years and more has believed, to be of the essence of our
faith, is a mere fable and superstition; whilst if, on the other
hand, “it be truth, and the thing certain,”
[43]
that a Christian priesthood, ordained
by Christ Himself, and these sacrificial powers, and altar and
sacrifice, remain and must remain ever in His Church, what words
shall describe the misery and sin of those who are endeavouring
to rob a whole nation of their belief in such truth of God, and
to pour more than slight and contempt upon the ordinances of
Christ; so that, in fact, they would, if they could have their
will and way, unchurch the Church of God in this land, deny the
virtue of His mysteries, and starve the children of God who seek
to receive at His altar the benefits of His sacrifice, humbly
waiting on Him there, and partaking of the sacrifice and feast
ordained by Him.

Oh! let us pray indeed that we may come to the consideration
of so weighty a matter, casting away all passion and prejudice
and preconceived opinion, and whatsoever may hinder us from
p. 44
seeing the
truth of God, to which may He of His mercy guide us.  And
may He grant us also that we may not merely know the truth, but
when we know it follow it, in our daily life and conversation,
without turning aside to the right hand or to the left.

p. 45
SERMON
III.

Witness of the New Testament to the Doctrine of Sacrifice.

1 CORINTHIANS x. 18.

“Are not they which eat of the sacrifices partakers of the
altar?”

I
resume
the subject upon which I
have spoken on two previous Sundays—the reality of the
Christian priesthood, altar, and sacrifice.

I endeavoured to shew in the first of these discourses that it
was no argument against the truth of the priesthood that they who
hold it have “this treasure in earthen vessels,” that
a priest is like and “of like passions” with others,
nay, is “weak as another man.”  In the second, I
pointed out that sacrifice was an institution as old as the days
of our first parents, and in all probability appointed directly
by the Almighty upon man’s fall, with some revelation of
its predictive significance; that certainly it met with His
approval when duly and religiously performed; and that it was by
faith that those who took part in it “obtained the witness
that they were righteous:”
[45]
whence we were led
to consider
p.
46
more particularly its relation to the sacrifice upon the
Cross of “the Lamb of God which taketh away the sins of the
world,” and how from the beginning it looked forward, in
its inner meaning, with a preparing and expectant eye and heart,
to that wonderful consummation.  We saw, too, that thus
among God’s own chosen people, by special and minute
provision, this doctrine and usage of sacrifice were preserved
even as long as the elder dispensation lasted; whilst, though in
terrible and wicked perversion, both as to the object and the
mode of worship, they yet prevailed universally throughout the
heathen world.  Admitting it to be conceivable that in the
Almighty’s will it might be intended that sacrifice should
altogether cease when once the great sacrifice was completed;
that, although He had appointed foreshadowing and predictive
rites of that wonderful event, He did not intend that there
should be any reflective or commemorative sacrifice to carry us
back to it, or to apply its virtue, or to plead its merits ever
afresh before the throne of God; we yet saw great reason to think
this to be highly unlikely, and reserved the point more
particularly for further examination.  What is the testimony
which has been furnished to us upon it?  You will remember
that I proposed to consider this testimony under the three heads:
first, what Holy Scripture tells us; secondly, what has been the
understanding by the Church from the beginning of the
declarations of Holy Writ; and thirdly,
p. 47
what is the
mind of our own Church in this matter?

Before, however, coming to these particulars, let me premise
that it can be but a brief summary of such evidences which it is
possible to give here.  The subject is so large, and the
full testimony so extensive, that it would require volumes to go
through it.  Those who would study it in a more complete
manner will find it elaborately discussed in the discourses on
“The Government of Churches and on Religious
Assemblies,” of Dr. Herbert Thorndike, Canon of
Westminster, about the middle of the seventeenth century, (a very
learned theologian); and in the three octavo volumes of
“Treatises on the Christian Priesthood,” by Dr.
Hickes, Dean of Worcester, some fifty years later; whilst there
is a very thoughtful and condensed statement of the whole matter
in a small book by the Rev. T. T. Carter, called “The
Doctrine of the Priesthood.”

Let us now turn to our own enquiry, as some help (if it please
God) to those who may not be so likely, possibly may not have
leisure or opportunity, to consult larger works, but may yet have
a godly anxiety amid the bold assertions, and I fear we must say,
in no small measure, the irreverent scoffing of a free and
licentious time, to learn the will of God herein, that they may
neither think nor do anything but what is pleasing and acceptable
in His sight.

Our question is, Has God willed, and has He
p. 48
revealed to
us His will, that in His Church, since the death of His Blessed
Son upon the cross, there shall be no priesthood, no altar, and
no sacrifice?  And first, “What saith the
Scripture?”
[48a]
I must take
but a few out of many passages.

1.  We have, in our Lord’s Sermon on the Mount, the
following direction: “If thou bring thy gift to the altar,
and there rememberest that thy brother hath aught against thee;
leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way; first be
reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy
gift.”
[48b]
Now if this direction be
intended to be a guide of conduct for Christian people in the
Christian Church, can it be denied that our Lord speaks of an
altar to be used, and an offering to be made thereon; and that,
speaking to those who were constantly accustomed to altars and
sacrifices, His words must have conveyed to them the meaning that
an altar and a sacrifice would remain for them whilst they should
be practising the precepts of His religion?  If He did not
intend so much by this precept, the question surely arises, How
shall we, with any certainty, know what other portions of that or
any of our Lord’s discourses were designed for the
instruction merely of the Jews who were around Him, or should
receive His teaching during the time that their covenant lasted,
but became immediately inapplicable and void in and under the
Christian dispensation?  Will any say that the
p. 49
precepts
concerning purity, meekness, government of the tongue, charity,
are thus limited? as, “Whoso looketh on a woman to lust
after her, hath committed adultery with her already in his
heart;” or, “Whosoever is angry with his brother
without a cause shall be in danger of the judgment;” or,
again, “Let your communication be, Yea, yea; Nay,
nay;” or, once more, “Resist not evil; love your
enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate
you, and pray for them that despitefully use you and persecute
you.”
[49]
That these and other divine
precepts of that same discourse were injunctions to bind the
Jews, to whom primarily they were spoken, but require other proof
or repetition before they can be conclusively accepted as
designed for Christians would seem strange indeed.  If no
one will say so, surely we must confess to a strong presumption
in favour of the doctrine of an altar and a sacrifice remaining
in the Christian Church.

But perhaps it may be said, Not so: we accept those other
precepts as belonging to the Christian Church, because they are
simply moral precepts applying to the heart, but the former
passage relates to a ceremonial usage of the Jewish polity, and
may well be taken to be a mere adaptation of what was then in
well-known use; to inculcate, not an act or mode of worship, but
figuratively a frame of mind that would be required in
Christians.  So that, as the Jew would literally
p. 50
understand,
he should go his way from the temple and the altar, and be
reconciled to any one to whom he had done wrong, before he could
there make his offering; so the Christian in all time, though
having no altar to which to come, and no real offering or
sacrifice in which to join, should yet learn to be in peace and
charity with all men, before he should esteem himself fit to lift
up his voice or heart in prayer to God; and that therefore our
Lord’s words, spoken “while as the first tabernacle
was yet standing,”
[50]
do not sufficiently
prove any altar designed to exist in the Christian Church.
Well, let us allow the utmost weight to such an argument, and
grant that the words in and by themselves might possibly be so
explained, and yet bear just a tolerable though not, I think, at
all a likely interpretation in such sense; but then, let us yet
turn and see whether the other and more natural meaning be not
corroborated elsewhere, where this gloss will not avail.
Remember the objection to the proof of a Christian altar from
those words is, that they were spoken whilst the Jewish polity
subsisted, and before the Christian Church was set up, and
therefore that it is only (as is asserted) by a figure, suitable
enough to Jewish ears, but not as really enunciating a truth or
principle to endure in the Christian Church, that they were
uttered.  But shall we not find a witness in Holy Scripture
to the existence of this altar in the new dispensation, which
p. 51
is free from
this exception or construction?  I turn to the Epistle to
the Hebrews, and I find the Apostle writing, “We have an
altar, whereof they have no right to eat which serve the
tabernacle.”
[51a]
Was not this
written to Christians?  Does it not speak to them expressly
of their altar at which they are to eat?  Was it not set
down for their guidance and instruction?  Was it not written
after the great sacrifice upon the altar of the cross had been
made, and made once for all?

Was it not after the setting up of the Christian Church, and
the establishment of Christian worship?  Nay, is it not in
an Epistle, the very whole drift and scope of which is to
contrast the usages and provisions and teaching of the elder
covenant with those of the new, and to shew the superiority in
each respect of that which had been ordained, not by angels, but
in the hand of the Son of God Himself.
[51b]
And can it therefore be that the
inferior part or type in the one can lack the corresponding
superior part, or antitype, in the other with which it is
contrasted, and on which correspondency and contrast the whole
argument depends?  Will any one say, Yes, but still the
Jewish temple had not then been destroyed; the Jews’
visible altar and worship still existed, and it is only by
(again) an adaptation, as a mode of speech particularly
intelligible to the Hebrews, and by a very natural economy, that
such terms were employed.  But granting that the date of
p. 52
the Epistle
is, with all probability, rightly put some little time before the
destruction of Jerusalem, yet does not the very turn both of the
argument and of the expression of the Apostle shew that he is not
making an application of a figure, but a declaration of a
fact?  Addressing Hebrews, but most evidently converted
Hebrews, Christians, to keep them firm in the faith, and to
enlighten them to the more full understanding in it, he presses
on them this point, that they have an altar; and not only so, but
one distinguished from the altar of the Jew; one at which
“they have no right to eat which serve the
tabernacle.”  Take the whole passage together and see
its force: “We have an altar, whereof they have no right to
eat which serve the tabernacle.  For the bodies of those
beasts whose blood is brought into the sanctuary by the High
Priest for sin, are burned without the camp.  Wherefore
Jesus also, that He might sanctify the people with His own blood,
suffered without the gate.”  Where evidently the type,
the great day of atonement under the law, is contrasted with its
antitype, the great sacrifice of Christ upon the cross.  So
far it might be perhaps thought that our altar is only the cross;
but then he continues: “Let us go forth, therefore, unto
Him without the camp, bearing His reproach; for here we have no
continuing city, but we seek one to come.  By Him,
therefore, let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God
continually, that is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to His

p.
53
name.”
[53]
Here it is
evident another sacrifice is to be made, even the sacrifice of
praise (which we must remember is the very phrase universally
used in the ancient Church for the Holy Eucharist).  Let us
therefore (surely we are to understand) follow after Christ,
being content to bear His reproach even as we offer to Him,
ourselves, our souls and bodies, in and by the sacrifice of His
own appointing, the Eucharistic Sacrifice in the supper of the
Lord, at the enduring Christian altar as well as table.

But perhaps some may still say, We are not convinced.
The allusion to an altar here may yet be figurative, or only
adapting language to the mind of the Jew, “while as the
first tabernacle was yet standing;” and the sacrifice of
praise need not necessarily mean the Holy Eucharist, or, if it
do, may point to no altar or sacrifice by means of a priest, but
merely denote the lifting the heart in sincerity to God.

Now, although putting the whole argument together and reading
the passage by the light which the continuous belief of the
Church throws upon it (as we shall see presently), nothing, I
think, can be more unlikely or untenable than such an
interpretation, still, for the moment, let us allow it to throw a
doubt upon the sense of the passage.  Let us, then, turn to
yet another place, and see if the witness of the Apostle is not
unmistakeable as to the doctrine of which we speak.

p. 54
Take
that passage in the first Epistle to the Corinthians in which our
text occurs, and see if it be possible to understand it in any
sense but in that which speaks of a present altar and a
continually recurring sacrifice, in which Christians have an
interest and bear a part: “Are not they which eat of the
sacrifice,” says he, “partakers of the altar?”

[54]
and this especially in contrast as to
the conduct of those engaged in idol worship, and those in
Christian worship.  As truly, then, as the idolater partook
of his altar (though his idol be nothing), so, only much more,
does the Christian of the Christian altar.  And this cannot
be the one offering on the cross alone, however deriving all its
virtue and power from it, because in that case the Christian
could not be said to eat of the sacrifice in any continuous or
recurring act.  The sacrifice would be wholly past, and not
present as the idol sacrifices were, and so there would be no
true parallel between the two things brought into
comparison.  Mark the progress of the argument: “What
say I then? that the idol is anything, or that which is offered
in sacrifice to the idol is anything?  But I say that the
things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils and
not to God;” that is, under the symbol of the senseless
wood or stone there lurked an acknowledgment of demoniac power,
so that, in fact, in the heart of those worshippers there was a
homage paid to Satan and his angels, and this was something
p. 55
wickedly
real, even though the idol was nothing.  For he immediately
adds what shews that this worship was not without its effect, an
effect impressing a character on those who shared in it; for he
says, “And I would not that ye should have fellowship with
devils,” and why? because thus they would lose all
fellowship with God.  “Ye cannot drink the cup of the
Lord, and the cup of devils.  Ye cannot be partakers of the
Lord’s table, and of the table of devils.”
[55]
Let it make no difficulty that it
is called a table here, as an altar above.  It is both, just
as the other, the heathen altar, was both, because in each case
there was not merely a sacrifice, but a feast upon a
sacrifice.  As truly, then, as the Apostle says that there
is a heathen idolatrous sacrifice which Christians can never have
to do with, because if they do they would have fellowship with
devils, so does he, by the very parallel he draws, and the whole
scope of his argument, imply that Christians have a sacrifice, at
which they can be, and are to be, continually present; in and by
which they have fellowship with the Lord, which also is offered
continually in their assemblies, and of which they eat.  For
as in the one there were the heathen feasts upon the victims or
offerings offered to devils; so in the other there is the feast
upon the Christian sacrifice, the offering made in that
continually recurring commemorative oblation to God of the body
and blood of Christ.  If this
p. 56
be not to be offered up continually,
since the one sacrifice completed as the propitiation by blood
made once for all upon the cross, then there is no coherency or
force in the Apostle’s argument; for there would be nothing
in the Christian dispensation like, or answering to, those
sacrifices to devils which the heathen used, and in which they
were forbidden to join.  The teaching surely is, and must
be, as they who join in the heathen altar-worship are partakers
of it, and have fellowship thereby with those to whom it is
really offered, so they who join in the Christian sacrifice (not
so made and passed in point of time as to be incapable of
continued and continual recurrence by commemorative but real act)
are thereby partakers in and of their feast upon their sacrifice,
and have therein fellowship with the Lord.  So this is the
continual memorial of the one “sacrifice upon the cross,
and of the benefits which we receive thereby,” also the
appointed means of our receiving those benefits.  And it
would be absurd to think of the Apostle describing the worship of
idols as a real act of adoration and sacrifice to devils, and as
impressing a real character by a power upon them for evil in
those who join in such worship, and not to see that he must allow
an equal act of sacrifice, adoration, and homage in the sacrifice
and the altar which he speaks of as the Christian’s
constant privilege to frequent; and which is as much greater to
impress a character for good upon the Christian and to nourish
p. 57
him to life
eternal, as the real presence of the Body and Blood of Christ is
greater than the idol, which is nothing, or the things offered to
idols, which are nothing.

Nor is there any escape, that I can see, from the force of
this argument of St. Paul, unless any one will try to evade it by
saying: “Look back a moment, and see if the whole argument
does not belong to the Jew, and not to the
Christian.”  Will any one take this line and appeal to
the words immediately before the text?  True, it is written,
“Behold Israel after the flesh.  Are not they which
eat of the sacrifices partakers of the altar?”  But if
this be urged, I say, go back a little further still, and observe
the flood of light thrown upon the whole passage, in connection
not merely generally with Christianity, but especially and
particularly with the sacrifice of the Body and Blood of Christ,
in this true commemorative Sacrament, which is exactly where and
how, we say, the Christian sacrifice is offered by the Christian
priests upon the Christian altar.  After exhortation against
yielding to temptation, and declaration of the ever-ready help of
God for those who will use it, “who will not suffer us to
be tempted above that we are able, but will with the temptation
also make a way to escape, that we may be able to bear it,”
the Apostle adds: “Wherefore, my dearly beloved, flee from
idolatry.  I speak as to wise men; judge ye what I
say.”  (Oh, let us also be wise to hear and
p. 58
learn!
“Judge ye what I say.”)  “The cup of
blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the Blood of
Christ?  The bread which we break, is it not the communion
of the Body of Christ?  For we, being many, are one bread
and one body: for we are all partakers of that one bread.”

[58]
And then all but immediately he
adds, “are not they which eat of the sacrifices partakers
of the altar?”  Can anything be clearer than that, to
the blessed Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, he
attaches the teaching which follows so directly as to the nature
of the sacrifice and the altar?  Ah! but, it is said, he
interpolates words that you have omitted which alter the
application:—“Behold Israel after the flesh;”
he says, and then adds, “are not they which eat of the
sacrifice partakers of the altar?”  Well, and what do
the parenthetical words mean?  Surely they must mean merely
this,—that, as his readers would allow such was the case
under the law, and with Israel after the flesh; and that Israel,
as well as the heathen, had an altar and a sacrifice, so it is
also with Christians: as if he had said, We Christians, by this
blessed sacramental bond, are one body, even as we are all
partakers of that one Bread; and as you will all allow, the
partaking of a common sacrifice (for instance, that of the
Paschal Lamb,) signified this under the law and with
“Israel after the flesh,” so you must be prepared to
admit as
p.
59
much under the Gospel, and with the true Israel born
anew of the Spirit.  Thus the interpolation does not for one
moment break the sequence or invalidate the force of the argument
as to the Christian sacrifice, but merely illustrates it by a
parenthetical allusion to what his hearers or readers would allow
at once to have been the case with Jewish rites, sacrifices, and
altars: and the conclusion from the whole is distinct and
inevitable, that St. Paul,—speaking to the Christians at
Corinth as to men who would understand the whole force of his
argument, as being acquainted with Jewish customs, and living
also in the very midst of heathen idolatrous
worship,—teaches as plainly that Christians use a Christian
altar, and offer up a Christian sacrifice, and feast together
upon it, and that this is undoubtedly the cup of blessing which
we bless, and the bread which we break, and that thereon follows
the blessedness of fellowship with the Lord; I say, teaches this
as plainly as he says there is, or has been, in Jewish worship a
Jewish altar and sacrifice, and as there is in heathen worship an
altar and a sacrifice to devils, and a partaking of the cup of
devils, and of the table of devils, and thereby the having
fellowship with them.  And, (what is particularly to the
purpose of my citing this passage), herein is the proof that the
sacrifice referred to cannot be the one meritorious, painful,
bloody sacrifice upon the cross, once made and never to be
repeated; both because this was not (no one can
p. 60
say it was)
the literal breaking of bread, and the blessing the cup in the
Holy Eucharist, and because also, if that one sacrifice had been
intended, there would have been no parallel at all between the
heathen sacrifices to which the people were often called, and
that sacrifice to which Christians on this supposition could
never be called.  Whereas if we do but allow, according to
the plain meaning of the words and of the argument, that there is
a true sacrifice to God, commemorative, but real, as ordained and
appointed by Christ Himself,—no repetition of blood or
agony, but the presenting afresh, and pleading afresh, yea,
causing Christ Himself to plead afresh for us in heaven, the
merits of that one precious death,—then we have the most
manifest recognition and declaration of the very doctrine for
which we contend, and both many other passages of Holy Writ are
made perfectly clear,—(who will now doubt the sense of the
other two Scriptures which we examined?)—and the whole
sense and usage of the Church from the beginning is both
explained and justified.

Our time has been so much taken up in examining what was, of
course, the most important question of all, the teaching of Holy
Scripture upon this point, that we have left ourselves no time
to-day to consider the further portion of our proposed subject,
viz., what is the teaching of the Church Catholic from the
beginning, and its understanding of the written word on this
p. 61
doctrine of
sacrifice; and, yet again, what is the witness of our own Church
to her having most carefully preserved, held, and maintained the
same.  To this we will recur, if God will, another day; in
the meanwhile commending ourselves ever to His mercy, and all we
think or do to His grace and guidance.

p. 63
SERMON
IV.

The Testimony of the Early Church to the Doctrine of the
Priesthood.

JEREMIAH vi. 16.

“Thus saith the Lord, Stand ye in the ways, and see, and
ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein,
and ye shall find rest for your souls.”

The
next division of our enquiry
is, the understanding of Holy Scripture in the primitive Church
as to the priesthood, the altar, and the sacrifice, and its
consequent doctrine thereupon.  Before, however, proceeding
to this examination, let me briefly remind you of the point in
the argument from Holy Scripture at which we have arrived, for
our time on Sunday last hardly permitted me to sum up the remarks
then made.  The last passage which we considered asks in the
tone of unquestionable affirmation, “Are not they which eat
of the sacrifices partakers of the altar?”  The
parallel, as I then pointed out, lies between those on the one
hand, who, eating of the heathen sacrifices, are partakers of the
heathen altar, and thus have fellowship
p. 64
with devils;
and those, on the other hand, who, eating of the Christian
sacrifice, are partakers of the Christian altar, and thus have
fellowship with God.  For, I must repeat, if St.
Paul’s argument have not this meaning and significance,
there is no coherency in the things brought into juxtaposition,
and nothing on the one side to answer to the requirement of the
other.  Observe further, before we pass on, how the
Apostle’s whole reasoning, as it stands, excludes, and must
exclude, the sense of the Christian sacrifice being a mere
figurative expression, and that which is eaten in it a mere
subjective thing, dependent upon the mind of the recipient for
its being there at all; for, if it were so in the Christian
sacrifice, it must be so in the idol sacrifice also.  But is
it so in the latter?  Is it that what is there eaten is a
mere nothing in itself, dependent upon the mind of the
eater?  Is the partaking of the idol altar not an effect of
an actual eating?  Is the consequent fellowship with devils
not the result of such actual feasting upon an actual objective
sacrifice?  And, therefore, if the parallel has any force at
all, must it not be that there is a real objective presence of a
sacrificial thing at the Christian altar,—the
res
sacramenti
, as in strict theological phraseology it is
termed,—by which he that eateth is partaker of the altar,
and the result of which is, his having fellowship with Christ and
God?  From which our inference
p. 65
was plain and direct that in St.
Paul’s understanding there is a Christian altar and a
Christian sacrifice.  Such was the conclusion from Holy
Scripture at which we arrived.

I proceed now to shew further, that this, the natural and, as
I think, the necessary sense of that passage (supported by
numerous other passages of Holy Writ, some of which we have
noticed, though many others we have not had time particularly to
examine), is the sense in which the Church Catholic has ever
understood the doctrine of the Scripture upon this subject, and
which our own Church carefully guarded and preserved at her
Reformation; thus maintaining, on so essential a point, her
connection with the Church from the beginning and in all
times.

But yet, before we go into the proof of this, let it be
remarked (for it is very important in order to our seeing the
full weight and bearing of the facts and records to which we are
about to refer) that these three things—the priesthood, the
altar, and the sacrifice—are what we may call correlatives,
and reciprocally imply one another.  As the word parent
implies a child, or brother, brother or sister; so, if there be
an altar, there will be a sacrifice, for the altar would be
unmeaning without it, would miss its aim and be purposeless if
there were nothing to be offered on it; and in like manner, if
there be a sacrifice there will be an altar, for it is contrary
to the whole sense and usage of the word to make such sacrificial

p. 66
offering
to God, and not withal to sanctify some special place and mode of
oblation.  Again, if there be an altar and a sacrifice,
there will be a priesthood; unless the voice of the whole world
(over and above the constraining teaching of the Scripture) be in
error, and any man that pleases may “take this honour unto
himself,”
[66a]
and offer up “gifts and
sacrifices” acceptably to God.

Premising, then, thus much, I proceed to call attention to the
fact, that the whole literature of Christianity from the
beginning either states or implies the doctrine of the
priesthood, the altar, and the sacrifice, which we have deduced
also from Holy Scripture.  It is true that in the very
scanty writings which remain to us from the first century, we may
not find the word ‘priest’ applied to the Christian
ministry.  But, as Mr. Carter has well observed, “the
real question is not whether the name, but whether the idea, of
priesthood is found to exist in the extant writings of the
Apostolic Fathers;”
[66b]
whilst for the
absence of the name it is not hard to assign satisfactory
reasons.  In the first place, the extant writings of that
century are too few to let a negative conclusion be built upon
them.  They amount, I believe, in all, (if we exclude the
“Shepherd of Hermas,” a confessedly mere allegorical
work,) to not more than what would make about thirty pages of an
octavo volume.
[66c]
Over and above this paucity of
material on which to found an argument, other reasons
p. 67
may readily
be given for the term ‘priest’ not occurring.
It may be sufficient here just to touch upon two.  First,
there might be great cause why the earliest Christian writers
should not designate those who ministered at their altars by a
term which might have been understood to imply that they claimed
for them a descent from the house of Aaron according to the
flesh; which claim the Jews around them would know in many
instances to be unfounded, and which, therefore, to be supposed
to make, would lay them open to a charge of imposture; whilst
again, secondly, they might equally desire to keep clear of all
mistake as to their being confounded with the priesthood of the
Gentiles, or heathen world, so likely to involve them in the
charge of offering up bloody sacrifices like them; a charge which
in fact we know, as it was, they did not wholly escape; a
wonderful and most unsuspicious witness by the way (for it comes
from those who had no thought to forward any interests of
Christianity), that Christians claimed to make a true sacrifice
in the Eucharist, for it is evidently this, perverted and
mistaken by the persecuting heathen, (as if, when they offered
the Body and Blood of Christ, they confessed to offering a human
victim,) which led to the accusation; a great evidence surely to
the doctrine of the real presence of Christ therein, for who
could mistake the Eucharistic doctrine of a large portion of
modern Christianity for anything open to such a charge, under
which we know,
p.
68
upon the testimony of heathen writers, the early
Christians suffered reproach?

These two reasons, then, may suffice as to the term
‘priest’ not being so early applied to the Christian
ministry, and indeed we need no defence upon the subject, because
the whole idea of the priesthood prevails in those early writings
whether the word ‘priest’ be used or not, inasmuch as
there is constant mention of the sacrifice and the altar as in
use in the Christian Church.

As we proceed with the stream of Christian writing there is
ample proof of the universal holding and teaching of this
doctrine.

I cannot, of course, pretend here to go through this evidence
in detail.  We must rather look for a summary which may give
the result of a fair examination into the records left us, than
make a series of extracts from them.  We shall perhaps
hardly find a more unexceptionable witness than the learned
writer Vitringa, cited by Mr. Carter in his work already
mentioned.  Speaking of the age shortly succeeding the
Apostles, Mr. Carter says: “As to the usage of this period
there can be no surer authority than that of Vitringa.  His
extensive learning, directed assiduously to this very point, and
his zeal as a partizan, make his testimony to be peculiarly
conclusive.”
[68]
His zeal as a partizan, be it
observed, was not in favour of the Catholic sense of the
writings, nor of any priesthood or altar, for Vitringa was a
Dutch
p.
69
Presbyterian, who lived about the middle of the last
century, and wrote expressly to explain away the evidence which
nevertheless he adduces.  He acknowledges that his own views
are opposed to the unvarying testimony and belief of the Catholic
Church for sixteen hundred years.  His theory excludes all
idea of priesthood and equally of bishops, (not the name only,
but also the office,) chancels, altars, and oblations, and,
indeed, any stated ministry.  In fact, he regards the whole
subject as a staunch Presbyterian, and it is, therefore,
certainly not with any bias in favour of the doctrine which we
are considering that he thus sums up the results of his enquiries
into the writings of those early centuries:—

“That Tertullian, in the beginning of the third century,
calls the bishop ‘chief priest,’ (
summus
sacerdos
); that before his time, in the second century,
Irenæus calls the gifts made at the Holy Eucharist,
‘oblations,’ (
oblata
,) and when consecrated by
the prayer of the bishop, ‘a sacrifice,’
(
sacrificium
); and that in Justin Martyr, a still more
ancient writer, the gifts are called ‘offerings,’
(
προσφοραὶ
);
are facts so certainly known to the learned, that it is needless
to speak of them at greater length.  In the subsequent
writings of the Fathers, the terms ‘priesthood,’
‘Priest,’ ‘Levites,’
‘altars,’ ‘offertories,’
‘sacrifices,’ ‘oblations,’ used in
reference to the Church of the New Testament, are so obvious and
frequent that it can escape no one who has even
p. 70
cursorily
examined their writings.  In Eusebius, moreover, and the
rest of the ecclesiastical historians, and the canons of
Councils, such frequent mention occurs of these phrases, that it
is evident they must have struck deep root into the minds of men
in those ages.”
[70]
So much is the
testimony of a very learned man, and a most unsuspicious
witness.

But there is a separate line of evidence to be drawn from
another and perhaps even still more convincing source: I mean the
ancient liturgies of the Church which have come down to us, and
tell us in what way the early Christians worshipped God; the
place which they assigned to the Holy Eucharist, and the light in
which they regarded it in connection with sacrifice, altar, and
priesthood.  There are four liturgies, (and we are to
remember, the word in all ancient writings means merely and
simply the Eucharistic service,) which have been shewn to have
been reduced to writing in the course of the fourth century, and
one of them in the earliest part of it.  They bear their
witness to the Church’s faith and hope and teaching in
those days, and even earlier, because it is generally conceded
that they were in use long before they were put into writing, the
days of persecution rendering it unsafe for the Christians to
have documents which might be seized, and turned against them; or
perhaps still more,
p.
71
the desire to preserve the mysteries of their faith, and
especially of the Holy Eucharist, from the inquisition of heathen
scoffing, indisposing them to keep any records which could be
thus profanely used.  Of course, after the Empire became
Christian, under Constantine, this reason ceased, and it was only
what was natural that the services which had been orally in use
for years should now be reduced to writing.  Now, these four
liturgies were used at the four great central sees of
Christendom, and their subordinate branches, and so pervaded the
whole Catholic world.  “The first,” to use the
words of a learned writer, Mr. Palmer, the author of the

Origines Liturgicæ
, “is the great Oriental
liturgy, as it seems to have prevailed in all the Christian
Churches, from the Euphrates to the Hellespont, and from the
Hellespont to the southern extremity of Greece; the second was
the Alexandrian, which from time immemorial has been the liturgy
of Egypt, Abyssinia, and the country extending along the
Mediterranean Sea to the West; the third was the Roman, which
prevailed throughout the whole of Italy, Sicily, and great part
of Africa; the fourth was the Gallican, which was used throughout
Gaul and Spain, and probably in the exarchate of Ephesus, until
the fourth century.”
[71]

Now, the especially important bearing of these liturgies upon
our subject is this, that in spite of enough of difference to
shew that they are independent
p. 72
witnesses, they yet correspond most
closely with one another in all main features, and particularly
in their witness to the sacrificial doctrine, and the priestly
office, in relation to the Holy Eucharist.  And (as Mr.
Palmer has pointed out), with regard to the one first named, the
Oriental, existing documents enable us to trace this liturgy to a
very remote period indeed, almost or quite to the Apostolic age;
for he reminds us that in the time of Justin Martyr, whose
writings are the “existing documents” of which he
speaks, the Christian Church was “only removed by one link
from the Apostles themselves.”
[72a]
Nor even is
this all; for there is yet a fifth liturgy, of a date still
earlier than these four already named, called the Clementine, and
what is particularly remarkable in it is, that it agrees with
those four great liturgies in all points where they agree with
each other, as well as in their general structure.

“Now, in all these liturgies alike,” says Mr.
Carter, “the ancient sacerdotal terms in question are
ordinarily used.  In reading them, we open upon a scene
which represents a priesthood of different degrees, with a
complete ritual, ministering before God on behalf of the people,
offering sacrifices, and communicating heavenly gifts and
benedictions.”
[72b]

I must forbear both any quotations to shew this, as well as
defer any further remarks upon
p. 73
the progress of events, or (which
also is part of our subject) on the careful attention, by our own
Reformers and Revisers, to preserve the teaching of the primitive
Church in this matter.  If it please God, yet once more we
may return to the subject, and see how this stands, as well as
make some little practical application of the doctrine to
ourselves at this day, to some of our dangers and temptations in
an age so free-thinking and free-handling as the present.
Without anticipating these things in any detail, let me yet just
remind you that the mere fashion, or usage, or clamour, or
forgetfulness, or unbelief of any age or time can make no
difference in the truth of God, or in the doctrine which has been
from the beginning, or in the mysteries of His kingdom.
That men should try to bring all things, however divine and holy,
however deep and mysterious, to the level of their own
understanding, and discard all which they may be unable to
explain, need be to us no matter of surprise.  The very same
temper which in one induces a disbelief in the doctrine of the
Holy Trinity, because the doctrine is beyond the human
understanding to fathom,—or leads another to reject the
mystery of the Incarnation, because it is ineffable and above his
comprehension,—or another to deny the regenerating gift and
efficacy of holy baptism, saying, “How can these things
be?”—may readily bring others to that hard state of
scepticism which robs the Holy Eucharist at once of its deep
mysteriousness and of its hidden
p. 74
virtue; which therefore rejects, and
too often ridicules, the very idea of a priesthood and an
availing sacrifice, saying, “How should man have power with
God?” or, “How can this Man give us His flesh to
eat?”
[74a]
even though the priestly power be
derived from Christ’s own commission, and the mysterious
virtue assured by His own Word of Truth.  That there should
be some who, leaning too much to their own understanding, forsake
the old ways, and dislike and accuse those who desire to cleave
to them; that they should frame worldly arguments for worldly
men, and even deceive some who in heart and wish are not worldly,
but rather unwary, or led away by the mere voice of the
multitude, or swayed by prejudice, or betrayed through an
ignorance of what has been from the beginning; that
some

should scoff when they cannot reason, and ridicule that which
they have not the heart to understand,—all this, I repeat,
need not fill us with either surprise or dismay, though perchance
it may make us (not wholly unwarrantably) deem that the latter
days are come, or close coming, upon us.  I say all this
need not surprise us, for have not our Lord and His Apostles
warned us that such things must be?  “When the Son of
Man cometh,” He said Himself, “shall He find faith on
the earth?”
[74b]
as though it would
exist but in a remnant.  And again, “If they have
called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall
they call
p.
75
them of his household?”
[75a]
Why, then, should we expect to
escape such things?  But I said, also, we need not be
dismayed at them.  Is there not the exhortation, “Ye
have need of patience?”
[75b]
and again the
encouragement, “In your patience possess ye your
souls?”
[75c]
and again the gracious promise,
“He that endureth to the end shall be saved?”
[75d]
What though in the latter times
some shall depart from the faith?
[75e]
What though
“the time will come when men will not endure sound
doctrine.”
[75f]
Shall this make any difference
in our faith, or cast any gloom upon our hope?  No!
Brethren, let us ever remember that what we have to rely upon is,
not “man’s wisdom,” nor “an arm of
flesh:” what we have to cleave to with all constancy is
“that which was from the beginning;”
[75g]
for it is this which gives us
“fellowship with the Father, and with His Son Jesus
Christ.”
[75h]

And surely here we may see and bless the goodness of God
towards us in this our Church of England that He put it into the
hearts of our Reformers not for one moment to think of making a
new religion or a new Church, but only (throwing off errors and
corruptions) to go back to the teaching of the early ages, and
embrace the doctrine of the Church universal.  If the Church
of England had
begun
at the Reformation, (as sometimes
p. 76
men speak,)
no man, who knew anything of the essentials of Christianity could
belong to her for a moment.  But, blessed be God, He put it
into the heart and minds of those who, in His providence, guided
the course of the English Reformation, to make it a maxim,

Stare super antiquas vias
, to give heed to the injunction
of the prophet: “Thus saith the Lord, Stand ye in the ways,
and see, and ask for the old paths where is the good way; and
walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls.”
[76]
It is this which has been, under
God, our safeguard.  From time to time assaults have been
made to destroy our true Catholic character and our bond of union
with primitive Christianity; but God has, of His mercy, hitherto,
ever kept it in the heart of the rulers in our Church to
“ask for the old ways, and to walk in them.”
That our Church has kept to the old ways is manifest from this,
that the very persons who disbelieve and desire to drive us from
the ancient faith, are the same who, as the means of doing so,
are striving to new model our formularies and alter our
Prayer-book.  They feel no less than we that, whilst we
retain these, we cleave to the doctrine which has been of old;
and they, desiring to deprive us of the doctrine, are as anxious
to alter our formularies as we are to keep them unchanged.
And many of them would perhaps, even more openly than they do,
advocate extensive measures of liturgical revision,
p. 77
in a
doctrinal sense, but for the consciousness that to shew too great
anxiety on the point is too like a confession of how much the
Prayer-book is against them.  Surely these things are of
great weight when we would know what doctrine is most according
to the mind of the Church of England.  “I speak as to
wise men; judge ye what I say.”  It is this same
principle, too, of preserving the one faith once delivered, which
makes it so important to examine, as we are attempting to do, the
sense of Holy Scripture as attested by the consent of the Church
from the beginning, and as accepted by our own Church, upon so
grave and practical a subject as the priesthood, the altar, and
the sacrifice.  May God give us His illumination to see His
truth as He has seen fit to reveal it to us, and grace that where
we see it, we may boldly confess it; so shall we pass in safety
the waves of this troublesome world, so may we, perchance, be
delivered from the strife of tongues; or, if not, yet shall we
learn not to fear man, nor be troubled even if we cannot please
men, remembering the witness of St. Paul, that “if he
pleased men, he should not be the servant of Christ.”
[77]

And, brethren, let us all pray for an humble, meek, gentle,
teachable, believing heart, that we may not despise or refuse, or
disbelieve God’s mighty works, though His treasure be
placed in earthen vessels; nor turn our back upon His mysteries,

p. 78
though
they transcend our utmost powers of conception, nor neglect His
call, be it what it may; to go forth, if it be so, like Abraham,
we know not whither; or, like him, to sacrifice our dearest hope,
if God demand it; or, like Daniel, to be cast even into the den
of lions; or, like the Apostles, to be made the very refuse of
the earth and the offscouring of all things,—so that we may
but hold fast the faith, and yet hand on again to those who shall
come after the good deposit committed to our charge.  If
this, indeed, we are enabled to do, we may well “thank God
and take courage.”

p. 79
SERMON
V.

The Testimony of our Formularies to the Doctrine of the
Priesthood.

ST. JOHN xx. 22, 23.

“And when He had said this, He breathed on them, and saith
unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost: whose soever sins ye remit,
they are remitted unto them; and whose soever sins ye retain,
they are retained.”

In
the brief outline which I have
submitted in these discourses of the evidences for the doctrine
of the Christian priesthood, altar, and sacrifice, I first met
the objection sometimes made to there being any such treasure (in
our Church at any rate) because lodged in earthen vessels;
secondly, I traced, at least in part, the witness of the whole
world before Christ’s coming to the belief in, and usage
of, sacrifice and altar, with the necessarily attendant
priesthood; and thirdly, I adduced some very small portion of the
proofs both from Holy Scripture and from the universal consent of
the early Church in its interpretation of Scripture, that
priesthood, altar, and sacrifice did not expire with the law, but
were intended to be continued, and were continued in and under
the Christian dispensation, in and under Him who
p. 80
was and is a
High Priest of surpassing power and dignity, not after the
pattern or lineage of the priests of the sons of Aaron, but
“called an High Priest for ever after the order of
Melchizedek;” of Him who, fulfilling that royal type, was
“King of Righteousness,” and after that also
“King of Salem, which is King of Peace,” and yet,
again, in like manner, “priest of the Most High God,”
and who “abideth a priest continually.”
[80]

We brought our examination of this evidence to the fourth
century of the Christian era by, as I think it must be allowed,
the summary of an unexceptionable witness to the substance of the
early Christian writings upon that point, and by a reference to
the five most ancient liturgies of the Christian Church.  It
is unnecessary to say a word as to the same doctrine being the
universally received doctrine of the Church from the fourth
century to the sixteenth, because its very opponents adduce the
teaching of that thousand or twelve hundred years, in this among
other things, as proving the great darkness and corruption which
had then fallen upon the Church, and obscured, in their view, the
simplicity of the Gospel.  So that, whatever may be thought
of its orthodoxy, the fact is not disputed, that for such period
the whole of Christendom, with the most insignificant exceptions,
believed in the doctrine which we are considering.  Whether,
as is affirmed by such objectors, this universal belief
p. 81
were a mark
of the corruption and ignorance of “the dark ages,”
as the self-complacent pride of later times has designated them,
(when perchance in God’s judgment they may be as light
itself compared with much of the “philosophy and vain
deceit”
[81a]
of this free-handling nineteenth
century, which so often “darkens counsel by words without
knowledge”
[81b]
); or whether such consent, following
the track of the earliest ages, be not rather the mark of a true
understanding of the mind of the Spirit pervading that body with
which Christ has promised to be, “even to the end of the
world,” is another question.  It is one which I need
not now pursue, as what we have to say of the course taken and
the doctrine maintained by the Church of England at her
Reformation will throw a light upon the whole matter, which
ought, I think, to be sufficient for any understanding and
faithful member of our Church.

Thus we are brought to the immediate subject of our further
enquiry.  It being admitted, as I think I have shewn it must
be, that this doctrine of the priesthood, altar, and sacrifice,
is a doctrine founded upon, and supported by, Holy Scripture; so
understood by the Church at large from the earliest times, so
maintained with no faltering lips to at least the sixteenth
century; what, we ask next, is the evidence of the mind of our
own Church at the Reformation and since, as to her preserving or
rejecting it?

p. 82
You
will hardly expect me to go through all the evidence.
But—remembering what we said on Sunday last, that these
three things are correlatives, reciprocally implying each other,
or each one the other two, (the priest; the altar and the
sacrifice;—the altar; the sacrifice and the
priest;—the sacrifice; the priest and the altar;)—let
us turn to some portion of the proof that our Church has fully
intended and intends, has accounted and accounts, those who in
her carry on the services of the sanctuary to be priests of
God.

Now, observe, the three great offices embraced in the idea of
a priest are these:—first, that he is one who has
commission to rule and teach; secondly, one who has power to
absolve; thirdly, one who has authority to offer up
sacrifice.  The first of these functions, though belonging
to the priesthood, is hardly to be called distinctive of it (as
we may see more clearly presently); the other two are of its
essence, that is, pertaining to none else; so that, on the one
hand, he who has them both, or even he who has, if it were so,
either of them, is necessarily in a true sense a priest; and, on
the other, he who is a priest will have one or other, or both of
these powers, not indeed of himself, but committed to him.
To see how this stands with us, who are ministers and stewards of
God’s mysteries in this our Church of England, we must turn
to our service-books, and especially to the Service for Ordaining

p. 83
Priests,
to see what is the commission given to each, and what we learn
from this to be the mind of the Church concerning them who are
admitted to that holy function.

Turn first, then, for a moment to the Preface, to “The
Form and Manner of making, ordaining, and consecrating of
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, according to the order of the
United Church of England and Ireland.”  We find it
there said: “It is evident unto all men diligently reading
the Holy Scripture and ancient authors, that from the
Apostles’ time there have been these Orders of Ministers in
Christ’s Church; Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.  Which
offices were evermore had in such reverend estimation, that no
man might presume to execute any of them, except he were first
called, tried, examined, and known to have such qualities as are
requisite for the same; and also by public prayer, with
imposition of hands, were approved and admitted thereunto by
lawful authority.  And therefore, to the intent that these
Orders may be continued, and reverently used and esteemed, in the
United Church of England and Ireland; no man shall be accounted
or taken to be a lawful Bishop, Priest, or Deacon, in the United
Church of England and Ireland, or suffered to execute any of the
said functions, except he be called, tried, examined, and
admitted thereunto, according to the form hereafter following, or
hath had formerly episcopal consecration, or
ordination.”

p. 84
Now
this shews, I think, beyond dispute, that the Church of England
holds that no one, according to her mind and rule, is to be
accounted or taken to be a lawful bishop, priest, or deacon,
without episcopal ordination or consecration; for those who are
ordained or consecrated according to the forms which follow,
unquestionably have it; and those who are or have been admitted
by any others, are not to be accounted lawfully admitted to those
Orders unless they have at some time been episcopally
ordained.

We therefore find the authority and commission, in each case,
given by the laying on of a bishop or bishops’ hands,
though, according to the Scriptural warrant, accompanied also, in
the ordination of priests, by the laying on of the hands of the
priests present.  Still it is evident that these, without
the bishop, are not esteemed competent to convey the gift of Holy
Orders.

But, next, what is the commission given?  Observe the
difference between that to deacons and to priests, and you will
see the more clearly what is of the essence of the
priesthood.

To the deacon it is said, with the laying on of hands:
“Take thou authority to execute the office of a deacon in
the Church of God committed unto thee; in the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost;” and then, further:
“Take thou authority to read the Gospel in the Church of
God, and to preach
p.
85
the same if thou be thereto licensed by the bishop
himself.”
[85a]

But to the priest the corresponding, but far higher
commission, is: “Receive the Holy Ghost for the office and
work of a priest in the Church of God, now committed unto thee by
the imposition of my hands.”
[85b]

Yes, it may be said, but what work?  We grant there is
the use of the word ‘priest,’ but the whole question
turns upon the sense in which it is used.  Oh, brethren,
listen with simple hearts of reverence, loving and seeking only
the truth, to the solemn and awful words which follow:
“Whose sins thou dost forgive, they are forgiven; and whose
sins thou dost retain, they are retained; and be thou a faithful
dispenser of the Word of God, and of His holy Sacraments: in the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
Amen.”
[85c]

And then, further, delivering the Bible into the hand of each:
“Take thou authority to preach the Word of God, and to
minister the Holy Sacraments in the congregation where thou shalt
be lawfully appointed thereunto.”
[85d]

Now, not only is there evidently in all this a general
superior commission given, but there is the particular and
specific difference which I affirm can only be accounted for by
the intentional full recognition of the priestly idea and
p. 86
priestly
office as we have all along explained and taken those terms.

And the words settle, as it seems to me, beyond dispute,
another question,—which yet is not another, though it may
bear a separate word of comment in our argument,—namely,
whether the Church of England considers our Lord’s
ministerial commission to His Apostles to have been confined to
them, or whether it was His will, by virtue of His words,
“As My Father hath sent Me, even so send I you,”
[86]
that they should again transmit the
powers of the priesthood on to others after them?  For
observe particularly what words they are which are used by the
bishop to give this commission to the priest.
“Receive,” he says, “the Holy Ghost for the
office of a priest, in the Church of God;” and then,
“Whose sins thou dost forgive, they are forgiven; and whose
sins thou dost retain, they are retained.”  Now from
whence do these words come?  Who used them before, and to
whom did they then give a commission?  Let us turn to the
twentieth chapter of St. John’s Gospel, and we shall find
the Divine record: “Then said Jesus to them again,”
(viz. to the Apostles,) “Peace be unto you; as My Father
hath sent Me, even so send I you.  And when He had said
this, He breathed on them, and saith unto them, Receive ye the
Holy Ghost: whose soever
p. 87
sins ye remit, they are remitted unto
them; and whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained.”

[87]

Now is there any one who denies that our Blessed Lord thus
gave such power to those to whom He then spoke, and on whom He
then breathed?  I suppose not.  It would be wholly to
explain away and contradict His word to say so.  It would be
to prevent any one relying upon the plainest meaning of anything
to say so.  It would be to make every injunction He ever
gave, and every truth He ever uttered, without sense or force, so
to read such a passage, as that it gave no commission even to the
Apostles.  If His Apostles did not receive from that
commission a power to bind and loose, to remit and retain sins,
it must, I think, be hopeless for any one to imagine any duties
can be proved or any doctrines declared in Scripture, or, we
might add, by any words anywhere set down.  But then it is
said, We do not deny the commission as a personal thing to the
Apostles, but we say that it extended no further.  We say
that if any imagine such a power and authority to have been
intended to be transmitted further, or to be capable of being
thus transmitted, he is in a grievous error and mistake.
Now I am not arguing this question, whether mine be the right
understanding of the Scripture, but I say, is it not as plain as
the sun at noon-day that, right or wrong, it is the understanding
of the Church of England?  Surely her meaning here
p. 88
can no more
be questioned as to those to whom she applies them, than our
Blessed Lord’s intention can be questioned as to those to
whom He addressed them.  What possible explanation is there
of her appointing those words to be solemnly used in her Ordinal
at the time of, and in the ordaining a man to be a priest, but
that she believed the powers of the priesthood, as to absolution,
to be then and thereby given to that man according to the will of
God and Christ?  “I speak as to wise men; judge ye
what I say.”  Would it not shew either an ignorance of
the force of words which is inconceivable, not merely in eminent
theologians, which assuredly many of our Reformers were, but in
any one of sane mind, if the words appointed to be so solemnly
used, yet mean absolutely nothing?  Or, if not this, must it
not argue an impiety amounting to blasphemy for the Church of any
country to draw up for use a service such as this, and, playing
unmeaningly or deceitfully with such holy words, not to suppose
any gift of the Holy Ghost, or any power of absolution, to be
conveyed to those to whom they are addressed?  What could we
esteem such a barren equivocation with the holiest of things, if
there were such design, but impious mockery towards God and
deceit towards man?

But further, we are not even left to such proof that our
Church intends no such mockery.  Turn to the work of the
priest on this very point of absolution, and what is the light
thrown by this
p.
89
upon the words of ordination?  I will pass over the
Absolution both in our Morning and Evening Prayers and in the
Office of Holy Communion, as, though in each case specifically
limited to being given by the priest, they may be thought to be
capable of a sense chiefly or only declaratory, or
precatory.  But I ask you to turn to two other
places—1. to the end of the second Exhortation, as to the
coming to Holy Communion; and, 2. to the Office for the
Visitation of the Sick.

In the former place, after explanation of the preparation,
“the way and means” to come worthily to that Holy
Sacrament, we find the following: “And because it is
requisite, that no man should come to the Holy Communion but with
a full trust in God’s mercy, and with a quiet conscience;
therefore if there be any of you, who by this means”
(namely, his own private examination of his life) “cannot
quiet his own conscience herein, but requireth further comfort or
counsel, let him come to me, or to some other discreet and
learned minister of God’s Word, and open his grief; that by
the ministry of God’s holy Word, he may receive the benefit
of absolution,” (What is the benefit if there be no power
to absolve?) “together with ghostly counsel and advice, to
the quieting of his conscience, and avoiding all scruple and
doubtfulness.”
[89]

Here then, surely, he who has been ordained a priest, and
received the Holy Ghost that he may
p. 90
remit or retain sins, is to exercise
his ministry in the absolution of the penitent soul.

But if it be said, There is no minute description or account
of the mode of absolution, it may still be but declaratory or
precatory; I say, then, turn once again to another place, and see
if the form and method of the absolution be not there actually
all which we can suppose even an Apostle himself could use.
In the Office for the Visitation of the Sick, when the sick man
is in the full contemplation of death, and perhaps death very
near at hand, the priest being solemnly engaged in his office of
preparing him for it, the distinct direction is given that the
sick person shall be “moved to make a special confession of
his sins, if he feel his conscience troubled with any weighty
matter.  After which confession, the priest shall absolve
him (if he humbly and heartily desire it) after this
sort.”  And the words are: “Our Lord Jesus
Christ, who hath left power to His Church to absolve all sinners
who truly repent and believe in Him, of His great mercy forgive
thee thine offences;” (so far we have the declaration of
the power left to the Church, and either, it may be said,
declaratory or precatory words, “forgive thee.”
But this is not all; immediately it is added), “And by His
authority committed to me, I absolve thee from all thy sins; in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost.  Amen.”
[90]

p. 91
Now,
brethren, I do not desire to say much in comment on such words as
these.  But I do say, and I know not how to avoid saying,
first, if such authority was committed to the priest, when was it
committed to him, or how, but at his ordination, and in and by
“the form and manner of ordering priests,” which we
have before noted?  And, secondly, can any reasonable being
believe that the Church could have drawn up such a service, and
put such words into the priest’s mouth when dealing
solemnly and truly with a sick or dying man, and yet believe that
such power of absolution, as a part of the priest’s
distinctive character and endowment by God, had not been
conferred upon him? or maintain that she thought our Blessed
Lord’s commission extended no further than to its first
recipients, and died out with the Apostles themselves, when still
she uses the words continually in her “ordering of
priests?”  If it be said,—Well: still we cannot
believe this, and can only say that we heartily desire to remove
from our Prayer-book and Ordinal, as a blasphemous fable and a
dangerous deceit, all traces of such authority being
given,—I can only reply that this argument is wholly beside
our present question.  I am not now arguing whether such an
interpretation and use of Holy Scripture be the right
interpretation and use, (though I have given reasons before for
feeling sure it is,) but I am shewing what is the mind and
understanding herein of the Church of England.  I am
p. 92
silencing, if
I may, (and in the judgment of right reason I cannot conceive
that I should fail in doing so,) the calumny that they who
maintain the doctrine of the priesthood are disloyal to the
Church of England, or deviating from the principles of the
Reformation.  For, not merely according to what right reason
must, I think, enforce to be the intention of those who drew up
our formularies, but according to the simple sense of those
formularies, this doctrine and none other is the only doctrine
which can be made consistent with the documents themselves, or
which they can justly be taken to enunciate.  We have at
times heard not a little of the dishonesty of those who, it is
said, have taken our formularies in a non-natural sense, on the
Catholic side, though in a sense which they deemed they would
fairly bear.  If this argument be good for anything, against
whom can it so conclusively be brought as against such as will
affirm that, when in the most solemn exercise of a bishop’s
office, the bishop says, “Receive the Holy Ghost for the
office and work of a priest in the Church of God,” the
Church intends that there is no gift of the Holy Ghost bestowed,
and no priest made at all?  Or, again, when he says,
adopting Christ’s own words of
commission,—“Whose sins thou dost forgive they are
forgiven unto them, and whose sins thou dost retain, they are
retained;”—that in this there is no intention to
teach that the commission of Christ extended beyond the Apostles
themselves, and that no
p. 93
power of binding or loosing is
conferred by this solemn act?  Or, yet again, who tell us
that when the priest is instructed to exercise this holy function
of absolving penitents, either that they may come “with a
full trust in God’s mercy and with a quiet
conscience” to the Holy Eucharist, or, in the solemn
moments of serious sickness, perhaps the near prospect of death,
(things and times surely beyond all others to drive away the very
notion of unreal or unmeaning words, which must also, if they be
such, be to the poor penitent most deceitful and misleading words
also); that then the Church gives her instruction to use the word
of absolution, and say, “By His authority committed unto
me, I absolve thee from all thy sins, in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,” and yet means
hereby only a mockery and a delusion; that there is no such
power, no such authority, no such absolving at all; surely all
this is not a mere non-natural sense which the words will bear,
though it may not be the most obvious at first sight, but is a
non-natural sense so monstrous that they will not bear it at
all.

So much I say in proof of the mind of the Church of England
upon the subject of the priesthood, as involved in the priestly
function of absolution.  It is but a small part of what
might be said, but it is as much perhaps as our time will now
permit, and I cannot understand it to be less than sufficient
(unless our Reformers in the sixteenth
p. 94
century, and the Revisers of our Book
of Common Prayer and offices since, are to be esteemed either as
the most incompetent or the most impious of men,) to prove the
point for which I have adduced the wording of our Ordinal, and
the comment upon this given by other parts of the Prayer-book,
namely, that our Church unmistakably maintains the doctrine of
the Christian priesthood, not merely the name but the thing, in
the same reality and power in which the Church universal has ever
claimed and ever maintained it.

And this remark may give us, if it please God, a wholesome
thought with which to conclude this morning.  Let us ever
strive and pray, that we may never for a moment be severed in
heart or hope, or even in thought, from the universal
Church.  Let us love it, and cleave to it, as we contemplate
it one and undivided of old, however, alas, now distracted by
unhappy divisions.  Let us beware of encouraging a
self-sufficient or self-reliant temper, as if we shewed our
wisdom or independence, by isolating ourselves from that which
has been the faith of the Church, not here or there, but
everywhere from the beginning.  If we can discover (as in
most points of importance we may if we will,) what are the truths
which have been held always, everywhere, and by all,
(
semper
,
ubique
,
ad omnibus
, according to
the well-known rule of St. Vincentius,) we may be certain that we
shall run into no serious error, nor perverted interpretations of
Holy Scripture dangerous to our souls.
p. 95
Individuals,
however gifted, may go astray.  Individual Churches may err,
and have erred, even in matters of faith; but the whole Church at
large, the Church Catholic, we may be sure, has not done so, nor
ever shall, or how should it be, what St. Paul tells us
“the Church of God” is, “the pillar and ground
of the truth,”
[95a]
or how should be
fulfilled our Blessed Lord’s word and
promise,—“The gates of hell shall not prevail against
It;”
[95b]
and again, “Lo!  I am with
you alway, even unto the end of the world.”
[95c]
So, indeed, let us look upon Her
with tender reverence as the spouse of Christ.  “Oh!
pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper that love
Thee.”
[95d]

p. 97
SERMON
VI.

The Christian Altar.

HEBREWS xiii. 10.

“We have an Altar.”

I
resume
our subject: the
priesthood, altar and sacrifice in the Christian Church, and the
mind of the Church of England upon it.  On Sunday last we
treated of this in part, shewing in relation to it what were the
“old paths,” and pointing to the proof that our
Church walks in them, recognising and maintaining a true
priesthood in those who minister at her altars, by the solemn
committal to them of the power of absolution, a thing which she
would not do upon any other hypothesis than that of their
possessing a true sacerdotal character.  We had not time to
say much upon the altar or the sacrifice.  Our text,
however, now leads us by no uncertain course to this portion of
our subject, especially when placed in connection with St.
Paul’s emphatic question in another place: “Are not
they which eat of the sacrifices partakers of the
altar?”  You will remember that we examined both those
passages on a former occasion,
[97]
when we were
regarding the scriptural
p. 98
testimony to the doctrine, and I need
not repeat what I then said.  But they will lead us on now
naturally,—after the remarks I made last week upon the
Christian priesthood, as borne witness to by the primitive
Church, and maintained in the Church of England,—to some
consideration of the sacrifice also, as borne witness to and
maintained in like manner.

“We have an altar,” says the Apostle.  Of
course it is in the celebration of the Holy Eucharist that this
altar is used, and the sacrifice made; the great commemorative
sacrifice of the Christian Church, wherein we do not repeat, or
attempt to repeat, (God forbid,) the one sacrifice, oblation, and
satisfaction once for all made upon the Cross, but yet are
allowed to present before God the Father, the memorial of that
ever-blessed offering, by the Body and Blood of Christ really
present, (though not after the manner of any “corporal
presence of Christ’s natural flesh and blood,” but)
after a true though mystical and heavenly manner; to present
this, I say, according to His will and ordinance, by which it is
granted us to apply to ourselves the merits of His death and
passion, and to obtain His own prevailing intercession for us
before the throne of God; whereby, too, our souls and bodies, as
we “eat of the sacrifice are partakers of the altar,”
and gain heavenly nourishment and sustenance unto everlasting
life.

We have seen already that such is the judgment
p. 99
and doctrine
of the primitive Church in its understanding of Holy Scripture,
as shewn by the early Christian writers, and by the ancient
liturgies.  Also, that the doctrine was maintained
continuously for fifteen hundred years.  Our question now
is, What has our own Church said and done in this matter at or
since the Reformation?  Does she maintain, or does she
reject, the previous teaching of the Church Universal, and put
something else in the place of its doctrine, and its
understanding of Holy Scripture upon the subject?

We cannot here go into a minute history of all which was done
at the Reformation in this regard.  But I think we may,
within reasonable compass, arrive at a satisfactory general
conclusion.  If we compare our Church’s Eucharistic
Office with the ancient liturgies which have been preserved to
us, we may see, I might almost say, at a glance, whether in
prayer, in praise, in oblation, in general design and structure,
we follow in their steps, or make “some new
thing.”  It cannot be disputed that in design and
structure those liturgies all proclaim the doctrine of priest,
sacrifice, and altar.  This is interwoven with their whole
system.  It was the one understanding of Christians in those
days as to what their liturgies contained.  If, then, we
find that the Church of England follows carefully in their steps,
and maintains in her Eucharistic Office the whole substance of
those liturgies,—at
p. 100
any rate, all the main points in
which they agree together, even though it be with some
differences of arrangement, such as might naturally be
expected,—surely we prove our point, and cannot doubt that
our Reformers had no design to break away from the ancient faith,
though they would cast off Roman error and Roman usurpation, and
therefore that our Church not only does not condemn, but adopts
and continues, (as in truth she never dreamed of any other
thing,) the doctrine of the Church Universal in this matter.

Take, then, the following short account of the structure,
form, and usage of the ancient liturgies.  I extract it from
Mr. Carter’s book, as I know of no better way to place it
before you:—“The following brief digest,” he
says, “may give some idea of this system of devotion into
which the mind of Christendom was habitually casting itself in
its communion with God.  It will be readily seen how the
outline corresponds with our own Eucharistic Office.  One or
more collects; lessons from Holy Scripture; a sermon, sometimes
preceded by a hymn or anthem; prayers for the catechumens,
penitents, and others, who, with a benediction, were then
dismissed; the creed, the offertory, with the oblations of bread
and wine” (observe, first offered by being placed upon the
altar); then, “thanksgivings and intercessions, with a
commemoration of the dead in Christ.  Then, the more
mystical portion of the
p. 101
Liturgy commenced, and in all cases
with the very same words,
Sursum corda
, (‘Lift up
your hearts’); a thanksgiving, closing with the
Ter
sanctus
, (‘holy, holy, holy’); intercessory
prayers; consecration of the elements, with the repetition of our
Lord’s words of institution; a second oblation of the now
consecrated elements, (this was not always expressed in
words,—sometimes silently, and in act only); an invocation
of the Holy Ghost.  This is not found in the Roman nor in
the Gallican Liturgies;”—(so, observe, we do not
forsake the doctrine of the sacrifice if we have it not, for no
one will suspect the Roman Church, which was equally without it,
of denying or disparaging that doctrine;)—then,
“intercessory prayers for the whole Church, the dead as
well as the living;”—(this, however, would be praying
only for the dead in Christ, for none other would be considered
as part of the Church after the time of probation is over: though
in this world, and in the Church on earth, the good and evil, the
wheat and tares grow together, it is not so in the Church beyond
the grave:)—“the Lord’s Prayer; a benediction;
administration or communion; thanksgiving;
Gloria in
excelsis
; final benediction.”
[101]

Now will any one take this account of the liturgies and usage
of the ancient Church, which on all hands confessedly is admitted
to have held the doctrine for which we contend, and then,
comparing
p.
102
these with the Eucharistic Service of our own Church,
doubt for a moment that the Church of England at the Reformation
intended to preserve, and did preserve, the ancient form and
practice, and therefore the ancient faith, in this matter?
[102]

p. 103
The
Articles and Catechism of our Church are perfectly in accordance
with this conclusion.  Although the former, as we well know,
were drawn up rather to guard against current errors of that day
than to state doctrine upon points not brought into controversy,

[103]
they indirectly confirm
p. 104
what has
been said.  For instance, the Twenty-fifth Article, guarding
against the notion of a gross carnal presence of Christ in the
Holy Eucharist, expressed by the term
‘transubstantiation,’ might not be called upon,
within its proper scope, to say anything in the way of dogma
asserting the doctrine of sacrifice; but yet we find in it the
statement that sacraments “be not only badges or tokens of
Christian men’s profession, but rather they be certain sure
witnesses and effectual signs of grace,”—that is,
signs effecting what they signify, and therefore, in the case of
the Holy Communion, effecting or procuring for sinners pardon
through Christ’s body broken and blood shed, even as there,
“as often as we eat that bread and drink that cup we do
shew the Lord’s death till He come,”
[104]
all which is in perfect accordance and
harmony with the doctrine of a true propitiatory commemorative
sacrifice therein offered up to God.

One point further in relation to the Articles I will notice,
lest I seem to overlook an objection.  It is sometimes said,
If the doctrine of a true and propitiatory sacrifice in the Holy
Eucharist be admitted, there is a contradiction to the
Thirty-first Article, which tells us that “the sacrifices
of masses, in which it was commonly said that the
p. 105
priest did
offer Christ for the quick and dead, to have remission of pain or
guilt, were blasphemous fables and dangerous
deceits.”  It is assumed that any doctrine of a real
and true sacrifice of the Body and Blood of Christ in the Holy
Eucharist must come under this condemnation, and so it is
sometimes thought that the whole question is thus decided.
But, not to notice other points not without importance, but which
we can hardly spare time to go into now, one thing surely is
evident,—that the whole Article must be read together if we
would rightly understand it.  It is: “The offering of
Christ once made is that perfect redemption, propitiation, and
satisfaction for all the sins of the whole world, both original
and actual; and there is none other satisfaction for sin but that
alone.  Wherefore the sacrifices of masses, in the which it
was commonly said that the priest did offer Christ for the quick
and the dead, to have remission of pain or guilt, were
blasphemous fables and dangerous deceits.”  Now it is
plain that the contrast here is between the one satisfaction for
sin made by agony and blood upon the cross, and any supposed
repetition of that painful and bloody sacrifice.
“There is none other but that alone;” wherefore, for
which reason, such attempts at sacrifice as would repeat it, or
such teaching as would imply that Christ repeats it and suffers
again, “are blasphemous fables and dangerous
deceits.”  If, then, in anything we say there were a
doctrine of its repetition, if we did not absolutely and entirely

p. 106
disclaim
(as we all along have done) any such attempt and any such view of
the sacrifice of the Christian altar, there would be a
condemnation by the Article of our teaching.  But certainly
neither its terms nor its scope deal with any view of a merely
unbloody commemorative sacrifice, appointed to be continually
made in the Church of God so long as the world lasteth, by which
the sacrifice upon the cross is never supposed to be repeated,
but its sole merits applied to the believing and obedient heart,
and the prevailing pleading and intercession of the Son of God
presenting our prayers and praises, our penitence and offerings,
before the throne of the heavenly grace are secured, and He
Himself, our Advocate with the Father, is our propitiation.
This no more interferes with the one “full, perfect, and
sufficient sacrifice, oblation, and satisfaction for the sins of
the whole world, once offered” upon the cross, than His own
continued intercession at the right hand of God (and certainly
“He ever liveth to make intercession for us,”)
[106]
interferes with, or is inconsistent
with, the same.

So much I have thought it well to say on the Thirty-first
Article, because it is sometimes misunderstood and
misapplied.

Next, I would say just a word as to the teaching of the Church
Catechism, which it would not be right to pass over.  I
think it throws a further light upon the doctrine of the
sacrifice and the
p.
107
altar, for it not only tells us that “the Body
and Blood of Christ are verily and indeed taken and received by
the faithful in the Lord’s Supper,” (that is, the
baptized, Christian people, for so the word is always used in
strict theological language,) and therefore certainly that there
is a real presence of His Body and Blood; but it also says that
that Holy Sacrament was ordained “for the continual
remembrance of the sacrifice of the death of Christ, and of the
benefits which we receive thereby,”—where, as in the
Communion Office itself, the term ‘remembrance’ is
also to be understood in its complete theological sense as the
memorial, the continual memorial before God, which by the
offering up of the sacrifice is made in the Holy Eucharist; all
which is strictly accordant with the doctrine of the primitive
Church and the ancient liturgies; for, to sum up with the words
of the learned Mede, “They (the ancient Fathers) believed
that our blessed Lord ordained the Sacrament of His Body and
Blood as a rite to bless and invocate His Father by, instead of
the manifold and bloody sacrifices of the Law, . . . the mystery
of which rite they took to be this, that as Christ, by presenting
His death and satisfaction to His Father, continually intercedes
for us in heaven, so the Church semblably (i.e. in a like manner)
approaches the throne of grace by representing Christ unto His
Father in those holy mysteries of His death and passion.”

[107]

p. 108
If
further proof still be required of our Church’s mind from
the Reformation downward, let it be noted how often this doctrine
has been assailed, and yet how, on every occasion, the Church has
refused to depart from the ancient rule and faith.  As one
instance, take the fact, that at the last revision in 1662, when
the real meaning of the Puritan objections was well and fully
understood, and when the demand was absolutely made by their
leaders, both that the absolution by the priest should plainly be
made only declaratory, and that the word ‘priest’
should be wholly omitted and ‘minister’ substituted,
the Church refused both these demands: the bishops replying to
the first, that the words as standing in the Visitation Service
were far nearer to those of Christ Himself in the commission
given, as these were, not, whose soever sins ye declare to be
remitted, but, “whose soever sins ye remit,” and to
the second, “It is not reasonable that the word
‘minister’ should be only used in the liturgy; for
since some parts of the liturgy may be performed by a deacon,
others by none under the order of a priest, viz. absolution and
consecration, it is fit that some such word as
‘priest’ should be used for these offices, and not
‘minister,’ which signifies at large every one that
ministers in that holy office, of what order soever he be;”

[108]
whilst yet again, it has been well
noted, that the care of the Church was increased in this last
revision to preserve the distinction and the doctrine dependent

p. 109
upon the
word ‘priest,’ now that the objections to it were the
better understood.  For it has been pointed out that the
word ‘priest’ occurs ninety times in the first book
of King Edward the Sixth; fifty-five times in the second book,
when the Puritan influence of the foreign reformers obtained its
height; whilst in our present Prayer-book it occurs eighty-eight
times: and an examination in detail would shew that this
restoration was made on principle, and that wherever the term
‘priest’ is employed, more or less of the sacerdotal,
or strictly priestly character and authority is implied; whilst
where the term ‘minister’ is used, it is either as to
simply a ministerial, as distinguished from a sacerdotal act, or
the meaning of the term is determined by the previous use of the
word ‘priest.’
[109]
So that as
to this whole ministration, we may well adopt the weighty and
persuasive language of Dr. Hickes, where, summing up a detailed
argument against Cudworth, who had invented the theory that the
Holy Eucharist was only a feast upon a sacrifice, and not a
sacrifice itself, he says: “I have said all this in defence
of the old, against the Doctor’s new notion of the Holy
Eucharist, much more out of love to that old truth than to prove
Christian ministers to be proper priests.  For, it will
follow even from this,” (that is, from Cudworth’s own
view,) “that they must be proper priests, because, as none
but a priest can offer a sacrifice,
p. 110
so none but a priest can preside and
minister in such a sacrificial feast as he allows the Holy
Sacrament to be.  Who but a priest can receive the elements
from the people, set them upon the holy table, and offer up to
God such solemn prayers, praises, and thanksgivings for the
congregation, and make such solemn intercessions for them as are
now, and ever were, offered and made in this Holy
Sacrament?  Who but a priest can consecrate the elements and
make them the mystical Body and Blood of Christ?  Who but a
priest can stand in God’s stead at His table, and in His
Name receive His guests?  Who but a priest hath power to
break the Bread, and bless the Cup, and make a solemn memorial
before God of His Son’s sufferings, and then deliver His
sacramental Body and Blood to the faithful communicants, as
tokens of His meritorious sufferings, and pledges of their
salvation?  A man authorized thus to act ‘for men in
things pertaining to God,’ and for God in things pertaining
to men, must needs be a priest; and such holy ministrations must
needs be sacerdotal, whether the holy table be an altar, or the
Sacrament a sacrifice or not.”
[110]

To what conclusion, then, can we come but to that of the
learned Archbishop Bramhall?  “He who saith, Take thou
authority to exercise the office of a priest in the Church of God
(as the Protestant consecrators do), doth intend all things
p. 111
requisite
to the priestly function, and, among the rest, to offer a
representative sacrifice, to commemorate and apply the sacrifice
which Christ made upon the Cross:”
[111a]
—or to the brief but weighty
saying of St. Jerome?  “Ecclesia non est, quæ
non habet Sacerdotes.”
[111b]

Once more, brethren, we must pause, and as we do so, let us
pray to Him from whom “cometh down every good and every
perfect gift,”
[111c]
that He may give
us His grace more and more to realize, and more and more to thank
Him for the great privileges which He has vouchsafed to us in His
“holy Catholic Church.”  “We have an
altar” to which we may come, the same blessed feast, of
which we may partake, the same blessed sacrifice, in which we may
join, which has ever been in His Church from the beginning.
As the Israelites were taught to remember, as to their land
flowing with milk and honey, that they “gat it not in
possession through their own sword, neither was it their own arm
that helped them;”
[111d]
Oh, so let us
ever say with heart and voice, “Not unto us, O Lord, not
unto us, but unto Thy Name give the praise, for Thy loving mercy,
and for Thy truth’s sake.”
[111e]

p.
113
SERMON VII.

The Christian Altar.

HEBREWS xiii. 10.

“We have an Altar.”

It
may be well, before we proceed
with our general subject, to call your attention to one
particular as to the course of our argument.  You may have
observed that I have not, except here and there incidentally,
entered into any examination of the nature of the Christian
sacrifice itself, any more than I have into any details or
particulars of the doctrine of absolution, such as its power and
effect, or the necessary limitations to be understood in its
application.  And this has been done advisedly, because I
was not so much concerned, for instance, with the doctrine of
absolution in itself, as with it in relation to, and as a proof
of, the necessary existence of a sacerdotal power in those to
whom it is entrusted; and therefore if I shewed that such
authority is, in and by the Church of England, considered to be
vested in those who minister at her altars, I inferred thence, I
think justly, the existence of a priesthood in the mind of our
Church.  This has been the object with which I have referred

p. 114
to that
doctrine in illustration, and not to discuss the nature or define
the powers of absolution itself.  As, however, I have here
touched upon it again, I may add, lest any mistake or
misconception arise, that no one pretends the efficient power to
absolve, (any more than to offer sacrifice,) lies in the priest
himself.  He is but the instrument administering the grace
of God.  The history of the cure of the lame man at the
beautiful gate of the Temple (which we lately read) may well
illustrate this.  Surely no one will deny that the power to
heal him was vested in St. Peter and St. John, whilst it is clear
also, beyond all dispute, that not by their “own power or
holiness had they made that man to walk.”
[114]
What, then, is there incredible
in the affirmation that the power of the keys is vested in a
priest as the instrument, though all the authority and absolving
power is from God only; so that it is God and not man who
pardons, and makes any man whole from sin.  “Who,
indeed, can forgive sins but God only?”  But he who is
invested with such authority, even instrumentally, is exactly
what we term a ‘priest;’ and our argument has been
(to recur to it thus for a moment) that the Church, which regards
men as so endowed, regards them as priests of God.

I return more generally to the declaration of the text,
“We have an altar;” and I will adduce one further
illustration of the mind of the Church
p. 115
of England
hereon, by a reference to the foreign Reformation.  Take the
two systems of Luther and Calvin, and what do we find?
Luther was already a priest before he began the Reformation, and
he had no design to cast off the priestly element and character
in his Reformation.  He and other priests who joined him did
not cease to administer Sacraments, or to teach their
efficacy.  The Confession of Augsburgh, which embodies the
principles of the German Reformation, asserts regeneration in
baptism, private confession to a priest, the grace of absolution,
and the real presence in the Holy Eucharist.  It also fully
recognises (as with this teaching we should expect it would) the
priesthood in its true meaning.  Luther did not design or
promulgate a change of system in any of these doctrines.
What he did declare, under the exigencies of his position,
because no bishop joined him, was, that for the purposes of
continuing the priesthood and its powers, no episcopacy was
necessary, but that priests could make priests; as Mr. Carter
observes, a perfectly new doctrine in the Church of God.
But the whole proceeding shewed that a sacramental system was
maintained after the pattern of the Church, nay, with true
priests to administer it for a time, but without the only
ordained means of transmitting the same powers to the succeeding
generation.  Now how great a testimony is this to the true
doctrine, and how much light does it throw upon the acts of our

p. 116
own
reformers at home, who, with a true episcopate and the power of
succession unimpaired, were not likely to design a less perfect
system than the German Reformer admitted and maintained in his
theory, though he failed in the appointed means validly to carry
it out.

And Luther’s testimony is all the more weighty when we
remember that he was one who had so little reverence for
antiquity or authority, that at one time he rejected and denied
the inspiration of the Epistle of St. James, because he could not
make its teaching as to good works square with his own theory of
justification; and, at another time, absolutely exhorted the
elect to sin boldly and shamelessly that they might be fit
objects for the mercy of God, and because no sin which they could
commit could frustrate the grace of God toward them! and yet even
such a man wholly received and enforced the ancient doctrine of
the priesthood, and its accompaniments, the altar and the
sacrifice.

Glance for a moment at the teaching of Calvin, and you will
find another theological aspect.  Calvin was not a priest;
he had, therefore, no authority to administer Sacraments; so he
took the bold line of rejecting the doctrine of a priesthood
altogether.  He taught that Christ was the only Priest of
the New Testament, and that Christian ministers were only, what
such names as elders and pastors might denote, rulers and
teachers that is, in the Church of Christ.  This
p. 117
is the
first of those three functions which we spoke of in a former
discourse, as connected with the priesthood, but is just that one
which we then said lacked the distinctive character of the
priesthood,—the power of absolution and of offering
sacrifice.  So much Calvin allowed to his ministry, but all
else he denied!

Now, it is obvious, that besides his own defect in point of
orders, (that he was not, like Luther, a priest,) his system was
one to dispose him to reject this doctrine; for what need of a
priesthood, or any external means of approaching God acceptably,
when his theory and teaching was that of individual election and
reprobation, determined from all eternity, according to the mere
purpose of God?  How naturally would such a system dispense
with the priesthood?  Aye, and there seems hardly room to
doubt that it would equally well have dispensed with
Sacraments.  But here both the testimony of Holy Scripture,
and the whole usage of the Christian world, as to fact, were too
strong for him.  He saw he could not actually reject
Sacraments, although his system might well do without them.
It is true, there was evidence of the same kind, both in
Scripture and in antiquity, for the priesthood also.  But it
was much easier to discard the doctrine as a mere matter of
opinion, (so he might call it,) than to set aside things so
plainly presented to the sight, as the facts of the use of
baptism, and the celebration of the Lord’s
p. 118
Supper,
everywhere established.  The bodily eye could see those
usages, but could not see the inner impress of the
priesthood.  He could elude or deny the one, but he dared
not, even if he wished it, displace the other.  To what,
then, did he have recourse?  He kept the outward form and
show of Sacraments, as we may say, but denuded them of all their
truth, mystery, and power.  “He taught that they were
bare signs; symbolizing, but not conveying grace; or rather, he
separated the sign from the thing signified, making the one
independent of the other.”
[118]
Yet, as he
wished to keep them, so he saw that he must teach that there was
some good in them.  How did he contrive to give them this
use in his system?  Why, he invented and taught that the
faith of the receiver, and not the act of consecration, is the
cause of grace in Sacraments; not in the sense that Sacraments do
not profit the unworthy (which is true), but that this subjective
faith in the recipient is the sole cause of their having power or
virtue, (which is not true).  Thus he, in effect,
constituted every man his own priest, and led directly to the
conclusion further, that unless in each individual case, the
receiver were predestinated to life eternal, there was nothing in
the Sacrament at all.  And so, again, we see the Christian
ministry became, in Calvin’s system, nothing but an organ
of government and instruction, which the term ‘elder’
or ‘presbyter’ might
p. 119
sufficiently describe.  And all
this, with full deliberation and design on his part, because
Calvin was far too learned and able a man not to know that, if
there were an altar and a sacrifice, there must needs be a
priesthood, which he had not, and was determined to do
without.

I should hardly have gone into this statement as to Calvin for
its own sake, but I think it worthy of notice, for the sake of a
practical lesson as to those who decry or deny the doctrine of
the priesthood, call Christ our only Priest, and make every man,
in fact, his own Priest.  Surely we may see that the root of
all this is, not the teaching of the Church of England, but
absolute Calvinism and the teaching of the Helvetic Confession,
the embodiment of the views of the Swiss Reformers.  Those
who accept this teaching may, or may not, adopt with it, the
predestinarian part of Calvin’s scheme; but certainly they
are adopting to the letter his denial of a Christian priesthood,
which denial, equally certainly, the English Reformation did not
accept.  “We,” then, “have an
altar,” however it may be that others may have rejected and
cast it off, and perhaps, alas, some among ourselves may be
unconscious of it, or may disbelieve it.

And this leads us to a few words further as to our position,
when—I fear there is no denying or concealing it—when
some of the priests themselves among us repudiate their
priesthood, and thus follow the Swiss instead of the English
p.
120
Reformation!  What must we say as to the effect of
such unbelief; first as to their ministrations and the effect
upon their flocks, and, secondly, as to themselves?

And, first, as to the first point.  Brethren, blessed be
God, we do not, and we need not, think that, even on this
account, they do not offer up the true sacrifice.  Turn, for
your comfort, to the Twenty-sixth Article of our Church, and you
will see why I say so.  It is headed, “Of the
unworthiness of the ministers, which hinders not the effect of
the Sacraments;” and it tells us of them, as to
“their authority in ministration of the Word and
Sacraments,” that “forasmuch as they do not the same
in their own name, but in Christ’s, and do minister by His
commission and authority, we may use their ministry, both in
hearing the Word of God, and in receiving of the
Sacraments.  Neither is the effect of Christ’s
ordinance taken away . . . nor the grace of God diminished from
such as by faith and rightly do receive the Sacraments ministered
unto them; which be effectual, because of Christ’s
institution and promise. . . .”

Thus, even such have received the priesthood, and its
indelible impress, the

χαρακτὴρ
, (as it
is theologically termed,) which cannot be destroyed in them by
any act or will of theirs.  Thus, their ministration at the
altar (so long as it be according to the rule and order of the
Church of England) is the offering a valid sacrifice,
p. 121
and their
distribution of the consecrated elements is the giving to be
“verily and indeed taken and received by the faithful, the
Body and Blood of Christ.”  However, therefore, we may
mourn for them, however we may feel in addition to sorrow a godly
shame on their account, yet we need not fear that the flock is
deprived of the needful food, nor defrauded of the blessed
intercession of the Lamb, pleading for His people at the right
hand of God, as often as the oblation is made, and the dread and
blessed sacrifice is (even thus) offered up.

As to such themselves (our second anxious question) what shall
we say?  I will say nothing of my own mind or thought, but
rather adduce a weighty passage which I have found upon the
matter in the work of the learned Dr. Hickes, whom I have
mentioned more than once, as having so largely treated on our
present subject.  Even in his day, more than a
hundred-and-fifty years ago, these deniers of the grace given
them, were not unknown; and he thus speaks of them, going, you
will observe, not so much as I have done here, into the question
of the effect of their misbelief upon their ministrations to
their flocks, but more particularly into its effect upon
themselves.  “I desire,” he says, “your
late writer,” (the author whom, in his dissertation, he was
answering,) “and such others as he, who have been led into
their errors by these and other writers since the
Reformation,” (Cudworth he
p. 122
means more particularly, and the
novel theory propounded by him,) “to consider that, if the
Holy Eucharist be a sacrifice, as the Catholic Church believed in
all ages before that time, how far the defect of administering it
only as a sacrament may affect the holy office and the
administration of it; and whether the Communion administered by a
priest, who neither believes himself to be such, nor the
Sacrament to be an oblation or sacrifice, can be a Communion in
or with the Catholic Church?  I say, I leave it to
themselves to consider these things, and I think they deserve
their consideration, and hope they will seriously and impartially
ruminate upon them, lest they should not ‘rightly and duly
administer that Holy Sacrament.’  The best of the
Jewish writers tells us” (i.e. Maimonides), “that it
was a profanation of a sacrifice, if the priest thought, when he
offered up one sacrifice, that it was another; as if, when he
offered a burnt-offering, he thought it was a peace-offering; or
if, when he offered a peace-offering, he thought it was a
burnt-offering.  Whether that obliquity of thought, when it
happened, had such an effect or no, I shall not now enquire; but
this I dare say, if a Jewish priest, who did not believe himself
to be a proper priest, nor the Jewish altar a proper altar, nor
the sacrifices of the Law true and proper sacrifices, had
presumed to offer while he was in this unhappy error, that he had
profaned the sacrifice, so far as he was concerned in it, and not

p. 123
offered
it up
ὁσίως
καὶ
ἀμέμπτως
, (holily and
unblameably,) according to the will of God, though according to
all the appointed rites, nor in unity and conjunction with the
Jewish Church.  For the Jewish Church would not have
suffered such priests, if known, to minister among the sons of
Aaron and Zadoc; nor would the ancient Catholic Church have
endured bishops and presbyters without censure, who durst have
taught that the Christian ministry was not a proper priesthood,
the Holy Eucharist, not a proper sacrifice, or that Christian
ministers were not proper priests.”
[123a]

Oh, my brethren, for those who may have fallen into such error
(not knowing what they do), let us pray, in all tenderness and
charity, that they may be forgiven and enlightened; and for us
all, priests and people alike, let us make our petition that we
may never fall into it; whilst, as to whatever truth or privilege
or blessing God has shewn or given to us, let us “not be
high-minded, but fear,”
[123b]
not being puffed
up because of our advantages, but all the more careful, because
we confess we have them, diligently to use them.

And this brings us to the great practical question to which
this whole enquiry leads.  “We have an
altar.”  Do we, as we ought, use and profit by our
great privilege?  Do we indeed, individually and one by one,
value the altar, use the altar, bring our gift to the altar, join
in the services
p.
124
of the altar, become partakers of the altar, and
thereby have fellowship with the Lord?

Such questions, seriously considered, may furnish us with a
most important test as to our true state, particularly whether we
believe the doctrine, and whether we so live day by day as to be
meet to take our place and part in the altar worship.  Let
me say a few words on these points before I conclude.

First, do we really believe the doctrine?  If we do,
surely we must frequent the sacrifice.  We must see in the
altar service the highest act of our devotion.  We must
perceive that here is the crown and completion of all other
worship, the sum and substance of our praises and thanksgivings,
the prevailing mode of petition for ourselves and of intercession
for others, the greatest and highest means of applying to our
individual wants and individual sins the mercies of God through
the ever-availing sacrifice of Christ.  Such persuasion of
their dignity and power has ever pervaded those who have believed
in a priesthood, an altar, and a sacrifice.  Heathen
testimony witnesses to this, even amidst all the corruption and
debasement of idol worship.  The solemn, gorgeous, awful
sacrifice has ever been the central act of all devotion, that to
which all the people congregated, and to which, if they had any
religion, they delighted to be called.  We cannot here, and
we need not, go into the proofs of this from the poets or
historians of antiquity.
p. 125
We hardly need adduce any proofs
further than we have done already from Holy Scripture to
it.  We may, however, just recall the manner of the
sacrifice offered by Samuel previous to the anointing of Saul to
be king over Israel, when all the people would not eat until the
Prophet came, “because he doth bless the sacrifice.”

[125a]
And the majesty of the great
feast and sacrifice at the dedication of Solomon’s temple;

[125b]
and again, the solemn renewal of the
covenant and worship of God by Josiah, King of Judah, when he
held the feast of the Passover unto the Lord, such as had not
been “from the days of the judges that judged Israel, nor
in all the days of the kings of Israel, nor of the kings of
Judah.”
[125c]
Let us remember, too, that the
great Paschal sacrifice and feast, itself the type of the true
Lamb of God, was ordained to be annually kept under the earlier
dispensation, and was assuredly so great and central a scene and
act of Jewish devotion that to it the whole nation was called,
and called so stringently that he who observed it not was to be
cut off from the people.
[125d]
What an
intimation that he who keeps not its far greater antitype, the
Christian Passover in the Eucharistic Sacrifice and feast, is
p. 126
cutting
himself off from the people of God under the new and better
covenant!  Do we, then, all of us thus frequent and delight
in the Christian altar? and if not, why not?  Do we suppose
that holiness of life, less than that which may allow us to come
worthily to the Holy Eucharist, will be sufficient to let us come
to heaven?  Do we think that, though we are without the
marriage garment which we feel is needful for us to go to the
Supper of the Lord on earth, we can enter without it, to sit down
at the great marriage of the Lamb in the courts of heaven?
Can we believe that a heart less devoted to God, and a love and
obedience less perfect toward Christ than will permit us to join
in the highest act of thanksgiving in this world, will allow us
to join in the everlasting Hosannas of the world to come?
Or do we imagine that such a service as that of the Christian
altar is not intended for us all, but is to be restricted to a
certain few out of the whole body of the baptized?  Surely,
however widely such may seem to be the practical belief (rather,
I should say, unbelief) of our day, there is no support for any
such notion in either the Holy Scripture, or the faith and usage
of the Church Catholic, or in the principles of the
Reformation.  Not only is the whole teaching of the Bible,
of the primitive Church, and of our Articles, Canons, and
Catechism against any such view, but our very Eucharistic Office
itself speaks plainly against it also.  Not to mention more

p. 127
direct
proofs in other ways, it is a great mistake to suppose that
office to design any division in its midst where ordinary
Christians have licence to depart, and a few select or chosen are
bidden to remain.  The not unfrequent custom of using a
collect and benediction after the sermon may perhaps, however
well intended, have fostered an error here.  This may seem
to make an authorized close to the service at that point, as if
one service were now ended and another were to begin.  It
has, therefore, enabled people the more easily to forget that we
are then in the middle of the Office for Holy Communion, whilst
the usage itself (as well as the custom of saying a collect and
the Lord’s Prayer before the sermon) is certainly without
authority, and rather against than according to the mind of our
Church; and although we may perhaps not unreasonably, to avoid
confusion, make a pause whilst children and those who may be
unable, at any particular time, to remain for the celebration may
leave, we are not to think that a certain barrenness or
awkwardness felt by such as then depart is without its value in
instruction.  If they who thus habitually absent themselves
from the sacrifice and feast of the altar, may be led to reflect
from this very feeling that the Church herself, by the gentle
remonstrance of the structure of her service, reminds them that
they are leaving before the service in which they are engaged is
ended, this may surely give a wholesome lesson.  Oh,
p. 128
if any

one
even may be thus led to think, Why do I depart? why
need I go away? why do I refuse to join in the Christian
sacrifice, the highest act of thanksgiving and praise? why do I
turn my back upon my Saviour, present to pardon, to feed, and to
save me?—if any feel this, until meditating upon the love
and the command of Christ, he resolves, instead of departing, to
come with his gift to the altar, and taste and see how gracious
the Lord is, shall he not find reason to bless and praise God
that He thus brings him to himself, and thankfully acknowledge
the wisdom of our Church, which has not appointed even the
semblance of a finished service in the middle of her holy
Eucharistic Office?

The opposite conduct to that of those who depart without
communicating, I mean that of such as remain without
communicating, has, as we know, been the subject of no small
controversy in the present day.  I do not desire here to
enter into that dispute, but just so much I would observe: first,
that if any desire to remain, having perhaps already communicated
at an earlier service, or in a serious anxious wish to learn the
will of God better as to the Christian sacrifice, with a view to
the becoming a partaker of it; or, if any desire to join so far
in it as to unite his heart and voice with those who offer it,
being a communicant, though he may not design on that occasion to
communicate, I do not conceive that the priest would have the
wish, or if he had, would have
p. 129
any authority, to bid him
depart.  Whilst, nevertheless, I deem it needful to observe,
secondly, that I see no warrant to think they are in anything but
a dangerous error who imagine (if, indeed, any do so) that the
presence of any one as a gazer upon, or witness of, the holy
mysteries, is in any way equivalent to communicating.  I do
not see how such presence of one looking on, even joining in
words of praise, but habitually and constantly doing no more; of
one who is not a communicant, nor seeking to become a
communicant; of one who does not eat of the sacrifice though
present, perhaps often, at the offering of it, can be an act of
worship or adoration well-pleasing to Almighty God; can, in any
way, make up for his lack of understanding, or preparation, or
obedience in that he does not “eat the flesh of the Son of
Man and drink His blood,” without which, our Lord Himself
has told us, we have “no life in us.”
[129]
To be present in order to learn,
and to learn in order to obey, we may indeed hope will be an
acceptable service, so far as it goes; but to gaze constantly
without obeying ever, and then to think nevertheless that we
“are partakers of the altar,” seems to me nothing
less than a dangerous self-deceit, and therefore certainly a
practice not to be encouraged.

I sum up our remarks then, brethren, in this conclusion, that
we should all of us, with a depth of feeling beyond our words to
express it, thank
p.
130
our merciful God for His tender care and providence
over us in this our Church of England.  He has given us the
treasure of the priesthood, though in earthen vessels, handed
down from His very Apostles themselves by the laying on of hands,
even according to the powers of their own commission from Christ
Himself.  He has shewed us the witness to the doctrine of
sacrifice, as exhibited in the world from Adam to Christ.
He has confirmed the doctrine and the usage of the sacrifice and
altar in the Christian Church by His holy Word in the New
Testament, and by the records preserved to us of the early
Church, telling us unmistakeably how the Church, from the
Apostles’ time downward, understood the Scriptures in this
respect.  He has let us know the mind of the Church at large
to have been one upon the doctrine for nearly sixteen hundred
years; and, blessed be His name, He “so guided and governed
the minds” of those in authority among us at the momentous
period of our Reformation, and in all revisions since, that our
Church has ever maintained, and does maintain, the doctrine of
the Church Universal on the deep and mysterious, but, at the same
time, most important practical subject of the priesthood, the
altar, and the sacrifice.  Thus, in His mercy, our Church
has made no “new thing,” nor departed from “the
old paths.”  She is one with the Church of God in all
times in this matter, and we need have no fears but that if we
come, one by one “with
p. 131
true penitent hearts and lively
faith,” to the altar of God and the table of the Lord among
us, we may and do eat of the sacrifice, are partakers of the
altar, and have fellowship with the Lord; that we have indeed
preserved to us, in spite of the unbelief among us, and the
strife of tongues around us, all that true and holy thing which
the Church has ever had as Christ’s own appointed means for
the pardon of our sins and the sustainment of our spiritual life,
by the which we, with His “whole Church militant here on
earth,” are allowed to offer up the never-ceasing,
unbloody, commemorative, propitiatory sacrifice which the Church
has ever offered, and by which she pleads before the throne of
God the power of the one great sacrifice upon the cross for the
pardon of sin, yea, even procures the pleading thereof for our
individual sins and transgressions by the Son of God Himself, our
“High Priest set on the right hand of the throne of the
majesty in the heavens,”
[131a]
who “ever
liveth to make intercession for us;” so that we thus, in
common with the whole Church of God, fulfil the Prophet’s
word, “From the rising of the sun even unto the going down
of the same, My name shall be great among the Gentiles; and in
every place incense shall be offered unto My name, and a pure
offering: for My name shall be great among the heathen, saith the
Lord of Hosts.”
[131b]

And if God has been thus gracious to us in all straits and
perils in time past, it would surely be
p. 132
a grievous
want of faith not to put our trust in Him for the time to
come.  Though we know that for sin persisted in the
candlestick of a church may be removed, yet we will hope
confidingly that where He has preserved His truth so long He will
still watch over it and keep it; where, too, in the ordering of
His providence, so great a door seems set open before us; where,
by our power and extended empire, our vast colonial possessions
and daily increasing colonial Church, (all His own gift,) we seem
fitted to be the means of His “way being known upon earth,
His saving health among all nations,” He will still cause
the light of His countenance to shine upon us; where, again,
thousands, as we verily believe, come before Him daily in
humility, penitence, and prayer, (like Daniel, interceding for
his country and his people,) “crying mightily unto
Him” for support in all dangers, and aid in all
adversities; I say, we will hope indeed that He “will hear
their cry and will help them.”  Even in the day of
thick darkness He can cause that “at evening time it shall
be light.”
[132]
Whatever be our trial we need
not, on that account, deem ourselves forsaken.  Nay, unless
we see it plainly written that for our sins He has turned His
face wholly from us, we will not doubt, in all faith though in
all humility, that He will allow us to hand on to our
children’s children, and to the “generations which
are yet for to come,” the same good deposit which we
p. 133
have
ourselves received.  If ever we seem to be disheartened or
ready to faint by the way, we will remember on whose word we rely
and on whose arm we lean; we will call to mind His wonders of old
time; we will ever with all faith and hopeful trust, knowing how
with Him “all things are possible,” make the prayer
of the Psalmist continually our own, saying, “Turn us
again, O Lord God of Hosts: shew the light of Thy countenance,
and we shall be whole.”
[133]

p.
135
SERMON VIII.
[135]

(Preached on Christmas Day.)

God Incarnate our Great High Priest.

COLOSSIANS ii. 3.

“In Whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge.”

The
preceding verses will tell us
“of whom speaketh” the Apostle this.  Having
declared what great conflict he had for his converts at Colosse
and “for them at Laodicea, and for as many as had not seen
his face in the flesh,” he tells them that this his
conflict and desire for them was, that their “hearts might
be comforted; being knit together in love, and unto all riches of
the full assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgment of the
mystery of God, and of
p. 136
the Father, and of Christ; in
Whom,” he adds, “are hid all the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge.”

As there is nothing on which men may not make a controversy,
so there has been a question raised whether the meaning be,
“in Whom,” viz. in Christ, or, “in
which,” viz. in the mystery of God, and the Father, and
Christ, “are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge?”  But we may well be excused if we do not
desire on such a day as this to run into criticism of this kind;
and I shall therefore take it at once for granted that the plain
and natural sense of the words is the true one, and that we have
here the Apostle’s declaration of and concerning Him of
Whom he says just afterwards unmistakeably, that “in Him
dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily,”
[136]
that He is the same “in Whom are
hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.”  And
if they be so in Christ, as He is, at the right hand of God, (for
He was there undoubtedly when the Apostle wrote this of Him,) so,
being ever one and the same Eternal God, “the same
yesterday, and to-day, and for ever,” they were equally in
Him in the days of His humiliation, “when for us men and
for our salvation” He took upon Him man’s
nature.  As the Second of our Articles of Religion, in the
strictest theological language, expresses it: “The Son,
which is the Word of the Father, begotten from everlasting of the
Father,
p.
137
the very and eternal God, and of one substance with the
Father, took man’s nature in the womb of the blessed
Virgin, of her substance: so that two whole and perfect Natures,
that is to say, the Godhead and Manhood, were joined together in
one Person, never to be divided, whereof is one Christ, very God
and very Man;” whereof, too, be it well observed, the just
and immediate consequence is, that He—“Who truly
suffered, was crucified, dead and buried, to reconcile His Father
to us, and to be a sacrifice, not only for original guilt, but
also for all actual sins of men,”—was this same one
Person, very God, and very Man.  So that we speak simple
truth (though a mystery beyond even angelic powers fully to
understand or appreciate) when we say that God Himself was born
of the Virgin Mary; God Himself lay in that manger at Bethlehem;
God Himself grew up from infancy to manhood before men’s
eyes; God Himself shed His Blood, and died upon the Cross, to
save the lost and guilty race of Adam, whom by His Incarnation He
made His brethren: even as the Apostle declares to the disciples
at Miletus, that God had “purchased His Church with His own
Blood;”
[137a]
and again, tells the Ephesians, that
through Christ “we have redemption through His
Blood;”
[137b]
and again, the Hebrews, that
“by His own Blood entered in once into the holy place,
having obtained eternal redemption for us.”
[137c]

p. 138
This
perfect union for ever of the two Natures in the one Person of
Jesus Christ our Lord it is of the highest importance for us to
receive, or we shall have unworthy notions of God, and what He
has done for us.  We shall, if we “divide the
Substance,” making two Persons to be in Christ, be in
danger of believing that a mere man died for us; or else, that
the death of Christ was not, in a true sense, death at all; so
that there would be either a propitiatory sacrifice made for the
sins of the world by one less than God, or else no propitiatory
sacrifice made at all.  In either case, a denial of
“the Lord that bought us.”
[138]
In the one, that He is the Lord;
in the other, that He bought us.  For, as we see at once,
God, as God only, cannot die; and man, as man only, cannot make
propitiation for sin.  It is, of course, true that the
Godhead, considered in itself, is incapable of suffering, and
therefore, the Son of God, for this reason, (among many others,
as we may well believe,) took upon Him man’s nature, which
was capable of suffering and death.  And not less true or
less plain is it, that the Manhood, even in its best and most
perfect state, could not make atonement to God for sin, or enable
any man to “save his brother.”  But when God
became Flesh, when the Son of God became also the Son of Man,
when the two natures in their Perfection were thus joined in the
Person of Jesus Christ: then God being man could die, and man
p. 139
being God
could not only live but give life.  So Christ not only
liveth ever, but He “giveth eternal life”
[139a]
to as many as are His.
“Thus,”—to use the words of the well-known
commentator on our Articles, the present Bishop of
Ely,—“thus we understand the Scripture when it says
that men ‘crucified the Lord of Glory,’
[139b]
when it says that ‘God
purchased the Church with His own Blood,’
[139c]
because though God in His Divine
Nature cannot be crucified, and has no blood to shed; yet the Son
of God, the Lord of Glory, took into His Person the nature of
man, in which nature He could suffer, could shed His blood, could
be crucified, could die.”
[139d]
All this
being done and suffered by that one Person—Christ Jesus,
God and Man—it is no figure or fallacy but a simple truth,
however wonderful, to say that God was born in Bethlehem and died
upon the cross at Calvary.  Thus, too, He the one
ever-blessed Son of the Highest, “in Whom were hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge,” could become unto us
“wisdom and righteousness and sanctification and
redemption;” our Prophet, Priest and King, our Sacrifice,
our Mediator, our Intercessor, our ever-merciful and
ever-enduring Saviour, Who sitteth at the right hand of God,
until He shall come again with power and great glory to be also
our Judge.

p. 140
So
very far have modern times gone in forgetfulness of the ancient
faith, that, I believe, it is sometimes considered a strange
thing to give to the Blessed Virgin the title of “the
Mother of God,” as if it were a novelty so to designate
her.  Whereas, to deny her this title, and so in fact to
make two Persons to be in Christ,—one, God, not born of
her; and one, man, born of her,—is precisely the very and
exact heresy of Nestorius condemned by the Third General Council
held at Ephesus in the year 431, which decision was, and has ever
since been, received by the whole Church.  So that it is not
merely truth so to designate her, but it is absolutely heretical
to maintain the contrary.  “Ever since the Council of
Ephesus, the Church has consecrated the peculiar title of
‘Theotokos’ (God’s parent, or Mother of God,)
to denote the incommunicable privilege of the Blessed Virgin
Mary, in that she became the mother of Immanuel, ‘God with
us.’ . . .  For, though it is as man that Christ is of
the substance of His Mother born in the world, yet, inasmuch as
the Word took man’s nature in the womb of the Blessed
Virgin of her substance, she may truly be styled ‘Mother of
God,’ because ‘two whole and perfect
natures—that is to say, the Godhead and Manhood—were
joined in One Person never to be divided, whereof is one Christ,
very God and very Man.’”
[140]

p. 141
But
let us turn back again for a moment to the thought of the text,
that in Christ “are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge.”  There is surely an emphatic force in the
words “are
hid,”—“
εἰσὶν
ἀπόκρυφοι
,”
not merely ‘contained,’ but ‘laid up,’
‘concealed,’—and if in a certain sense, even
now they are hid, because Christ our Lord does not manifest
Himself to the eye of sense in any visible form of glory, though
He has all wisdom and all knowledge ever inherent in Him, it may
be said that they were even more obscured, when, emptying Himself
of His glory, “He took upon Him the form of a servant, and
was made in the likeness of men, and was found in fashion as a
man.”
[141]
Look upon Him as He was on this
day eighteen hundred and three-score and more years ago!
Think of Him as a little infant, in the arms of His blessed
Mother, or laid under her watchful eye upon some rude pillow in
the manger, and then consider that
there
was the God of
all flesh, the great God of heaven and earth, God the Son, ever
one with the Father and the Holy Ghost, all-powerful,
all-knowing, all-creating, all-upholding, all-preserving, and say
if these treasures were not indeed hid and obscured!

But though obscured, the treasures were there
nevertheless.  It were impious to doubt or deny it.
When, then, we hear it asked, as sometimes in these latter days
of almost unlimited free enquiry it is, Are we to imagine that in
that little
p.
142
infant was centred the knowledge of all history, all
learning, all the secrets of nature as we term them, all the
devices of art, all the developments of science?  I think we
cannot doubt that the answer is, There was.  For what is
there in any kind or department of knowledge or science, or of
things past, present, or to come, which we can suppose the
Almighty not to know?  This would be to deny His attribute
of Omniscience; and, therefore, to deny it of Christ, God and
Man, would be to deny His Godhead.  People think to escape
this consequence by saying that it is merely His human nature
which was ignorant,—that whilst as God He knew, yet as Man
He did not know,—not seeing that thus immediately they must
fall into that other error before mentioned.  For if they do
not deny the Godhead, they must divide the Substance of the
Son.  Perhaps in their defence they will urge such passages
of Holy Scripture as that in which it is written, “Jesus
increased in wisdom and stature;”
[142a]
or where He Himself said, concerning
the Judgment, “Of that day and that hour knoweth no man,
no, not the angels which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the
Father,”
[142b]
of which it may be sufficient to
remark to-day, that the first passage seems to imply no more than
that His wisdom, as He grew in years, and of course appeared to
acquire human knowledge, increased, in the sense of its being
more manifested in
p.
143
the eyes of men, just as His bodily stature increased
in visible presence before them: whilst of the other, (without
going into all which may be said on a passage confessedly
difficult,) it may be enough to point out that He does not say
even of the Day of Judgment, that He, the God-Man, Christ Jesus,
ever undivided in His divinity and humanity, did not know it: but
that the Son (Who must be taken of course here to be the Son of
Man), knoweth it not.  And if it be thought that this
admission grants all that the objector asked, and is in fact but
the enunciation of his own view, I should maintain that it is not
so, and for this reason, that it is a very different thing to say
of the One Person, Jesus Christ, that He, thus one and undivided,
was ignorant of anything, and to
contemplate apart
His
Godhead and His Manhood, and so, in some sort, their attributes
apart.  And I conceive that here our Blessed Lord using the
term “the Son” (not ‘
I
know not,’
but
the Son
knoweth not,) contemplates Himself as the Son
of Man, and speaks of Himself as viewed in that relation.
What modern unbelief seems to delight to assert, is, that our
Blessed Lord, as He stood and talked and reasoned with the
people, was ignorant or mistaken.  What we affirm to be the
really just and consistent sense of the passages adduced, is,
that
if
His human nature be contemplated apart from His
Divine, it
might
be taken to be thus ignorant; so, I would
repeat, He is not thus proclaiming
p. 144
that He, the God-Man, the One
Christ, is ignorant, nor yet dividing His Substance and becoming
two, but merely contemplating apart the Divine and human natures,
which may well be done; and we may even go so far as to say that

if
we contemplate them as separated, then there would be
things unknown to the one, though known to the other, and

if
they could be divided there would be a separate
province of knowledge in each; but that, as we must believe the
two natures have ever been united in one Person from the time of
His taking our nature of the substance of the Blessed Virgin
Mary, so no one can ever predicate of Him, the thus born Son of
God and Son of Man; of Him “in Whom dwelleth all the
fulness of the Godhead bodily;” of Him “in Whom are
hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge;” of Him
“Who is over all, God blessed for ever,”
[144a]
that it is possible there was, or is,
or shall be anything, whether “of things in heaven, or
things in earth, or things under the earth,” of which He
was, or is, or shall be ignorant.
[144b]

Turn then again, brethren, to the stable at Bethlehem.
Cast away, at least on such a blessed
p. 145
day as this, the thoughts of
controversy.  Come to the sight which is to be seen in that
lowly habitation “where the stalled oxen feed.”
See the blessed Mother!  See the glorious Infant, glorious
and divine in Himself, howbeit He may look like any other child
of man, and with the eye of faith “behold thy
God!”  Think of the wonders of love in the
condescension that He should be found in such an humble guise and
lowly place, only excelled by the marvel that He should abase
Himself to become man at all!  And then think that all this
is no barren spectacle, to be gazed upon indeed with wonder, but
in which we have no practical interest.  No, it all belongs
to us, and has to do with us, in matters of the very highest
moment.  It is so important to us, that we might say all
other things are mere bubbles and trifles compared with it.
What should we be, and what would be our hope, if we had not the
Christmas season, and all which it has brought, to gild our year,
and gladden our hearts?  Think of what we are, and what are
our prospects by nature!  The children of Adam in his fallen
state, and therefore “born in sin and children of
wrath.”  A degenerate race, from our very birth, with
the sure seed of the first and second death implanted in us, with
a corrupt nature, a depraved will, a heart estranged from God,
exiles from Eden, unable to return to it.  Even if we had
the heart to seek it, only doomed to find it barred against us,
and “cherubims and
p. 146
a flaming sword turning every way to
keep the way of the tree of life,” on account of both the
original guilt and actual sins of men.  Thus, in ourselves
with no access again to God.  Placed, it is true, in a world
of wonders, a world adapted by Almighty wisdom to supply our
wants and minister to our comfort and gratification, apparently
capable of almost unlimited development in these things under the
fertile mind and ever-busy hand of man, yielding thus much
enjoyment for the time, if we give ourselves to enjoy it.
Even in more than such external things adapted to our
constitution, as furnishing the food for absorbing pursuit and
high aim in the acquisition of wealth or power, or in
intellectual cultivation; nay, more and more widely still,
meeting the cravings of our nature by supplying the field for
sweet sympathies and home affections in the varied scenes of
domestic life and mutual love; but yet, after all, not satisfying
the yearnings of man’s heart or the aspirations of his
being.  A world, too, however framed with all these means of
comfort or enjoyment, yet with much of pain, sorrow, sickness,
bereavement, trial, fear, and weakness in the lot of every child
of Adam.  All this without; and within, a conscience enough
alive to make us uneasy, when we have yielded to temptation, and
broken the law written in our hearts, though of no sufficient
power to prevent our yielding to the one and breaking the other,
joined with a certain consciousness, indeed,
p. 147
of
God’s greatness and goodness, but not the heart to love
Him.  So, with no light in ourselves to see our way clearly,
nor in ourselves any strength to throw off our chains and turn to
God; with dim forebodings of and even earnest yearnings after
something higher, better, and more enduring than this world, and
this earthly life and being, but with no apprehension to grasp
it, and no power to attain to it.  And then, as life wanes,
and death draws on, and conscience, it may be, pricks, and the
evil one himself, perchance, mocks and triumphs, and no remedy,
in either external things or in our own selves, is to be
found,—how darkly and sadly does the night close in upon
man in his mere natural condition!  Survey him in such
aspect from his life’s beginning to its end, and what is
there for him but either blank despair or reckless levity (often
the direct fruit of despair), or a dark and corrupting
superstition calling “evil good and good evil, saying
Peace, peace, when there is no peace,” and resulting in the
utmost dishonour to God, and the greatest licence of an unbridled
sensuality, even under the plea of religion? or else, if not
this, an utter unbelief, merely falling blindfold into judgment
and eternity?  Yes: for when once man was lost by the Fall,
no one could save himself and no one could save his fellow.
As it is written, “No man may deliver his brother, or make
agreement unto God for him; for it cost more to redeem their
souls, so that He must let that alone for ever.”
[147]

p. 148
But
now, men and brethren, think of Christmas-tide, and all it tells
and brings to us, and what a change is there!  On this
appalling picture, on this “day of darkness and gloominess,
of clouds and of thick darkness, as the morning spread upon the
mountains,”
[148a]
“the Sun
of righteousness hath arisen with healing in His wings;”
[148b]
“the day-spring from on high
hath visited us; to give light to them that sit in darkness and
in the shadow of death.”
[148c]
As we
raise our eyes to the Christmas morning the light dawns not
merely on our eyes but on our hearts.  Here we find the
“seed of the woman” who reverses our curse, and the
curse upon the earth, by “bruising the serpent’s
head.”  He comes, He comes, the Saviour of the world,
bringing “life and immortality to light through the
Gospel,”
[148d]
because He is God and Man.
“Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given: the
government is upon His shoulder: His Name is called Wonderful,
Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of
Peace.”
[148e]
What can more declare His
Godhead?  But nevertheless He is “not ashamed to call
us brethren;”
[148f]
nay, we are
told, it even “behoved Him to be made like unto His
brethren,” and this, that “He might be a merciful and
faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make
reconciliation for the sins of the people.”
[148g]
Yes, and although He is such
p. 149
“a
great High Priest, the Son of God passed into the heavens,”
yet is He not one “which cannot be touched with the feeling
of our infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are,
yet without sin.”
[149a]
What can
more declare His Manhood?  Like unto us in all points, sin
only excepted.  Like unto us, with perfect manhood, human
body and soul taken into the Godhead, so to be unto us
“both a sacrifice for sin, and also an ensample of godly
life.”  As the new federal Head of the human race; as
the one, and only one, of the descendants of Adam in whom sin
found no place, and whose obedience was perfect, “He is
able to save to the uttermost all them that come to God by
Him.”  Thus is God Incarnate our great High Priest and
only Saviour.  “To this end was He born, and for this
cause came He into the world,”
[149b]
and such is the mercy which we this
day commemorate.  By this, the Incarnation of the Eternal
Son, is the cloud of thick darkness rolled aside; by this, as the
first manifested step (so to say) in our redemption, is the veil
lifted; by this, is hope revived; by this, joy spread; by this,
is Satan defied; by this, and by the consequences to which it led
and leads, is he conquered; by this, is the sting taken from
death, and victory wrested from the grave; this, is peace made
for man with God, and peace brought to man within himself; by
this, is he enabled to please God, for by the death of the Son
made Man was the purchase and gift of the
p. 150
Spirit,
whereby alone he can be sanctified.  By Him, then,
(“the great God and our Saviour,” as St. Paul terms
Him,) are “we reconciled, and have peace with God through
our Lord Jesus Christ;” by Him, “being now justified
by His Blood, we shall be saved from wrath through Him:”
and so truly “we joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ,
by Whom we have now received the Atonement.”
[150]
He is the great High Priest,
with power in Himself as none other has, or can have, to offer up
the sacrifice and “make reconciliation for the sins of the
people.”  He is the immaculate Victim, the one only
meritorious Sacrifice, “once offered to bear the sins of
many,” Whose “Blood speaketh better things than that
of Abel.”  He is the true Paschal Lamb, “without
blemish and without spot;” “the Lamb of God that
taketh away the sins of the world;” the Lamb
“slain,” (in God’s design, and His own
ever-merciful intention,) “from the foundation of the
world,” but manifested for this purpose “in the
fulness of the time.”  He is the great Physician,
causing joy wherever He goeth, because He can heal all diseases;
He is the great Lawgiver, proclaiming His will; He is the great
Prophet, ordaining and promulgating His method of salvation; He
is the great King, setting up His kingdom, marking out its
boundaries, and ruling His subjects; He is the great Captain,
ordering His armies, displaying His banners, giving out His
weapons, going forth “conquering and to
p.
151
conquer;” He is the one Mediator, He is the
availing Intercessor; He is the Way, the Truth, and the Life; He
is the Sun and Centre of the whole mediatorial kingdom; He is the
Lord of this world and of the world to come!—And all this,
because He is (as He is and ever hath been) “God the Son:
God of God, Light of Light, Very God of Very God; of one
substance with the Father;” and because, in mercy to us, He
became also the Son of Man, “conceived by the Holy Ghost,
and born of the Virgin Mary.”

Surely, then, this is a day “to be much observed unto
the Lord,” a day in which we do well indeed “to make
merry and be glad;” so only that our mirth be with
sobriety, and our gladness with godliness.  If, indeed, He
had not come, if we had no Christmastide, and Christmas memories,
and Christmas teaching, and Christmas faith, where should we
place our hope?  Truly, we should be “of all men most
miserable.”  Whether God could have forgiven man in
any other way, without Himself becoming Flesh, and doing all
which Christ has done, we know not.  But it seems to be
unlikely, according to His attributes and will, inasmuch as St.
Paul plainly says, “without shedding of blood is no
remission,” and (as we know,) “the blood of bulls and
of goats could never take away sin;” whilst again it is
declared, that God set forth His Son “to be a propitiation
through faith in His Blood, that He might be just, and the
justifier of him which
p. 152
believeth in Jesus:”
[152]
from which it would seem that
God’s attribute of justice could not be satisfied unless by
the payment, by some one able to pay it, of the penalty due to
man’s transgression.  But whether it could have been
otherwise or not, otherwise it is not.  This is God’s
way, and undeniably it tells us more of God’s love, Who
gave His only-begotten Son; and of Christ’s tender
compassion, Who shrunk not back from all which He undertook, than
if we had been saved by a forgiveness, without an atoning
sacrifice at all.  Therefore this mode, God’s mode of
pardon, as it supplies us with greater proofs of His love, so it
gives us higher motives for our own love and gratitude than any
other mode which we can conceive.  Therefore this day calls
upon us all the more for praise, adoration, thanksgiving, joy,
and obedience.  Whatever else we do, or learn, or think, we
can never think aright, unless—in praising and thanking God
for all His mercies, and for the birth of Christ in human nature,
as the source, if we may so term it, of the Gospel scheme of
Redemption,—unless, I say, we attribute all we are in
sanctification, and all we have in hope, and all we feel in
peace, to God and Christ.  Whatever be His way to bring us
pardon, whatever laws He has set up in His Kingdom, whatever
means He has appointed,—whether His Holy Word, or His
Church, or His ministry of instruction or
reconciliation,—all
p. 153
these are but His instruments, and
He Himself is the only efficient cause of our salvation.
“Not unto us, not unto us, but unto His Name give the
praise.”  No; even the fruits of the Spirit, wrought
in us by Him, “albeit, indeed, they are the fruits of
faith, and follow after justification, though they are acceptable
and pleasing to God in Christ, yet can they not put away our
sins, and endure the severity of God’s judgment.”
[153a]
Nay, not faith itself can do
this; for though, as the means and instrument to lay hold on
eternal life, faith may be said to save us, yet, as the efficient
cause of our salvation it would be heresy to say so.  For it
is plain, we are not saved by anything of ours, even when wrought
in us by God’s Spirit.  As one of our Articles says,
they are in grievous error “who say that every man shall be
saved by the law or sect which he professeth, so that he be
diligent to frame his life according to that law and the light of
nature,” for that “Jesus Christ is the only Name
whereby men must be saved;”
[153b]
so, truly, no
one may affirm that we are saved, except instrumentally or
conditionally, either by good works, (even if they were good, in
the sense of being blameless, which none of ours are,) or by
knowledge, or by the priesthood, or by sacraments, or by the
Church, or by the Bible, or by prayer, or even by faith itself,
for it is manifest that we are saved by Christ only, and by none
else, either thing or person.  He may have set forth, as He
has done,
p.
154
certain conditions of salvation; He may have appointed,
as He has done, certain means of applying to Him for mercy, and
of obtaining mercy from Him; He may have ordained, as He has
done, certain channels of help by which His grace flows to us,
and enables us to receive His favour, and the reconciliation with
God, which He has purchased for us; but it is
He
, and He only, Who is the sole meritorious
cause of all we have, and all we are, and all we hope for.
So, truly, again we may repeat in the words of the Apostle, that
it is “Christ Jesus, Who, of God, is made unto us Wisdom
and Righteousness and Sanctification and Redemption;” not
as if He could be this to us (God forbid the thought!) if we
persist in sin, or in neglect of His way of life; but, as if
(which is the truth), even if we had done all, we should be but
unprofitable servants; as if (which is the truth) we are very far
from having done all; as if (which is the truth) anything we have
done to please God has been only of Him and through the purchased
gift of His Spirit, and the communication to us of Himself.
So that, indeed, we owe all to Him, and without Him are and must
be lost indeed.

Brethren, as we think of these things, and of all we owe to
Him in and for His abasement and humiliation in His Incarnation,
should not “our hearts burn within us?”  Oh, let
them do so, with a reverent, loving, grateful, joyful sense of
His goodness; Who, “though He was rich, yet for our sakes
became poor;” Who has gladdened
p. 155
and cheered this otherwise dark and
gloomy World by His presence in it in human form and nature; Who,
since He came to it thus, has (though absent so far as the eye of
sense discerns) yet never left it to be as it was before, but, by
the very means of His Incarnation, dwelleth in it
still,—dwelleth, aye, in us, and we in Him, if we be His by
the Spirit.  And all this, though He be so wonderful, high,
and mighty—nay, because He is so,—the very and
eternal God, born as on this day in the stable at
Bethlehem!  In Whom, lying there, in all appearance, a mere
helpless, unknowing, human babe, in Whom were still “hid
all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge;” and “in
Whom,” then as always, “dwelt all the fulness of the
Godhead bodily.”

Oh, my brethren, believe that He sees and knows every one of
us; and how we think of Him this day, and how we love and honour
Him.  He loves and longs for every one of us.  He wills
us to rejoice (and “again I say rejoice”) at the
“good tidings of great joy which should be to all
people” from that day at Bethlehem.  Let our joy be,
then, such as He sanctions, such as leads us nearer and nearer to
Him, both in the exercise of dear and holy home affections, and
in love to Him Himself; and then we may hope we shall indeed
bless Him, not only now but for ever, that He has again brought
us to this great and happy day.

When we gather, then, our families around us
p. 156
and see the
aged, whom we love, still permitted to be with us, (though, it
may be, now infirm and feeble,) let us rejoice in that hope, and
the object of their faith, which gilds and cheers their old
age.  When we meet our fellows and companions of our own
time of life, knit with us in the tenderest bonds of human
affection, and enjoy with them some of that good which
God’s bounty allows us, let us rejoice in the thought that
they and we have a mutual share in things better than all which
this world has to give, and are heirs together of the same common
salvation.  When we gather round us our little ones, and
thank God for the blessing He has given us in them, and look
forward not without anxious expectation to the future of their
life, yet let us not forget to bless and praise His name that, by
the Incarnation of His Son, He has permitted us to make our
children His children, and has made sure to them all the
privileges of their adoption and the promises of His
covenant.  So may we, whichever way we look and whatever
meets our eyes, ever overflow with thankful joy that unto us
“is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, which is
Christ the Lord.”
[156]

Printed
by James Parker and Co., Crown-yard, Oxford.

FOOTNOTES.

[1]
2 St. Matt. xii. 29.

[2a]
2 Tim. ii. 20.

[2b]
Gen. ii. 7.

[3a]
2 Cor. iii. 5, 6–9.

[3b]
2 Cor. iv. 1.

[4a]
2 Cor. iv. 2.

[4b]
Ibid., 3, 4.

[4c]
Ibid., 5, 6.

[4d]
Ibid., 7.

[6]
2 Cor. iv. 7.

[10a]
Isaiah liii. 2.

[10b]
Ibid. lii. 14.

[12]
St. John xx. 22, 23.

[13a]
St. John xxi. 3.

[13b]
Acts xviii. 3.

[14]
Cor. ix. 4, 5.

[17a]
Acts xv. 36, 39.

[17b]
Gal. ii. 11–14.

[19a]
St. Matt. xiii. 55.

[19b]
2 Cor. x. 10.

[21a]
St. John xvii. 21.

[21b]
St. Matt x. 25.

[21c]
1 Pet. iv. 12.

[22a]
Heb. xiii. 13.

[22b]
1 Cor. iv. 12, 13.

[22c]
Acts xx. 24.

[23]
Job i. 8.

[24]
Job i. 5.

[26a]
1 Chron. i. 43, 44.

[26b]
Numbers xxxi. 8.

[27a]
1 John iii. 12.

[27b]
Heb. xi. 4.

[28]
Gen. iv. 2–4.

[30a]
Gen. iii. 15.

[30b]
Heb. ix. 22.

[33a]
Gen. viii. 20, xii. 8, xiii. 4,
xiv. 18, xxii. 13, xxvi. 25, xxxiii. 20.

[34]
Heb. ix. 22.

[36]
Calmet, under the head
‘Sacrifice.’

[40a]
St. John viii. 56.

[40b]
Gen. iii. 15.

[43]
Deut. xiii. 14.

[45]
Heb. xi. 4.

[48a]
Rom. iv. 3.

[48b]
St. Matt. v. 23, 24.

[49]
St. Matt. v. 32, 37, 43, 44.

[50]
Heb. ix. 9.

[51a]
Heb. xiii. 10.

[51b]
Gal. iii. 19; Heb. ii. 2, 3.

[53]
Heb. xiii. 10–15.

[54]
1 Cor. x. 18.

[55]
1 Cor. x. 19–21.

[58]
1 Cor. x. 13–17.

[66a]
Heb. v. 4.

[66b]
Carter on the Priesthood, p.
71.

[66c]
Ibid.

[68]
See Carter’s
“Doctrine of the Priesthood,” p. 6.

[70]

Vitringa de Synagogâ
vetere
.
Prolegomena
, cap. 2, quoted Carter, pp.
54, 55

[71]
Palmer’s
Origines
Liturgicæ
.  See Carter, p. 58.

[72a]
Palmer’s
Origines
Liturgicæ
.  See Carter, p. 59.

[72b]
Carter, p. 60.

[74a]
St. John vi. 52.

[74b]
St. Luke xviii. 8.

[75a]
St. Matt. x. 25.

[75b]
Heb. x. 36.

[75c]
St. Luke xxi. 19.

[75d]
St. Matt x.

[75e]
1 Tim. iv. 1.

[75f]
2 Tim. iv. 3.

[75g]
1 John i. 1.

[75h]
Ibid. ver. 3.

[76]
Jer. vi. 16.

[77]
Gal. i. 10.

[80]
Heb. vii. 1–3.

[81a]
Coloss. ii. 8.

[81b]
Job xxxviii. 2.

[85a]
Ordering of Deacons in the
Church of England.

[85b]
Ordering of Priests.

[85c]
Ibid.

[85d]
Ibid.

[86]
St. John xx. 21.

[87]
St. John xx. 21–23.

[89]
Second Exhortation in Communion
Office.

[90]
Office for Visitation of
Sick.

[95a]
1 Tim. iii. 15.

[95b]
St. Matt. xvi. 18.

[95c]
Ibid. xxviii. 20.

[95d]
Ps. cxxii. 6.

[97]
Sermon III.

[101]
Carter on the Priesthood, p.
61.

[102]
Some attempts have been lately
made to throw doubt upon the authenticity of the copies of the
ancient liturgies which have come down to us, as not certainly
uninterpolated in places in later times.  But whether there
may be any ground at all for such suspicion or not, it is evident
that the inferences drawn from the liturgies, both in this
passage and in a former sermon, will not be affected.  For
the argument, as used in these sermons, is not dependent upon a
phrase or a sentence here or there, which, it may be alleged, is
open to question, but is based upon doctrine interwoven with
their whole system, and pervading their whole structure, and is
what moreover is borne witness to, as thus pervading them, by the
whole mass of contemporary Christian writing.  The
liturgies, therefore, must not merely have been interpolated in
places, but almost entirely re-written in another sense, and the
great bulk of the writings of the Fathers forged to agree with
this change, if the argument above is to be shaken by the
question raised concerning them.

I find a passage in Hickes’s Treatise, “The
Christian Priesthood Asserted,” which, though written more
than a hundred and sixty years before Mr. Carter’s book,
seems almost as if it were a comment upon the passage just cited,
and the application which I have made of it.  He says,
“I believe no man in the world that was of any religion
where sacrifice was used, and that by chance should see the
Sacrament of the Holy Eucharist administered among Christians, as
it was administered in the primitive times, or as it is
administered according to the order and usage of the Church of
England, but would take the bread and wine for an offering or
sacrifice, and the whole action for a sacrificial ministration;
and the eating and drinking of the holy elements for a
sacrificial entertainment of the congregation at the table of
their God.  To see bread and wine . . . so solemnly brought
to the table, and then . . . brought by the deacon, in manner of
an offering to the liturg or minister, which he also taking in
his hands as an offering, sets them with all reverence on the
table; and then, after solemn prayers of oblation and
consecration, to see him take up the bread, and say, in a most
solemn manner, ‘This is My Body,’ &c., and then
the cup, saying as solemnly, ‘This is My Blood,’
&c., and then to hear him with all the powers of his soul
offer up praises, and glory, and thanksgiving, and prayers to God
the Father of all things, through the Name of His Son, and Holy
Spirit, which they beseech Him to send down upon that bread and
cup, and the people with the greatest harmony and acclamation
saying aloud, ‘Amen:’ after which also, to see the
liturg, first eat of the bread and drink of the cup, and then the
deacon to carry about the blessed bread and wine to be eaten and
drunk by the people, as in a sacrificial feast; and, lastly, to
see and hear all concluded with psalms and hymns of praise, and
prayers of intercession to God with the highest pomp-like
celebrity of words; I say, to see and hear all this would make an
uninitiated heathen conclude that the bread and wine were an
offering, the whole Eucharistic action a sacrificial mystery, the
eating and drinking the sanctified elements a sacrificial
banquet, and the liturg who administered a
priest.”—
Hickes’s
“
Priesthood
Asserted
,”
Library of Anglo.-Cath. Theol.
,

Oxford
, vol. ii. p. 105–7.

[103]
The scantiness of statements in
the Articles, as to the inspiration of Holy Scripture, may
illustrate this.  Had it been possible to foresee the
boldness of unbelief which these days have brought to light on
this subject, or had our Reformers been now drawing up the
Articles, we may feel very certain they would not have been
content to leave that matter as it there stands.  But they
were engaged with practical errors of their own day, and not in
stating all dogmatic truth upon other points.  Many things
were so fully assumed to be true as to need no assertion of their
truth.

[104]
1 Cor. xi. 26.

[106]
Heb. vii. 25.

[107]
Mede’s “Christian
Sacrifice,” lib. ii. cap. 4, quoted in Carter, p. 65.

[108]
Cardwell’s
“Documentary Annals,” chap. vii, prop. 2.

[109]
Carter, p. 25, note 1.

[110]
Hickes’s Treatises, vol.
ii. pp. 183, 184.

[111a]
Bramhall’s
“Protestant Ordination Vindicated.”  Discourse
vii. 3.

[111b]
St. Jerome, adv. Lucif. c.
8.  Carter, pp. 22, 23.

[111c]
James i. 17.

[111d]
Ps. xliv. 3.

[111e]
Ps. cxv. 1.

[114]
Acts iii. 12.

[118]
Carter, p. 28.

[123a]
Hickes’ “Christian
Priesthood Asserted,” pp. 184, 185.

[123b]
Rom. xi. 20.

[125a]
1 Sam. ix. 11–13.

[125b]
1 Kings viii. 62–66.

[125c]
2 Kings xxiii. 22.

[125d]
“But the man that is
clean, and is not in a journey, and forbeareth to keep the
passover, even the same soul shall be cut off from among his
people: because he brought not the offering of the Lord in his
appointed season, that man shall bear his sin.”
(Numb. ix. 13.)

[129]
St. John vi. 53.

[131a]
Heb. viii. 1.

[131b]
Mal. i. 11.

[132]
Zech. xiv. 7.

[133]
Ps. lxxx. 19.

[135]
The following sermon, although
perhaps in strictness hardly one of this course, was preached
almost immediately after the others, and, in some measure, as a
sequel to them.  It is evidently not unconnected with their
subject, inasmuch as the whole Doctrine of the
Priesthood,—Christ our High Priest, through His Manhood
“able to be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities,” and the sacerdotal powers derived from Him to
“the ministers and stewards of His
mysteries,”—is intimately related to, and dependent
upon, the doctrine of the Incarnation.

[136]
Col. ii. 9.

[137a]
Acts xx. 28.

[137b]
Ephes. i. 7.

[137c]
Heb. ix. 12.

[138]
2 St. Peter ii. 1.

[139a]
St. John xvii. 2.

[139b]
1 Cor. ii. 8.

[139c]
Acts xx. 28.

[139d]
“Exposition of the
Thirty-nine Articles,” by E. Harold, Lord Bishop of Ely,
Art. II. p. 69.

[140]
Owen’s “Introduction
to the Study of Dogmatic Theology,” pp. 265, 266.  See
also, “Pearson on the Creed,” Art. iii. § 3.

[141]
Philip, ii. 7, 8.

[142a]
St. Luke ii. 52.

[142b]
St. Mark xiii. 32; St. Matt.
xxiv. 36.

[144a]
Rom. ix. 5.

[144b]
It may be observed that the
above explanation does not in any way impair the argument in our
Lord’s reply to His disciples.  It furnishes quite a
sufficient reason why such mysteries as “when shall these
things be, and what shall be the sign of Thy coming, and of the
end of the world?” should be unrevealed to flesh and blood,
that they are unknown to be angels of heaven, and even to the Son
of Man, if His humanity be contemplated apart from His
Divinity.

[147]
Ps. xlix. 7, 8.

[148a]
Joel ii. 2.

[148b]
Mal. iv. 2.

[148c]
St. Luke i. 78, 79.

[148d]
2 Tim. i. 10.

[148e]
Isa. ix. 6.

[148f]
Heb. ii. 11.

[148g]
Ibid. 17.

[149a]
Heb. iv. 14, 15.

[149b]
St. John xviii. 37.

[150]
Rom. v. 9, 11.

[152]
Rom. iii. 25, 26.

[153a]
Art. XII.

[153b]
Art. XVIII.

[156]
St. Luke ii. 11.

***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EIGHT SERMONS ON THE PRIESTHOOD,
ALTAR, AND SACRIFICE***

***** This file should be named 49115-h.htm or 49115-h.zip******

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/4/9/1/1/49115

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.