Project Gutenberg's Tom Pinder, Foundling, by Daniel Frederick Edward Sykes

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

Title: Tom Pinder, Foundling
A Story of the Holmfirth Flood

Author: Daniel Frederick Edward Sykes

Release Date: February 6, 2017 [EBook #54121]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TOM PINDER, FOUNDLING ***

Produced by John Parkinson

Part 1.

Tom â¦.....

Pinder, ...

Foundling.

(A Story of the Holmfirth Flood.)

*

by D.F.E. Sykes, LL.B.

*

Price one penny

_______________

Slaithwaite:

F. Walker, Commercial and Artistic printer, Britannia Works.

2,000/2/06

Later published under the title Dorothy's Choice

About the author

D F E Sykes was a gifted scholar, solicitor, local politician, and
newspaper proprietor. He listed his own patrimony as ‘Fred
o’ Ned’s o’ Ben o’ Billy’s o’ the
Knowle’ a reference to Holme village above Slaithwaite in the
Colne Valley. As the grandson of a clothier, his association with the
woollen trade would be a valuable source of material for his novels, but
also the cause of his downfall when, in 1883, he became involved in a
bitter dispute between the weavers and the mill owners.

When he was declared bankrupt in 1885 and no longer able to practise as
a solicitor he left the area and travelled abroad to Ireland and Canada.
On his return to England he struggled with alcoholism and was prosecuted
by the NSPCC for child neglect. Eventually he was drawn back to
Huddersfield and became an active member of the Temperance Movement. He
took to researching local history and writing, at first in a local
newspaper, then books such as ‘The History of Huddersfield and its
Vicinity’. He also wrote four novels. It was not until the 1911
Census, after some 20 years as a writer, that he finally states his
profession as ‘author’.

In later life he lived with his wife, the daughter of a Lincolnshire
vicar, at Ainsley House, Marsden. He died of a heart attack following an
operation at Huddersfield Royal Infirmary on 5
th
June 1920 and was
buried in the graveyard of St Bartholomew’s in Marsden.

Introduction

Tom Pinder, Foundling is a romance and moral tale, set in the early part
of the 19th Century, to the backdrop of the Greenfield and Holme Valleys
when both were a part of West Yorkshire. It deals with the life of a
foundling, Victorian values, the burgeoning of the cooperative movement
and the Holmfirth flood. The book was first published c.1902 and
subsequently published under the title Dorothyâs Choice (A Rushing of
the Waters).

Sykes is one of few novelists who chose to portray the lives of common
people in this period and for this reason alone it is a valuable
resource as a social history. His use of the local dialect, ability to
sketch interesting characters and their relationships adds greatly to
its readability.

CHAPTER I.

THE
Hanging Gate
is a public-house of venerable aspect. It
stands at the corner of one of four cross ways, where the road from the
summit of Harrop Edge cuts the turnpike from Leeds to Manchester. It
pays rates in the township of Diggle, and to Diggle it properly belongs;
but the small cluster of tumble-down cottages that constitutes a very
small hamlet rejoices in the name of Wakey, a name whose origin has
hitherto baffled the researches of local antiquarians. The inn itself is
a low, two-storied, rambling building. Its rooms are so low that a
moderately tall man must dodge the oaken rafters. There is much
stabling, now largely abandoned to the rats, for the pristine glory of
the
Hanging Gate
departed with the stage coach. A long
horse-trough by the side of the inn front still stands to remind the
wayfarer of the days when the highway was quick with traffic, but the
sign itself bears eloquent testimony of decay and fallen fortunes though
it still flaunts its ancient legend on a miniature crate that rocks and
creaks over the narrow doorway:

“This Gate hangs well and hinders none;

Refresh and pay and travel on.”

But on a certain winter’s night of 183—, when this story
opens, the guest more bent upon refreshing than travelling on might have
pleaded good excuse. Outside, the snow lay upon field and road
knee-deep, the thatches, gables, and very faces of the scattered houses
of Wakey were splashed and bespattered with snow, which for days had
fallen in big flakes, silent and sad as the grey leaves of latest
autumn, making thick the air as with the lighting of grasshoppers. The
moon in the low-hanging sky was veiled by heavy masses of dark cloud
that stole across the heavens like mutes oppressed by the sombre garb of
woe. Signs of life about the Wakey there seemed none, save the mellowed
light that shone across the bisecting roads from the curtained lattices
of the
Hanging Gate
. It was eight o’clock and the hand-loom
weavers or mill-hands habiting the small stone-build houses that
straggled from the valley up the bleak sides of Harrop Edge had
gone to bed, not so much because they were weary as to save fire and
light. The village smithy flanking the stables of the

Hanging Gate
was closed and the smith himself, big burly Jim
o’ Little Hannah’s had forged his last shoe and blown the
last blast from his bellows, poured his last pint down his throat in the
neighbouring taproom and trudged home to his little wife and large
family. The few frequenters of the tap-room had tarried till tarry they
might no longer, for times were bad, money was scarce and the credit
given by the best of innkeepers has its limits.

Mrs. Betty Schofield, the buxom hostess of the
Hanging Gate
was
no wise dismayed by the slackness of her custom. Rumour had it that
Betty was a very warm woman. She had been some years a widow, and her
husband had left her, as the gossips said, well worth picking up. Look
at her as she sits in the long kitchen before a roaring fire of mingled
coal, peat and logs. Below the medium height, with wavy brown hair, a
soft brown eye, a dimpled chin, now inclined to the double, a full and
swelling bust, a mouth not too small and smiling lips that parted only
to display a perfect set of teeth—it does one good to look upon
her rosy cheek.—Happy the man, you say, who shall own those ample
charms and for whom shall beam the ready smile or soften the warm brown
eyes.

There are another two seated in the brick-tiled kitchen. Mary o’
Stuart’s commonly called Moll o’ Stute’s, and Mr.
William Black. Moll shall have precedence in honour of her sex and
calling, a noble calling, of a verity, for Mary was the midwife of the
valley. She is scantily clad for the time of the year, yet you judge
that it is not from cold that she huddles by the fireside, but rather
for convenience of lighting the black clay pipe she so intently sucks,
one long skinny brown arm resting on her knee, her eyes fixed upon the
glowing fire that casts its flickering light upon the sharp
hard-featured face. Her black hair is long and though streaked with grey
is still abundant, and rebellious locks, escaped from the coil, stray
over the scraggy shoulders, round which a shabby, faded, flannel shawl
hangs loosely. No one knows where Moll lives, if it be not at the

Hanging Gate
, which, if not her home, is for Moll a sort of

Poste Restante
, and if not there to be always seen there she can
always be heard of. Moll has less need of fixed abode than ordinary
mortals. She has reached the age of fifty or more, and still bears her
virgin name and owns to neither chick nor child, though there were that
breathed mysterious hints of wild passages of thirty years gone bye,
when Moll’s cheek was soft and rosy and her form, though tall,
lacked nought of grace and suppleness. “A saucy queen,” the
village grannies said, “and one that always thought herself too
good for common folk; but pride had had its fall,”—a
reflection that seemed to bring comfort to the toothless, hollow-cheeked
beldames as they wheezed asthmatically of the scandals of a youth long
fled, when Mary’s foot light upon the village green and her laugh
was readiest at feast or wakes.

On the opposite side of the hearth sat Mr. Black, the village
Schoolmaster, a little lean man well past his meridian, his hair sparse
and thin, and sparse and thin all his form and frame. He is clean
shaven, but his lips are firm and his eye bright and keen. Though he has
the lean and hungry look of the born conspirator, never did such a look
so belie a man; for a gentler being never breathed than
William Black, nor one more secure in the affection and esteem of
high and low for many miles around. He was not a that country man and
how or by what fate, driven by what adversity or sore mischance, he had
drifted to that wild neighbourhood none presumed to know. He kept a day
school for boys and girls, whose parents paid fourpence a child per week
when they could afford it, and less when they
couldn’t—generally less. Then on alternate week-nights he
kept a night-school where strapping and ambitious youths from loom or
farm or bench, whose education had been neglected in their tender youth
sought painfully to learn to read and write and sum. These were known to
pay as much as twopence a lesson. Mr. Black—even in those
irreverent days and parts, where few even of the better sort escape a
nick-name, he was always called
Mr
. Black,—was a bachelor, and
his modest household and Mr. Black himself were ruled by a spinster
sister, shrill of voice, caustic of speech, with profound contempt for
her brother’s softness, but unceasing and untiring in the care of
the household gods, and happiest in those “spring cleanings”
that were not confined to spring. But to-night Mr. Black has fled
before his sister’s voice and twirling mop, and a look of seraphic
content rests upon his face as he meditatively puffs his long
churchwarden and sniffs the fragrant odour of the mulled ale that
simmers in the copper vessel, shaped like a candle-snuffer, or, as
Mr. Black reflected, like a highly burnished dunce’s cap, and
which the plump hand of Mrs. Schofield had thrust nigh to its rim
in the very heart of the ruddy fire. The schoolmaster’s thin legs,
clad in stout stockings of native wool, knit by Miss Black’s deft
fingers, were crossed before the blaze and the grateful warmth falls
upon them, the while the clogging snow slowly melts from his stout
boots.

“Redfearn o’ Fairbanks is late to-night,” he said at
length, after a silence broken only by the click of
Mrs. Schofield’s steel knitting needles.

“Aye, it’s market day in Huddersfilt, yo’ know,
Mr. Black, an’ th’ roads ’ll be bad to-neet. But
Fairbanks ’ll win through if th’ mare dunnot fall an’
break his neck.”

“Th’ mare’s nooan foaled ’at ’ll break Tom
o’ Fairbank’s neck,” said Moll o’
Stuart’s, grimly. “It’s spun hemp that bides for him,
if there’s a God i’ heaven.”

“Whisht yo’ now, Moll, an’ quit speakin’
o’ your betters, leastwise if you canna speak respectful.”

“Betters! Respectful! Quo’ she,” retorted Molly with a
defiant snort, pulling hard at her filthy cuddy.

“Aye betters!” snapped the landlady, or as nearly snapped as
lips like hers could snap. “It’s me as says it, an’ me
as ’ll stand to it. Wheer i’ all th’ parish will yo
find a freer hand or a bigger heart nor Tom o’ Fairbanks? Tell me
that, yo’ besom.”

“Aye free enew,” said Molly curtly.

Mrs. Schofield bridled indignantly.

“Oh! It’s weel for yo’ to sit by mi own fireside
an’ eat o’ mi bread an’ nivver so happy as when
yo’re castin’ up bye-gones ’at should be dead
an’ buried long sin.”

“Aye, aye, let the dead past bury its dead,” put in the
schoolmaster soothingly.

“An’ what if Redfearn o’ Fairbanks ware a bit leet
gi’en i’ his young days,” went on the irate hostess.
“He’s nooan th’ first an’ he’ll nooan be
th’ last. He’s nobbut human like most folk ’at ivver I
heard tell on. He’s honest enough now, if he’s had to wear
honest. An’ it’s weel known.....”

But what was so well known that the voluble tongue of
Mrs. Schofield was about to repeat it at large shall not be here
set down, nor was destined that night to enlighten the company; for the
outer door was opened, and a gust of keen wind laden with feathery
flakes of snow whirled up the narrow passage, well nigh extinguishing
the slender light of the oil lamp on the wall, and causing the great
burnished metal dishes and the very warming-pan itself to sway gently on
their hooks.

“It’s Fairbanks, hissen,” said Mrs. Schofield
“Talk o’ the de’il,” muttered the irrepressible
Moll but no one heeded.

Then was heard much stamping of feet in the outer passage and kicking of
boot toes on the lintel of the door and not a little coughing and
clearing of the throat.

“Ugh! Shut the door to, man,” cried a hearty voice;
“do yo’ want me to be blown into th’ back-yard?”

The heavy bolt-studded door was pressed back and there strode into the
room a tall well-built man. Top-booted, spurred, with riding-whip in
hand, and wearing the long heavy-lapetted riding-coat of the
period—a hale, hearty man fresh-complexioned, with close cropped
crisping hair, the face clean shaven after the fashion of the times, a
masterful man, you saw at a glance, and one who knew it. Though he was
over the borderland of his fifth decade, time had neither wrinkled his
ruddy face nor streaked his crisp brown hair. Behind him as he strolled
into the kitchen, shambled a thick-set, saturnine, grim-visaged churl,
who knew more of his master’s business and far more of his
master’s secrets than the mistress of Fairbanks herself. It was
Aleck, the shepherd and general factotum of Fairbanks farm, Aleck the
silent, Aleck the cynic, Aleck the misogynist, against whose steeled
heart successive milk-maids and servant wenches had cast in vain the
darts and arrows of amorous eyes and who was spitefully averred to care
only for home-brewed ale, and the sheep-dog, Pinder that now, already,
was shaking the snow oft his shaggy coat preparatory to curling himself
up before the fire.

“Sakes alive! It’s a rough ’un, good folk,” said
the master of Fairbanks, “Good night to yo’ Betty, an’
to yo’, Mr. Black. I was feart aw should miss yo’. Give
me a stiff ’un o’ rum hot wi’ sugar an’ a splash
o’ lemon; an’ yo’ Aleck, will’t ha’ a pint
o’ mulled?” Which redolent compound Mrs. Schofield was
now pouring into a capacious pitcher.

“Tha knows better, mester,” was Aleck’s blunt reply.
“A quart o’ ale, missis, an’ nooan too much yead on
it—no fal-lals for me, mi stummack’s too wake.”

This was an unusually long speech for Aleck, and he sank exhausted on a
settle that ran beneath a long narrow window, whilst the dog prone upon
the hearth, his jaws resting on his fore paws, feigned sleep, but
blinked at times from beneath twitching eyebrows at the rugged visage of
the tanned, weather-beaten herdsman.

“An’ yo’ stabled th’ mare aw nivver heerd
th’ stable door oppen?” queried Mrs Schofield.

“Nay, I left Bess at th’
Floating Lights
. She cast a
shoe coming over th’ Top. So we’n walked daan an welly up to
mi chin aw’ve bin more nor once—it’s th’
heaviest fall aw mind on.”

“But you’re late Fairbanks,” said Mr Black. “I
looked for you this hour and more. Have you had a good market?”

“Aye nowt to grumble at, an’ we Aleck? Sold forty head
o’ beast an’ bought thirty as fine cattle as ever yo’
clapped e’en on, eh, Aleck? An’ we’re nooan strapped
yet,” he laughed, as he drew a leather pouch from an inner pocket
and cast it jingling on to the table. “Here Betty, put that
i’th cupboard.”

“Have yo’ counted it?” asked Mrs. Schofield,
handling the greasy bag gingerly.

“Count be danged,” said Mr. Redfearn, “saving
your presence, schoolmaster. Gi’ me another jorum. Sup up,
Aleck.”

Aleck supped up and silently handed his pewter to Mrs Schofield.

“But it wasn’t the market that kept me so late,” went
on Mr Redfearn. “There were a meeting o’ th’ free
holders o’ th’ district to consider the new Reform Bill. We
met i’ th’ big room at th’
George
, but it all came
to nowt; though Harry Brougham talked and talked fit to talk a hen
an’ chickens to death. Gosh! Our Mary’s a good ’un,
but she couldn’t hold a can’le to Brougham.”

“Aye, did you hear Mr. Brougham?” asked Mr Black, with
interest. “What manner of man is he?”

“Why nowt much to look at—aw could blow him away like
thistle down; more like a monkey up a stick nor owt ’at I can
think on. But talk! You should hear him! But he didn’t talk my
vote out o’ me for all that. King and Church for me, say I.
Th’ owd ways were good enough for my father an’ my
father’s father an’ aw reckon they’ll do for
me.”

“But he’s a marvellous man,” said Mr. Black.
“Who but he could leave the Assizes at York, travel, there and
back, over two hundred miles after the rising of the Court, address
half-a-dozen meetings and be back next day taking his briefs—I
think they call them—as fresh as new paint.”

“Aye, but that wern’t Brougham,” said Redfearn.
“It wer’ Owdham browies.”

“Eh?” queried the schoolmaster.

“Aye, Owdham browies. I had it from a sure source. Th’ other
day i’ th’ Court Harry wer’ fair done an’ it
wer’ getting late. ‘Won’t your ludship adjourn,
now?’ He says, as mild as milk.”

“‘No, sir,’ says th’ judge,‘I shall finish
this case if I sit till midnight.’ Yo’ see he knew Harry
only wanted to be off spoutin’ an’ th’ owd judge
wer’ a Tory.”

“‘Very well, my lord,’ says Harry an’ turns to
his clerk, an’ in a jiffy there war a basin o’ haver-bread
wi’ hot beef drippin’ poured on it an pepper an salt
an’ a pint o’ old port wine stirred in, an’ Harry
spooinnin’ it into him like one o’clock, slap under
th’ owd Judge’s nose. Th’owd felly wer’ a bit
hungry hissen, an’ th’ smell set his mouth a watterin’
an’ he jumped up an’ adjourned th’ Court, an’ if
he didn’t say ‘curse yo’,’ they say he looked
it. But what ails Pinder?”

The sheep-dog had pricked its ears, then listened intently, then gone
into the passage whining and growling.

“Pinder thinks it’s time to be goin’
whom’,” said Aleck, as he followed the cur into the passage.
The dog laid its nose to the bottom of the thick door; whined and began
frantically to scratch at the door beneath which the snow had drifted in
thin sprays. When Aleck neared the dog it leaped on him and then with
looks more eloquent than speech compelled him to the door.

“Ther’s summat up,” said Aleck, as he opened the door.
“Bring th’ lantern, missus.”

The dog bounded out, set its head to the ground and howled dismally.
Aleck stooped, his big hands swept away a big mound of snow and he
lifted something in his arms. “Mak’ way theer,” he
cried, as nearly excited as ever Aleck had been known to be;
“mak’ way; it’s a woman an’ oo’s dead,
aw’m thinkin’.”

He bore his burthen, almost covered with its cold winding sheet of snow,
into the warm kitchen, and laid it before the fire. Mrs. Schofield
had snatched a cushion from the settle and placed it under the head of
the lifeless figure. The men had risen to their feet and gazed
helplessly at the rigid form. They saw the fair young face, marble white
and set, fair tresses, sodden through. Upon the feet were shoes of
flimsy make, the heel gone from one of them. A slight cape covered a
thin dress of good make and material, but far too tenuous for winter
wear, and all was travel-stained and soaked through.

Moll o’ Stute’s thrust the men aside. “Go
whom,” she said, “yo’re nooan wanted here.” She
put her hand into the woman’s bosom. “Gi’ me some
brandy,” she said. It was there already, held in
Mrs. Schofield’s trembling hand. A little passed the lips and
gurgled down the throat. A little more and the potent spirit did its
saving work. The white thin hand twitched, the eyes partly opened, then
closed again as a faint sigh breathed from the pallid lips.

“Put th’ warming pan i’ th’ best
bed, an’ leet a fire upstairs,” commanded Moll.
“I’st be wanted afore mornin’ or aw’st be
capped.”

“Shall Aleck fetch Dr. Garstang?” ventured
Mr. Redfearn.

“Garstang fiddlesticks,” snapped Moll. “This is wark
for me, aw tell yo’. There’ll be one more i’ this
house bi morn, and happen one less, God save us. But get you gone
an’ moither me no more.”

CHAPTER II.

MR. Black did not sleep well that night. He had fevered visions of
Alpine crevasses, of St.  Bernard dogs and of fair blanched faces
set in long dank tresses of clinging hair. He had had, too, before
seeking his narrow pallet, a rather bad and disquieting quarter of an
hour with his sister, who had demanded in acrid tones to be told what
made him so late home. He was losing his character, the irate Priscilla
had declared, spending every spare moment at the
Hanging Gate
,
whose landlady everyone knew to be a designing women and openly and
unblushingly “widowing.” A nice howdyedo it must be for him,
a scholar, to have his name bandied about in every tap-room between
Diggle and Greenfield. But she would see Mr Whitelock the vicar of St
Chad’s, and perhaps her abandoned brother would take more notice
of his spiritual adviser than he did of those that were his own flesh
and blood so to speak. But if he meant to go on that gate, drinking and
roistering and maybe even worse, she, for one, wouldn’t stand it,
and nevermore would she set scrubbing brush to desk and floor or duster
to chair, no not if dirt lay so thick, you could write your name in it
with your finger—and so forth. Mr. Black had smiled when Mr
Whitelock was mentioned, for well he knew the worthy vicar’s cob
stopped without hint from rein as it reached the
Hanging Gate
,
and no one knew better than the reverend gentleman the virtues of those
comforting liquids Mrs. Schofield reserved for favoured guests.
Priscilla, however, had been somewhat mollified and allowed the cauldron
of her righteous wrath to simmer down, when her brother told her he had
been detained by Mr. Redfearn of Fairbanks, and that she might
expect a basket of butter and eggs, with maybe a collop, as a mark of
friendship and esteem from Mrs. Redfearn herself.

Mr. Black struggled hard with his early breakfast of porridge and
milk, but it was no use. He pushed away bowl and platter and murmuring
something about being back in time to open school he seized his beaver,
donned frieze coat and made off to the
Hanging Gate
.

His heart sank within him when he found the door closed though not
bolted, and every window shrouded by curtain or blind.

Mrs. Schofield was rocking herself in the chair and looked, as was
indeed the case as if she had known no bed that night. There were marks
of tears upon her, cheeks, and her glossy hair, was all awry and
unkempt.

“Eh, but Mr. Black,” she half sobbed, “but
it’s good for sair e’en to see yo’ or any other
Christian soul after such a time as aw’ve passed through this very
neet that’s passed and gone. Glory be to God. And oh! Mi poor
head, if it doesna crack it’s a lucky woman Betty Schofield will
be. If it hadn’t been for a cup o’ tay goodness only knows
but what aw’d ha’ sunk entirely, and Moll o Stute’s
wi’ no more feelin’ nor a stone. But sit yo’ down,
sir, an’ drink a dish o’ tea.”

Now black tea in those days was 8s. a pound and a tea-drinking was
almost as solemn a function as a Church sacrament. Tea was not to be
lightly drunk, and indeed was reserved chiefly for funerals and
christenings. The women folk of the middle classes drank it at times to
mark their social status, as people now-a-days emblazon emblems of
spurious heraldry on the panels of their broughams. The men held it in
derision as a milksop’s beverage and swore by the virtues of hops
and malt. But Mr. Black was fain to forget his manhood nor resisted
over much when a certain cordial, darkly alluded to as “brown
cream” and commonly supposed to mellow in the plantations of
Jamaica, was added to the fragrant cup.

“And the poor woman?” he asked timidly at last.

“Ah! Poor woman well may yo’ call her, though mebbe now
she’s richer nor any on us, for if ever misguided wench looked
like a saint i’ heaven she does—an’ passed away as
quiet as a lamb, at two o’clock this mornin’ just as
th’ clock theer wer strikin’ th’ hour. Eh! But
she’s a bonnie corpse as ever aw seed but she looks so like an
angel fro’ heaven aw’m awmost feart to look at her.
Yo’ll like to see her, but Fairbanks ’ll be comin’
down aw doubt na an’ yo’ll go up together.”

“Did she speak, is there anything to show who or what she
is?”

“Not a word, not a sign, not a mark on linen or paper; but
oo’s no common trollop that aw’st warrant, tho’ she

had
no ring on her finger.”

“Maybe her straits compelled her to part with it,” suggested
Mr. Black.

“Weel, weel, mebbe, mebbe, tho’ it’s th’ last
thing a decent woman parts wi’, that an’ her marriage-lines.
But, as I said, th’ poor thing med no sign. ’Oo just oppened
her sweet e’en as Moll theer laid th’ babby to her breast,
an’ her poor hand tried to touch its face, an’ just
th’ quiver o’ a smile fluttered on her lips, an’ then
all wer’ ovver, but so quiet like, so quiet, ’twere more a
flutterin’ away nor deein’. Eh! But awm thankful ’oo
deed i’ my bed an’ not o’th moor buried i’ a
drift”—and the tears once more trickled down
Mrs. Schofield’s rounded cheek.

Mr. Black took the plump left hand that rested on the widow’s
lap and gently pressed it in token of the sympathy his lips could not
express. Could mortal man do less?

“It’s times like these a poor widow feels her lonesome
state,” murmured Mrs. Schofield.

Mr. Black withdrew his hand, and the grim visage of Priscilla
flashed across his vision.

The twain had been so absorbed that Moll o’ Stute’s had
glided into the kitchen, and now was seated on her accustomed stool by
the fireside. She had a soft bundle of flannel in her arms and as she
sat she swayed gently to and fro murmuring, not unmusically, some
crooning lullaby of the country side.

“The babe?” whispered Mr. Black, and
Mrs. Schofield nodded silently, and then, sinking her voice,
“Moll’s got another maggot i’ her head. She thinks
th’ poor lass ’ats dead an’ gone wer’ seeking
Tom o’ Fairbanks. Yo’ know how daft she is when ’oo
sets that way.”

“Aye, give a dog a bad name and hang him. An old saying and true.
We all know Fairbanks was a sad fellow in his young days, but bar a quip
and maybe a stolen kiss from ready and tempting lips, he’s steady
enough now”.

“Aye, aye, worn honest, as they say,” acquiesced the
hostess. “But here he comes. Aw med sure he’d be anxious to
know the end o’ last neet’s doin’s—an’
wheer Fairbanks is Aleck’s nooan far off, nor Pinder far off
Aleck.”

Nor was Mrs. Schofield wrong in her surmise, Mr Redfearn came
almost on tip-toe through the passage into the kitchen. The presence of
death needs neither the whispered word nor the silent signal. Its hush
is upon the house of mourning as the Sabbath stillness rests upon the
fields. Even the phlegmatic Aleck had composed his rugged features to a
more impressive rigidity than was their use, and the very dog stole to
the hearth with downcast head and humid eyes.

“It came to th’ worst then?” asked Mr. Redfearn,
after a solemn silence. He needed no reply. “Well, well, we all
mun go someday; but she wer’ o’er young an’ o’er
bonnie to be so cruel o’erta’en.”

“Aye it’s weel to hear you talk, Fairbanks,” broke in
the irrepressible Molly, as she strained the child closer to her
shrunken breast. “But there’s someb’dy ’ll
ha’ to answer for this neet’s wark an’ who it is mebbe
yersen can tell.”

Redfearn checked a hasty retort. There were, perhaps, reasons why he
must bear the lash of Molly’s tongue. “Is she i’
th’ chamber?” he asked.

“Yo’d like to see her,” said Mrs Schofield.

Softly, the farmer and the schoolmaster followed their guide up the
narrow creaking steps that led from the passage to the best bedroom, the
room of state of the
Hanging Gate
. Upon a large four-poster lay
the lifeless form fairer and more beautiful than in life.
Mrs. Schofield drew the curtain of the window and the morning light
streamed upon the couch and cast a halo on the pure child-like face. The
long silken hair, deftly tended, had been drawn across each shoulder and
in rippling streams fell about the bosom. It was hard to think that
Death was there—’t was more as though a maiden slept.

The men stood by the couch side gazing reverently on the fragile form.
Redfearn drew a short and gasping breath and passed his hand furtively
across his eyes.

“A good woman, schoolmaster, a good woman. I’d stake my life
on that.”

The dominie moved his head in silent assent, then with broken voice
breathed low, “Let us pray,” and Mrs. Schofield flung
her apron over her head as she sank upon her knees, and Redfearn and
Mr. Black knelt by the bedside. ’Twas but a simple prayer
that God’s mercy might have been vouchsafed to the sister who had
passed away, far from her friends and home, a nameless wanderer, with
none to help but the Father who had called his wandering child to the
land where the wicked cease from troubling and the weary are at
rest,—His own sweet home; a prayer, too, that God would raise up
friends for the orphaned bairn that would never know a mother’s
love nor perchance a father’s care. And as he prayed
Redfearn’s hand pressed heavy on his arm and in hoarse tones the
farmer muttered.

“God forgive me all my sins—I’ll find the wee
lad’s father, if he’s in the three Ridings, an’ if aw
dunnot th’ lad shall nivver want for bite nor sup.” Then as
though ashamed, he groped his way down the dingy stair-case and flung
himself into the big oaken arm-chair that none ventured to dispute with
him.

But it was not in the nature of the man to be long oppressed by brooding
thought or to abandon himself to the bitter-sweet reflections of
sombre-visaged melancholy. His active, restless temperament was
impatient of reflection and his practical mind turned to the present
need.

“Aleck, yo’ll go to Sam Sykes’s an’ order
th’ coffin, an’ tell him to see about th’ grave
i’ Saddleworth churchyard. Gi’ my respects to th’
vicar an’ ask him to fix all about th’ buryin’, an
Sykes ’ll see about th’ undertaker. Yo’ll see
th’ poor lass put away, Betty, an’ yo’ too, Moll,
an’ yo’ll want a black gown, aw dessay. Well, thank God
ther’s a shot i’ th’ locker yet. Give us th’ bag
out o’th cupboard, Betty. It’s weel aw left it last neet, aw
med ha’ known. An’ now what wi one thing an’ another
awm fair done an’ yo mun bring me summat to put a bit o’
heart i’ me.”

“It’s weel talkin’ o’ puttin’ folk
away,” broke in Moll, in no way softened by the prospect of a new
gown. “Th’ dead’s soon away wi’; but what abart
th’ child here?” and Molly turned aside the flannel covering
the infant face.

“Dooms! Aw’d fair forgetten th’ bairn,” said
Fairbank, “Let’s ha’ a look at it bi th’ winder
mi eyes are none so good as they used to be.”

Molly reluctantly placed the little one in the farmer’s
outstretched arms and he bore it to the light.

“A fine child as ivver yo’ seen,” said
Mrs. Schofield. “It’s gotten my Benny’s things
on, leastwise them at ’aw made for him wi’ my own fingers,
but it warn’t to be, for th’ poor lad nivver breathed but
once. Eh! It’s a queer warld; them as could do wi childer
an’ thank the Lord for ’em cannot ha’ ’em,
an’ them as sudna ha’ ’em,—they come a
troopin’. It passes me altogether.”

Mr. Black was casting anxious glances at the long sleeve clock, its
long brass hand now marching upwards to that ninth hour of the morn that
every schoolboy dreads.

“I must be going,” he said.

“Nay, rest you,” urged the widow. “Gi th’
childer a holiday—. Yer’ none yersen tha morn, an’ to
be sure which on us is? I’ll ha’ some ham in th’ pan
i’ a jiffy, an’ it’s Fairbanks fed, an yo know what
that means.”

“Nay, nay, tempt me not, tempt me not. Those lads o’ mine
e’en now are up to their eyes in mischief. There’ll be a
crooked pin in the cushion of my chair, a chalk drawing of Priscilla,
none too flattering, on the map of Europe, and those of them that are
not playing cots and tyes for buttons will be playing ‘Follow mi
leader’ over the forms and desks. It’s much if the windows
arn’t broken and there wont be a button left on some of their
clothes—inveterate gamblers as though they shook a box at Brighton
Spa.” Mr. Black’s tone was harsh, but there was a gleam
in his eye that took away the sting of his speech.

“Yo’re a good Churchman, aw know,” said Redfearn,
“for yo’ do as th’ owd Book tells us—yo’
spare the rod an’ spoil the child. But we mun settle summat about
th’ bairn here, an’ aw’ll be down to-neet as soon as I
can get.”

Mr. Black bent over the sleeping babe nestling in its nurse’s
arms. “Come early,” whispered Molly, “aw’ve
summat to say to yo’ partic’ler.”

It was but a distracted mind the teacher gave that day to the budding
genius of his school. He was lost in conjecture as to what Moll might
have to say to him, and not less in surprise that she should have aught
at all, for though that hard-featured damsel of the rasping tongue
treated him with a deference shown to no other he could think of no
subject demanding the secrecy Molly’s manner had seemed to ask.

He did not fail to be early at the
Hanging Gate
, indeed
Mrs. Schofield, her wonted serenity restored by an
afternoon’s nap on the settle, had but just sided the tea-things,
after that meal which is locally called a
“baggin’”—(another term whose origin is shrouded
in mystery) and was still in the sacred retreat upstairs, where she was
accustomed to array herself as beseemeth the landlady of a thriving
hostelry, with money in the bank, and that could change her condition by
holding up her little finger.

Molly no longer held the child in her arms. It had been transferred into
the highly polished mahogany cradle, which Molly worked gently with her
foot, and which also had doubtless been purchased for the use of that
disappointing Benny.

“Eh! Aw’m glad yo’n come,” she said eagerly, as
Mr. Black removed his wraps. “Speak low, th’ missis is
upstairs, an’ these rafters is like sounding boards.”

She thrust her hand deep into one of those long linen pockets beneath
the upper gown and that only a woman can find.

“Here tak’ it,” she said, “tak’ it.
It’s welly burned a hoil i’ mi pocket. Dunnot let me
han’le it again or aw’ll nooan answer for missen. It’s
gowd, man, gowd, aw tell yo’ an’ there’s figgerin on
it i’ some mak o’ stones at glitter an’ dazzle till
yo’d think the varry devil wer’ winkin’ at yo’,
an whisperin’ i’ yo’r lug to keep it quiet an’
say nowt to nobody.”

She placed a trinket in the schoolmaster’s hand and heaved a sigh
of relief. It was a locket of gold, heart-shaped. On the one side was
worked, in small diamonds, a true-lovers’ knot, on the reverse, in
pearls, a monogram.

A.J.

The like neither dominie nor nurse had ever gazed upon before, save,
perhaps, through the tantalizing barrier of a jeweller’s window in
Huddersfield or Manchester, and, it is safe to say, never before had
either held in hand article of so much value.

“Yo’ know aw helped to put her to bed,” whispered
Molly, with a motion of head towards the best bedroom, “an’
aw undressed her, an’ when th’ missis wer’
airin’ a neet-gown for th’ poor thing aw’ spied that
teed round her neck wi’ a bit o’ velvet. So aw’
snipped it off, for aw seed weel enough oo’d nivver want it again.
Aw’d meant to keep it till aw could mak it i’ my way to go
daan to Huddersfilt; but aw stood at th’ bottom o’ th’
stairs when yo’ wer prayin’ yesterday, an’ oh,
Mr. Black, it wor’ a tussle, but aw couldna keep it, aw
couldna keep it after that.”

Mr. Black was much moved. He took Molly’s hand in his and
bowed over it. “You are a good woman Molly, and One who seeth in
secret will reward you openly.”

“Dunnot tell th’ misses,” urged Molly, flushing even
through the tan of her hard face at a tribute seldom paid to her.
“Oo’ll mebbe think aw sud ha’ gien it to her;
an’ though aw’ve no patience wi’ her airs an’
her greetin’ (crying) an’ settin her cap at’s aboon
her, thof poor they may be, but still oo’s reet at t’core,
an awd be sorry to fa’ out wi’ her.”

Mr. Black nodded, and carefully placed the locket in the pocket of
his vest.

“I must think over this. I don’t like secrets; but you shall
go harmless. This trinket, valuable as it doubtless is of itself, may be
more precious still as a clue to that poor child’s parentage and I
must take counsel with Mr Redfearn.”

Molly shook her head in emphatic dissent.

“You wrong Fairbanks, indeed you do, Molly.”

“Ah, yo’ ken, yo’ ken,” said Molly, brokenly,
“who but Fairbanks ruined my young life?”

“And hath he not repented and would have made amends? As you stand
in need of forgiveness, Molly, learn to forgive. ’Tis a lesson we
all must learn.”

The entrance of Redfearn himself precluded the further discussion of a
delicate and painful subject. Molly assumed with some difficulty the
control of her features, but there was lacking, for a time at least,
that resentful defiance and general contrariness his presence seemed
generally to arouse. Drawing back into the shade of her favourite corner
she devoted herself to the assiduous care of the cradle, whilst
Mrs. Schofield, now resplendent in her evening finery of black
silk, with massive gold brooch and long gold watch chain that reached in
double folds from neck to waist, with her own fair hand decocted the
soothing compound demanded by the master of Fairbanks, nor disdained to
pump the humming ale that was the nectar of the attendant herdsman.

“Well, Aleck, tha wer’ tellin’ me,” said
Redfearn, “tha’s seen Mr. Whitelock an’ th’
sexton an’ th’ undertaker, an’ all’s
arranged?”

Aleck made no reply till he had lowered the pewter two-handled quart
measure, and wiped his lips with the back of his hand—a good pint
had disappeared, and you might have heard it gurgling down his throat
like water down a bent and choked drain. He nodded his reply: then
gruffly:

“To-morrow, three o’clock. Th’ hearse an’
coaches here at two.”

“An’ now what’s to be done about th’ little
’un?” queried the farmer. “I’ve thowt an’
thowt, an’ better thowt. An’ aw’m nooan a bit nearer.
Aw thowt mebbe yo’ could tak’ care on it, till its own folk
wer’ found. What ses ta, Betty?”

But Mrs. Schofield shook her head. “It wouldn’t do
Fairbanks, it ’ud nivver do. Aw met manage if Moll wor allus here
to look after it an ’oo could give a hand i’ th’
taproom o’ Saturday neets and Sundays. But wi’ her, nivver
to be depended on five minutes together, knocked up i’ th’
middle o’ th’ neet when least yo’ look for it,
an’ nivver knowin’ when oo’ll be back or wheer
oo’ll be next more like a gipsy or willy-wisp nor a regular
lodger, an’ me a sound sleeper—yo’ can see for yorsen
it ’ud nivver act.”

“Why dunno yo’ offer to tak’ him to Fairbanks?”
Molly could not forbear asking, with some malice. “One more or
less ’ll mak’ no differ to yo’, an’ th’
lad ’ud sooin be o’ use on th’ farm.”

“Not for a thousand golden guineas,” exclaimed Redfearn.
“Our Mary’s th’ best o’ women; but if ’oo
has a fault it’s jalousin’ about every bye-blow that’s
born i’th’ village. There’s her an’ your
Priscilla, schoolmaster, bin collogin’ o’er this job
already, bi what aw can speer, an Mary looked sour enough to turn a
field o’ red cabbage into pickles, when aw started fro’
Fairbanks to-neet. Didn’t ’oo, Aleck?” concluded
Redfearn, with his usual appeal to his faithful henchman.

“Oo did that,” said Aleck, starting out of a deep reverie.

“Yo’ might lay it to me,” at last Aleck said,
“awst nooan mind, an’ aw say Pinder ’d get used to it
in a bit.”

“What could yo’ do wi’ a child i’ th’ hut,
you numskull?” laughed the farmer.

“Well, settle it yo’r own gate—it’s all a price
to me. Best chuck it i’ th’ cut an’ ha’ done
wi’ it.”

If a look could have blasted man, as lightning blasts the oak, never
more would Aleck have herded flock on the lofty heights and stretching
moors that edge Diggle valley and its rippling brook.

“Out on yo’, Aleck no-name,” cried Molly, springing
hotly to her feet. “Eh! But if aw could nobbut see mi way,
yo’ bonnie bairn, none sud ha’ yo’ but mysen. These
hands received yo’, an’ these hands sud tew for yo’,
if aw worked ’em to skin an’ bone. But it canna be, my
bonnie pet,”—she apostrophised the unconscious
babe—“An’ Moll o’ Stute’s nooan fit to
ha’ th’ rearin’ o’ such as thee, quality-born if
ivver ther’ wor one.”

“That reminds me,” interposed the schoolmaster, as he drew
forth the locket and told its tale.

“Well, aw nivver did,” gasped Mrs. Schofield, eyeing
the keepsake and with some difficulty prizing it open with the point of
her scissors. “Black hair an’ leet, crossed an’
knotted. Th’ leet coloured ’ll be th’ poor
lass’s, silk isn’t in it for fine, an’ th’ black
’ll be th’ father’s, aw’ll be bun’.”

Even Aleck could not refrain from admiration. “It’ll come in
handy some day,” he predicted, “aw sudn’t wonder if it
fot enough to breech th’ lad, when th’ time comes.”

“Breech th’ lad, in sooth; hear him. Why, yo’ stupid,
it ’ud buy twenty o’t best sheep ivver tha seed i’
pen. Our Mary’s nowt to marrow it, wi her mother’s an
gret-aunt Keziah’s thrown in.”

“Twenty ship!” repeated Aleck. “Weel, weel, fooils
an’ ther brass is soon parted.”

“But we get further off i’stead o’ nearer th’
point,” pursued the farmer. “Yo’n said nowt,
Mr. Black; what’s to be done wi’ th’
child?”

“Well, first and foremost we must advertise i’ th’

Leeds Mercury
an’ th’
Manchester Courier
, for you see
we’ve nothing to guide us which way she came. It may well be
sorrowing parents, perhaps a conscience-stricken lover, or indeed,
perchance, a distracted husband, at this very moment is seeking far and
near for the poor wanderer. What tale of wrong those sealed lips could
tell we may not even surmise. But the locket and these initials may put
us on the right track. Anyway it won’t cost much, and it’s
our clear and bounden duty to both the living and the dead.”

“It’s reet weel thowt on, Schoolmaster. See what it is to be
educated. Thof aw will say aw hannot much hope. Aw onest lost a cow for
three week—yo’ moind on it, Aleck?”

“Three week an’ three days,” muttered the shepherd.

“An’ aw ’vertised an ’vertised but nowt
cam’ on it. But Pinder fan her didn’t ta, lad?”

Pinder winked his dexter eye and lazily stirred his tail.

“An’ if th’ advertisin’ comes to nowt, what
then?” said Molly.

Aye, what then! There was indeed the rub.

“Mr. Black’s nooan finished yet,” said Mrs
Schofield.

The schoolmaster thoughtfully stirred his rum toddy with the metal
crusher.

“I should dearly like to take the child as my own and rear him up
to follow me when I’ve closed the school door for the last time
and the long vacation begins for the old dominie. I could bring the lad
on in arithmetic, grammar, the use of the globes, mensuration, algebra
up to quadratic equations, Latin as far as Caesar
De Bello
and the
Greek Testament as far as Matthew,” and Mr. Black’s
eyes glistened at the alluring prospect.

“To be sure yo’ could, no man better,” assented
Mr. Redfearn, none the less stoutly that he did not know what
Mr. Black meant. “Aw’d a dog once called Caesar, but
Bello’s beyond me.”

“It’s to ’prentice him to th’ blacksmith,
can’t ta see?” said Aleck.

“Aw see, an’ a very gooid notion too.”

“But I cannot take the child on, though fain I’d be to do
it. You know Priscilla’s never wed. She says it’s for my
sake, and doubtless she knows best. But she isn’t as young as she
was, and those plaguy boys have tried her temper. I wouldn’t say
it to anyone, but Priscilla is a little, just a little, mind you,
tetchy, so to speak, and certain sure I am she’d neither be
willing nor able to do for a helpless bairn.”

“Aw see how it’ll end,” cried Molly. “Sakes
alive! Farmer, missus, an’ schoolmaster all backin aat, like those
folk i’ th’ Bible ’at wer’ bid to th’
weddin’, an’ nooan on ’em could come. There’s
nobbut one end for yo’ an’ that’s th’
work’us, th’ big hoil o’th’ hill yonder, as weel
say it as think it,” and the incensed virago bounced out of the
kitchen and joined the company in the taproom in a game of
“checkers” and sparing neither partner nor opponent the rasp
of her biting tongue.

“Yo’ could make it, easy for th’ bairn?” went on
Mr. Black.

“An’ th’ matron’s a motherly body wi’
childer o’ her own,” put in the hostess.

“An’ we needn’t lose sight o’ th’
lad,” added Mr. Redfearn.

“And I could spare an hour or two a day, when he’s big
enough. I’ll make a course of study this very day. It’s the
very thing. Good Molly,
rem acu tetigisti
, as we say in the
classics.”

“Exactly,” assented the farmer. “By the way, Aleck,
did yo’ say owt to Mr. Whitelock about th’ chrisenin’?
Aw’d welly (well-nigh) forgetten it.”

“After th’ buryin’, t’ same day,” said
Aleck the terse.

“Yo’ll be god-mother, Betty, na’ who’ll stand
godfather?”

“I’ve always understood in case of a foundling it takes the
finder’s name,” said Mr. Black.

“That’s Aleck,” said the landlady.

“Nay it wer’ Pinder theer,” protested Aleck.

“The very thing,” exclaimed Mr. Redfearn, smiting the
table so the glasses danced. “Tom Pinder, fit him like a
glove. We’ll weet his yed i’ glasses round an’ then
whom (home) and bed, say I.”

Mr. Redfearn glanced at the
schoolmaster, the schoolmaster at Mr. Redfearn.

“You’re the chairman of the Guardians,” said the
teacher mildly.

“An’ th’ biggest ratepayer, worse luck,” said
his crony.

CHAPTER III.

THE Workhouse for the Saddleworth Union is a low stone building of no
great dimensions, standing on about as bleak and cold a site as could
well I have been selected. It stands on the hill-side on your left hand
as you walk from Diggle to Saddleworth, part of that dorsal Pennine
Range we call “the back bone of Old England.” Its exterior
is grim and forbidding, nor is the external promise redeemed by any
extravagance of luxury inside. It is in unenviable contrast to the
palatial structures modern architects design for the option of the sick
and destitute. But it is healthily situated, and that counts for much.
All in front as you look down the valley, are the green fields; at its
rear stretch the moors on which sheep graze and lambs bleat and gamble
conies sport and burrow and where the warning "Go-back, go-back”
of the grouse salutes the ear as summer softens into autumn, and the
purple heather hides the luscious bilberry.

At the time of which I write no mill chimney belched their smoke into
the air and the breezes that swept the Workhouse on every side though
blowing at times with unwelcome force, were pure and sweet. The
Workhouse kine yielded milk so abundantly that adulteration was never
thought of; the kitchen-garden, tended by the pauper hands, was rich in
its herbs and vegetables, and a small flower garden gave forth the
fragrance of the hardier roses, of musk and mignonette, whilst sweet
williams, forget-me-nots and stocks gave colour and variety, dear to the
eye of the female paupers. It is true the wards were low, the benches
hard, the light and ventilation far removed from modern notions; but in
this respect they differed in no wise, or if they differed, differed for
the better, from the houses of the well-to-do farmers and tradesmen of
the district.

Anyway there the young foundling of my story was in babyhood and boyhood
tended, petted, and made much of. Consigned to the charge of an elderly
pauper he had a not unkindly foster-mother. Rare, thank God, the women
whose hearts do not soften to the helpless child. Tom sucked his bottle
like a hero, waxing chubby and rosy, “poiting” with his legs
on which the flesh lay in creases, and crowing lustily as he grew.
Mr. Redfearn, it has been said, was the Chairman of the Guardians
and did not conceal the interest he felt in the lad; Mr. Black, a
privileged visitor everywhere for miles around, had to be restrained by
the nurse from gorging his protege with lollipops. The story of his
birth had spread in all those parts and lost nothing in the telling. For
anything the master and matron knew the Workhouse might be entertaining,
if not an angel, unawares, at least a baronet. The lad, when able to run
about, was transferred to the particular care of “Workhouse
Jack,” a pauper of some thirty years of age, supposed to be
“not altogether there,” or as it is sometimes put, to have
at least a half slate off. Jack was the messenger or Mercury of the
Workhouse. He fetched the masters newspaper from the village
post-office, he was entrusted with commissions to the grocer and draper
by the matron, and smuggled snuff and twist and forbidden luxuries to
the inmates. He knew every farm-house and every shop for miles around,
and never wanted for a meal or a copper when he went his rounds. But,
best of all, he knew the habits and the haunts of every bird that nested
in the tree or hedge, on the greensward or, like the stone-chat, in the
crevices of the long, grey dry-walling of the pastures. He knew, too, to
an inch, the curvature of the field drains, their exits and their
entrances. He kept surreptitiously in the old, two-stalled stable of the
House a sharp-toothed ferret, which he oft-times carried in his pocket
and that allowed him to handle and fondle it with quite appalling
familiarity. It took Tom a long time to overcome his shrinking awe of
that lithe and stealthy ferret, but he did it, and once nearly sent
Mrs. Schofield into convulsions by insinuating it from his own into
the capacious pocket of this steadfast friend. For I regret to say that
Jack was a daily visitor at the
Hanging Gate
, and was doubly
welcome when the little Tommy toddled,
haud aquis passibus
, by his
side. But Jack had a seasoned head and though he called, on one pretext
or another, at many an hostelry, was never overcome and had the rare
good sense to inculcate sobriety on his admiring charge by many a
precept if not by example. To Tom, Jack was the very incarnation of
wisdom, and his very first battle was fought at the back of the
Workhouse stable with another foundling who had called his guide,
philosopher, and friend by no less derogatory a title than “Silly
Billy.” From that encounter Tom emerged with streaming eyes and
nose, but in the proud consciousness of victory. Nor was Jack’s
lore confined to the creatures of the air and land. Down the mountain
sides trills many a gushing stream to join the Diggle Brook, pellucid
waters murmuring over the worn pebbles and larger fragments of volcanic
rock that still, to this day, resist the action of the fretting air and
pelting storm. Who so deft a hand as Jack at tickling the shy trout that
darted among the sedges and rushes of the banks or lurked beneath leaf
and boulder motionless as the stones themselves. And if the matron, when
the dainty fish graced her table was not scrupulous to ask whence came
this toothsome addition to the dietary approved by my lords in London
town, whose business was it to interfere?

Ah! It is grand upon the billowing hills to wander idly in the sweet
spring-time; to mark the lark rising above its nest high in the azure
sky, trilling joyous melody, to hear the lambs calling to their dams, to
see the kine cropping pensive, in the meadows the sweet new blades of
the greening grass; sweet is it to bask at mid-day nodding on the
heather and lulled to sleep by the hum that, like distant muffled music,
just falls upon the ear, and sweet too, is it as the western sun drops
to its rosy curtained couch, to call the cows with their swelling udders
from pasture to their byre; sweet to stand by rustic maid of rosy cheek
and buxom form as, piggin betwixt her knees and head pressed on the
flanks of patient and grateful beast, she strains the warm and frothy
fluid to the can. Glorious, too, to hearken to the whetstone drawn by
practised hand across the scythe, to bear its swish as the swathe
lengthens out before the steady strokes of the mower; glorious to strew
the damp, green grass upon the ground to catch the morning sun, and
grander still to mount upon the load of fragrant hay and be borne
triumphant with the gathered harvest of the fields. Who that has passed
his early youth on the hill sides of Marsden and Diggle can ever forget
the changing raptures of those early days or weary in recalling them
when the brain is distraught by the turmoil of the town, and the heart
turns sickening from the searing sorrows of thwarted schemes and fallen
hopes.

It may seem to the reader that Tom Pinder’s workhouse life
was not the life depicted by the immortal genius who told the piteous
tale of a pinched and bruised Oliver asking for more. But be it
remembered that all masters were not and still less are not Bumbles. The
Saddleworth Workhouse in the thirties of last century had few inmates.
The people on the sparsely populated hill-sides were mostly hand-loom
weavers; not a few of them had a patch of land, a cow, a pig, and
poultry. They were as clannish as the Scotch and when age, infirmity, or
affliction overtook the declining years it was counted shame even of
distant kin to suffer one of their name and blood to go to the big
House. The poor then were mindful of the poor, and though the pinch of
want was felt in the long winter days it went hard with folk if a
neighbour’s cupboard was left bare or his grate without the
mountain peat. Add to this that the master and matron were good,
easy-going folk; that the Guardians knew well every inmate of the House;
had perchance played truant with them in their youth and been birched by
the same cane, or employed them in their prime, and, to cap all, forget
not that Saddleworth was an obscure Union, scarce worth the expenditure
of red-tape or the visit of an inspector.

Mr. Black did not forget his promise to see to Tom’s
education. Almost before the child could lisp he was at him with the
alphabet, and with his own hands designed alluring capital letters and
emblematic animals so that to his dying day Tom never saw the letter D
without thinking of a weaver’s donkey going
“a-bunting,” or in other words, taking in his master’s
warp. At six Tom could read big print, and at seven was set to read
chapters of the Bible to the old grannies of the women’s side of
the House; at eight he could do sums in Practice and was not afraid of
Tare and Tret. But beyond this he stubbornly refused to budge. In vain
Mr. Black wooed him to decline
Rosa
, a rose, or to conjugate

Amo
. Tom feigned indeed an interest he did not feel, but promptly
forgot on one day all the Latin he had learned the day before.
Mr. Black was fain to confess with a sigh that Tom was not bent by
nature to a clerkly calling.

“Well, he’s none the worse for that,” said
Mr. Redfearn, consolingly. “Look at me, schoolmaster. I can
read a newspaper, make out a bill though it’s seldom called for
i’ my trade, thank the Lord, write a letter, and what more do I
want? How could I tell the points of horse or beast if mi head
wer’ allus running on th’ olden times an’ chokefull
o’ a lot o’ gibberish, saving your presence, an’ no
offence, Mr. Black, as well yo’ know. We can’t all be
schoolmasters, nor yet parsons an’ as for lawyers and doctors
aw’ve very little opinion o’ awther on ’em, an’
th’ less yo’ have to do wi’ ’em th’
better. Not but what a cow doctor’s a handy man to ha’
wi’in call; but th’ lawyers! Aw’ve had three trials at
th’ Assizes abaat one watter-course on another. An’ lost one
case an’ won two, an’ th’ two aw won cost me no more
nor th’ one aw lost. No! Th’ lad’s fit for better
things nor a black gown. He’s getten th’ spirit o’ a
man choose wheer it comes fro’. Aw put him on Bess’s back
t’other day, wi’out a saddle an’ his little legs could
hardly straddle fro’ flank to flank, an’ he catched her bi
th’ mane an’ med her go round th’ field like a good
’un. He rolled off into th’ hedge at th’ Bottom
Intack, an’ ’steead o’ sqwawkin’ and
pipin’ he swore at Bess like a trooper an’ wanted
puttin’ up again. Oh! He’s a rare ’un, that he is.
Larnin’s thrown away on him. It ’ud nobbut over-weight
an’ handicap him, so to speak.”

“I’m sorry to hear of the lad swearing,” interposed
Mr. Black.

“That’s Work’us Jack’s teachin’,”
commented Mrs. Schofield. “It’s surprisin’ how
easy th’ young ’uns ’ll pick up owt they
shouldn’t know, when ther’s no brayin’ what they
should know into their little heads.”

“Well, well,” went on Mr. Redfearn, to get out of a
sore subject, for he had recognised some of his favourite expletives in
Tom’s scholeric words; “th’ point is, th’
lad’s handier wi’ his hands nor his head piece. Yo’
can tak’ a horse to th’ watter but yo’ cannot
mak’ him drink. An’ talkin’ o’ watter, th’
young scoundrel gave me a turn t’ other day an’ no mistake.
Yo’ know th’ dam aboon Hall’s papper-mill? Weel
it’s th’ deepest dam bi a seet for miles round here.
Aw’d gone up wi mi gun to see if aw could pick up a rabbit or two
for th’ pot an’ theer wor Tom reight i’ th’
middle o th’ dam, throwin’ up his arms an’ goin’
dahn like a stun, and then he cam up blowin’ like a porpus.
Aw’ sent th’ retriever in after ’im an’
th’ young devil, ’at aw should say so, cocked his leg over
th’ dog’s back an’ med him, carry ’im to
th’ bank, an’ ’im laughin’ all th’ time
fit to crack his young ribs. He’d nobbud pretended to drown to
fley me.”

“Jack’s doing again,” said Mr. Schofield.

“Well, but, what’s to be done with him?” persisted Mr
Black. “Can’t you take him on to th’ farm,
Fairbanks?”

“‘Tisn’t good enough,” said Fairbanks.
“He’s fit for better things. At best he could never be much
more nor a sort of bailiff an’
they’re
noan wanted about
here. If we could send him out to Canada now, or Australey,
theer’s no tellin’ what he med come to be. At least so they
sen. But i’ th’ owd country farmin’s nowt wi’out
brass, an then it’s nowt much but a carryin’ on. Nah,
I’ve thowt o’ a plan. We could ’prentice th’ lad
out to a manufacturer. Th’ lad’s sharp an’ ’ud
sooin sam up owt there is to larn. Th’ Guardians ’ud pay
th’ premium for him’ an’ nobbut a fi’ pun note
or so an’ aw think aw know th’ varry man to tak’ him
an’ sud do well by ’im if ther’s owt i’
religion?”

“Who is it?” asked Mr. Black.

“It’s Jabez Tinker, o’ th’
Wilberlee Mill, i’ Holmfirth. He’s the main man at
Aenon Chapel,—a pillar they call ’im an’ preaches
hissen o’ Sundays, so he suld be fit to be trusted wi’ a
lad.”

“I’d rather he’d ha’ bin Church,”
commented Mrs. Schofield. “Aw’ve often noticed
’at those ’at put it on so mich o’ Sundays tak’
it aat o’ th’ Mondays. Devil dodgers, aw call
’em.”

“There are good men among the Dissenters.” Mr Black’s
spirit of fairness compelled him to testify, “though I wish they
could find their way to heaven without making so much pother on
earth.” The days of the Salvation Army were not as yet, and sound
and salvation were not convertible terms.

“There’s one gooid thing abaat it,” was the
landlady’s opinion. “Holmfirth’s nobbut over th’
hill, so to speak, an’ th’ lad could come to see his old
friends at Whissunday and th’ Feast, when th’ mills are
lakin’.”

“Aye, aye, a lot better nor them furrin’ parts,”
agreed the farmer. “Owd England for me, say I.”

“And I have not lost hopes of clearing up the mystery of the
boy’s birth,” concluded Mr. Black. “He must stay
near us.”

To this time nothing had been said to Tom about his parents. He knew he
had no father and no mother—that was all. He knew other lads had
fathers and mothers, and how he came to be without did not concern him
very much. Once, indeed, one of the village lads had jeered at him as a
love-child. He did not understand what this might mean, but he had sense
to perceive something offensive was meant.

“What is a love-child?” he asked Mrs. Schofield one
day, suddenly.

“All childer’s love childer,” fenced
Mrs. Schofield, but Tom was not satisfied.

“What’s a love child, Jack?” he asked his bosom
friend.

Jack ruminated. Definition was not his forte.

“It means a lad’s mother’s nooan as good as she should
be.”

Tom flushed hotly, and said nothing: but that night a village lad with
lips much swollen slept with a raw beefsteak over his eye.

The germ of thought had been sown in the youthful mind.
Why
was he
different from other lads? Time had been when in some confused sort of
fashion he had looked on Mrs. Schofield as his mother and
Mr. Black as his father.

“Mr. Black,” he asked one day, “where is my
mother?”

It was a question that the Schoolmaster had looked for at every recent
visit that he courted and yet dreaded.

It was on a Sunday noon as the congregation left the porch of St.
Chad’s some lingering by the gateway to exchange neighbourly
greeting, others sauntering with an air of unconcern to the door of the
Church Inn across the way, whilst yet others still made with leaden foot
to a recent grave to pay the tribute of the mourner’s tears.

Tom had been with other pauper lads in the gallery, a spot of vantage
screened from the verger’s eye, and where it mattered to nobody
what heed you took of the service or sermon so long as you did not make
too much noise. He had made haste to get outside the churchyard so that
he might not miss his ever gentle friend, the schoolmaster, and now
stood by the village stocks outside the graveyard wall and watched the
stream of worshippers pass slowly by. Presently his hand was in the
schoolmaster’s, who turned his face to the road which led past the
workhouse boundaries down to his own home at Diggle.

“Mr. Black, where is my mother?”

The schoolmaster paused, hesitated. They had left the rough and narrow
road and crossed a stile into the fields. They were on the higher ground
and could plainly see the churchyard. The loiterers had gone their
homeward way or drifted into the Inn to seek a solace that is supposed
to be appropriate alike in the glad hours of rejoicing and the heavy
time of affliction.

“Your mother lies yonder,” said Mr. Black, solemnly and
sadly.

“Show me,” said the boy, simply.

They retraced their steps and sought the ancient burial ground with
it’s sunken crosses and mouldering mossy stones, and those little
mounds without a name that cover the humble dead. In a distant corner
Mr. Black stood with uncovered head by a small marble cross and
stone slab.

sacred to the memory
OF
A. J.
AN UNKNOWN WANDERER WHO DIED IN CHILDBED
AT
THE HANGING GATE, DIGGLE.
JAN. 11TH, 183—.

Tom gazed upon the simple monument till he could gaze no more, for
blinding, scalding tears welled into his eyes and trickled down his
cheeks.

“Let us go home,” he said, “let me stop with you
to-day.”

In the evening of that peaceful Sunday the school-master told the
foundling all he knew: he placed in his hand the precious locket taken
from the mother’s neck and promised that it should be transferred
to Tom’s, keeping when he should be old enough to keep it safely.

“You will treasure it as the immediate jewel of your soul,”
he said; “for thereby you may clear your mother’s
name.” Then, falling on his knees he read the evening prayer, and
with his blessing dismissed the lad.

CHAPTER IV

THE ancient village of Holmfirth on the river Holme was, in former days,
of considerably more pretension than it is to-day, when the neighbouring
town of Huddersfield dwarfs the surrounding communities. Holmfirth
stands near the head of the valley of the Holme, and at one time was
looked up to as a petty capital by the straggling hamlets that
intervened between the river’s head and the spot where, some nine
miles below, its tortuous course joins the river Colne at King’s
mill in Huddersfield, whence the united currents sweep in broader stream
to blend with the Calder at Cooper Bridge, and so onwards to the
capacious bosom of the Humber.

Best known and best accustomed of all the shops in Holmfirth was that of
Ephraim Thorpe, sometimes; known as Eph o’ Natt’s o’
th’ Thong, but more as “Split,” from a tradition
current in the village that he would split a pea rather than be guilty
of giving over-weight or measure. The shop was low and dark, it’s
floor of blackened stone seldom scrubbed. The two counters were not
cleanly, their surface much worn by the friction of heavy vessels and
the testing of doubtful coins. But what article of household provision
you failed to get at “Split’s” you might despair of
purchasing anywhere nearer than Huddersfield itself. A candle rack ran
round three sides of the shop, just above the counters, and the sickly
odour of tallow pervaded all the spot, dominating even the smell of
treacle and “shilling-oil” as the oil used for lamps was
called. Flitches of bacon hung from the rafters; bags of flour and of
oatmeal with open necks were propped up in corners. Bars of soap, piles
of soft-stone and white stone, tins of tea and coffee, pats of butter,
skins of lard, papers of blacking and black-lead, pots and pans, and
brushes hard and soft, eggs and herrings, peas and beans and Indian corn
for poultry, gridirons and porringers, thimbles and shoelaces, clogs and
pocket-handkerchiefs—all these and sundry others were the articles
of commerce retailed at fifty per cent, profit to a grateful public by
Mr. Ephraim Thorpe. That public consisted for the most part of those
employed in the neighbouring mills, and few were the families of the
humbler sort entirely out of Ephraim’s debt. He was always willing
to trust a man that he knew to be fairly sober and in fair work, and to
his regular customers at the crisis of a funeral or a wedding, lend a
guinea or so at the easy interest of sixpence in the pound per week; so
long as the interest was paid regularly he never pressed for the
principal. But woe betide any housewife who took her ready money to a
rival tradesman, or ventured to go shopping at the flaunting stores of
Huddersfield. The Court of Requests and the “Bum” were words
of terrible portent, and Ephraim knew every trick of the law. He knew,
too, the wages of every working family in the district how much they
ought to spend when they bought in for the week, and how far it was safe
to trust when work was slack or sickness rife and ready-money not
forthcoming. Truly no lord of the manor in the good old days of
dungeon-keep, thumb-screw and rack, was held more in awe than the
red-headed, freckled, yellow-fanged, parchment-skinned, ferret-eyed
“Split,” general dealer and deacon of the Baptist Flock that
gathered at Aenon Chapel, Holmfirth, “the altar by the rushing
waters.”

For Ephraim was as zealous in his chapel-going as in his shop-keeping.
Sunday morning and afternoon saw him in his pew, dressed in sable
doeskin, but with a subtle flavour of soap and chandlery exhaling from
his pores. He rented a high, uncompromising pew, in which he could coop
himself up and barricade himself from the non-elect. It was a capital
sentinel-box, whence he could espy the gaps in the ranks of the
faithful. He could note when Ned o’ Ben’s, or Bill o’
Sue’s absented himself from service, and speculate at his leisure
whether a bull-baiting or a cock-fight had lured to sinful delight, and
recall to a nicety the amount that stood to the delinquent’s debit
in the long narrow, greasy, skin-bound ledger of hieroglyphics that only
Ephraim understood, and at whose sight the stoutest good dame’s
heart would sink and the shrillest-tongued virago’s voice be
hushed.

Mr. Thorpe was a widower, and though it is possible—such is the
amiable of a women for the bereaved and afflicted—that more than
one might have been willing and lend attentive ear had he wooed again, a
widower, Ephraim announced, he meant to live and die. His daughter, and
only child, Martha, was old enough to keep the house above the shop, in
which the father and daughter dwelt. The spiteful gossips of the village
said she was not only old enough, but ugly enough. But said gossips
suffered their critical judgment of the daughter to be warped by their
unfavourable opinion of the father. It cannot be denied that
Martha’s hair was not only of somewhat harsh and coarse texture,
but of hue from her sire. It is true also that her face was angular and
pinched, and freckled to boot, and that her form displayed none of the
graceful curves so suggestive of clinging warmth and seductive softness;
nor was her voice the soft and dulcet fluting that disarms not less than
melting eye or witching smile. Poor Martha had been crushed and stifled
and starved all her life. She had never loved nor been loved but the
timid, wistful, yearning look that stole unbidden from her grey eyes
told of a heart that hungered for the love that makes a woman’s
life. Though she lived, and had lived for years under the same roof with
her father, she could not remember to have heard from his lips one
caressing word, to have received from his hand one gentle touch, or;
seen from his eye one glance of affection. He was not unkind to her,
save in the negative way which is the withholding of kindness; nay, if
in any way. Ephraim could be said to be extravagant it was in the lavish
adornment of his daughter’s person. The vicar’s wife had not
a richer silk or costlier shawl; no manufacturer’s daughter finer
feathers or more elegant bracelet. But Martha would have preferred a
much homelier garb and a necklace of beads or jet; she asked only to
slink unnoticed through her chill life, and had an half-formulated idea
that her father dressed her as he did his shop windows, in the way of
trade and to abash his neighbours.

Martha had practically no friends. The daughters of the manufacturers
could, of course, not be expected to have more than a go-to-meeting,
bowing acquaintance with a shop-keeper’s daughter, though that
shop-keeper was popularly supposed to be able to buy up any two
mill-owners put together. To be sure the Rev. David Jones, the pastor at
Aenon Chapel, and Mrs. David Jones and Miss Lydia Jones called at times
and dutifully partook of tea and muffins in the sitting-room above the
shop from which no ingenuity had been efficient to bar the insidious
blend of many odours from the store beneath, and true also Martha was a
constant attender at Dorcas meetings, class meetings, prayer meetings,
and Chapel and Sunday School tea-parties, called by the scoffing and
ungodly herd, “muffin-worrys.” But Martha was constrained,
awkward,
gauche
, and though her heart, was ready to go half-way to
meet an overture, she could not make an advance. Little children were
not allured to her, girls of her own age ridiculed whilst they envied
her dress jewellery, staider matrons thought it shame that grasping
miser’s scarecrow daughter should “peark” herself out
in dainty raiment whilst their own well favoured ones went in cheap
cottons or plain home-spun.

Of all the worshippers at Aenon Chapel, none was more considered than
Jabez Tinker. There were many reasons for this. One undoubtedly was
that Jabez Tinker was one of the leading manufacturers in the
valley. No one, not old Daft Tommy, who was reputed to be over a hundred
years old, could remember a time when the Tinkers were not a great name
in Holmfirth and when Wilberlee Mill was not run by them. The very
name of Tinker is, curiously enough, significant the family connection
with the staple industry of the valleys of the Colne and the Holme. It
is said to be derived from the Latin,
tinctor
, a dyer, and to have
come down from those far off times when the Roman conquerors introduced
the arts of civilisation to the aboriginal Celts of these northern
wilds. Certainly Jabez Tinker’s father and grandfather and
great-grandfather before him made cloth and doubtless dyed it. And they
had made good cloth, buckskin and doeskin of the best. They were not a
pretentious nor an ambitious race. They worked hard made shrewd
bargains, paid their way expected to be paid, and put by money slowly
but steadily. They had mostly married money too, not, perhaps marrying
for money, but taking care to marry where money was. They were just to
their work people and were slow either to put a man on or to take a man
off. Once get a job at Wilberlee Mill and you were there for good,
if you behaved yourself—or, as the heads said, if Tinker
didn’t know when he had a good man, the man knew when he had a
good master. It was not that the Tinkers paid more than ruling prices
for their labour. They made no pretence at being industrial
philanthropists—that would not have been business; but they
contrived to keep the mill running, shine or shower. Times must be
parlous bad indeed if the great water-wheel did not turn at proper times
in the race at Wilberlee; and constant employment is more to a man than
high wages, with slack times in between, if men had only the sense to
see it.

It is not necessary to go far back into the ancestry of the Tinkers,
though, in a quiet way, they were not a little proud of it. Old William
Tinker had left two sons, both of whom had been brought up to the
business, and to both, as partners, the business had been left. Jabez,
the elder, I shall have much to say. Richard, the younger, might not
have been a Tinker at all. He did not “favour” the Tinkers,
who were traditionally tall lean, wiry, big-boned men, somewhat sallow
of complexion, with dark straight hair, scant of speech, inflexible of
will, their word their law, neither grasping nor prodigal, and as strict
at chapel as the counting-house. But Dick Tinker, Dick o’
Will’s o’th Wilberlee, had been a “non-such.” He
had blue eyes that always sparkled with mirth; curling chestnut hair,
that affronted Puritanic sense; and he was a sad spendthrift. He had a
hearty word for everyone. He liked to go of a night to the

Rose and Crown
, and led the revels there. He never missed a
meet of the harriers, and he kept his own game-cock. He had a very
appreciative eye for a pretty face, even though it was half-hid under a
weaver’s shawl, and for a neat ankle, though cased in clogs.
During his widowed father’s life he had gone dutifully to chapel,
when he couldn’t make any plausible excuse for shirking
attendance, for it was no small matter to stand up against the old
man’s will. But when the father died, Dick stoutly declared, with
not a few oaths, that he was sick to death of the
Hard-bedders—such was his irreverent term for the Particular, very
particular, Baptists—and contented himself by going to the Parish
Church, on those rare occasions when he felt need of spiritual solace.
Then he capped all his follies by marrying the pretty, penniless,
governess at the Vicarage, a girl said to be from down Lincolnshire way,
who spoke with refined accent, had gentle, graceful ways, and was so
clearly a lady that every woman in the district, save the Vicar’s
wife and the working folk, resented it. But the moors were too bleak for
her and she had the grace to die after two years—which had been
like Paradise to Dick—leaving him an infant daughter, Dorothy.

Jabez had not liked his brother’s marriage. He had nothing to say
against his sister-in-law, except that it would have been better if she
had been a “that country’s” woman. Why couldn’t
Dick have done as the Tinker’s had done from time immemorial, and
married in the valley. “There were lasses anew, and to
spare,” he said, “well favoured, and only waiting to be
asked.” Then Dick’s bride had brought him nothing but the
clothes she stood up in, and that was another grievance. But Dick had
laughed, in his careless way, and said it was time to mend the Tinker
breed, by bringing some grace and beauty into the family, and “my
Louie has that, you can’t deny.” And Jabez could not deny
it.

“Why don’t you marry yourself, Jabez? You, all alone
i’ th’ old homestead, with nobody but old Betty to look
after you! Dreadful lonesome you must be. Th’ house is none too
cheerful at th’ best o’ times. But a woman’s pretty
face, an’ a soft voice, an’ th’ patter o’ little
feet ’ll lighten it up if now’t else will. And tak’
advice, Jabez, look further afield, not among th’ Wrigleys,
an’ Wimpennys, an’ th’ Brookes. Their lasses are weel
enough, an’ there’s money with all on ’em. But they
run too much to bone, an’ they’ve been chapelled, an’
missionarized, an’ dragooned till religion ’s soured on
’em, an’ when they love they love by rule o’
three.”

But Jabez had winced, and changed the subject.

After his wife’s death Dick had gradually fallen back into his old
courses. He loved his little wench, as he called his daughter,
passionately; but a full-blooded, hearty man, still in the very pink and
flower of his manhood, one used all his life to the bustle of the
market, the free and easy ways of an inn and the sports of the field is
not very much at home in a nursery. So Dick, who had felt, when the
cruel blow fell, that life had nothing left for him was once more to be
seen o’ nights at the
Rose and Crown
, roaring out a
hunting song, or arranging the details of a coursing match, a pigeon
shooting, or a cock fight—and the maidens of the valley of the
Holme took heart once more, and began to feel a lively concern for the
poor orphaned babe in the lonely house. They forgave
Dick—handsome, rollicking Dick—his passing aberration, his
one overt act of treason to their charms, and reflected, with
satisfaction, that his married life had been so brief, it might be
considered as not counting at all—an episode, not a history.

But the rising hopes of these speculative spinsters were rudely dashed.
One bright winter’s morning, when a sudden thaw had softened the
iron fields and promised the scent would lie, Dick rode forth cheerily
on his hunter to the meet at Thongsbridge. There was a substantial
breakfast at Mr. Hinchliffe’s a brother manufacturer and a county
magistrate. Dick did ample justice to the cold beef and ham but declined
coffee for old October. Then he must needs drain a stiff glass of brandy
and water “to warm the old ale,” he said; and in very merry
mood was Dick when the hounds broke covert. Now save the stone walls of
Galway there are no worse fences than those of the Valley of the Holme.
You must clear them at the peril of your neck. There is no crashing
through a dry-walling,—a “topping”
may
give once in
a way; but it is odds that it wont. Dick—Dare-devil Dick they
called him in the hunting-field,—rode straight. The ground in the
higher reaches had not yielded to the thaw or the morning sun. His horse
baulked at an awkward fence, slipped, and failed to recover itself, and
before Dick could disengage boot from stirrup, fell upon its side, with
Dick crushed beneath. The broken ribs were pressed into the lungs, and
though he lingered a few days at Mr. Hinchliffe’s house, he was
borne from it a corpse.

“You will be good to Dorothy?” he said to Jabez and Jabez
had pressed the clammy hand in silent promise.

“You’ll take her to live with you. She’s a bright
little lass, like a ray of sunshine in the house. You wont let her
forget her mother or her worthless dad, will you, Jabez? You’ll be
taking a wife someday yourself, lad, an’ have childer o’
your own. But you won’t be hard on th’ little lass, will
yo’, Jabez?”

And Jabez said she should be as his own.

“She won’t be bout brass, yo know, Jabez,” gasped the
dying man, the sweat standing in heads upon his pale brow.
“There’s my share i’th’ business, and odds and
ends. Yo’ know all about ’em. I’d never no secrets
fro’ yo, Jabez, though yo’ wer’ always a bit close,
weren’t tha, lad? I’ve left everything to Dorothy an’
made yo’ her guardian an’ th’ executor. I know
yo’ll do right bi th’ little ’un. I’m none
feared for that. Th’ Tinkers aren’t that sort; but
don’t be hard wi’ her. She’s nooan as tough as some,
her mother’s bairn, God bless her.”

And so poor Dick was gathered to his fathers and lay in the old
churchyard at Holmfirth by the fair, fragile wife’s side in the
grim vault of the Tinkers. Not a mill worked in the district as they
carried him to his grave. Men and Women “jacked work” with
one accord and lined the route from the dead man’s house to the
very side of the grave. For Dick with all his faults, perhaps, because
of them, was dear to the simple folk of the valley, and many, a tale was
told in the village inns, of cheery word and ready jest, and helping
hand in time of need; and many a buxom housewife, as she stirred
porridge for good man and bairns, smiled sadly and gave a gentle sigh as
she saw herself again a sprightly wench chased at Whitsuntide round the
ring at “kiss in the ring” Or “choose the lad that you
love best,” and found herself a willing captive, but panting and
struggling still, whilst Dick saluted the rosy cheek. For at the Sunday
School treats at “Whis-sunday,” all classes were on a level,
and even the parson himself must run as fast as legs could carry him if
tap of maiden greatly daring fell upon his shoulder, or her kerchief
dropped at his feet.

Whether it was the necessity of having some other companionship than old
Betty for the young niece so solemnly committed to his charge, or
whether he was weary of his bachelor solitude and felt the need of a
woman’s presence in the old homestead in which he had been born
and which he had inherited on his father’s death, certain it is
that Jabez Tinker began seriously to think about a wife. He was now
nearing his fiftieth year, and the romance of youth—love’s
young dream—he sadly told himself was not for him. Perhaps he had
never been young; but be that as it may he was now a staid, prosaic man,
who looked all his years and more, his whole soul in his business, in
parish affairs and in other spheres in which the gentler emotions have
no concern. Business was with him as the breath of his nostrils. Had he
liked, he could have retired on a fair competence; had he been asked he
could have given no solid reason why he should continue to toil and moil
and put by money. Dorothy was his nearest relative, though of remoter
ones—cousins and half-cousins, agnates and cognates as the Roman
lawyers said, he had them by the score. But it certainly was neither for
Dorothy nor other relative, near or distant, he spent more and more time
in mill and counting-house, planning fresh outlets for the produce of
his looms, building additions to the old mill, and watching eagerly
every improvement in the machinery of his trade. He did it simply
because he must, as a successful lawyer takes briefs upon briefs, or a
popular doctor case upon case. And he resolved that in his choice of a
bride he would look for money that would buy out Dick’s share in
the business, and leave him sole master of Wilberlee mill.

And in this mood his thoughts turned to Martha Thorpe; he scarce knew
why, except, perhaps, that he was used to the sight of her Sunday after
Sunday, and at the weekly services and social functions of the chapel
and Sunday school. All the world knew that Martha would have money, but
none the less did all the world—of Holmfirth—gape and
exclaim with its “Did yo’ evver? “and its “Aw
nivver did,” when the reserved master of Wilberlee was seen, not
once or twice, but, in time, Sunday after Sunday, pacing slowly by
Martha and Old Split’s side from the chapel gates to the modest
home above the shop in Victoria Street. But when it become known that
Jabez Tinker actually took his roast beef, and Yorkshire pudding,
and apple pie (with cheese) at Splits, the spinsterdom of the village
was divided between wrath and scorn.

“Such a letting down to th’ Tinkers,” declared one.

“I’ll never believe it till I see it,” affirmed
another.

“It’s money he’s after,” a third alleged.

“He’s enough o’ his own.”

“There’s no telling. Happen he’s speculated. Besides,
much will have more, an’ Tinkers wer’ allus rare ’uns
for th’ main chance,” was the general conclusion.

“All but poor Dick,” said his old cronies of the

Rose and Crown
.

“By gosh! But Ginger o’ Split’s ’ud be a pill as
’ud bide some gilding for my taste,” vowed the jolly
landlord. “Jabez mun ha’ a good stomach.”

And what thought Martha?

It was inconceivable to her at first that the visits of Mr. Tinker,
of Wilberlee, could be anything but visits of business to her father;
doubtless some matter connected with the Chapel or the Sunday School.
But Ephraim dropped hints.

“How would ta like to be wed, lass?

“Father!”

“Aye, it’s father now. It ’ll be happen
gran’father afore long,” and the old man chuckled a greasy
chuckle.

It could not be true, murmured Martha to her heart. That anyone should
come a wooing to her, unless, perchance it were some needy parson after
her money, seemed preposterous. And yet everyone said Mr. Tinker
was more than well-to-do. And, after all, was she so very plain? Is
there in this wide, wide world a woman’s glass that does not tell
a flattering tale to one, at least? And, as she looked, a warm glow
tinged the pale cheeks, and a light shone in her eyes they had never
known before. To be loved! To be loved for her own sake! To get away
from that horrid shop; to be Jabez Tinkers lady; to queen it over those
who had sneered at her behind her back! There was rapture in the
thought. And oh! She would love him so; she would be his very slave; no
house should be like theirs. Never did the heart of Andromeda leap to
meet the coming Perseus, as Martha’s heart went out to this
prince, come, if come indeed he were, to break the chains that bound her
to the cruel rock of barren life. Her heart overflowed with gratitude,
and humbly she thanked her God that His handmaiden had found favour in
this great Lord’s sight. She did not ask for the fervent worship
of an ardent wooer’s love. She only asked to be allowed to love,
and to be loved a little—oh! just a little, in return—as the
parched ground thirsts for the grateful shower, so thirsted the heart of
the patient Martha for a good man’s love.

CHAPTER V.

HAPPY'S the wooing that’s not long a-doing, and Jabez Tinker,
his mind resolved, was not the man to let the grass grow under his feet.
Martha was not the one to insist on all the formularies of a protracted
siege; she surrendered the citadel of her heart at the first blast of
trumpet. She only insisted that the wedding should be a quiet one. As
this jumped entirely with her lover’s notions she had her own way,
though Ephraim protested.

“We don’t kill a pig every day, and blow th’ expense.
If aw pay th’ piper surely I ought to chuse th’ tune.”

But he was not suffered to choose the tune, though none questioned that
he paid the piper, and paid him handsomely. Exactly how many thousands
of pounds made over his humble counter went to swell
Mr. Tinker’s balance at the Bank no one but he and his
son-in-law and the bankers knew, and is no concern of ours.

Jabez took his bride to London for the honeymoon. The wool-sales were on
at the time, so that the manufacturer was able to combine business with
pleasure, and to avoid that exclusive devotion to his wife which even
more ardent husbands are said to have found somewhat irksome. But he
took care that Martha should see some of the sights of London—the
Houses of Parliament, the Abbey, St. Paul’s, and the Tower.
Theatres were, of course, not to be thought of, but on one
never-to-be-forgotten Saturday, the two went up the river to Hampton
Court. Then for the first time Martha realized that the world is very
beautiful and often amid the bleak hills and stone walls and hideous
mills of her mountain home, her thoughts would dwell upon the green
fields and rich hedges and rustling, swaying, leafy branches and deep
flowing waters of the fair valley of the Thames. The portraits at
Hampton Court shocked her, and she hurried through the rooms with
crimson face.

But her heart was very light and glad as she entered her own home at
Wilberlee. The ancient homestead of the Tinkers was hard by the mill. It
was a long two-storied building of rude ashlar, now dark with age. There
was a sitting room or company room, low and gloomy even on a bright day,
for the windows were overhung by the ivy that covered the house front.
The furniture was massive, dark mahogany. There were but few pictures or
ornaments in the room, the pictures mostly oil-paintings of dead and
gone Tinkers in stiff stocks, precise coats, with thick watch-chains and
seals hanging from the fob; the women with smooth plaited hair, long
stomachers, and severe looks. By the looking-glass over the mantel-piece
were deep-edged mourning cards, in ornate frames, recording the deaths
of defunct ancestors, with pious texts and verses expressive of a
touching confidence in the departed’s eternal welfare.

The bedrooms of the upper story were furnished in the same enduring
fashion, were even gloomier than the dismal sitting room, the vast
four-posted mahogany bedsteads with their voluminous drapery casting
heavy shadows, and as the narrow windows were never opened, the chamber
air, in summer time, was heavy laden with the blended smell of feathers,
flocks, and lavender. It is marvellous what a dread our forefathers, who
lived so much in the open, had of fresh air and thorough ventilation in
the sleeping rooms of their homes.

But, after all, the kitchen or living room was the main thing. A roaring
fire in winter time, walls yellow-washed, floor ochred and sanded, dark
rafters overhead, flitches, hams, ropes of onions, dried bushes of sage
and parsley, burnished tins that caught and reflected rays of fire and
gleam of sun, a long table, its top white as soap and scrubbing brush
can make the close-grained sycamore, long shelves laden with Delf and
ancient crockery—ah! It was a paradise for a good housewife.

And a good housewife Martha proved to be. There was not a cleaner house
in all that country side. She had kept on Betty for Dorothy’s
sake, and there was besides, Peggy, scullery maid and general help.
Betty and Peggy would very much have preferred that their mistress had
been neither so keen of eye nor sharp of tongue—for the Mistress
who, as callers said, could not say boh to a goose, could talk thirteen
to the dozen, so Betty averred, anent a grease spot or an iron-mould.

Martha’s lot, it may be said, if not an ideal, was now a serene
one. Had she but had child of her own, she thought no happier woman
could have been found in the wide West Riding. But in this Fate was
unkind, and the withholding of the crowning blessing of a woman’s
life, to hold her own babe to her breast, was all the harsher measure,
that Martha knew her husband in his secret heart brooded over their long
disappointment and nursed it as a grievance. Poor Martha! How many
prayers, how many vows, were thine for this boon so freely granted to
your husband’s poorest workman!

It was in vain that Martha tried to stay her heart’s longings by
filling a mother’s place to the little niece left by that
graceless Richard. All that duty dictated Martha did; did ungrudgingly
conscientiously. But there is one thing in this world that is absolutely
beyond the human will: it is the human heart. Love knows no reason, and
is uninfluenced by the sternest logic. It is like the wind that bloweth
where it listeth. School herself as Martha would she came, in time, to
have a smouldering jealousy of little Dorothy, and the child’s
quick perception taught it to shun the eye, and soon the company, of her
aunt, and turn for comfort to buxom, homely Betty.

It is a Sunday afternoon in the Summer of the year ’45—a
glorious summer’s afternoon. The garden at Wilberlee, stretching
below the parlour window right down to the river-side—no great
stretch, indeed—is ablaze with colour. The sky overhead is of rich
deep blue, flecked with trailing wisps of feathery cloudlets. The lark
sings high in mid ether. From the meadows round about comes the scent of
the hay, and the garden gives forth its fragrance of musk and rose. In a
low basket-chair, placed beneath the shades of an umbrageous chestnut
tree, Mrs. Tinker sits, stiff, erect, unyielding. She is dressed in rich
dark silk, and the lace of collar and cuffs have come from the skilled
fingers of the nuns of Belgian convents. A religious periodical, the
“Baptist Magazine,” lies unheeded on her lap, for Martha is
watching, with wistful eyes, the graceful movements of a young girl, who
flits from flower to flower, and bends occasionally to snip a bloom or
leaf.

“Why are you getting flowers of a Sunday: Dorothy? You know your
uncle would not like it. I’m sure we don’t want any more in
the house—the parlour smells almost sickly with
them—besides, it’s Sunday.”

“I don’t want them for the parlour, aunt Martha. They are
for poor Lucy Garside.”

“Who’s Lucy Garside?”

“Why, aunt, how can you forget? She worked in uncle’s mill
till she had to leave. It is something the matter with her legs and
spine. Don’t you mind that pretty, rosy Lucy Garside, that used to
be in your class at the Sunday School? But she isn’t rosy
now—oh! so pale and thin, and has to lie all day on the
settle.”

“You mean the sofa, child.”

“No, aunt, the kitchen settle I mean, they have no sofa; but they
try to make it comfortable for her with shawls and things; and her
mother is making a list hearth-rug for her to lie on, and then, may-be,
she’ll be easier—and she loves flowers. You will let me take
them, aunt Martha, won’t you?”

“Well, they’re gathered now, and it’s no use wasting
them. But, in future, you must ask my leave before you cut more. And I
don’t quite know how your uncle would like you going trashing
about among those low mill-girls.”

“But, aunt”—and here Dorothy lowered her voice and
glanced timorously at the opened window of the parlour—“but,
aunt Martha, they say—in the village, I mean, not Lucy’s
mother—that Lucy’s hurt her spine and crooked her legs
working too long in the mill—hours and hours, and hours, they say,
all the day and nearly all the night, and sleeping under the machines
because she was too tired to go home to bed; and that, and not enough to
eat, the doctor says, has made poor Lucy a cripple for life.”

“Then Dr. Wimpenny ought to be whipped for saying such things, and
I won’t have you listening to these tittle-tattling stories. You
ought to be ashamed of yourself, to let folks tell you lies about your
uncle’s mill. Folk ought to be glad they can send their children
to work, to earn their own living. How would they live if they
couldn’t? But there’s no gratitude left in the
world—that’s a fact. But there’s your uncle finished
his nap, and you’d best be off; and don’t let me hear any
more of your silly tales about things you don’t understand.”

It was a very prim and demure maiden that walked sedately from the
side-gate of the house at Wilberlee, a large bunch or posy of flowers
grasped in one little hand, a basket in the other. Dorothy had coaxed
sundry delicacies from the not reluctant Betty—a loaf of bread,
some slices of meat, a pot of jam, a glass of calves’-foot jelly,
and a small packet of tea.

“Bless her bonny face,” remarked Betty to Peggy, the
underling, “it isn’t i’ my heart to refuse her owt.
But it’s to be hoped th’ missus ’ll never find it
out.”

“Saints preserve us,” devoutly ejaculated Peggy, who was
shrewdly suspected to have Milesian blood in her veins.

“Isn’t she a pictur’?” said Betty, as her eyes
followed her little mistress until the gate shut her from admiring gaze.

“’Deed, then, she is—an’ as good as she’s
purty,” assented Peggy.

“It’s Mr. Richard’s own child, she is,” went on
Betty, reminiscently—“th’ same dancin’
e’en, an’ gladsome look, an’ merry smile; and yet,
sometimes, when she’s thoughtful-like, an’ dreamy,
you’d think she wer’ her own mother, as I could fancy her as
a lass,”—and Betty heaved a very deep sigh, from a very
capacious bosom.

And, indeed, Dorothy was a picture to gladden the eyes of man. The small
coal-scuttle bonnet of Leghorn straw, with its drab strings, could not
hide the pure oval of the face, nor its shade conceal its rich, warm
complexion. The auburn ringlets, not corkscrewed to mechanic stiffness,
but loosely curling, fell in clusters about her shoulders; and the child
moved with an instinctive grace. Once out of the view of the garden and
the house windows her pace quickened, she began to skip along joyously,
her bonnet thrown back from the head, and her little feet, peeping and
twinkling from beneath her shortened skirts, beat measure to the
snatches of songs, that were not hymnal in their wording or their
melody. As she passed the cottage doors, the good folk—standing by
their thresholds to breath the air, or bask in the grateful sun, or
while away the sleepy hours of unwonted rest in friendly gossip with
“my nabs”—would turn to look upon the sweet and glad
young face, and not one but had a hearty word and a friendly greeting
for Miss Dorothy.

“Eh! But oo’s a bonny wench. A seet ov her ’s fair
gooid for sore e’en. Oo’ll be a bright spot i’ some
lucky chap’s whom some fine day, please the pigs.” And
Dorothy had a nod, and a smile, too, for everyone; for she knew them all
by name, and most of them worked for her uncle, either in the mill, or
at their own loom in the long upper chamber of their little cottages.

“Oo’s bahn to see poor Lucy Garsed, Ben’s lass,
aw’ll be bun; an’ oo’s noan empty-handed noather. See
th’ posy oo’s getten; an’ mi mouth fair watters when
aw think o’ what there’ll be i’th basket—noan
o’ th’ missus’ sendin’, aw’ll go
bail.”

“Aye, there’ll be summat beside tracks, if Miss
Dorothy’s had a finger i’ th’ pie,”—and so
the old wives’ tongues ran on.

The cottage of Ben Garside was barely furnished, but all was spick and
span. Ben was a hand-loom weaver, and, of a week-day, by earliest day,
til sunset in the spring and summer-tide, you could have heard the clack
of his loom overhead as the nimble shuttle with its trail of weft sped
across the warp. But to-day Ben has gone to stretch his legs on the
moors, and it is Lucy’s mother who bids Dorothy welcome and
relieves her of her parcels.

A long oaken settle runs under the deep window of the
“house” or living room. The window ledge is full of pots of
geranium, fuchsia, musk and rose that turn their petals to bathe in the
glorious sunshine that streams with tempered warmth through the thick
glazing of the long low window. Poor Lucy lies upon the couch, her
cheeks so hollow, her skin so transparent, her brown soft eyes so
unnaturally large and her look of patient suffering, and of the
resignation of abandoned hope so heart-rending when it is stamped on the
face of youth. But the large eyes brighten as Dorothy comes to the
couch, and her thin hand, so white and bloodless, rests in loving,
lingering caress upon Dorothy’s glossy tresses as she stoops over
the invalid and leaves a kiss upon the pallid lips.

“Better to-day, I hope, Lucy.”

And Lucy, with a suspicious catch in her voice, says:

“Oh! Yes, better to-day, Miss Dorothy, almost well.”

Alas! There will be no well for Lucy till that best of all days shall
dawn for her, where sickness and suffering enter not, and tears forget
to flow.

“See what Aunt Martha has sent you,” said Dorothy
presently,—may heaven forgive the fib,—“no, not the
flowers. I gathered them all myself because I know just what you like
best, and now all the afternoon, when I’m gone, you know, you must
just do nothing but arrange them in that big glass on the drawers there.
And this jam is for you, too, and the calves’-foot jelly to make
you strong, you know, and the tea is for you, Mrs. Garside, when
you’ve been washing and feel just like sinking through the ground,
as I’ve heard you say you do.”

“And thank the missus kindly, Miss Dorothy, my respects; but
whativver’s this?” and Mrs. Garside extracted the bread and
meat.

“Oh! I’d forgotten them. These are for Ben.”

“Eh! But aw’m feart they’ll nivver keep till next
Sunday i’ this welterin’ weather. To be sure aw might rub
’em wi’ salt, but Ben do want such a power o’ ale
a’ter salt meat. But we’ll see, we’ll see. Eh! Miss
Dorothy, but it’s yo’ that thinks o’ ivverybody
an’ thof yo’ say it’s yor aunt, it’s well aw
know—but least said, sooinest mended. But sit yo dahn an’
aw’ll dust that cheer i’ hauf a tick-tack—it’s
fair cappin wheer all th’ muck comes fro’ this warm weather,
fit to fry yo’ like a’ rasher o’ bacon; sit yo’
dahn, do, an’ throw yo’r hat off an’ yo’ll read
ith Book a bit; not ’at aw held so much religion but Lucy theer
likes it an’ it’s cheap, that’s one gooid thing or
th’ poor folk ’ud get little enew on it.”

Mrs. Garside, who, it will be observed, did not allow her power of
speech to rust for want of use, paused to draw breath for another
effort.

“What shall I read, Lucy?”

“Oh! Just that story about Jesus at the pool of Bethesda. How I
wish I could have been there.”

Mrs. Garside composed herself to listen, putting on that look of
impenetrable stolidity and unreceptiveness that a good many people seem
to think most appropriate for a Scripture-reading.

“In these lay a great multitude of impotent folk, of blind, halt,
withered, waiting for the moving of the waters.…‘Sir, I
have no man, when the water is troubled, to put me into the pool; but
while I am coming, another steppeth down before me.’”

“Nah! If that isn’t Holmfirth all ovver, my name’s not
Hannah Garsed” broke in that lady. “Holmfirth all ovver. Aw
can see just how it wer’. Th’ poor man wer’ ligged
theer all bi hissen, an’ nobbudy to help ’im. Then fust one
an’ then another comes up an’ thruts ’im o’ one
side. An’ if them watters wer’ owt like th’ Booik
says, yo may mak’ sure ’at there’d be th’ rich
folk theer wi’ their sarvants, an’ lackeys, an’ nusses
an’ lady’s maids, to put ’em i’th’ watter
an’ they’d ha’ th’ pick o’ ivverything.
An’ yar Ben sez ’at if th’ heealin’ o’
th’ man wi a infirmary wer’ a miracle, it’s a bigger
miracle ’at someb’dy hadn’t bowt that pool up
an’ med a fortin’ out o’ it. Not ’at aw hold
wi’ all yar Ben says, for there’s gooid folk amang th’
quality, as we’d no need to look further nor Wilberlee,” she
concluded, with a penitent glance at the table.

“But I’ve some news for you, Mrs. Garside,”
interrupted Dorothy, “and I hope it will be good news.”

“It’ll be summat fresh if it is,” murmured the
irrepressible dame, “weel, out wi’ it.”

“You know uncle has been very busy lately, putting in new
machinery?”

Mrs. Garside nodded.
That
did not concern her, except perhaps that it
might mean either more or less country-work to the hand-loom weavers.
But that would be to try for.

“And he is going to take another apprentice,” continued
Dorothy. “I heard him tell Aunt Martha so and ask her where she
should lodge him. Aunt Martha said she hadn’t an idea, anywhere
would do for an apprentice. So I managed to catch uncle all by himself,
and I said perhaps you would be glad to do for a boy.”

“And that’s what yo’ ca’ gooid news, is it,
Dorothy? As if aw hadn’t enough to do wi’ th’
house-work and th’ cookin’, though that’s easy enough,
God knows, an’ me bobbin-windin’ to keep Ben agate at
th’ loom, an’ th’ little lass theer at might ha’
been a help an’ a comfort laid o’ her back fro’ morn
to neet an’ neet to morn an’ all to do for, not but what
it’s a pleasure to do for yo’, my pet, an’ it’s
more aw wish your owd mother could do, an’ aw wodn’t swap
her agen ony lass i’ all th’ valley; but a noisy lad a
rampagin’ all abaat th’ haase an’ whistlin’
an’ happen stoppin’ out o’ neets till all hours, an
nivver’ wipin’ his feet except upo’ th’ fender
rails, an’ makkin’ enough noise to wakken th’ deead,
an’ eitin’ enough for two! Not but what th’ bit
o’ brass ’ud be welcome, an’ thank yo’ kindly.
We’ll see when th’ time comes; its no use meetin’
trouble hauf way nor lawpin’ afore yo get to th’ stee,
an’ doubtless yo’r aunt ’ll be speikin’ to me or
yar Ben, an’ that ’ll be time enough, which awm obliged to
yo’ all th’ same, miss, for givin’ a thowt o’ us
an speikin’ a gooid word for us, though yo’r aunt knows weel
as if aw
did
ha’ a boy aw’d do for ’im as well as
here an’ theer a one, though aw say it, mebbe, as
suldn’t.”

Who can unravel the tangled skein of life and say, as the foolish say,
“This is fate,” or as the wise, “This the
foreordaining of God, the will and fashioning of the great Designer,
from the foundation of the world?” But call it Fate or what you
will, certain enough it is that the very day after Dorothy’s visit
to Dame Garside’s cottage, Jabez Tinker mounted his stout cob
and rode up the road that leads past the Bilberry Reservoir, past the
Isle of Skye and far-famed Bill’s o’ Jack’s, past the
grey pile of St. Chad’s, and so to the Workhouse On the hill. His
horse was taken at the gate by Workhouse Jack and Tom Pinder, and
led to the stabling in the rear to have a draught of meal-and-water and
a feed of oats. Jack and Tom lingered in the stable admiring the gloss
of the horse’s coat, running fingers through its mane, smacking
its warm flanks with many a “Whooa hup” and
“Stan’ ovver, lass,” examining its hocks and its
teeth, and generally doing those knowing things affected by the veriest
tyro who would be thought wise in the deep and subtle matter of
horseflesh.

But presently came the Workhouse Porter:

“Tom Pinder, th’ Master wants you in th’ office.
No, not you, Jack; you can go into th’ potato patch and
don’t let me catch you here again or you’ll know about
it.”

The porter was a much more dignified man and more important in his own
esteem than the master himself, so it is just as well he had not eyes at
the back of his head to see that sign made by a certain application of
thumb and outspanned fingers which in all times and countries has been
deemed significant of contempt unutterable.

Tom followed the Porter wondering to the office. The Master was closeted
with a tall, broad-shouldered, sparer, man, with clean shaven face, keen
grey eyes, and hair tinged with grey at tee tell-tale temples. He sat by
the table, a tankard of ale at his side, and his hand swinging his
riding whip idly to and fro.

“This is the lad, then, Mr. Redfearn wrote to me about? He
seems a likely lad enough, but somewhat overgrown. How old are you
boy?”

“Rising fifteen, sir.”

Mr. Tinker eyed the youth from head to foot and turned him round
and round, feeling the muscles of his arm and the thews of his thigh and
calf as though he was appraising a horse at the Cattle Fair.

“Sound in wind and limb, I should judge,” he concluded,
“but his age is against him. A lad should go into a mill young,
Master, before his bones are set and his fingers stiff, if he’s to
be any good. I’m not in your Union or I would have seen to this.
The Guardians have no business to keep a big lumbering lout of a lad
lazying about the House and eating his head off. It’s demoralising
to the lad and is enough to pauperize a whole neighbourhood.
What’s his name?”

“Pinder sir, Tom Pinder,” answered the Master, and,
whilst Tom stared with all his eyes on the stranger, wondering vastly
who he might be and what this interview might portend and wondering too
if Workhouse Jack would remember to feed his rabbit and find a fresh sod
of grass for his lark, the Master made apology for Tom’s height
and girth.

“You see, Mr. Tinker, Pinder’s been kept longer than
usual. There’s a sort of mystery about him, and both the Chairman
and Mr. Black have taken uncommon interest in him. Indeed the
Schoolmaster’s so wrapt up in him he couldn’t have been more
if th’ lad had been his own son, which I’d almost think he
was myself if it wasn’t so ridiculous. But there’s never no
telling, is there, Mr. Tinker? these quiet uns is often as deep
an’ dark as a pit, bu’ we’re all human, eh?” And
Master winked a wink meant to be a summary of profound knowledge of the
universal fallibility of the human race.

But Mr. Tinker was not a man to be winked at or joked with, nor
apparently was he disposed to discuss the tempting topic of
man’s—and woman’s—depravity—with a
Workhouse Master, the sole audience a Workhouse foundling.

“Pinder,”—he said musingly, strumming meditatively on
the table, and somewhat brusquely declining the Master’s
hospitable offer to have in another jug of October ale, or something
shorter if a cordial for the stomach would be more
acceptable.—“Pinder—Tom Pinder? it isn’t a
this country name. There was a Pinder at Marsden, a clothier in a small
way—took to drink, banked, and showed his creditors a clean pair
of heels; but you wouldn’t have a Marsden brat in this
Union.”

“But he wasn’t called after his father,” said the
Master, somewhat curtly, for if Jabez Tinker could be curt, curt
too could the Master be, and any way, he was sovereign there except on
Guardian days. “Damme, I can crow on my own dunghill,” he
thought, “or I’m th’ poorest cock ever crowed this
side of Stanedge.”

“Oh! I forgot, Mr. Redfearn said something about his being a
bastard, a chance child—a rambling tale. I didn’t mind it, I
was thinking about something else. ’Twill be his mother’s
name?”

“No, nor his mother’s,” said the Master. “I
don’t rightly know who he was called after. It had something to do
with Mr. Redfearn’s shepherd. But it’s a long time
since, and I forget. But what’s the odds? There th’ lad is.
You can either take him or leave him, it’s all a price to me, and
I reckon to th’ Guardians too.”

“When can he come?”

“Next week. There’ll be th’ papers to make out.
Th’ overseers will sign th’ indentire. Five pounds
they’ve to pay, I think t’was settled.”

“Yes, five Pounds; but if I’d known his age and size
I’d have stood out for more. But it’s too late for haggling
you’d send him over this day week. I’ll arrange about him.
Tell him to bring the cob round, Tom, and so good day to you, Master.
Time’s money these days, and I’ve wasted a whole forenoon
over this job. Pinder, Pinder, it’s a strange name and yet there
seems a look i’ the lad’s eye I’ve seen before
somewhere. My respects to Mr. Redfearn when you see him, and tell
him he should be too old a farmer by this to keep his cattle till
they’re almost too far gone for the market.”

The Master smiled the official smile at a Guardian’s jest; but it
was no very friendly glance that followed the erect form of the
Holmfirth manufacturer as he turned his good mare’s head over the
hills. “Tom’s in for a bad time of it, I’m
thinking,” said the master.

It was Mr. Black who conveyed the lad with a father’s love
from the Workhouse to Holmfirth. And the lad went with a heart light
enough, though on his cheek the tears were wet he had shed at parting
from the faithful Jack. He had solemnly made over to the lamenting
Workhouse drudge his boyish treasures,—the lark, that obstinately
refused to sing, the lop-eared rabbit, and the hedgehog he had rescued
from the clogs and sticks of a posse of village urchins—captive
not of bow and spear, but of fist and toe. Moll o’ Stuarts, too,
had been to bid him farewell, and, as a parting gift, had bestowed on
him a child’s caul.

“Keep that all th’ days o’ your life; nivver part
wi’ it, wet or fine. Yo’ll allus know th’ weather by
it, as guid as a glass an’ better nor bi a mony on ’em.
An’ as long as that caul’s thine, drowneded bi watter
yo’ canna be. There’s mony a fine spark at sails the seas
’ud be main glad o’ that same. Hanged yo’ may be,
tho’ God forbid, but drownded nivver.” And in after years,
of which the reader shall read in good time, Moll o’ Stuarts was
able to invoke her prophetic soul, and to attribute to her own
prescience the wonderful deliverance this story shall narrate. Moll,
too, brought a pair of stout stockings knit by the widow
Schofield’s own plump hands, and a crown-piece, that the night
before had jingled in Tom o’ Fairbank’s well-filled leathern
purse.

Over the hills trudged the Schoolmaster and his ward; the dominie
thoughtful, and not a little sorrowful.

“Pray God we’ve done for the best,” was his pious
hope, as they reached the low wall of the Church of St. Chad’s,
and one at least thought of the fair unknown, whose son was setting
forth into the untried paths of life, with all the glad, unquestioning
undoubting confidence of eager youth. Hard by the Church Inn they turned
to the face of the steep ascent of almost unbroken moorland, threaded by
a rude and rutty path, strewn with rubble and boulders, torn and
wrenched from the crags above by the driving storms and angry raging
winds of the rolling years. On the lower face of the hill they passed,
here and there, the rude shelter of a moorland cottier, whose cow and
pig and poultry gained precarious living in the lean enclosures won from
the sweeping stretch of heather and coarse grass or the lowly cottage
whence the familiar clack of the hand-loom told of swaying beam and
scudding shuttle. Anon they reached the summit; Mr. Black,
notwithstanding the help from Tom’s sturdy arm, fain to rest upon
one of the vast rocks belched forth from the bowels of the earth in some
angry vomiting of the prisoned airs, and now, rounded and smooth-worn
and dark with the gloom of ages, resting massive on the commanding
summit called Pots and Pans.

“Yes, that indeed, is Bill’s o’ Jack s,” panted
Mr. Black, in answer to Tom’s eager questioning.

“That is where the murder was done, murder most foul. Poor hapless
Bill and Tom, I knew them well, a hale and hearty farmer, and his son a
strapping gamekeeper. Done to death, whether for gain or revenge, none
knew for certain, though it was shrewdly guessed, but nothing was ever
proved and for ought is known, the murderers may dwell in our very
midst. See yon little window left of the door, ’twas the old
man’s bedroom. There, in a pool of blood, his lifeless body was
found; his son,—his head cleaved by a heavy bill-lay lifeless in
the kitchen. It was a little wench, who went betimes for milk, gave the
alarm.”

“Was it long gone sir?” asked Tom, gazing spellbound at the
farmhouse in the valley’s dip.

“In ’32—the year of the great Reform Bill. You were a
bouncing baby then, Tom. But see how thick the bilberries lie snugly in
the heather, and how a film settles on the ripened fruit as though the
mist of the hills had kissed them with a lingering kiss. Better fill
your kerchief, for well I guess they’ll be right welcome at Mrs.
Garside’s, where you must make your home.

“And now, lad, turn your eyes once more upon the old church and
towards the fields you know so well. Remember in that valley you were
born and bred, and in that valley are those that love you well and who
have knit you to their hearts. Yonderwards, in the other valley, is your
future home; what trials, what labours there await you, who shall say?
but as David said to his
son
, say I to you:

“’Be thou strong and shew thyself a man, and keep the charge
of the Lord Thy God, to walk in His ways, to keep His statutes, and His
commandments, and His judgments and His testimonies that thou mayest
prosper in all that thou doest, and whithersoever thou turnest
thyself.’ And now, come, lad, ’tis a brave step from here to
Holmfirth and the way will be long for me when I come back without
thee.”

CHAPTER VI.

Tom Pinder was “apprenticed”—so the phrase
ran—to Jabez Tinker with all the form and circumstance and
not a little of the verbal exuberance of the law. The manufacturer bound
himself to the overseers of Saddleworth who stood to the foundling in

loco parentis
, to teach his apprentice the art and calling of a
clothier—so manufacturers were then styled, when men were less
fond of high-sounding terms and preferred plain English to
foreign-fangled names. He also undertook, under his hand and seal, to
feed the said Tom and provide him one new suit of clothing each year
until he should attain the age of twenty-one years. The overseers, on
their part, engaged that the “said Tom should faithfully serve the
said Jabez Tinker and his wife and family, his and their lawful
orders should do, his secrets should keep, and his goods protect,”
likewise that the said Tom, so long as his indenture should endure,
taverns should not frequent, bowls nor dice should play, fornication
should not commit, and marriage should not contract. As the delicate
subject of wages was not so much as hinted at in this formidable
document, it seemed pretty certain that the ingenuous apprentice would
not be exposed to much temptation either from tavern or dice-box; and
Mr. Black, after reading, no less than three times, the articles of
this solemn covenant could not withhold his admiration of the zealous
care the law manifested for the morals of the young. He should think
better, he averred, of lawyers ever after, and was inclined to believe
they must be a much maligned body of men. If there had only been some
mention of the catechism, he said, the deed might have been framed by a
Bishop. Mr. Redfearn to whom he thus unbosomed himself said
nothing, but there were volumes in the wink he conveyed to the stolid
Aleck.

“I could ha’ thoiled th’ absence o’ ony mention
o’ th’ catechism if there’d been some mention o’
wage,” was his only spoken comment.

“But think of the immense advantage of learning the whole art and
commerce of a clothier under such a teacher as Mr. Tinker,”
urged Mr. Black.

Mr. Redfearn apparently did think, and what he thought was again
conveyed to Aleck by a surreptitious wink.

Tom was not long in proving for himself the advantages of being an
apprentice. They consisted, so far as he could make out, of being harder
worked and more harshly treated than a paid hand, and as for instruction
or initiation into the mysteries of the clothier’s craft, he was
left to learn so much as his own eyes could teach him and his gumption
acquire. It was fortunate for him that Ben Garside, with whom he lodged,
lived at no great distance from the mill, for he had to be at his work
by daybreak in the summer months, and long before the first uplifting of
night’s black curtain in the cold winter morns. Many who worked in
the same mill, young boys and girls not yet in their teens, had to
trudge in all weathers from distant homes on the raw hill sides, often
by lanes and footpaths deep in mud or slush, often by the light of the
many stars, sometimes by the pale glimmer of the lanthorn, sometimes in
Egyptian darkness, feeling their way by the touch of walls or hedges or
trees, drenched by rain or sleet, pelted by hail, sinking into deep ruts
or forging through the drifted snow, lightly clad, the warmest garment
of the girls the shawl about their head and ears, their faces pinched
and blue with cold, their fingers aching with the shrewd wintry pinch,
starting from home without breakfast and hurrying with empty stomachs to
their dreary work, ill-clad, ill-shod, worse-fed, and still worse paid.
The hours of labour were long. Wilberlee Mill was, though not
exclusively, mainly a water-mill, the motive power being led from the
mill-dam by a head-goit to the great waterwheel, and from the wheel-race
restored by the tail-goit, little diminished, to the river’s
course, to serve the turn of mill owners lower down the stream. Often in
dry seasons the supply of water was scant enough and hence it came that
when the dam was flush of water the manufacturer reversed the process of
making hay while the sun shone by making pieces while the rain fell.
There was little or no restriction in the age at which a child might be
sent to work, or the hours for which it might be kept there. It was of
so common occurrence as to be almost regarded as a matter of course, not
calling for comment, that a child nine or ten years of age should stand
to its work sixteen or seventeen hours at a stretch, cramming its meal
of water-porridge down its throat in the fluff-laden air of the weaving
shed or spinning room, afraid to break off work even to eat a hurried
and unsavoury meal. Sometimes the children were locked in the mill all
night, and many would fall asleep as they stood, or drop exhausted by
their machines only to be roused by a kick from the slubber’s
clogs, a blow from a roller, or a resounding smack from the
slubber’s strap.

Tom had been set to billy-piecing, but it was found that his fingers
were too big and his joints too set for such work, so, to his great
delight, he ceased to rub the skin off his knuckles till they bled
again, and was transferred to the “scouring-hoil” and in
time had charge of a willey, or as it was sometimes called a
“devil,” or “fearnowt,” an iron monster into
whose maw he threw the scoured wool just fresh from the
“drying-hoil,” to be torn and “teased” by the
hundred fangs of the insatiable mouth, digest as it were, in its
mechanic stomach, and thence cast out in a light and airy fluff ready to
be scribbled, slubbed and in time spun into warp and weft.

But though, for a time, Tom escaped the most arduous and confining and
debilitating part of an operative’s daily lot, his lines were hard
enough. He looked back upon his workhouse life with a sickening
yearning, and when he remembered the regular and abundant meals of the
House, his gorge rose at the ever-recurring surfeit of water-porridge to
breakfast, water-porridge to dinner, water-porridge to supper, and
water-porridge between meals.

But for all that Tom grew apace, and his was not the willowy, weedy
growth of the towns. If the advocates of vegetarianism want to press
their proofs, let them recur to the country-bred, porridge-fed
youngsters of a by-gone generation, when they were not cooped up in
mills and worked beyond the endurance of Nature. As Tom was often sent
out with the lant-barrel to collect from the cottages for miles around
the scouring liquid for which ammonia is the modern substitute, he had
ample opportunity to stretch his legs and broaden his chest and brace
his sinews; so that when, as time went on; he attained to the dignity of
a loom, he was as well-set-up a youth as one would meet in a day’s
march, straight, old Hannah Garside vowed, as any “picking
rod,” with strong limbs and corded muscles, and, best of all, with
a sound head and a warm heart,—a happy contrast to the many of his
comrades whose shoulders were rounded, and backs bent and legs curved by
weary hours of standing and stooping at tasks and under burdens beyond
the immature powers of ill-nurtured bodies. It was a common saying in
those days that nine out of every ten of the mill-hands of Holmfirth
could not stop a pig with their legs.

But the happiest chance that befell the young apprentice was that which
made him a lodger with Ben and Hannah Garside. It was long enough before
he had much more than a nodding acquaintance either with them or their
invalid daughter; for, of weekdays, he took his meals at the mill, and
at night he was so dead-beat that he was fain to wash himself and steal
to bed; and on Sundays, for many a week of his early apprenticeship it
was his glad custom to bolt his morning meal and make off as fast as his
legs could carry him over the moors to Saddleworth, generally arriving
at St. Chad’s Church in time to be late for the morning service,
but ample time to accompany Mr. Black or Mr. Redfearn home to
a better dinner than Hannah Garside had ever seen, or even dreamed of.

But as the summer mellowed into autumn and the autumn drooped to Winter,
there came Sundays when wind and rain made the tramp over the
storm-beaten moors a matter not to be undertaken merely for a
jaunt’s sake, and Tom had, perforce to put up with the somewhat
meagre fare furnished by Hannah Garside.

Sunday was the one day in the week when there was meat hot and fresh to
dinner-roast beef and Yorkshire pudding with pickled cabbage, and
sometimes rice pudding. One can imagine what a welcome day that weekly
day of rest and feasting was, the day when the village
“knocker-up” forbore to rattle at the door or tap the
chamber window with long stick, calling out belike: “Ger up, Tom,
an’ howd th’ dog while aw wakken thee.” Daily use
would break the morning sleep of the wearied toiler, but, oh! how sweet
to remember with your first yawn that it was Sunday, and that if you
liked you could spend the livelong day in bed, or at least, forego your
morning meal and stretch between the blankets till the steaming
fragrance from the revolving spit saluted your nostrils and sent you
with yearning stomach down the rickety steps to cozen a sop from Hannah,
stooping with reddened face over the spit, basting the revolving joint
as it shed its dripping over the Yorkshire pudding, whilst Lucy, propped
up with many pillows, peeled potatoes, or, on rare and great occasions,
pared the apples for pie or pudding, chatting pleasantly, and soothing
the ruffled temper of her mother.

And it was of Sunday afternoons that began those long talks with Ben
Garside that had no less influence on Tom’s destiny than the
earlier monitions of Mr. Black, or the shrewd worldly axioms of Tom
o’ Fairbanks.

It had been a matter of less surprise than delight for Ben to find that
Tom could not only read, but read without having to spell out or slur
over long words. The joy of Hannah was great thereat, for so was Ben
deprived of any pretext for sneaking out of a Sunday morning to the
nearest public to hear the paper read. Now, she managed to produce each
week a penny, by virtue of which Ben became one in a partnership of six,
whose united contributions purchased a weekly paper. It mattered not at
all that when it reached Ben’s house it was much thumbed and
soiled and beer-stained, for in virtue of receiving it when truly it was
a week old and much the worse for wear, Ben was allowed to retain it in
perpetual proprietorship, and, had made a cover of “rolling
boards” in which the copies were tenderly hoarded up and
treasured.

Now Ben was a great politician, and if pressed upon so close and home a
matter would profess and express himself an Owenite. Add to this that he
very rarely troubled either chapel or church except on Christmas Day,
and that he made a point of slinking out of the house if he chanced to
be in when the vicar of the parish or the shepherd of a dissenting fold
called at the cottage.

“Aw cannot abide parsons,” he confided to Tom one day.
“Though aw wodn’t let yar Lucy yer me say so for
worlds.”

Now Tom, as we know, had been taught to respect the Church, and he was
absolutely against when Ben Garside, a little wiry, keen faced,
middle-aged man, eager of speech and not a little fond of the sound of
his own voice, went on:

“Weel, Tom, aw’m nowise minded to hurt yo’r
feelin’s, an’ if th’ parsons wer owt like that Mister
Black ’at yo set such store by, an’ well yo’ve a reet
to by all accaants, if they tuk after him, aw’d happen ha’
cause to alter mi mind. But “ifs” an’
“buts” ma’ all th’ differ i’ this world,
an’ they simply isn’t.”

“Well, they couldn’t be better,” said Tom, pleased
with this tribute to his  benefactor.

“Noah, but they set up to be. Nah aw’ll nooan go as fur as
some folk ’at aw know, ’at say as parson’s bun’
to be oather a rogue or a fooil.”

“That’s strong, Ben, isn’t it?”

“Aye, lad, it’s nooan exactly what yo’d call meeat for
babes; but aw reckon it meeans summat like this—’at if a
parson believes all he preeaches he’s a fooil, an’ if he
dunnot he’s t’other thing.”

“But surely,” began Tom.

“Aye, aye, aw know what yo’d say—’at they
do

believe. Weel then aw’ll tell yo’ I’m too mich respeck
for their intellec’s to think at them, wi’ all their college
larnin’, can believe one hawf o’ what ther paid to teach.
Nooah, nooah, religion as them mak’ o’ preachers
mis-ca’ their teachin’ is nobbut fit for women an’
childer, an’ to keep th’ ignorant i’ awe. Nah!

aw’m
a
reely
religious man missen, an’ that’s why
aw dunnot hold wi parsons.”

This seemed a somewhat novel reason for discrediting ministers, and Tom
could but look his surprise, which was exactly what Ben wanted.

“Nah! aw’ll gi’ yo’ a hinstance,” he said,
sitting on a low wall—they were out for a walk—and bidding
Tom follow his example. “Aw’ll gi’ yo’ a
hinstance. Yo’n bin to th’ Baptis’ Chapel, wheer
Jabez Tinker goes?”

Tom nodded.

“Nah, then, if yo’ll swallow all th’ parson says at
Aenon yo’ mun believe that afore aw wer’ born aw wer’
predestined awther to heaven or hell—yo’ follow me?”

“Weel, tak’ it ’at aw wer’ predestined for hell,
just for argyment’s sake.”

Tom thought it more than probable that this dreadfully free-spoken man
was at least in danger of the fire, so he conceded the postulate.

“Nah! Do yo’ think it fair o’ God Almighty to send a
poor weak sprawlin’ infant into th’ world, knowin’
full weel ’at after mebbe sixty or seventy yer o’
moilin’ an’ toilin’ an’ scrattin’,
he’d end up wi’ weepin’ an’ wailin’
an’ gnashin’ o’ teeth for all eternity. Aw put it to
yo’ Tom, wod yo’ ha’ done it yersen?”

“But if you were to go to Church, Ben, or even to Chapel,”
began Tom.

“That doesn’t touch th’ point. Th’ point is at
One they sen is Love, suld suffer a bairn to be born i’to this
world, weel knowin’ its awful end.”

“And don’t
you
believe in God?” asked Tom, sinking
his voice almost to a whisper and edging a little further off his
companion.

“Aw do that, lad, but nooan i’ siccan a God as that’n.
But aw’n nooan done wi’ th’ parsons yet—one
thing at a time. Yo’ know aw can read th’ Bible, though
nooan so glib-like as yo’ can, but aw think on what aw read. Nah
chew this tex’ ovver th’ next time yo’ go to th’
church. Yo’ll find it i’th’ General Epistle o’
James:—

“’For if there come unto your assembly a man with a gold
ring, in goodly apparel, and there come in also a poor man in vile
raiment, an’ yo’ hav’ respec’ to him ’at
weareth the gay clothin’, an’ say unto him, sit yo’
here in a guid place; an’ say to th’ poor, stan’
yo’ theer, or sit under my fooitstooil.’ Well, lad,
tha’s bin a Workhus lad thissen, an’ yo’ know weel
enough wheer they towd yo’ to sit.”

Tom did know, and reflected that on the whole he had very much preferred
the dark corners of the gallery to the chief places in the synagogue;
but he had the sense to know his reasons were not of grace.

“Aye, an’ it’s th’ same all through,” went
on the little hand-loom weaver, growing excited and warming to his
topic. “It’s th’ same all through. They’re all
tarred wi’ th’ same brush, or welly (well-nigh) all on
’em. They uphowd th’ rich, an’ they patronize
th’ poor, aw’ most to a man. Why, see yo’, we’n
been feightin’ for th’ Factory Act i’ this district
ivver sin Sir Oastler tuk his coit off an’ put his neck to
th’ collar i’ 1830, afore yo’ were born. How many
o’th’ parsons i’ this district, dun yo’ think,
has sided wi’ th hand agen th’ maisters? Ther’ wer
th’ Reverend Madden, o’ Woodhouse,
he
com’ aat like
a man, but he had to dare to be a Daniel an’ dare to stand alone,
as th’ hymn says. Yo’st take all th’ progress
’at’s bin made i’th’ world sin th’ days
o’ Adam, an’ tak’ it broadly speikin’
yo’ll find ’at th’ parsons ha’ bin agen it.
There’s Stephen’s th’ Wesleyan minister an’
Chartist he cam’ to Huddersfield wheer had he to talk do’st
think? I’th’ Parish Church? Not he, faith. I’th’
Wesleyan Chapel? Not he. I’th Hall 0’ Science, man, i’
Bath Buildings, a infidel shop, th’ bigots ca’ad it.”

“But surely, Ben, you believe in something. You say you believe in
God. You believe in Christ too, don’t you?”

“Aye i’ th’
natural
Christ, but nooan
i’th’ travesty o’ Jesus o’ Nazareth ’at
th’ owd monks twisted an’ fashioned out o’ th’
natural man till his own mother wouldn’t ha’ known him.
Aw

believe in him, but th’ parsons don’t.”

“Nay, nay, Ben,” expostulated Tom, bewildered, shocked, but
interested.

“They dooan’t. They sen they do, an’ they happen think
they do, for it’s wonderful, just fair cappin’, how folk can
cheeat their own sen. Nah! Aw’ll just ax yo’ if yo’
wer to steal th’ vicar’s cooat, or poise his shins for
’im, wheer do’st think tha’d sleep to-neet? I’
th’ towzer,* wouldn’t ta.”

Tom thought this highly likely.

“But that’s nooan what Jesus towd folk. An’ what abaat
heeapin’ up stores o’ riches i’ this world wheer moth
an’ rust doth corrupt an’ thieves break through an’
steal? Weel, if there’s a chap i’ all this valley at’s
keener after brass nor some o’th’ parsons
aw
know
an’ some o’th’ deacons
yo
’ kno, aw dooant want
to have ony truck wi’ ’em for one.”

Tom thought of Ephraim Thorpe, and was mute.

“But that’s nooan th’ warst aw han agen th’
parsons. They’re nobbud men, though they set thersen up for
saints, an’ there’s good an’ bad amang ’em same
as there is amang other folk, aye, an’ allus will be as long as
th’ world goes round, but ther’s just one doctrine ’at
sticks i’ my gizzard waur nor all th’ others.”

Tom thought it must be a particularly lumpy doctrine, if this were so,
for Ben seemed to have a narrow and constricted throat.

“Yo’ heard th’ parson tell folk to be content
wi’ that station i’ life to which it has pleased Providence
to call ’em.”

“Well, it’s no use being anything else that I can
see,” said Tom, getting tired of being talked down and jumped on,
in a manner of speaking.

“A’m ashamed on yo’, Tom. Aw thowt better things on
yo’, after all my talkin’ to yo’. Nah, my motto is, Be
content just as long as yo’ can’t better yo’sen; but
it’s yo’r bounden duty to yo’r sen an’
yo’r fam’ly, when yo’ get one, an’ yo’r
fellow-men, to be as discontented as ever yo’n reason to be,
an’ to try all yo’ know to better yo’sen an’
them. Discontent, lad, ’s th’ basis o’ all progress,
an’ yo’ll nooan be a reformer till yo’r chock full on
it. Look at Moses, nah!”

But Mrs. Garside might be seen at the cottage door beckoning them to
tea, for there was ever a cup of tea on Sunday afternoon with wheat
bread and fresh butter, and lettuce or watercress and radishes and
spring onions, when the season served, and these fresh pulled from
Ben’s little garden patch, or gathered from the brim of the
purling brook.

Tea over, Ben seated himself by the hearth on which was spread the large
warm list rug, like Joseph’s coat of many colours, lists which
Lucy had herself cut and her own mother stitched into the stout canvas
backing. Ben justly regarded this rug as a work of art, and when he
ventured to plant his feet upon it of a Sunday night, did so, as it
were, apologetically.

“But we hannot finished our talk yet, Tom,” he began,
puffing vigorously at his clay pipe to assure that well-gripped glow
that permits of soliloquy or monologue. “Aw wer’
sayin’ when Hannah ca’ed us in.”

“Now, father,” interrupted Lucy, “remember what day it
is, don’t let us have any o’ those horrid politics, they
only put yo’ in a fash an’ a tantrum.”

“Tom ’ll ha’ to bide it,” said Hannah, who was
pleased to see her husband settle down by his own fireside and cross his
legs upon his own hearth, as what wife is not. “Tom ’ll
ha’ to bide it. Yo’r father’s like a eight-day clock.
If Tom’s wun’ ’im up, Tom mun let ’im run
daan.”

“Well, aw wer’ sayin’—at what wer’ aw
sayin’?—guise-’ang-me if aw hannot forgotten wheer aw
left off—Oh! Abaat Moses. Nah, tak’ th’ Book theer.
Reick it daan, Hannah, reick it daan, Tom ’ll happen mash a
ornament or crumple a fal-de-lal” and Ben winked at Tom in token
that this must be taken as a subtle innuendo at Hannah’s
over-tidiness.

But Hannah was impervious to innuendo, and carefully lifted down the
ponderous family Bible, bound in stout leather covers with brass
corners, and containing on the front leaf in faint ink and sprawling
characters the brief records of marriages, births and deaths. The book
had been given to Hannah by her grandmother on her death-bed, and never
did priest of Levi touch the Ark of the Covenant with more reverent hand
than hers as it held the sacred volume.

“Nah, lad, read that abaat th’ ovverseer an th’
Hebrew.”

Tom looked at Lucy for further explication.

“Father allus picks th’ fightin’ bits i’
th’ Scriptures,” she said.—“I like th’
stories o’ Jesus best, myssen—but as long as it’s
i’ th’ Bible it must be good, so best humour him. It’s
wheer Moses felled th’ taskmaster.”

And Tom read:

“‘And it came to pass in those days, when Moses was grown,
that he went out unto his brethren and looked on their burdens: and he
spied an Egyptian smiting an Hebrew, one of his brethren.

‘And he looked this way and that way and when he saw that there
was no man, he slew the Egyptian and hid him in the sand.’”

“Aye, aye, blood’s thicker nor watter, all th’ warld
ovver,” commented Hannah, who sat rocking herself softly before
the dying embers of the fire, her nervous fingers playing with the
corners of her apron, lacking the knitting needles that are to a woman
what a pipe is to a man.

“Eh! That Moses wer’ a man after mi own heart,” burst
in Ben. “Just think on it; theer he wer’, browt up o’
th’ fat o’ th’ land, wi’ th’ best o’
ivverything to eit an’ drink, an’ brass for owt; an’
nowt to do but scrape his leg to th’ powers ’at be an’
he wer’ a made man for life. There isn’t one man in a
thaasand, pampered an’ fed an’ thrussen up as he wer’,
but thrussen up as he thrussen up as he ’ud a left th’ poor
bondslaves to shift for theirsens, yo’ needn’t go aat
o’ Holmfirth to see that e’ry day o’ yo’r life.
Gi’ a workin’ man a bit o’ power an’ a bit more
wage an’ set ’im ovver t’ others an’ he’ll
what-do-you-ca’ it?—‘out-Herod Herod,’”
and Ben paused in evident gratification at this rounding of his period,
but added on reflection, “or mebbe, aw sud say, out-Pharaoh
Pharaoh. But Moses nah” ...

“Yes but, father,” said the gentle voice of Lucy, as she
laid her thin white hand caressingly on her father’s
knee—“Yar Lucy can leead th’ father wi’ a threed
o’ silk,” thought the mother.—“Yes but, father,
Moses had a direct order from God; ‘I will send
thee
unto
Pharaoh, that thou mayest bring forth my people out of
Egypt.’”

“True enough, lass, true enough: but yo’ll obsarve ’at
th’ angel o’ the Lord didn’t appear to Moses till
he’d shown th’ stuff he wer’ made on. Aw tak’ it
God likes to know summat abaat folk afore He sets ’em on to gaffer
a job. Us workin’ folk didn’t go to Oastler i’ that
gret haase o’ his at Fixby, aboon Huddersfilt yonder, till
he’d written to th’ pappers an’ spokken aat like a man
abaat th’ ill-usage o’th’ little childer. It’s a
long day sin’ but we’st win yet, as sure as God’s
i’ heaven, for He has surely heard the cry of the little uns,
an’ He has seen the oppression wherewith the Egyptians oppress
them.”

“But, Ben,” said Tom, “we aren’t living in
Egypt, an’ Queen Victoria isn’t Pharaoh, and we aren’t
bond slaves.”

“Oh! th’ warst kind o’ slave’s him,”
retorted Ben, “as doesn’t know he is a slave. Look at Lucy
theer, her ’at sud ha’ bin, aye an’ wod ha’
bin’, as strong as a young colt, on’ what is ’oo nah,
a lily brokken on its stalk—mi poor lass, mi poor
lass”—and the father’s voice broke and the
mother’s face was turned aside.

“Dunno greet, father I’m very happy, for aw nivver knew till
aw wer bed-ridden how sweet life can be wheer love is.”

“Wheer’s yo’r een, Tom? “went on Ben very
fiercely, to hide his softer feelings, “wheer’s thi
e’en? aw say. Isn’t Sam Buckley th’ spinner at
Wilberlee yet?”

Tom nodded.

“Weel, aw know Sam. ’As to ivver seen him peilin’
an’ cuffin’ th’ young ’uns abaat th’ yed,
wi’ them big fists o’ his’n, little, wee, puny,
ramshackle things o’ scorn an’ eight yer owd, all skin
an’ bone, so to speak, an’ precious little bone at that.
Hasn’t ta seen ’im strappin’ ’em an’
layin’ abaat ’im reet an’ left wi’ a roller as
thick ay yo’r shackle, an’ crack’d ’em abaat
t’ poll till th’ blood’s come, when he’s getten
’is skin full o’ four-ale? Things ha’ altered
strangely if tha hasn’t, or else tha’rt stone-blind and past
prayin’ for.”

Now Tom had seen this and felt it too; but he had supposed it was all
part of the day’s work. He saw others put up with it, and he had
put up with it—it might, for aught he knew, be involved in that
all-controlling indenture of apprenticeship.

“Aye, it’s true enough,” he said, “I’ve
wondered about it, Ben. Isn’t ther’ a law against it?
Mr. Black says there’s one and the same law for the rich and
the poor.”

“Then Mr. Black’s nooan as knowin’ as aw
tak’ ’im to be. Law! Law fiddlesticks! Tak’ an’
overseer afore th’ magistrates—most on ’em
manufacturers theirsen—for beeatin’ a child, nivver name a
’prentice—why, yo’ might as weel fall out wi’
owd Harry an’ go to hell for justice.—But it’s time yo
wor i’ bed, lad, if tha meeans to gooa to-neet, an’ nivver
tha forget abaat Moses. Gooid neet to yo’.”

Now it so befell that on the afternoon of the very next day it was
Tom’s ill-fortune to become embroiled with that same Sam Buckley.
The foreman spinner was a big, burly fellow, broad-shouldered and vast
of paunch. He had the fishy eye and mottled face of the heavy drinker
and a short and uncertain temper; not, perhaps an ill-meaning man, but
quick and heavy with his shoulder-of-mutton hands. It chanced that
Mr. Tinker had been obliged to go to Huddersfield that day and was
not expected at the mill till late in the afternoon. As the day
lengthened, the sky had become overcast, the air sultry with the
unseasonable warmth and closeness that tells of a brooding storm or the
artillery of the heavens. The upper room of the mill, where the
billy-pieceners were mostly engaged, was a long, low chamber. Its walls
had once been whitewashed but were now a dull, dirty colour from mingled
grease and fluff and dust. The floors were cased with grease. There was
little ventilation, except the air that entered when the door opened or
through an odd broken Window; pane or so. The inner air was hot to
sultriness, laden with the breath of a score or so of workers and with
the rancid smell of machine oil. The spinner had gone to his dinner, and
it was seldom he missed “calling” on his way back to the
mill. It was a toss-up whether he would return in a good or a bad
temper. If in a good one he would probably spend a half-hour or so in
the weaving-shed among the grown-up girls who worked there, making jests
and taking the coarse liberties they dared not resent if they would keep
their looms. If in a bad temper he would make for the
“billy-hoil,” where it would be safe to vent it. Now
this afternoon he was in a particularly bad temper.—Monday
is often given up to bad temper. The overeating of Sunday conduces to
it, the fact that Monday is, in the parts of which I write, as sacred to
the wash-tub as Sunday is to the chapel, does not soothe it. The moment
Sam shoved open the door, with thunder on his brow and lightning in his
eye, the quick-witted hands, sharp beyond their tender years, sniffed
the threatening storm, and bent with intent looks and nimble fingers
over their work. But little “Billy-come-a-lakin” had
succumbed to the drowsy influences of the time and place. Sat upon the
floor, his little legs outstretched, his back against the greasy wall,
his dinner can by his side, Billy slept. He had just time to start from
his slumber and his dreams when Sam pounced upon him and dragged him to
the central gangway of the long chamber, the lad shrinking within
himself, cowering and whimpering, and but half awake.

“So aw’ve caught o’, have aw, yo’ young gallows
bird? This is th’ way yo’ rob yo’r mester, as soon as
a man’s back’s turned.”

“Please sir aw couldn’t help it; summat cam’ ovver me,
an’ mi legs seemed to ha’ nooa feel in ’em, an’
oh! aw wer so tired. Don’ beeat me, Sam, it’ll mak mi mother
greet so, if ’oo sees th’ marks on me when aw doff missen
to-neet.”

“Aw’ll mark yo’ nivver fear, aye an’ gi’
yo’ summat ’at ’ll keep yo wakken, too, yo’ idle
good-for-nowt,” and Sam swung in with a piece of belting thicker
and broader than a navvy’s belt.

Now it was at just this moment that Tom took the door. He had come from
the dyehouse to match a cop.

“Hold,” he cried, and strode quickly up the room, “you
won’t beat that child, Sam, wi’ that strap. Drop it, I
say.”

“An’ who’ll stop me?” roared Sam.

“I will.”

“Then tak’ that for thi’ impudence yo’
d——d, meddlin’ workhouse bastard,” and Sam
brought the stinging leather right across Tom’s flashing cheek.

Then, quick as lightning, sped a downright blow, straight from the
shoulder true between the eyes, and Sam fell like a stricken ox,
ignominious, into a skep of cops. There was the quick catching of breath
from a score of throats as two score eyes watched the bully’s
fall, and Tom, as he looked about him, felt prouder and gladder than all
his life before.

“Eh! but aw’st catch it for this,” whispered
Billy-come-a-lakin. “Aw’ll run for it whilst aw’ve
th’ chance,” and he fled the place, and his billy knew him
no more that week.

“Yo’n nooan heerd th’ last o’ this,” said
Buckley, as he slowly picked himself up, dazed and scowling.
“Aw’ll mak’ yo’ pay for this day’s wark,
if aw swing for it, mind yo’r piecenin’, yo’ young
limbs o’ Satan, an’ quit yo’r gapin’,” and
the irate spinner stalked out of the “scribbling boil.”

Tom did the errand on which he had been sent by the dyer and made his
way down the outer steps to return to his own work. He had to cross the
mill-yard. Mr. Tinker had just ridden in at the gate and now was
bending his head from the saddle to hearken to the tale Sam was pouring
into his ear. Tom saw his master’s brow contract.

“Send him to me,” Tom heard, “I’ll deal with
him. It’s rank mutiny.”

Tom stepped forward and stood by the horse’s side.

“I’m here, sir,” he said quickly, tho’ he could
hear the beating of his own heart.

The riding-whip was raised with quick and angry menace. Tom never
flinched, he only dug his nails into his palms to stay his tingling
nerves. But the blow fell not.

“
Where
do you say you come from?”

“Diggle, sir,” and Tom’s quiet grey eye looked his
master in the face. “You hired me yourself at the
Workhouse.”

Jabez Tinker peered, in the falling autumn light, into the
lad’s pale set face and scanned it searchingly.

“How came that weal across your cheek?”

“Sam can tell you best,” was the quiet reply.

“You said nothing of this Buckley,” said the master.
“Mind when you come to me again, you don’t come with half a
tale. Go your ways, Pinder, but let me have no more of this broiling or
you’ll soon regret it.”

And Jabez Tinker dismounted, threw the reins to Buckley, who stood
surlily by, waiting the upshot of his complaint, and walked without
another word to the office. But he had sighed as he watched Tom’s
upright, sinewy figure cross the mill yard, and a lingering, longing
look followed the unwitting ’prentice.

CHAPTER VII.

TIME passed, as it will pass even in Holmfirth. Tom is still an
apprentice, but in no fear of stick or strap from Sam Buckley, or any
other Sam. The first Factory Act has become law, Ben Garside had a
grievance the less, though when the night drew long it was still delight
fighting his battles o’er again, to tell the oft-told tale of that
famous march to York, when from Huddersfield, and all the parts
contiguous, men, women, and little children made their weary way to
York, to cry aloud that the iron-heel of capital might not crush out the
infant life of the nation’s self. Ben’s limbs are stiffer by
many a year since that historic tramp, but he straightens them and erect
with flashing eye, as he dwells upon the heroic patience, the grim
resolve of those who trod the long, long miles, and tells how weary men
stayed with their arms the feeble, halting steps of bent and grey-headed
sires, and worn and foot-sore women carried in their arms drooping
children, not their own; how the rain fell in torrents, and the wind
beat the cold showers in upon their drenched garments and many stole
behind the hawthorn hedges, and the gray low stone walls, and slept the
sleep of an exhaustion that was well nigh unto death; of how, as they
came by some kindly waggoner, carting sacks of corn, or bales of wool,
or barrels of good ale, the women and the children were taken up and
given a sore-needed lift; how, as they passed through village and
hamlet, hard-featured men and homely women came running into the road,
and pressed upon them meat and drink, and wished them God-speed, and a
safe return; of how when they reached the Castle yard in York itself,
the clogs of many were clotted with the blood of their bruised and
lacerated feet, and last, of how when their hearts were sick with hope
deferred, the glad hour of triumph came, and the groans of the workers
pierced the ears of Parliament, and the joy-bells rang to herald in the
great Charter of the Toiler’s freedom.

But Tom had that to protect him which was better fashioned than any
statute ever made, incomprehensible by amplitude of words. Now, in his
nineteenth year, he is nearing the six feet of manhood, and his frame is
well knit and strong. Simple fare has agreed with him, anyway, simple,
fare and simple, cleanly ways. He is the delight of Hannah
Garside’s eyes, and of eyes, too, younger and brighter than hers,
though the winsome mill-hands of the valley declare that Tom Pinder
is as dateless as a stone. “It’s time wasted on him,”
they say, “he thinks o’ nowt but his books an’ his
wark, an’ maybe o’ that poor ill-shaped Lucy Garsed.”

It is Saturday afternoon, and Hannah’s cottage is all “red
up,” and Hannah herself is washed and dressed and ready to don
herself, and sally forth a-shopping, when the clacking of Ben’s
loom shall cease in the upper chamber. Lucy still tenants the settle
under the window, but it is a stronger, bonnier Lucy than the wan frail
Lucy of former days. Deformed she will always be, but some measure of
bodily strength has been vouchsafed to her, and the bobbin-wheel by her
side, presently to be put by, and a basket of bulky cops, and another of
plenished bobbins tell that Lucy is no longer an unwilling divine in
that busy hive, but can, with nimble fingers and pliant wrist, do the
winding once her mother’s care.

“Now stand you there, Beauty, and stir a foot if you dare,”
a voice is heard outside, a pleasant girlish voice; and without knock or
ceremony the latch is lifted and a merry face, all smiles and sunshine,
roses and dimples, peers in at the half-opened door.

“May I come in, and
do
you mind my fastening Beauty to the
door-hasp, he is so restive, and always in a hurry to rush off
home,” and without waiting for permission the speaker trips into
the room and kisses Lucy on both cheeks, and gives Mrs. Garside a hearty
hug.

“Why, if it isn’t Miss Dorothy!” exclaimed the good
old dame. “My word, how yo’ dun grow, miss, to be sure.
Deary me, an’ it only seems t’ other day aw held yo’
i’ mi arms an’ nussed yo’ o’ mi lap, an’
yo’ a wee-bit babbie kickin’ an’ croonin’
an’ little dreeamin’ o’ what yo’d lost upstairs,
an’ yo’r father awmost off his head wi’
grief—deary, deary, how time dun fly, to be sure. But sit
yo’ daan, nah do.”

How beautiful, how utterly bewitching and distracting a picture was
Dorothy Tinker my art would utterly fail to tell. Image to yourself a
lissom maiden of sweet seventeen, just of that happy medium height that
reaches to a tall man’s heart, and of that rounded proportioning
of form, with outline of graceful curve that company with health and
exercise; dream of an oval face in which the blush rose dwells, a
rounded dimpled chin, violet eyes dancing with mirth, carnation lips and
ivory teeth, and the small head crowned with wealth of auburn hair,
rippling in waves like a dimpling streamlet;—dream of all this,
and still ’tis but a dream, and only eye and ear could tell you
how sweet and dainty a maid was Dorothy. Men drew their breath sharp
when first they looked on her, and young men ravished and betook
themselves to poetry and woeful sighs, and wandering far and lone by
moonlit ways.

“We don’t see much of you now-a-days, Miss Dorothy,”
said Lucy, smiling fondly at her visitor.

“An what mak’ o’ a gown do yo’ ca’
that?” said the mother.

“Oh! this, Mistress Hannah Garside, wife of Benjamin of that ilk,
is my riding-habit and to be respected accordingly. It is, I believe,
the only one in Holmfirth. Neat, isn’t it?”

“Yo’ look like a lad i’ petticoits. Is it quite decent
for a wench?” asked Mrs. Garside, somewhat anxiously.

“Decent! why, it’s the very pink of the latest fashion: the
only wear, in fact, though I
think
I would rather be without the skirt
on a windy day.
Then
there’d be an uplifting of hands and a
searching of hearts, if you like.”

Mrs. Garside only looked half-satisfied.

“Yo’r th’ same, an’ yet not th’
same,” she said.

“Not the same! Hannah, why I should hope not indeed, or my good
uncle’s money would be sadly wasted, and you know that wilful
waste makes woeful want. I know or should know, for Aunt Tinker dins it
in my ear every time I buy a new ribbon or a pair of gloves. The same,
indeed! Why do you know, Hannah, I’m being
finished
,” and
Dorothy dropped her voice as though she spoke a word of doom.

“Finished?” queried Lucy, “finished?”

“Aye finished, in very sooth. Fashioned, moulded, formed taught
carriage and deportment, and several other extras at Miss Holmes’s
highly fashionable, strictly select academy for young ladies in
Huddersfield, and thither and thence I ride on Beauty every day of the
blessed week bar Sundays and missin’s—but that’s an
improper word and not to be spoken in genteel society.”

“A ’cademy! lor, think o’ that now,” said Hannah
much impressed “an’ what do they larn yo’ now, furrin
languages I’ll be bun.”

“Oh dear, yes! I can already relieve my feelings to my aunt in
French that she cannot understand, and which I dare say, would puzzle
Mons. Feugley, our French master, and I know some German words that
sound so like swearing that Aunt Tinker gasps and grows pale when I use
them, and I can tinkle on the piano and sing indifferently well for a
screechy voice.”

“That’s nooan Gospel, my word,” put in Hannah,
stoutly, and Lucy held up a reproving finger.

“And oh! tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of
Ascalon.”

“More furrin’ parts” groaned Hannah.

“I can, sh! speak low my voice, bend your heads and lend your
ears.—I can dance!”

“Dance!” gasped Hannah.

“Yes,
vraiment
, which is French or German, I forget which, for
of a verity and in good sooth—but they don’t know at home.
It’s an extra extra, dancing is and Aunt Martha wouldn’t
hear of it, and Uncle declared it was a vanity. But I learn all the
same.”

“How do you manage it?” asked Lucy, with an admiring,
caressing but wistful look at the beaming face.

“Why the other girls teach me, silly, in the bedroom. We dance in
our nightdresses, when
Fraulein
has put out the gas. But it
isn’t as nice, they say, as dancing with Professor Blanc,
de
Paris, vous savez
.”

“Oh, Dorothy, how can you say such things!” and Lucy looked
really shocked.

“But you, Lucy, you are altered too. Ah! How my tongue runs on.
But there, it is such a relief to let it run just once in a way, for at
school, it’s ‘Miss Tinker, give silence, if you
please,’ and ‘Miss Tinker, less noise.’ and
‘Miss Tinker, cease laughing,’ till I’m Miss Tinkered
to death, and you know what it is at home. I vow if it weren’t for
old Betty and Irish Peggy, I’d soon be competent to conduct a
school for the deaf and dumb. Yes, Lucy, you are altered too;
you’re stouter and rosier, altogether happier looking,
what’s come over the child, Hannah!”

“Ah! that’s all Tom’s doing,” said Hannah,
“and God’s, mother dear,” softly added Lucy.

“Tom?” queried Dorothy, “who in the name of goodness
is Tom?”

“Why, Tom,—oh, Tom is just Tom,” said Lucy, “you
can’t have forgotten him, Miss Dorothy, you must remember to have
seen him.”

“Not a remembrance!” exclaimed Dorothy emphatically;
“but it’s an ugly name enough. Tom what? or maybe it’s
the cat.”

“Ah! now aw see you’re only playing, miss,” said
Hannah. “Noah, sen yo’? why, wheerivver han’
yo’r e’en bin not to see yar Tom, Tom Pinder, yo’
know—he’s warked for yo’r uncle these how mony years
is’t, Lucy, lemme see, aye these five year an’ more,
an’ if yo’ hannot seen him I’se warrant yo’re
th’ only wench i’ Holmfirth ’at ha not.

“But what’s this Admirable Crichton to do with Lucy’s
better looks?”

“Why, ivverything, if truth be spokken, as ever it shall be
i’ this haase whiles Hannah Garsed has a tongue to speik.
Yo’ mind what a pale peaky helpless critter ’oo wor five yer
back, none fit to do a hand-stir for hersen. That wer’ after
’oo’d worked ’at yor’ uncle’s for a
spell—but that’s nother here nor theer. An’ then, who
but yo’r own sen up an’ spak’ to yo’r uncle
’at aw could, mebbe do wi’ a lodger, an’ didn’t
he come—yo’r uncle, aw meean—an’ ’gree
wi’ me to tak’ Tom an’ do for ’im, an’
he—yo’r uncle aw meean—wer’ to pay me
hauf-a-craan a week for him, at first, an’ rise to four
shillin’ afore Tom wer’ out o’ his writin’s,
which awm sure it’s little enough when th’ weshin’s
considered, an’ ’im that hearty yo’d think sometimes
he’d eit a man off his horse, not but what he’s welcome to
all he can howd an’ more till it, for aw couldn’t think more
on ’im nor do more for ’im, if he wer’ my own lad,
which aw sometimes awmost think he is, an’ yar Ben that set up
wi’ ’im, an’ ’im so clivver at his books
’at it’s as gooid as a sermon an’ better nor some to
yer th’ father an’ ’im a argeyfyin’ an’ a
argeyfyin’ till yo’d think they’d nivver ha’
done.”

“But what about Lucy?”

“Weel, weren’t aw tellin’ yo’? Weel, at first
when he come he wer’ a bit shy, like, o’ Lucy, an’ her
o’ ’im; bud one day, a Sunday afternooin it wer, an’
th’ sun shinin’, an’ th’ sky as blue as
weshin’-powder, Tom says it wer’ a shame o’ Lucy to be
cooped up i’ th’ haase an’ ne’er taste th’
taste o’ fresh air; an’ he just up wi’ her in his
arms, same as yo’d lift a babby, an’ carried her aat into
garden, an’ th’ hedge wer’ all thick wi’
May-blossom, both white and red, an’ he gate a lot, an’ made
a posy for her; an’ after that it wer’ a regular
outin’ for her as long as th’ weather held, an’ after
he’d come fro’ th’ mill, fit to drop, so to speik, he
wer’ nivver too tired to gi’ Lucy her outin’. And then
it wer’ Tom ’at put into yar Ben’s yed to ha’ a
cheer on wheels, an’ he poo’d it hissen up an’ daan
th’ loin, though lads and lasses, shameless hussies some on
’em, made nowt bud fun on ’im an’ ca’d him
dree-nurse. Bud he sooin garr’d th’ lasses howd their
tongues an’ keep aat o’ th’ loin—trust Tom for
that—an’ when th’ lads went th’ lasses followed,
trust
them
for that.”

“And how did he make them?” asked Dorothy, laughing.

“Oh! weel, he ca’s it moral suasion; but it looked uncommon
like feightin th’ time aw’ see’d it. Ben says it
wer’ effectual callin’.”

“H’m, I don’t think I shall like this same Master Tom
of yours. He’s a paragon, and I don’t think paragons and I
quite hit it.”

“Aw dooan’t know what yo’ meean bi a Paragon, miss,
but there’s a Paragon what’s a public-haase i’
Westgate i’ Huddersfielt, an’ yo’ nivver wer’
further off yo’r horse, Miss Dorothy, though aw mak’ bold to
say so. Why, yar Tom nivver touches a drop stronger nor teea, an’s
awmost ’verted yar Ben, leastwise he tak’s nowt no stronger
nor whom-brew’d an’
aw
see that’ll nooan hurt
’im.”

“Aye, aye, I see, a paragon, a saint. Oh! I can picture him. Tall,
you say? Yes, tall and thin and hollow-chested, stooping, pale, with
long black hair as straight as a yard of pump-water; and he turns his
eyes up and his toes in, and groans dismally, and his clothes
don’t fit him, and he wears black cotton gloves on Sundays, an
inch too long in the fingers, and he goes to temperance meetings and
prayer meetings, and regularly to chapel twice on Sundays, and attends
experience meetings and turns his soul inside out for the world—of
Aenon Chapel—to gaze at. Oh! I think I see him now, that quite too
precious Tom!”

“Weel, so yo’ may, Miss Dorothy,” said Hannah with a
quiet smile. “He’s had his bath upstairs—nivver such a
one there wer’ sin Adam for weshin’ hissen all ovver once a
week whether he wants it or not—an’ nah, aw’ll be bun
he’s mankin’ i’ th’ garden.”

And Hannah went into the back kitchen or scullery at the back of the
“house” and, still smiling, beckoned to Dorothy. “Aye,
he’s theer, sure enough.”

And this is what Dorothy saw: a young Hercules, stripped, save his vest,
to the belted waist, his heels together, his toes out-turned, his knees
braced, his breast expanded, his chin in air, and in his outstretched
brawny arms whirled about his head a mighty pair of
clubs—“it’s a windmill,” whispered
Dorothy—“Oh! but he’s a proper man.”

“As ever yo’d see in a day’s walk,” chuckled
Hannah,—“more o’ a Samson nor a saint, accordin’
to my readin’ o’ th’ Scriptur’s,—but
ther’s neer a Dalilah o’ ’em all ’ll ha’
to cut Tom’s hair for ’im, trust owd Hannah for that.”

“H’m, that’s as may be,” said Dorothy in the
maturity of wisdom, finished and formed at a select academy, and,
turning to take her leave of Lucy.

“I must run away now, dear Lucy; ’t will never do to let
your handsome lover catch me in this fright of a gown. I’ll come
again some day when you’re likely to be by yourself. And, Lucy,
dear, I daresay he isn’t at all a paragon. There, now, and
don’t blush any more, or you’ll be struck so.”

Now although from this time forth Dorothy Tinker made more than one
occasion to visit her sick friend, popping in at uncertain times of the
day, as Mrs. Garside said, “promis’us-like” it was not
till nigh up upon Christmas time, that she ever had speech with Tom. And
this is how that came to pass. One day, a week or so before Yule-tide,
when the snow lay heavy upon all the hills, no other than Workhouse Jack
presented himself in Wilberlee mill yard, looking very like a
middle-aged, beardless, lean and hungry image of Father Christmas. He
was met in the yard by Sam Buckley.

“We don’t want no hands: we’re puttin’ no fresh
’uns on this side Easter, so off yo’ pack abaat yo’r
business.”

“Be yo’ Mr. Tinker, sir?” said Jack.

“Nooah,” answered Sam, somewhat mollified by the implied
compliment; “nooah, what do you want?”

“Isn’t this th’ spot at Tom Pinder works
at?” asked Jack.

“Aye, if yo’ ca’ it workin’; some folk ’ud
ca’ it lakin’. What does ta want to kno’ for? no good
awm sure.”

“Well, aw’n getten a letter for him.”

“A letter! Who’s it fro’?”

“Aw reckon th’ letter tell that for itsen.”

“Well, hand it here, aw’ll see he gets it.”

“It’s varry partickler, yo’ see,” demurred Jack.
“It’s fro’ a woman, an’ oo’ telled me at
aw wor to ’liver it to nob’dy but Tom hissen, an’
’oo’s a woman ’at generally has her own way i’
our parts.”

“Well, yo’ can oather gi’ it to me or wait outside
th’ gate till he comes aat. Yo’ll nooan see Pinder afore
th’ mills lose.”

“Tha’rt a liar; aw see ’im nah. Hey Tom lad, aw want
thee!” and Jack adroitly dodged past the protesting slubber and
ran up to Tom. Buckley deemed discretion the better part of valour and
took himself off.

“Sithee, Tom,” almost gasped Jack in his eagerness, and
casting a triumphant glance at the discomfited obstructionist,
“sithee, there’s a letter for thee. It’s fro Betty
Schofield at th’ Wakey, an’ tha’s to go back wi me.
’Oo’d ha’ put that i’t’ letter, aw wer to
tell thee, but ’oo’d no more ink, an’ th’ pen
gate cross-legged.”

And Tom read as follows:

“Deer Tom,

This is to let yew ’no at Mr. Black’s bin took vary
bad, an’s frettin’ becos yo’ dont com’ to see
’im. He’s i’ bed; wi’ a stroke i’th reight
side, hopin’ you’re well which it leaves me, so no more at
present from

Yours trewly,

BETTY SCHOFIELD.”

Tom’s heart smote him. He was conscious that latterly he had been
remiss in his visits to his friends beyond the hill. His new life was
growing on him, and new interests filling his mind.

“Is it serious, do you know, Jack?” he asked.

“Moll ’o Stute’s says another do ’ll finish him.
He’s had two doctors till ’im, an’ Moll says his
constitooshun’ whativver ’oo meeans bi that, couldn’t
ha’ stooid one, ne’er name two. But yo’ll come, Tom,
an’ Betty says yo’ll do him more gooid nor physic.”

It would have been nothing out of the common for a hand to
“jack” his work without saying “by your leave,”
or “with your leave,” but that was not Tom’s way. He
sought Mr. Tinker in the dingy little office, but he was not
there,—he might be in the house, someone suggested; and Tom made
for the house, a mere stride, not a stone-throw from the mill-gate. Jack
trotted by his side like a faithful dog.

“Weel, I declare, if there beeant big Tom Pinder comin’
up th’ walk, miss,” exclaimed Betty, the cook, wiping her
hands on her coarse apron, “an’ as shallockin’ a
lookin’ felley wi ’im as ivver yo’ clapped een
on,” and a knock at the kitchen door coincided with her wondering
“what’s to do naah!”

Now Dorothy was in the very thick of that daintiest of all household
doings the making of pastry for the Christmas fare. She was garbed in a
pretty print dress, and a white bib and apron, spotlessly clean, became
her vastly. Her small and shapely hands were cunningly turning the
well-greased tins, and shaping the dough within and above a noble array
of large and portly tins crammed with the makings of pork-pies and
jimping the edges of lesser tins designed for the mince-meat that, not
innocent of the flavour of brandy, scented the warm kitchen air. The
sleeves of her dress were rolled up and gave play to as white and
rounded an arm, with a dainty dimple at the elbow, as ever delighted the
eyes of man. Her cheek was flushed either with the heat of the roaring
fire or confusion at being so discovered by eyes whose sudden glance,
quick withdrawn, betrayed a startled admiration more speakingly than
speech.

“I beg your pardon, Miss, but is Mr. Tinker at home? He
isn’t in the office, nor about the mill,” said Tom, whilst
Jack alternate gaped and sniffed.

“Can’t yo’ shut th’ door after yo’,
Tom Pinder,” exclaimed Betty, “or do yo’ think
yo’re big enough to do for a door yersen?”

“Uncle’s not at home; he’s gone to Huddersfield, I
think,” said Dorothy, hastily unrolling her sleeves, and hiding
the glistening ivory of her arms.

“Mrs. Tinker, perhaps?” hazarded Tom.

“And aunt’s in bed, as bad as can be with a sick head-ache.
A pretty Christmas
we
are likely to have; but is it any message you
can leave?” for Tom had turned to go, “you look in
trouble.”

“Jack here has brought me a message, Miss. It’s from an old
friend, perhaps from the oldest, and it concerns the best friend I have
in the world. My more than guardian Mr. Black, the schoolmaster at
Diggle, is sick, it is feared unto death, and Jack here has won over
th’ top through th’ snow to fetch me to him.”

“An’ dun yo’ meean to say, Tom Pinder,”
broke in Betty, “’at this yer drowned rat of a man ’at
stann’s theer gaupin’ as if he wer mooin-struck an’
drippin’ all ovver my cleean floor like a leeakin’
piggin’ ’s come all th’ way fro’ Diggle i’
this weather ’at’s nooan fit for a dog to be aat in.”

“Aye, Betty,” said Tom,—he was a prime favourite with
Betty of old, and he knew it,—“not so warm as your kitchen,
but it was urgent you see, and Jack’s an old friend too,
aren’t you, Jack?”

But Jack’s eye and Jack’s thoughts were fixed upon something
more to a hungry man’s purpose than mere matters of
friendship—he had caught the whiff from the oven door—it was
the scent of pork pie piping hot.

Dorothy caught the glance that waywards.

“Why how thoughtless I am. Now, Jack, I’m sure, as
it’s Christmas time”—needless
qualification—“you can eat some Christmas fare. And
they’re the very first pies I’ve ever made, and I
do
hope
they’ll be nice. Peggy, why don’t you set some
plates?”

“And mind yo’ hot ’em afore th’ fire. Its simply
beyond all belief how aw’ve to tell that girl to put hot plates
wi’ hot meeat, an’ cowd wi’ cowd, i’steead
o’ cowd wi’ hot an’ hot wi’ cowd.”

“And you Tom,”—and then with a hesitation as though in
doubt, “I mean, Mr. Pinder, you will take something before
you cross those terrible hills?”

If Dorothy had there and then asked Tom to sit down and make a
comforting meal of dynamite washed down with prussic acid it is odds
that he would have set to bowl and platter with a cheerful heart; but to
put knife and fork into a rich brown crust that crunched beneath the
blade and to see the hot jelly gush out over the plate and to catch the
fragrance of the red and brown pork with judicious blending of lean and
fat cut into squares like dice, and to see all this flanked by a crested
jug of foaming beer.—Oh! Don’t talk to me of nectar and
ambrosia.

“Yo’r health, miss,” said Jack, politely and as
distinctly as he could with his mouth full, “and yo’rs, too,
aw’m sure”—this to Betty, whose ample form he surveyed
with lingering approval “and a merry Chersmas when it
comes.”

But Tom, even as he plied his knife and fork heard ringing in his ears
the words that some instinct or some dim apprehension or prompting of
native delicacy had compelled from Dorothy’s
lips.—“Mister Pinder”. Tom had never been called
Mister Pinder before in all his life “Gentleman Tom” and
“Dandy Tom” he heard occasionally from the lasses of the
mill, smarting from that worst of feminine ailments—
injuria
formal spietal
,—the quiet unconsciousness of or indifference to
advances none too coy. But “Mr. Tom”—’t was
the baptism into a new life, the stirring of a new manhood, his
accolade; it fell on his senses as falls the sovereign’s sword on
shoulder of kneeling knight. It was a new and nobler Tom that turned his
face that afternoon over the hills to Diggle.

“Go to see your sick friend?” Dorothy had cried. “Why,
of course you’ll go. I’m sure uncle would say so, and anyway
if he faults anyone, why he must fault me.”

“An’ aw hope his first mince-pie may choke him if he
does,” wished Betty, but kept her wishes to herself.

Tom was shocked at the change a few weeks had made in the old
schoolmaster Mr. Black had, truly, been failing ever since the
sudden and unexpected death of the shrill Priscilla some twelve months
before. His devoted if exacting sister had gone to that land where there
is neither dusting nor teaching, and where she must have received a
shaking of cherished convictions if she found any schoolboys. Since then
her brother had lived alone, cooking and generally doing for himself,
save that one of the boys scrubbed the schoolroom floor and scrubbed the
desks, in consideration of being put on the school free-list. More and
more as the days wore on the schoolmaster had seemed to shrink within
himself, and find a placid joy in the not wholly unpleasing melancholy
of reflection and regret. Perhaps Priscilla’s faithful girding had
been to him like a tonic and an irritant, and saved him from a natural
tendency to the introspective absorption of a lonely life. Gradually the
nightly symposia at the
Hanging Gate
were abandoned, much to the
wrath of good Mistress Schofield, who roundly declared that “if
th’ Schooilmaster had nobbut gone theer o’ neets,
takin’ th’ best chair, an’ sittin’
i’th’ warmest corner, just to be out o’ reick o’
his sister’s tongue, she for one fun’ his room as gooid as
his company.” Perhaps one reason for Mr. Black’s
inconstancy might be found in the fact that so long as Priscilla lived,
he knew there was a shield and buckler between him and the engines and
weapons of attack the buxom widow knew so well how to employ. Priscilla
gone, he felt himself as a city girt round and besieged, but helpless
and defenceless, its strong tower razed to the ground. Reason be what it
might the angle nook of the sanded kitchen knew him no more and the
friendly circle had a very sensible gap. And ere long the news, the all
but incredible news, spread through t’ village, and up the valley,
and about the steep hill-sides, that “owd Black wer’
givin’ up teeachin’, and what to do wi’ th’ lads
and lasses ’at wer’ allus under yo’r feet, or up to
some mak’ o’ devilment till they we’ owd enough to go
to th’ mill, ’ud pass a weary woman’s wits to
tell.”

Tom felt as he neared the school a strangely depressing air of solitude
and desertion. The playground no more resounded to the eager cries of
boys revelling in a brief freedom, nor from the open windows came the
murmuring buzz of unwilling voices droning in unison the tables of
multiplication. The schoolmaster he found in his little bedroom, not in
bed, indeed, but looking far fitter for bed than up. To Tom’s
surprise, he found Moll o’ Stuarts in attendance on the sick man.
She had, it transpired, carried the citadel of the sick-room by assault
and taken possession with characteristic coolness and determination, and
there she had announced her resolve to abide till the schoolmaster
should be either better or worse. As for her more legitimate profession
she declared:

“They mun get someb’dy else. Onyb’dy wer’ gooid
enough to bring a fooil into th’ world, but it wer’ worth
while tryin’ to keep a wise man in it. Th’ best of
men’s poor feckless things when i’th’ best o’
health, but if they nobbut cut their little finger, they’re as
useless as babes unborn, an’ it were well there wer somebody to
look after him, sin’ those ’at had most reight to kept away
for weeks at a time, an’ ne’er cam’ near till they
wer’ sent for.” And with this Parthian shaft, Molly at a
sign from the invalid, withdrew, to give Jack, who had stayed below,
gazing open-mouthed at the maps and globes, the benefit of her pent
storm of wrath.

“I’m glad you’ve come, Tom. I knew you would, but
hesitated to send for you. I know you have little time away from work,
and youth companies best with youth when work is laid aside.”

“Indeed, Mr. Black, I had no notion you were so ill or
nothing could or should have kept me away. I would have come to help and
nurse you if I had had to break my indentures and go before the
magistrates for it.”

“I know it, lad, I know it; and it was pleasant to think there was
one not so many miles away who had a warm place in his heart for the old
man. You have been to me, Tom, as a son since first I held you in my
arms, and I have even thanked God that to my childless life He sent the
blessing of one I could cherish and foster as my own.”

Tom could find no words. He pressed the thin and shrunken hand that
rested, oh! so feebly, on the arm of the pillowed chair.

“And now, lad, that you are here, you must let me say my say, for
my strength is waning fast and a voice within tells me my days remain
but few. Nay, lad, never greet my course is run, my work is done, and
the vespers ring for eventide. I do not dread its shadows, lad, for a
hand will hold mine when I tread the unknown way. Take this key, unlock
that topmost drawer and bring me the case you will find there.”

Tom silently, treading softly did the master’s bidding.

Mr. Black raised the lid of the little casket and thence a small
bundle of letters, their ink now faded to a pale yellow. They were tied
together with a thin blue ribbon. Mr. Black touched them lovingly
and sunk into a reverie from which Tom made no stir to rouse him. The
vacant eyes of the invalid seemed to be looking through and beyond the
stalwart youth or to be intent on the unforgotten scenes of a buried
past.

Then with a wan smile and a gentle sigh the faint voice said:

“If I die, Tom, I trust you to place these with me.” Then,
like a maiden confessing her heart’s secret:

“Ah! Tom, even your old dominie was young once—but there was
Priscilla, you know.”

And what tragedy of a sacrificed life those letters revealed was never
betrayed to the eyes of Tom or other man, for unopened and unread they
laid upon the faithful, uncomplaining heart that treasured them.

“And, now, Tom, to business. This you see is my will. A man
doesn’t die any sooner you know for making his will. When I lost
Priscilla, a rare woman, Tom, but over tender for this World, a
matchless Woman,—I made a new will. I haven’t much to leave,
but what there is will be yours. I should like you to keep the
books—don’t part with them. They have been very precious to
me. Perhaps some day you will know how precious books can be. I had
hoped, fondly hoped, that you would turn to scholarship and take my seat
by the old desk—but it wasn’t to be, it wasn’t to
be,” and the schoolmaster shook his head sadly.

Again Tom could find no words—what could he say, how could he tell
the master that a few hours before the glance of a young maid’s
eye and the trill of her glad young voice and the touch of her soft
white hand had been of more moving eloquence than a guardian’s
pleading, and that, as he pushed over the hills that day through depth
of snow and stress of storm to the sickbed side, revolving many things
in his awakened mind, he had made a great resolve and vowed a deep and
binding vow.

“There remains but this,” continued Mr. Black.
“You have seen this locket before. It was your mother’s. The
time has come when I may place it where it belongs. You know its story.
Wear it ever, and may God in His own good time raise the veil and grant
light where now is darkness and certainly where all is fruitless
conjecture.”

Tom took the locket, pressed it to his quivering lips and hid it in his
bosom. “Lucy shall twine it about my neck,” he said,
“and I will wear it ever.”

“Send for Moll now. I must lie down. You won’t forget Moll,
when I am gone. She is a good soul, and has tended me well.”

The old man was assisted to his bed, and sank exhausted on the pillow.
There was silence in the darkling chamber, save for the heavy breathing
of the fast failing man.

“Read me the twenty-first Psalm,” he said, presently.

But Tom’s voice failed him, and broke as he read:

“‘Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of
death, I will fear no evil; for Thou art with me, Thy rod and Thy staff
they comfort me.’”

And Tom kneeled by the bedside, and hid his face in the coverlet, nor
restrained his tears.

And the light trembling hand of him who had so loved him rested on the
bowed head, and the feeble voice was raised in prayer and benediction.

And the night fell and the “peace that passeth all
understanding” entered therein and there abode.

CHAPTER VIII.

THE legacy left him by Mr. Black amounted to no less than a hundred
pounds, which seemed to Tom a vast sum. Mr. Redfearn was sole
executor of the will. Tom took possession of the books,—a few
choice Latin authors, the Greek Testament, and many educational works.
He selected, besides, a few articles of furniture, of which he made a
present to Mrs. Garside; he did not forget Moll o’ Stuarts. Out of
the proceeds of the portion of the furniture which he sold, there was
just enough to pay for a mourning suit of good broadcloth for himself,
and strangely ill at ease he felt when first he beheld himself arrayed
in the glossy doeskin. But after the funeral, he had only to wear it on
Sundays, when most people who could manage it by hook or crook contrived
to wear decent suits, mainly of black,—black was the general, if
not “the only wear.” The reason is not far to seek. Among
the working-classes the better suit is a very distinct garment from what
are called emphatically “wartday clo’es,” and is
seldom worn except on Sunday, and at funerals.

There remained the hundred pounds, and the question was not easy of
answer, what should he do with it? Under the will, Mr. Redfearn had
power to apply the money for Tom’s advancement in life, even
before his majority when it was to pass into his uncontrolled
disposition. Tom cudgelled his brain so much and so vainly as to the
ultimate application of this immense sum that he came to be thankful he
could not, as yet, touch the bulk, or he would have been tempted to
throw it into the river. He did not get much help from
Mr. Redfearn.

“Yo’ see, Tom,” said his guardian, “a hundred
pounds is a very awk’ard sum o’ money. It’s summat
like a gooise, which is too much o’ a meal for one, an’ not
enuff for two. Nah this legacy o’ yo’rs is summat
i’th’ same fashion. It’s too much to go on th’
spree wi’, an’ ha’ done wi’ it, an’ off
yo’r mind, so to speeak, and it’s too little to set up
i’ business on yo’r own account,—at leastwise i’
ony business ’at’s likely to suit thee. Yo’ might
start i’th’ grocery line, to be sure, but I doubt th’
little childer ’ud be feart to come into th’ shop if they
seed six feet of brawn and muscle behind th’ counter. Besides they
say it tak’s a very light hand to weigh grocer’s stuff aat
to ony profit. I can think o’ nowt else. You might go into
th’ public line on yo’r furtin in a smallish way, an’
there’s one thing ’at’s i’ yo’r favour,
yo’d nooan want a chuckor aat.”

Tom shook his head emphatically: “Nay,” he said, “I
will never make my living by giving my brother strong drink to his
hurt.”

Redfearn laughed, “they’ll call yo’ ‘Parson
Tom’ in a bit, lad. But happen yo’r i’th’ reight
on it. For one gooid word yo’ can find to say for drink yo’
can find a hundred to say agen it, an’ then start afresh an’
tack another hundred to it. Folk will have it, but them as get’s
th’ leeast has th’ best share, an’ I’ll nivver
be one to set a young lad i’ th’ way o’ temptation.
But has ta thowt o’ onything thi sen?”

Tom shook his head. “I’ve thought till I’m almost
stalled of the thought of the money.”

“Well, there’s no hurry, that’s one comfort. Th’
brass ’ll nooan get less so long as it’s ith’ bank,
that’s a sure thing. An’ yo’re not be out o’
your indentures yet. Tak’ yo’r time i’ makin’ up
your mind, an’ remember ’at it’s th’ easiest
thing i’ th’ world to put good money into business, but
it’s quite another thing getting it back after yo’n once let
go yo’r how’d.”

On one point Tom was quite resolved. So soon as his apprenticeship
should be at an end, and sooner if might be, he would be his own master.
He would not live and die a weaver, nor yet be content even to live and
die a slubber. Other men had conquered Fate and he was resolved that by
God’s help, he, too could and would. Why, the whole valley in
which he did his daily task abounded with men who could tell of early
privations, of years of patient unremitting toil, of Spartan endurance,
of privations self-imposed and  cheerfully borne, and of a notable
success crowning and rewarding in middle life, the efforts of their
youth and manhood’s prime. And Tom felt that he had him the
makings of a man and though he had, as yet, unbosomed the inner workings
of his soul to man nor woman, being, indeed more given to seek commune
with himself rather than another, yet was his mind firmly fixed either
to make a spoon or spoil a horn, as the saying goes. But how?

He had said nothing at home, as he now considered Ben Garside’s,
about his little fortune, and as for the furniture which he had placed
in the little cottage, Hannah declared, and meant it, that though it was
“gooid on ’im to think o’ old fr’en’s,
an’ like ’im, ’oo wer’ nooan so greedy as to do
owt but store th’ thin’s for ’im, till such times as
he wer’ wed, and warst wish ’at ’oo could wish
’im wer’ ’at he’d wed a lass ’at ’ud
put as gooid a shine on th’ owd table, an’ cheers, an’
th’ oak-chest an’ linen-press and charney-cupboard as
’oo’d done, but that wer’ past prayin’ for
now-a-days.”

There is no question that in this time of electricity and daily papers,
news travels faster than in the times of our grandfathers but it
travelled fast enough even then. And somehow it began to be whispered
about the village that Gentlemen Tom “had come in for a
fortin’.” with that delicacy of reserve which is nowhere
more to be found than among the better end of the working classes,
neither Ben, nor Hannah, nor Lucy spoke to him on the matter. It was his
concern, and if he choose to have secrets from his best well-wishers
they were not going to force his confidence; though it cannot be denied
that when neighbours questioned Hannah on the subject, as she stood with
her flour-poke and basket waiting her turn at Split’s counter of a
Saturday afternoon she could give to her sibs no more satisfactory
reply, than to tell them “to mell (meddle) o’ their own
business, an’ ’ood try, God helping her, to mell o’
hers,”—a reply which was no more satisfactory to herself
than to her gossips, for it not only brought a discussion of a highly
interesting domestic topic to an untimely end, but it deprived Hannah of
that assumption of exclusive intelligence which is as dear to a woman of
conversational gifts as to a newspaper editor. But when Tom became aware
by many subtle signs that not only had people heard something of his
windfall, but that Hannah was piqued by his silence he resolved to take
counsel with Ben. Even should he get no better advice than to seek
advice.

“Ah, it’s a seet o’ brass lad, is a hunderd paands,
an’ a gret responsibility. Aw dunnot think aw ivver seed more nor
ten all at onc’t, an’ that fair med me gip.” It was
thus Ben delivered himself one Sunday afternoon as he smoked his pipe
before the kitchen fire. “Aw knew tha’d do nowt wi’out
speikin’ to me or yar Hannah abaat th’ job, an’ we
thowt no waur o’ thi’ for howdin’ thi tongue abaat it
i’steead o’ makkin a spreead abaat it waur nor a peeacock
wi’ it’s tail as some ’ud ha’ done. An’ as
for wearin’ th’ brass o’ drink an’
wenchin’, as some ’ud ha’ done; why it wer better for
thi’ ’at tha’ sud ha’ had a millstone then raand
thi neck an’ bin plumped fair i’ th’ middle o’
th’ mill-dam.”

“Yes, but Ben, I can discover for myself what I should
not
do
with the money; what I want to settle is what I
should
do with
it.”

“It’s safe enew wheer it is, isn’t it?” asked
Hannah, anxiously.

“Well, it’ as safe as the bank, any way,” Tom assured
her.

Hannah seemed dubious. “Aw dunnot ma’ mich accaant o’
them banks. Ther’ wer’ Ingram’s, tha’ll mind
oo’, Ben, i’ Hundersfild. It went dahn th’ slot
an’ lots o’ folk lost ther brass through it. Aw’d just
as sooin put my bit i’ th’ teea-caddy—but we’re
nivver safe, as th’ lad said when he fun’ a
sov’rin’.”

Ben had puffed his pipe in silence, but now waved the long churchwarden
to bespeak attention.

“There’s yo’r writin’s to think on,” he
said. “Yo’ munnot forget as yo’r bun’ to
Jabez Tinker till y’or twenty-one, an’ thof mebbe
nob’dy could blame yo’ if yo’ just went yo’r own
gate as if th’ writin’s weren’t ther; still aw
misdoubt me th’ law ’ud ha’ summat to say: an’
if yo’ once get into th’ lawyers’ han’s aw reely
dunnot think yo’ need bother yo’rsen abaat what yo’
mun do wi’ yo’r fortin’.”

“But, Ben, whatever comes I mean to do the square thing by
Mr. Tinker. I’ve served him faithfully up to now, and I
don’t mean to end up by doing otherwise. But don’t you think
he would release me, if it were fairly put to him, and he received some
equivalent.”

“He mote,” said Ben, “an’ then agen he
moten’t. But ther’s no harm i' axin’.”

“Aye, that’s just like yo’ men,” said Hannah,
“nowt’ll do but goin’ at a thing like a bull at a red
rag. Tom mun step i’ to th’ caantin’-haase, an’
say: ‘If yo’ please Mr. Tinker, aw’d like
yo’ to breik mi writin’s, aw’n had some brass left
me.’ Nah, that’s nooan my way.”

“Well, what is it, Hannah?”

“Sayin’s tellin’, an’ if aw tell’d
yo’, yo’d be as wise as me. Th’ question is, what mun
Tom do when he’s free?”

“Aye, that’s it,” said Tom. “Well aw ’ve
my plan, Tom, if th’ missus, theer ’ll let a man get a word
in edgeways. Nah! Hannah, if th’rt fair run daan aw ’ll go
on.” Hannah disdained to make reply.

“Nah! my advice is,” said Ben, “just go on, as it
were, quiet, for the next few months; but i’stead o’
bein’ satisfied i’ th’ mill wi’ just doin’
what tha’rt set to, keep thi een oppen an’ tak’
th’ cotton wool aat o’ yo’r ears, if yo’ happen
to have ony in, an’ larn all ther’ is to larn at
Tinker’s. He ’greed to teeach thee th’ trade o’
a clothier, an’ aw’ll be bun’ he has’nt swopped
ten words wi’ yo’ sin a ’prentice yo’n bin
an’ as for that druffen swill-tub, th’ slubber, he might
teich yo’ th’ differ atween th’ feel o’ a strap
an’ th’ feel o’ a pickin’-rod abaat yo’r
back, an’ that’s abaat all. But till th’ time comes
for thee to oppen aat to Tinker, aw’d recommend yo in a quiet way,
to larn all tha can. Get to know th’ feel an’ th’
qualities o’ wool, an’ th’ prices, an’ th’
natur’ o’th’ dyes an’ acids, an’ aboon all
mak frien’s wi’ th’ tuner, an’ larn to gear a
machine, an’ tune it when it’s aat o’ gear.”

Tom nodded.

“Weel,” went on Ben, “as aw’n said. A hunderd
paand ’s a seet o’ brass, an’ if yo’ know
yo’r way abaat yo’ can get a set o’ machines wi’
it—what ’ll do for a start ony road i’ a sma’ish
way, which is th’ best rooad an’ choose hah! Yo’ll ha
nooa difficulty i’ gettin’ room an’ power, an’
what’s more, if yo’ winnot think awm sayin’ one word
for thee an’ two for mysen, if yo’ like to start i’
manifactorin’ o’ thi own accaant, owd Ben Garsed’s
mony a yer o’ gooid wark in him yet an’ he’ll be
yo’r man, an’ that’s more nor he’d say for ony
other being ’at walks o’ two legs atween here an’
th’ next spot.”

Tom’s eyes sparkled with a sudden light, and he leaped to his feet
to the imminent peril of his head against the rafters.

“The very thing,” he cried, “the very, very thing.
‘Oh! wise King, oh! prudent King’—stupid that I was
never to think of it before, couldn’t see wood for
trees.—Lucy, you shall be our book-keeper. Let me
see—Garside and Pinder, woollen manufacturers Holmfirth. Carried
unanimously. Put it. Lucy, put it and hold up both your hands. My word,
Ben, but you’ve a headpiece if you like. We’st nivver mend
o’ that idea if we talk fro’ now till Doomsday. But will
th’ money run to it?”

“Ben ’ll ha’ considered that,” said Hannah.

“He’s a deep un, is Ben, an’ if he wadn’t talk
so much wod mak’ heead way yet; but it’s ’im for
goin’ round an’ round a thing an’ under it an’
ovver it afore he’s made his mind up. Yo’n awmost to
shak’ him to get an opinion aat on him sometimes.”

“Aw waren’t long i’ makkin’ up mi mind abaat one
thing ony road th’ time aw clapt mi e’en o’ thee,
lass,” said Ben, with a wink that comprehended both Tom and Lucy.

“Aye, an’ aw didn’t gi’ time to unmak’ it,
noather,” chuckled Hannah, and cast a glance at Ben that made her
look thirty years younger and set him thinking of the days when an
apparently chance shaft from Hannah’s eyes set his heart a
pit-a-pat.

“Aye, lad,” said Ben, “there’s folk started
i’ this valley wi’ less nor a hundred pun’, ’at
fairly stinks o’ brass naah. It’s noan th’ brass
altogether ’at does th’ trick; there’s more i’
knowin’ haa to use it, an’ more still in knowin’ haa
to keep what yo’ mak’ an’ turn it ovver an’
ovver like a rolling snowball. There’s mony a man can mak’
brass but it’s stickin’ to it bothers ’em.”

And so it was settled that Tom should bide his time, making haste
slowly, as the Roman sage advises, and that, meanwhile, Ben should keep
his weather-eye open for room and power.

And Tom was not content with such knowledge as could be acquired in the
Mill. Although his hours at the loom were long enough in all conscience,
and he certainly led laborious days, he resolved also to shun luxurious
nights, if idling through the evenings with a novel of Sir Walter Scott
or doing odd jobs about the house for Hannah Garside or, in the summer,
strolling about the lanes and over the moors could be said to constitute
a luxury. He joined the classes at the Mechanics’ Institute and
nightly wrestled with the mysteries of Euclid, chevied the elusive
x

through algebraic equations, acquired enough of statics and dynamics to
be appalled by the height, depth, and breadth of his own ignorance, and
enough of chemistry to bring him to the same conclusion that the highway
to ruin would be to trust to his own knowledge of that weird and
fascinating science. But if of learning to be likely to be really useful
in the career he had marked out for himself, Tom attained to little
enough, his mind was all the better for the mental gymnastics his
studies compelled. The books he conned demanded close application and
sustained thought, and so, had he learned nothing from them at all, were
an intellectual discipline that would tell in the battle of life, and
rescued him from that flabby habit of mind that comes from desultory and
random reading.

It was noticed too, that about this time Tom forsook in some measure his
first love, the services of the Established Church, and became a very
frequent worshipper at Aenon Chapel. Ben declared that he couldn’t
make head or tail of this change from country walks turned to profitable
account, as Ben conceived, by Ben’s discursive utterances
de
omnibus rebus et aliis praterca
, but more particularly and recurringly
concerning the high metaphysics of Calvinistic theology.

“There’s a screw loose, somewhere,” he remarked
solemnly to Hannah one Sunday afternoon when Tom, after brushing his
suit of woe very sedulously and looking more than once in the little
cracked glass to see if his tie were rightly bunched and his
“toppin” duly “lashed” and parted had sidled
rather shamefacedly out of the house with a hymn-book in one hand,
whilst with the fore-finger of the other he assured himself that the
coin destined for the collection box nestled securely in the corner of
his waistcoat pocket. Hannah stayed her rocking and smoothed the sheen
of her silken apron, but was mute.

“Aye,” continued Ben, “aw cannot tell
whativver’s come ovver th’ lad. Aw say nowt agen his
buryin’ his nose i’ books e’ery neet, an’ hardly
goin’ to bed till aw’m thinkin o’ gettin’ up.
That’s improvin’ his mind, that is, at least aw hope
so—it’s only to be hoped he won’t addle it i’th
process. But this chapel-goin’s beyond me. Mind yo’, aw
nivver said so mich abaat his gooin’ to th’ church o’
a mornin’. He wer’ browt up so, and Mr. Black set a
deal o’ store on it, so it wer’ like honourin’
yo’r father an yo’r mother, in a fashion o’
speikin’. But, dal me, chapel-goin’s like turnin’ his
back on th’ church altogether. What does
ta
mak on it,
Hannah?”

“Nowt,” said Hannah, and Ben knew from experience that the
wife of his bosom thought more than she was minded to tell.

“If it hadn’t been Tom,” continued Ben in a meditative
and perhaps something of a tentative strain, “Tom
’at’s as steady as a booat-hoss aw sud be enclined to
speckilate ther’ wer’ a wench at th’ bottom on it.
What do’st think, Lucy, has he said owt to yo’ abaat
it?”

“No, father. Tom has said nothing but that the new minister at
Aenon ’s a very good preacher. One o’ th’ new school,
he says.”

“Aye, aye, aw’n yerd abaat him. ‘A wind-bag,’
some o’th owd hands ca’ ’im. Bi all aw can mak’
aat he’s a trimmer ’at sets his sails to catch the wind
o’ approval fro’ th’ upper seats o’ th’
‘orthodox, orthodox Sons o’ auld John Knox,’ an’
the gale o’ applause fro’ th’ young ’uns
’at ’ud like to kick ovver th’ traces. He’s
noather fish, nor flesh, nor fowl, nor gooid red herrin’—so
folk sen, an’ goes on refinin’ an’ refinin’ and
explainin’ till Deacon Whiteley says he’s refined and
explained th’ owd Trust Deed away, an’ ther’s lots
o’th owder end dunnot know whether they’re stood o’
their heads or their heels. An’ they dunnot hauf like th’
Band o’ Hope ’at he’s started i’ connection
wi’ th’ Sunday Schooil, though aw’ll say nowt agen
that missen.”

“It ’ud be a gooid thing if they’d ha’ a Band
o’ Hope for th’ grown-up childer,” said Hannah.
“I fancy from what Tom said to me t’other neet—I mean
night,” began Lucy.

“Neet’s gooid enew,” interrupted her mother in a
sharper tone than Lucy often heard. “Though awm awmost forced to
be dumb, when yo’r father’s got owt to say, awm noather deaf
nor blind, thank God; an’ aw’n noticed lately ’at
Tom’s getten into a fine way o’ speikin’,—Miss
Nancyfied aw ca’ it,—an’ yo’r followin’
suit. There’ll be no livin’ wi’ oather on yo’
sooin if it goes on.”

“Well, what is it yo’ wouldn’t be capped at?”
asked Ben, by way of diversion.

“If Tom joined the Band of Hope,” said Lucy quietly, and,
one would have judged, sadly.

“Th’ lad’s clean off,” said Ben. “That
brass has bin too mich for his yed. Wi’ most folk it runs to
drink, but aw reckon it depends o’ th’ constitooshun. But,
dal me, if aw dunnot don missen up very next Sunday ’at ever is,
an’ gooa wi’ ’im to th’ chapel an’ hear
for missen; so, dooant forget, Hannah, to ha’ me a clean shirt,
for aw munnot shame th’ lad.”

“Aye,” assented Hannah, “gooa, bi all meeans,
an’ if a fooil’s advice worth’s takkin’, please
thissen abaat keepin’ thi ears on th’ pulpit, but keep thi
e’en on th’ pews.” And with this Delphic utterance
Mrs. Garside began to lay the little round table for tea, with a clatter
that threatened the longevity of the “chaney” cups and
saucers that had descended with the Family Bible, and were almost as
venerated.

And Lucy looked troubled with that trouble that seeks disguise in
constrained cheerfulness.

“It’s a woman, then,” said Ben to himself.
“Who’d ha’ thowt it, but whooa i’ th’ name
o’ wonder can it be?”

Pursuant to his resolve, Ben, the next Sunday, volunteered to accompany
Tom to Chapel, to Tom’s undisguised surprise.

“Well, yo’ see, lad,” explained the Senior, inwardly
congratulating himself on the astuteness of his reply,
“what’s gooid enough for thee ’ll daatless be gooid
enough for thi partner ’at is to be.”

The Rev. David Jones was a man of middle stature, quick and nervous in
his movements, and quick and nervous in his delivery. He had all the
fire and not a little of the poetic feeling and imagination of his Welsh
ancestry. He had the great gift of being able to see and understand the
very crux of an abstruse problem and to state it lucidly. Then, when you
held your breath for the solution, he would break into a rhapsody, and,
in a torrent of words, metaphor piled upon metaphor in dazzling
extravagance of phrase, he would scale the gamut of the emotions, and
close the exordium as in the wild frenzy of an ancient seer.

“Ther’s a gooid deeal o’clout, Tom,” whispered
Ben, “but aw’n nooan come to th’ puddin’.”
But Ben spoke to ears that heard not. The rhapsodies of the eloquent
Gael were thrown away on Tom. His eyes were fixed on the ample pew in
which Mr. and Mrs. Tinker sat erect and listening apparently with much
attention to the sermon. Mr. Tinker’s regard indeed, appeared
to be more critical than appreciative.

“Jabez is too owd a bird to be ta’en wi’ chaff,”
thought Ben. “Th’ parson’s main clever, reight enough,
but there’s one yonder’s gotten his measure, or awm
mista’en.”

But neither on his employer nor on the severe face of Mrs. Tinker was
Tom’s wrapt look so intently fixed. By her uncle’s side sat
Dorothy, looking, said Ben, in his afternoon account to Hannah,
“just as if butter wouldn’t melt in her maath. She nivver
took her e’en fro’ off her Bible or her hymn book or
th’ parson, barrin’ once, an’ if ’oo
didn’t look plainly at Tom then ’oo looked at me,
that’s all aw can say. But it weren’t a look straight out
o’ her e’en, yo’ mun understand, nor wi’ her
eyes starin’ out o’ her yead, like some wenches ’ll
look at a young felly; but just a sort o’ a squint aat o’th
tail o’ her e’en, an’ then th’ lashes fell part
way ovver ’em, an’ theer ’oo wer’ gazin’
at th’ parson as if ’ood nivver blinked. It’s a mercy
’oo didn’t look at me th’ same way again, or I’d
ha’ made a fooil o’ missen some road or other, an’
chance it. An’ Tom, why he went as red as a peony, an’ his
hand trem’led so he dropped a book an’ had to scrat it up
wi’ his feet by reason o’th pew bein’ too narrow for
him to get his yed dahn to reick it up wi’ his hand i’
th’ ordinary way. Aw poised his shin for ’im under th’
seeat to make him mind his manners for when aw
do
go to a chapel aw
like to behave some-bit-like, an’ after that he listened to
th’ sarmon as good as gowd.”

“And do you remember the text, father?”

“To be sure aw do, trust me for that. Aw gate Tom to nick it with
his thumb in his book, an aw wer’ settlin’ dahn comfortable
to th’ exposition when aw gate th’ full blast o’ Miss
Dorothy’s look, choose ’oo it wer’ meant for. It had
liked to ha’ bowled me ovver, but aw poo’d missen together,
an’ aw’n getten th’ heads o’th discoorse. Reick
us th’ Bible, missus. It wer’ eighth Romans, thirtieth. Read
it up, Lucy.”

“Moreover whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and whom
he called, them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also
glorified.”

“Nah! I thowt to missen, we’re in for it. Aw liked th’
chap’s courage. It’s holus-bolus, nah, says I, an’
th’ owder end they looked up at th’ parson wi’ a grim
sort o’ look as much as to say, ‘Get ovver that if yo’
can’ an’ then they glowered at th’ younger end
wi’ a look ’at said as plain as a pikestaff,
‘he’s bahn to throw yo’ ovver’ nah, wi’
yo’r new criticism an’ yo’r
refinin’s.’”

“An’ did he?” asked Lucy and her mother in a breath.

And it may be just as well to say here and once for all, for the benefit
of those who through no fault of their own, to be sure, but to their
great loss notwithstanding, have not the privilege of being Yorkshire
bred and born, that half-a-century ago theological discussion was, among
the mill-hands of the West Riding, as common as ratting or dog-fighting
or as disputing over the form of a foot-ball player in these degenerate
days. Any fine Sunday of the year, if you walked in the country, you
would come across a group of men, gravely excited, discussing with
acumen, and all the artillery of text and commentary, original sin,
predestination, effectual calling and the inefficiency of works.

“And did he?”

Ben shook his head. “He’s a deep ’un is yon’.
They ca’ folk ’at go to Church o’ a mornin’
an’ chapel i’ th’ afternooin, devil-dodgers; but
yon’s waur, he’s a deacon-dodger. He knew as weel as he knew
his dinner ’d be spoilin’ bi hauf-past twelve ’at
ther’ wer’ owd Split an’ Tommy Shaw, not to say
Jabez Tinker, at’s happen more charity, just simply
waitin’ to lay howd on a word here an’ a sentence theer to
condemn; but he slipped past ’em a’. It wer’ clivver
aw’ll nooan gainsay, but it wer’ nooan honest. Yo’ve
happen no reight to expect brains i’ a parson, but th’
leeast he can do is to be honest.”

“But yo’ dunnot tell us ha he han’led th’
text,” said his wife impatiently.

“Why th’ cream on it wer’ this: ’at th’
Almighty fro’ th’ beginnin’ had foreordained th’
law o’ righteousness, just th’ same as he foreordained
th’ law o’ gravitation an’ he elected to salvation
them as walked therein, an’ them as didn’t were rejected.
Same as th’ law o’ combustion,” he said, “if
yo’ put yo’r finger i’th’ fire God had
pre-arranged ’at yo’ sud be burned, an’ sarve
yo’ reight.”

“Why that’s common sense enough to please you, father, you
couldn’t find fault with that.”

“Aye’ that wer’ reight enough; but yo’ should
ha’ heeard th’ way he wrapped it up an’ dressed it
i’th catch words o’ th’ hard-an’-fast Baptists,
so as to mak’ them o’ th’ owder end think it
wer’ all th’ owd dish sarved up a bit different. But it
wern’t; it wer’ common sense an’ nat’ral
religion dressed up to mak’ ’em sound like Calvinism. He
caught th’ deacons sleepin’, as he thowt, an’ stole
their clo’es; but Jabez Tinker saw through him, aw tell
yo’, an’ so did Ben Garsed, if he
is
an’ owd
foo.”

“And what did Tom say to it all?” asked Lucy.

“Tom! Aw’ve no patience wi’ Tom. He walked all
th’ way whom as if he wer’ dreamin’, an’ all
’at aw could get out on him wer’ ’at pale blue went
varry well wi some shades o’ yoller. He wer’ thinkin
o’ his dyein’, yo’ see.”

“Was he for sure?” asked Mrs. Garside, “which dun
yo’ think’s th’ blindest, Lucy, a bat or a
mole?”

But Lucy was looking out of the window and answer made none.

CHAPTER IX.

NEHEMIAH WIMPENNY, of Holmfirth, “Gentleman, one of Her
Majesty’s &c.,” in other words a solicitor, was the only
legal practitioner in the village or neighbourhood, and though not more
than thirty years of age, enjoyed a considerable practice. His father,
Ebenezer, had been a successful manufacturer and a zealous Methodist.
Presumably he believed that it is easier for a camel to pass through the
eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
Certainly he shared the common belief that lawyers are very scarce in
the celestial regions. But these convictions did not deter him from
storing up riches in this world, nor from bringing up his son to the
legal profession. Perhaps he had confidence in the axiom that exceptions
prove the rule.

Nehemiah was well cut-out for a country lawyer: he had the native
shrewdness and common sense, and if he did not know much law he found
common-sense a very good substitute for it. His local knowledge was like
that of a historic character extensive and peculiar, and his
father’s acquaintances and business connections who, at first from
friendship, gave their business to young Nehemiah, had no reason to
complain of lack of his attention to their interests or ability to
protect them. In person he was of medium height, of sandy hair and pale
complexion, with a cold and fishy eye and a cold and clammy hand. He
dressed loudly and flashily, but as the extravagance of his raiment was
attributed to a twelve months’ stay in London in the office of a
town agent its fashion or propriety few questioned. He was fond of
jewellery, and displayed a good deal of it on his person, and was
supposed by envious young manufacturers and merchants to be
a“devil among the women,”—a reputation of which he was
not a little vain, and which he sustained by the amorous glances and

doubles entendres
of refreshment rooms and bars. He had spent a week
in Paris, and hinted that he could an’ he would tell a thing or
two about the iniquities of the gay city. This did not prevent Nehemiah
from attending with laudable regularity at the Methodist Chapel, and
anxious mammas with marriageable daughters, secure in the assurance that
a reformed rake makes a very passable saint, viewed with complacency the
attentions which it pleased this very common-place Lothario to pay to
the virgins of their flock and fold; and the pastor of Zion Chapel
himself, doubtless reflecting that he was sent to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel, and to heal those that were sick and not those that
were whole, was very tender indeed to a church-member who gave weekly
signs of grace in the form of substantial contributions to the
collection box, and whose quarterly pew-rent could always be depended
on. It is only fair to Nehemiah to say that he never permitted his
dissipations which were possibly much exaggerated, to interfere with
business, and that, however deep his potations of the previous night, he
was always to be found at his desk with a clear head and a steady hand,
a circumstance, of itself, that secured Nehemiah more appreciation in a
hard-drinking community, than would have been inspired by an intimate
acquaintance with the whole
corpus juris
.

Among his clients Nehemiah numbered Mr. Jabez Tinker, and he was
therefore not surprised when the master of Wilberlee presented himself
in the small, dingy, stuffy office which Nehemiah found sufficient for
his needs. Mr. Tinker, of course, was well aware of the somewhat
dubious moral character of the gentleman he had come to consult; but
then he did not go to Nehemiah for morals but for professional
assistance.

“Well, Mr. Tinker, and how do you find yourself this
morning—warm, isn’t it.”

“Very,” said Mr. Tinker—“it’s warm,
and it’s close for the time of the year. But any sort of weather
’ll do for your kind of work, I guess, Wimpenny.”

“Rather,—the warmer the better—get me used to a sultry
climate. It’s as well to be prepared for the future,
eh?”—Mr. Wimpenny’s expansive smile indicated his own
appreciation of a very feeble jest; but his client’s countenance
was not responsive.

“H’m,” said Mr. Tinker. “Well, Wimpenny,
let’s get to business. I want to make my will, and it’s no
use putting the thing off. I can always alter it?”

“Yes, yes, certainly—as long as a man lives he can alter his
will, always supposing he remain
compos mentis
; and we’re all
human, Mr. Tinker, we’re all human.”

“It shouldn’t be a very complicated affair either,”
went on Mr. Tinker. “Unfortunately, except the house I live
in.”

“Snug little hole, but too near the mill,” thought his
adviser.

“Except that, practically all I have is tied up in my
business.”

“And a very good business too, Mr. Tinker, by all
accounts.”

“I’ve nothing to complain of in that score; but it is
unfortunate as things have turned out that I did not arrange
differently. You see, I’ve no son to carry on the concern after my
death.”

The lawyer nodded assent.

“I must provide for my widow, of course. She must have the house
and furniture for her life, and I thought of, say, three hundred a
year—not a penny more, she’d only give it to the
chapel.”

Again the lawyer nodded, making notes, as he listened, on a sheet of
foolscap.

“That’s plain speaking,” went on Mr. Tinker,
“but where’s the Â£300 to come from? That’s the
difficulty. Mills aren’t easy to let, and the bigger they are the
fewer people want them. I suppose there’s nothing for it but the
hammer. It’s enough to make us Tinkers all turn in our graves. But
there it is.—Even if Dick—you won’t remember my
brother, Richard,—if he’d had a son, it would have been
different.”

“But we all know he left a very charming daughter,” said
Wimpenny with a bow and a smirk.

“Dorothy’s right enough,” said her uncle, curtly.
“But you can’t turn her into a manufacturer. Though
she’s a sort of partner all the same. You know her father died
suddenly.”

Of course Wimpenny knew.

“And her father was part owner of the mill and business. Well, the
girl’s money is in the business still.”

“Phew! that’s bad, Mr. Tinker.”

“I know it is, and the worst of it, I’ve kept no separate
accounts. I’ve treated Richard’s share just as my own. But
my will must put all that right. Subject to my wife’s provision
Dorothy must have all. There’ll be nob’dy else for
it.”

Wimpenny did not speak for some time. He chewed the end of his quill
instead, a way he had when absorbed in thought.

“It’s a bad business Mr. Tinker;” he said at
length; “it was scarcely like you to confound accounts in that
loose fashion and to put trust money into what was practically your own
business. People might call it by an ugly name.”

Jabez flushed angrily. “What do you mean, sir? I treated my niece
as my daughter, brought her up in my house as my own child, and now I
propose to leave her my sole heiress. Nothing very ugly about that, I
should think.”

“Not as things have turned out,” was the reply, “but
you know as well as I do they
might
have turned out differently, and
where would your ward’s money have been? However, it’s
to-day and tomorrow we’re concerned with, not yesterday. Has it
occurred to you that Miss Dorothy may marry?”

“Of course she may. One doesn’t need to pay six-and-eight to
learn that.”

“Exactly,” said the unruffled lawyer. “Now an adopted
daughter and an adopted daughter’s husband are often quite two
different beings, and should Miss Tinker marry it’s the husband we
should have to reckon with.”

“Well, I could pay him out, I suppose?”

“Of course you could—by selling Wilberlee at a sacrifice, a
great sacrifice, or by putting a heavy mortgage on the property if it
would carry it. We must remember that there are eighteen years of
profits to set-off against Miss Dorothy’s up-bringing, and the
Court of Chancery does not weigh trustees’ profits in a
hair-balance, I can tell you.”

Mr. Tinker rose impatiently. “I didn’t come here to
have you raise difficulties but to meet them, nor yet to be frightened
by bug-bears.”

“Now you are unreasonable, Mr. Tinker. I shouldn’t be
worth my salt if I didn’t put the situation plainly before you.
You don’t go to a doctor for smooth sayings nor yet for sweetmeats
instead of pills. No use getting huffed, you know.”

But Mr. Tinker was huffed. He was a Tinker and a magistrate, and
had been a man of mark these thirty years, and was not pleasant to be
told these things by a young lawyer who might have been his son. But he
had the good sense to know that what Nehemiah said was truth.

“Ah, well,” he said, “I dare say we are meeting
trouble half-way. You know what I want doing. I did everything for the
best, and I don’t know that I care very much what the world says
or your infernal Court of Chancery either, if it comes to that. When
will you have the will ready, Wimpenny?”

“Let me see. To-day’s Monday. Say Thursday of next week. We
close for Whitsuntide, you know.”

“Very good, so be it. I’ll call in on that day. I’ll
be glad to have the thing off my mind before the holidays. Mrs.
Tinker’s at Harrogate, and I was thinking of running over for a
few days. Till Thursday, then,” and Mr. Tinker went his way
feeling less comfortable in his mind than he had done for many a long
day.

“Confound the fellow,” he said to himself, wiping his brow,
“and confound his stuffy little office, too. It’s worse than
the sweating-room at the Bank.”

Left to himself Nehemiah Wimpenny sunk into a deep reverie; and, to
judge from the faint smile that occasionally played upon his face, a not
unpleasing one.

“So Miss Dorothy’s to be old Tinker’s heiress,”
thus ran his thoughts, “and that means probably old Eph.
Thorpe’s into the bargain. Guess I rather frightened the
immaculate Jabez with that hint of a probable Chancery suit. Talk about
men starting at their own shadows, as if any possible suitor for the
fair Dorothy would dream of muddling away not only her fortune, but her
expectations by going to law with a man who could leave him or not leave
him thousands of pounds just as the fancy took him. Should have thought
Tinker was more level headed. It isn’t the money he’s
frightened of, it’s the scandal. These cold, reserved, proud men
are always so devilish thin-skinned. Wonder who the happy man ’ll
be.—Haven’t heard of anyone nosing around.”

“By Jove! why shouldn’t I cut in myself? She’s a
pretty little filly and a high-stepper too. I’ve had my fling, and
it’s about time I looked around for Mrs. Nehemiah. Wonder I never
meet her out anywhere. Tinker keeps her up pretty close apparently,
perhaps she doesn’t care for high-teas, small talk, and cribbage.
Shows her sense.”

“Wonder how I can get to know her. No use fishing for an
invitation to Tinker’s. Jove! I have it. Didn’t he say he
was off to Harrogate to cheer up the old woman. Let’s see, Jabez
is an Aenonite. H’m, I must sweeten the Reverend David—well
that’s easy enough. Pity I don’t go to Aenon; but
that’s soon got over. One chapel’s as good as another to a
broad-minded man. All retail the same blooming rot. I mean they all lead
to the same place. Different roads to the same city— that’s
the phrase.”

“Whitsuntide is it, next week? Shouldn’t mind a run over to
Scarborough. Better than sulphur-water at Harrogate, friend Tinker. Why!
there’ll be the Sunday School treats, band, flags, processions
stale buns and coffee grounds. The sportive Dorothy’s pretty sure
to be doing the cheap philanthropic with the kids—and Nehemiah
’ll be there or thereabouts, you bet.”

“But I’ll make sure how Richard left his money.
Hearsay’s all very well, but matrimony on hearsay might turn out a
sell. I’ll get a copy of his will. But that’ll be all right,
I fancy. Gad, it’s dry work thinking. I’ll step across and
have a tiddley at the Crown, and I might as well take little Polly that
pair of gloves I promised her. Heigho, I guess I’ll have to swear
off lovely Pollys, at any rate till the honeymoon ’s over.”

But before the sagacious Wimpenny abandoned himself to the delights of
gin-and-bitters and the lively sallies of the lovely Polly, he dropped a
confidential note to his London agent to procure a copy of Richard
Tinker’s will and such information as the archives of Somerset
House could furnish to the interested or the curious as to the Residuary
and Legacy accounts filed by the deceased’s executor, Mr.
Jabez Tinker, to wit.

This missive despatched with his own hand Nehemiah turned his steps
towards the Crown, feeling very much at peace with himself and fully
entitled to bask in the sunshine of Polly’s ready smile. On the
way he chanced across the pastor of Aenon Chapel, who was devoting his
morning to calling upon sundry of his flock and getting up an appetite
for his mid-day dinner.

“Good morning, Mr. Jones the very man I wanted to see. I’ve
a crow to pull with you. Won’t there be the usual school treat
this Whitsuntide?”

“Certainly, Mr. Wimpenny We’d a special prayer last meeting
for a fine day.”

“Well, now, I go to Zion. But we Nonconformists are not so narrow
as our Church friends, eh? So long as the good work goes on,
that’s the main thing isn’t it?”

“Most assuredly, Mr. Wimpenny, most assuredly. We’re only
tools in the great Worker’s hands.”

“Quite so, Mr. Jones, quite so; my sentiments to a T, only better
expressed. Now I know these efforts of the Sunday School cost money.
I’m not good enough to be a teacher; but you must let me help in
my own way. I hoped you would have called, as your predecessor did, and
asked for a subscription, then we could have had a comfortable
chat,” and Nehemiah slipped a sovereign into the parson’s
palm.

Now Mr. Jones had gone very recently over the list of subscribers to the
various efforts and celebrations of Aenon Chapel, and flattered himself
that he knew to a nicety the amount for which every inhabitant of
Holmfirth “was good;” but he certainly could not remember to
have seen Nehemiah Wimpenny’s name for so much as a
widow’s mite. But perhaps the lawyer was one of those worthy men
who do good by stealth and blush to find  it known. So he had no
qualms about pocketing the coin.

“They say open confession ’s good for the soul,” went
on Nehemiah. “I was just on my way to have a nip and a snack at
the Crown—just a glass of bitter, you know”—Oh!
Nehemiah, Nehemiah!—“No use asking you, I know. The old
Vicar, now, always had a glass of sherry with me when we met. But they
say you are just ruining the trade, with your temperance sermons and
your temperance missions. You mustn’t do that Mr. Jones; for if
you shut up public-houses
I
might as well shut up shop too. Well, good
day, good day.”

Mr. Jones’s face was beaming.

“Do they really say so?” he asked.

“Of course they do, and mean it. There isn’t a publican in
the town but would rejoice to have you popped off like an Irish
rack-renter. Oh! By the bye, whose field do you have on Monday for your
gala? I might manage to have an hour’s romp with your
youngsters—any road I could squander a few nuts and have them
racing for oranges.”

“Mr. Tinker has kindly let us have the loan of his paddock at
the rear of Wilberlee. We’ve had it for years, till the school
almost expect it as a right.”

“I see, I see—a prescriptive right. A better sort of
prescription than a doctor’s, eh?”

Mr. Jones accorded the tribute of a smile. “You don’t allow
your drier studies to dull your sense of humour, I perceive. By the way,
the dear children of Zion are joining us this year both in the
procession and the after proceedings, so you will not be hampered by any
sense of a divided duty. I must not omit to thank you for your generous
donation, but I assure you we shall value your presence among us more
highly than any gift.”

“Don’t mention it—a bagatelle. Wish it were more. Make
it yearly. But now I really must be off or I shall miss my snack.”

“And your glass of—bitter? I think you said,”

“Ah, well, I’ll make it mild to-day. That’s next to
teetotal, you know. Again, good day. Hope to have the pleasure of an
introduction to Mrs. Jones on Monday.”

“What a very excellent young man,” mused the reverend
divine, as he scurried through his calls. “I wish brother Brown of
Zion put more fervour into Temperance work.—He might win that
young man to the cause”—a conclusion Mr. Jones might have
modified had he seen the wink with which the very excellent young man
favoured himself as he took the steps of the Crown Hotel and called for
his “usual, and a smile with it, please, Polly.”

“Miah’s in extra spirits this morning. Wonder who’s
feathers he’s been plucking so early,” was the mental
comment of the slim-waisted damsel as she handed the “usual”
with a coquettish air and neatly evaded the proffered salute.

“There’s someone coming!” she whispered, as she
skipped away.

“There always is, damn ’em,” said that very excellent
young man.

Whit-Monday in Yorkshire is the saturnalia of the Sunday schools, a
festival to which both teachers and taught look forward with delighted
anticipation. A committee of the teachers and those members of the
congregation who are supposed to be musically gifted, select the hymns
to be sung at the services and at the halts of the procession on its
route, and the discussion and final settling of the hymn-sheets are not
always attended by the harmony appropriate to the occasion. The lives of
the organist and the choirmaster are made a burden to them, and before
the sheet reaches the printer there is often a coolness between ladies
who had vowed eternal friendship. The scholars are very zealously
drilled by the choirmaster, the girls singing with zest at the
“practices,” the boys stimulating their attention by pulling
their hair, but lifting up their own voices under protest. The young
ladies of the Sunday School wear a subdued modification of their Sunday
best at the week-night practices and as they have neither father nor
mother to escort them home at the somewhat late hour to which the
practices are prolonged, have to make shift with the arm of a blushing
and embarrassed teacher from the Boys’ School, and, to do them
justice, the young ladies cheerfully submit to be thus accompanied. If
it should be discovered during the homeward walk of this sober minded
Phyllis and Stephen of the mills that their voices go well together, the
practising at the school not unfrequently conduces to domestic duets,
never, let us hope, to matrimonial discords. An ingenuous bride, not
long ago, assured the writer that she simply doted on the Sunday School.
When asked for the reason, she naively confessed that it was there she
first met her Billy. As this frank young lady has since sent in her
resignation as a teacher, it is to be assumed that she now dotes on
Billy to the detriment of the Sunday School; but she has not thought it
necessary to return the time-piece presented to her by her
fellow-teachers on the eve of her wedding-day.

He must be a very callous individual indeed who does not delight in the
sight of the scholars as they marshal under the folds of the School
flag, blazoned with the name of the chapel and borne in a somewhat
staggering fashion by sturdy teachers who find consolation for their
tribulations in the honour of being standard-bearers. Even a slattern
mother and a drunken father will make a shift at sacrifice to turn the
“childer” out decent for the “Whissun treat.” It
is indeed the time of year when the yearly Sunday suit is chosen.
Poverty must indeed have made its home in the house of a Yorkshire
mill-hand if a white muslin frock and brilliant sash and a new straw hat
with bright ribbons cannot be found for the girls, and a new suit, be
the material never so rough, for the lads. It is a feast to the eyes to
see the young coquettes—a maid of five is often a promising if not
a quite accomplished coquette—arrayed in all their glory,
conscious of their charms and severely critical of the gowns of their
comrades. There is the exhilaration of the strains of the brass
band—which in all probability will be comfortably drunk before the
day is out; there is the fluttering of the silken banners in the summer
breeze, and, above all, there is the consciousness of being the beheld
of all beholders. The boys look either bored or ashamed of themselves
and wish they were nearer the buns and nuts, for which they are gloomily
conscious they will have to pay by submitting to the humiliating
exactions of kiss-in-the-ring. Every door of the village is open as the
long procession winds through the narrow streets, and anxious matrons
and elder sisters watch for their own to see the sash has retained its
bunch and the flounces have not given: also to receive the soothing
assurance that Annie or Lizzie is dressed as smart as the best of them.
Then there is the singing of a hymn at the minister’s house and
before the deacons’ and—pleasantest feature of all the
day’s proceedings—the lifting of the sweet young voices
under the window of a sick companion who listens from a tear-stained
pillow to the air she may never sing again. The distinction almost
compensates for pain.

Among those watched the procession was Ben Garside, Hannah, and Lucy.
She had been wheeled to the open door. Her father and mother stood on
the other side. Tom was in his bedroom, “fettling hissen,”
as Hannah put it. Ben had put on his better suit, and shaved himself in
honour of the holiday,—the last holiday of the year for
working-folk till Christmas should come again. There were no Bank
Holidays in those days. Hannah had put on her somewhat rusty silk dress,
and would have scorned to acknowledge that it pinched round the waist
more than it did a year before. As the rear rank of the scholars and the
last banner disappeared up the street, Tom’s feet were heard
descending the stairs.

“Tom ’ll be for off, nah,” said Hannah, “pity he
couldn’t ha’ his baggin’ so’s things
wouldn’t be lyin’ abaat all hours.”

“Now Ben,” said Tom, cheerily, “I’m ready, are
you?”

“By Gosh! Aw sud think yo’ are ready: stan’ ther
an’ let’s ha’ a looik at yo’.”

Tom laughed, and stood to attention. “Do the creases show very
much?” he asked, “I feel like a draper’s parcel
wrapped in brown paper.”

It was a great event. Tom had got a suit of navy blue serge for the
summer, and it fitted him like a glove.

“Aw mun gi’ yo’ a pinch for new,” said Hannah,
nipping the upper arm.

“An’ put a penny in his pocket,” added Lucy,
“for luck.”

“It should be a shilling if it’s to match the pinch,”
laughed Tom, rubbing his arm. “But where’s your bonnet,
Hannah, and your hat, Lucy?”

“What’s ta thinkin’ on, Tom?” asked Ben.

“Why that we’re all going to the field together. I’m
going to wheel Lucy and stand by her, and you and Hannah are to enjoy
yourselves with the other young folk.”

Ben protested he wouldn’t budge an inch. “Not but what he
liked to see th’ childer enjoy theirsen, but Whissunday wer’
a heathenish festival an’ a relic o’ superstition.”

“But you’ve knocked off work and donned—I mean dressed
yourself,” remonstrated Tom.

“Aye at nooinin’. Who could wark wi’ that
blethrin’ brass band brayin’ up an’ down th’
street?”

Mrs. Garside looked at Lucy. “It ’ud be a treeat for
th’ lass,” she said.

“I should like it, but I should only be a hindrance. Fancy Tom
standing by me for hours at a stretch and all the other young men in the
field enjoying themselves. Take mother, father, and I’ll stop at
home. No one will run away with
me
.” she added bravely, but
there was a tear in her voice.

“If you stop at home, I stop,” said Tom emphatically.
“Besides, as for being tied to your side all the time, when you
get tired of me, and mother there’s tired of mooning about with
Ben, we can take turn and turn about. I couldn’t enjoy myself a
bit if you were stuck here all by yourself, and what’s more, I
won’t try.”

“Well, then, that sattles it,” said Hannah.
“We’ll all go, an’ th’ haase mun tak’ care
on itsen. Awst put mi silver spooins i’ mi pocket, an’
there’s nowt else ’at means owt. Nah! Ben, stir thee, mon,
an’ dunnot stan’ theer like a stuck sheep.”

“
Aw’m
ready,” said Ben, “Aw’n nowt to do
but don mi cap an’ that won’t tak me as long as it’ll
tak’ thee to don thi bonnet. Tom an’ me could go to the
field an’ be back afore yo’ an’ Lucy ’ll be
ready.”

“Aw said stir thee. Put th’ kettle on. What’s
th’ use o’ goin’ to th’ field an hour afore
there’ll be ony theer. Tha doesn’t want a whole field to
thissen, does ta? We’ll ha’ us baggin  afore we start,
an’ then we’st ha’ th’ day i’ front on
us.”

“But aw could put mi finger dahn mi throit an’ feel mi
dinner yet,” demurred Ben. “It’s nooan three
o’clock bi th’ Church.”

“That’s noah odds. Aw’m nooan baan to ha’ thee
worritin’ me all th’ afternooin becos yo’n nooan had
thi baggin, an happen sneakin’ off into th’ village to get a
pint becos tha’s a sinkin’ i’ thi’ stomach,
an’ me lookin’ for thi all ovver th’ field,
wanderin’ abaat gawpin’ as if aw’d just bin let loise
aat o’th ’sylum, an’ thee stuck at th’

Cropper’s Arms
as large as life, makkin’ a beeast on
thisen becos it’s Whissunday. Nooah! if yo’ dunnot want
yo’r baggin nah, yo’ mun ha’ it agen yo’ do want
it.”

Hannah’s feet and hands had been as busy as her tongue. She had
turned up the skirt of her gown and put an apron over all, spread the
cloth, fetched up the bread and the butter, cut and spread thick slices
for herself and the men, and thin ones for Lucy, washed the lettuce,
radishes, and shallots, smoothed the top of the salt-cellar, set Tom to
toasting a couple of currant teacakes, produced a jar of raspberry jam
and mashed the tea before you could say Jack Robinson.

“Aw’ve getten a caa-heel for thi supper, an’ tha can
bring thisen a pint o’ Timmy (best ale) for supper as it’s
holiday time,” she conceded to Ben, evidently in great good humour
with herself at the prospect of their outing.

And so as the large field near Mr. Tinker’s house—there
was but a privet hedge separating it from the house garden—began
to fill, as the boys and girls gathered from their respective
school-rooms, flushed from their hasty tea-drinking, the lads not
without a guilty consciousness of a filched bun bulging their trousers
pocket, as the brass band played their final tune before withdrawing to
the nearest inn to partake of something better than “spotted Dick
an’ washin’-up watter,” as a member irreverently
styled the scholars’ repast, Ben Garside sauntered into the field
trying to look as if Sunday School treats were an every-day occurrence
of his life, Hannah sailed behind, whilst Tom with Lucy brought up the
rear. There grew a large beech tree on the slope of the ground, and
under its full-leaved branches Tom drew the chair in which Lucy sat, her
cheeks faintly tinged with a delicate bloom and her eyes sparkling with
the unwonted excitement. Her mother raised her to a sitting posture and
settled the cushions and wraps as only she could, and “theer
yo’ are, lass,” she concluded, with a fond look at her
darling child, “theer yo’ are as right as ninepence.”
But the mother’s heart was full as she remembered the day, but as
yesterday, when Lucy’s little feet would have skimmed the
greensward light as a fairy’s dance.

But Hannah was not long suffered to indulge in reflections sad or
otherwise she was a popular character in the village, and everyone knew
that Hannah’s bark was worse than her bite. Soon the good wives of
the village began to stroll about the field, scanning each others’
dresses, and exchanging kindly greetings, whilst their good men sought
secluded corners where they might enjoy a furtive pipe, and talk over
the topics of the day; the serious minded discussing the last sermon,
the pugnacious revelling in the shortcomings of Parliament and the
misdeeds of ministers. A small group gathered round Lucy’s chair,
some of them rosy-cheeked young lasses, who had worked with Lucy in the
mill, and who now brought up their young men to be exhibited with all
the pride of conquest. And Lucy had a smile and pleasant word for all,
and many a strapping swain, as he lounged past the nook where Lucy held
her little Court and let his glance dwell upon the delicate face with
its refined and chastened beauty, knew rebellious thoughts against the
fate that had put the crippled girl beyond the sighs and vows of man;
and grey-headed grandsires, bent with age and toil, recalled the former
days when they had suffered and striven for the easier lot their
children owned.

“Eh! but it’s gran’ to see yo’, Hannah,”
one would say, “Why aw declare aw hannot seen yo’ donned up
an’ aat sin’ we put owd Susan o’ ’Lijah’s
under th’ graand. An’ yo’ do looik weel to be sure,
an’ aw will say ’at if theer’s a woman i’
th’ village ’at does her clo’es credit it’s
yo’, Hannah. And your Lucy, too, aw declare oo’s quite a
colour. Yo’re lookin’ mony a pund better nor th’ last
time aw seed thi, Lucy, an’ tha mun keep thi heart up, lass,
theer’s no tellin’ yet. See yo’ Hannah, theer’s
yar Jud (George) an’ yo’r Ben t’other side
o’th’ field, an’ Jud’s shakkin’ his fist
i’ Ben’s face, an’ Ben’s dancin’ like
peeas on a bake-ston’. It’s them plaguing politics, but
they’re enjoyin’ theirsen. An’ theer’s yar
’Tilda yonder i’th’ kiss-i’th-ring an Jim Sykes
after her. Run, lass, run—eh! he’s caught her. Th’
clumsy felly, he’ll rive all th’ clo’es off her back.
Gi’ ’im one an’ get it ovver. Eh! it fair ma’es
one young agin to see th’ young folk enjoy theirsen.”

Lucy had insisted on Tom joining the revels of the field, the gay and
innocent sports of the youths and maidens, and her eyes followed him as
he joined in the games at “Tirzy,” hand ball, and what not.
But Tom’s thoughts seemed elsewhere, and Lucy knew that his eyes
wandered from the laughter-ringing throngs to the rustic gate that led
from Wilberlee to the pasture land.

“He’s watching for Dorothy,” she thought, and there
passed, maybe, a shadow over Lucy’s gentle face, “and there
comes Dorothy herself. Ah! well, I knew it long ago. God send it may not
spoil our Tom’s young life.”

There was a rush of twinkling little feet to meet the young mistress of
Wilberlee as she passed slowly through the gateway, and moved into the
field, clad in a loose gown of sprayed muslin of palest blue. She swung
her hat in one hand that the soft cool air might play about her face,
and the rays of the declining sun gleamed upon the auburn tresses, and
gave them a golden sheen.

A dozen youngsters danced up to her, shouting their childish welcome,
and more than one little toddlekin did Dorothy catch up in her arms and
kiss. They danced round her as she walked up the field, or clasped her
hand to claim her for some favourite game. And Dorothy smiled down upon
the uplifted faces, and made feint to run away from them, but was
captured and prisoned in their midst. And so, surrounded by bright and
happy faces, Dorothy moved about the field, speaking to many, and giving
a pleased recognition to all she knew,—and there was not a man or
woman of Aenon chapel she did not know, not a worker at her
uncle’s mill she could not address by name.

“As free as th’ air, Miss Dorothy is,” said one,
“but she never demeans herself nor forgets she’s th’
young mistress.” And the hands respected her, the more for it. The
working people of the mills knew their place, and were not ashamed of
it, nor servile to those above them. They did not care that anyone
should assume a familiarity they knew must be feigned and which they
were bound to suspect.

The Rev. David Jones was in his glory. He had shaken hands with everyone
there above the age of thirteen, had inquired about everyone’s
health as though he loved them, and their pains were his, had narrowly
escaped being decoyed into a game at romps, and had looked as though he
liked it when a hand-ball knocked off his hat. This did not prevent him
confiding to Mrs. Jones, a placid little woman who took life serenely,
that he should be glad when it was all over.

As the afternoon wore to evening and the pastor, wearied of parading the
field and repeating stale vacuities, he saw, with the pleasure we
experience when we realize what we had hoped for rather than expected,
that young Wimpenny had not forgotten his half-promise of a day or two
ago. Wimpenny was speaking to the minister of his own chapel, a meek,
timid man, but hard-working, sincere and self-sacrificing, beloved of
little children and their mothers, and for whom even the hard-hearted
operatives had a good word. The lawyer was not long in making his way
towards Mr. Jones.

“You see I have been able to come, though I’m afraid
I’m a late scholar. Won’t you introduce me to Mrs.
Jones?” and the introduction was duly made. The three paced
together through the changing throng, parted occasionally when some
eager urchin, in full cry after the flying ball, darted under the
parson’s arms or a breathless Daphne, with ringlets streaming in
the breeze, fled in simulated fright from a pursuing swain.

“Miss Tinker seems to be enjoying herself,” said Nehemiah to
Mrs. Jones, after he had duly admired her own numerous offspring whom
she had indicated in various quarters of the field.

“Is she as nice as she is pretty?”

“Yes, she is very nice, and seems fond of the people. She spoils
the children though,—my husband is sometimes a little put out. She
does not take life seriously enough, she says, and he is vexed she
won’t be baptised, though she is quite old enough to become a full
church member. I asked her if she had religious scruples that Mr. Jones
could assist her to banish; but she only laughed and said the immersion
costume of the girls was hideous enough to account for a bushel of
scruples without searching further. But then you know she is
Mr. Tinker’s niece, and I daresay she is indulged too much at
home.”

Nehemiah did not think this very likely, but, all the same, he replied
that it was a great pity.

“Do you now,” he said, “I have never had the pleasure
of meeting Miss Tinker in society. She doesn’t go out much. I
fancy. Would you mind——?”

“Certainly, Mr. Wimpenny, if you wish it. See, she is resting now
and fanning herself with that outlandish hat of hers. Shall we join
her?” And presently the diplomatic Wimpenny was making a somewhat
exaggerated bow before the heiress of Wilberlee.

And Tom’s eyes followed the graceful girl as she walked by the
side of Nehemiah, chatting gaily and seeming well content with his
companionship; and Tom plunged his hands deep into his pockets and
stalked moodily with clouded brow about the field, deaf to every
entreaty from tempting lips to “choose the girl that he loved
best,” and feeling that for him life had lost its zest. The blue
of the sky was dulled, the music of the lark soaring in the azure might
have been the cawing of the rooks, and the gentle summer breeze that
scarce stirred the leaves an icy blast from eastern shores.

“What a fool I am, crying for the moon. I, Tom Pinder,
apprentice to Jabez Tinker, Esquire and Justice of the Peace. Go to
yonder rosy faced weaver with sparkling eyes and towzled hair.
She

will lend a ready ear, you can send her home to-night, her heart in a
tumult of delight; in her dreams heaven will open to her, and she will
wake with your name upon her lips. Or go down yonder to the

Clothiers’ Arms
. There are some jolly fellows there, and
you will be all the more welcome because you have been set down as a
strait-laced, sour-faced curmudgeon with lead in your veins for blood.
Go drink with them and join in their drunken chorus; better that than
eat your heart out after fruit that is not for you.”

And so with head down-bent he makes for where he had left Hannah and
Lucy; and in his abstraction nearly walks into Wimpenny and Dorothy.
Mrs. Jones had remembered the wise saying that two are company and three
are none.

“Mind where you’re walking, will you?” exclaimed
Wimpenny, cut short in a very flowery compliment which Dorothy was
perhaps not sorry to have curtailed.

“I beg your pardon, Miss Tinker, I’m afraid I was very
careless. I did not see. I was thinking.”

“Now that is not a very gallant speech, Tom—I mean
Mr. Pinder. Mr. Wimpenny would have assured me that he never
thought at all except of me, and that he would have divined my presence
by instinct a mile off.”

But Wimpenny was not to be rallied into good humour. He had put on a
very tight-fitting pair of patent-leather shoes, and he suffered from
the usual infliction of those who wear tight boots,—and Tom had
grazed his foot.

“Mr. Pinder! indeed,” he thought, “why, damme,
it’s one of old Tinker’s mill hands.”

Now Tom, having made his apologies to Dorothy, was for pursuing the
tenor of his way, being by no means disposed to offer any to Mr.
Wimpenny.

“Oh, you mustn’t go, Mr. Pinder, you must take me to
Lucy; but first you must help me to gather some flowers. You know Paris
so well, Mr. Wimpenny, and must excuse my accent. Shall I say

Au revoir
or
A bientÃ´t
, and without waiting for a reply
she turned in the direction of the garden at the house, Leaving Nehemiah
dumbfounded.

“Curse the jade,” he muttered to himself, “chucked
over for a dirty weaver, by Jove. But I’ll be even with her yet.
It doesn’t do to play tricks with Miss Dorothy, and so
you’ll find some day. But I can bide my time. I’ll go and
have a drink at the
Crown
, Polly ’ll be glad to see me
anyhow.”

And Tom walked as in a dream. The sky was blue again, and the lark
trilled a clearer note, and all the earth was glad in its summer
joyousness.

CHAPTER X

IT is one thing for a maiden to invite a young man to a garden, and
quite another to know what to do with him when she gets him there. It
would have puzzled Dorothy to say exactly why she had asked
Tom Pinder to help her cull flowers. The ostensible pretext given
had been the gathering of a bouquet for Lucy; but we all know that a
woman’s ostensible pretexts are—well, ostensible pretexts.
For one thing Dorothy had had enough of Nehemiah Wimpenny, and
wanted to be decently free of him for the rest of the day. She had
wearied of the mild pleasure of poking fun at his French. But in truth
Dorothy had acted from impulse and regretted her words all the more when
she saw the sudden light of glad surprise that sprung to Tom’s
dark eyes. But there is safety in numbers, reflected Dorothy. The back
door of the house was not locked. Dorothy looked into the kitchen, into
the parlour,—neither Betty nor Peggy was there. She called their
names at the bottom of the staircase, whilst Tom bided in the garden,
but there was no answering cry from Betty or from Peggy, those
handmaidens having very properly conceived that Whitsuntide comes alike
for bond and free, and betaken themselves, in gay attire, to the
delights of the field. Peggy, at this moment, indeed, was flying, with
fleet foot, from the outstretched arms of an amorous young butcher, who
’livered the daily joint at Wilberlee, and the staider Betty was
listening with all too ready ears to the somewhat halting wooing of the
village constable, who, even in plain clothes, was still a proper man
and had, perhaps, a prophetic vision of a village-inn with himself as
keeper of order and the purse-strings, and Betty as buxom but bustling
hostess.

“It is very tiresome,” said Dorothy, as she returned to the
garden where Tom was pretending to be wrapt in the contemplation of the
beauties of a
Gloire de Dijon
, “I did so want a cup of tea, but
Betty and Peggy have played me truant. Don’t you think,
Mr. Pinder, you had better go find them, and say I want one of
them, no matter which, very particularly.”

But Tom had taken possession of the handbasket and the scissors, and was
oblivious to hints.

“Some of these blooms want cutting very badly,” was his only
answer, “they will fall in another day.” Then there was
silence save for the clicking of the scissors, the humming of the bees,
the good-night song of the birds, and the laughter and cries from the
field. Unconsciously, as the basket filled, the steps of Dorothy had
turned the gable of the house. The merry crowd was hid from view. The
garden here sloped to the river side, and by its brim was a rustic seat.
Dorothy sank upon it weariedly.

“I confess I’m tired,” she exclaimed “I seem to
have been on my feet for a week,” and she put out the tiniest
point of a shoe-toe and contemplated it ruefully. “Now, what do
you mean, Mr. Pinder, standing there swinging that basket like one
of those boats in a fair that make you dizzy to look at them?
Can’t you find a seat somewhere?”

Tom looked all around. He might have found a seat by climbing on the
branch of an adjacent tree. Some such thought may have crossed his mind,
for by that magic of association that passes the wit of man came to him
the couplet that he had read long ago:

“Fain would I climb, but that I fear to fall,”

with its answering

“If thy heart fail thee, do not climb at all.”

Tom did not climb. He sat instead on the edge of the garden seat, as far
from Dorothy as space permitted.

“I wish you wouldn’t call me
‘Mr. Pinder’,” he said. “I never feel quite
sure you are not making mock of me.”

Dorothy had taken a rose from the basket and was looking for leaves to
bind it with.

“Well you see, you are getting rather too big for me to call you
Tom. And besides, you are a man now, and besides, oh!—lots of
things.”

This did not seem very lucid. Tom went on:

“I was never called ‘Mr. Pinder’ in my life till
you called me so. Then I was very glad and very proud. It put new
thoughts into my mind. It was like a ‘new birth,’ as the
chapel-folk might say. But it has done its work now, and I should like
once more to be plain ‘Tom’ to you.”

“Well, plain Tom then be it, if that will please you; but we
really must be going, or we shall miss Lucy. Hark! many of the people
must have left the ground already. I can hear them talking as they go
past the mill. Bring along the basket, Tom, and don’t spill more
than you can help.”

“I don’t think I should take the flowers to Lucy in the
field. People would say you favoured Lucy more than other folk’s
children.”

“And what do I care what people say; I do like Lucy more than any
other girl in the village.”

“I was not exactly thinking of what you might care about miss. I
was thinking more of what Lucy would feel.”

“Oh! Of course,” said Dorothy, not without a suspicion of
pettishness in her tone. Really, this young man was too frank. To say
exactly what one thinks is no doubt commendable in the abstract. But
then we should be careful to think only what will fall pleasingly on the
ear, if we wish to please. “Oh! of course,” said Dorothy.

Tom felt he had blundered. “The air comes very sweet and fresh
from the hills” he said, to change the subject. “How clear
the stream looks to-night and how softly it warbles over the
stones.”

“Yes,” assented Dorothy, “I love the river when its
waters are crystal as now; but you know it is so seldom we see it so
bright and sparkling. The dye-water from the mill makes it all the
colours of the rainbow, but you take care the colours are dirty
enough.”

“There’s something I wanted to tell you, Miss
Dorothy,” said Tom, after a lull in the conversation which both
felt to be embarrassing.

“Well?”

“You see, Miss Dorothy, I shall be of age soon.”

“Really! Well that seems to me a thing you need not look so solemn
about. It happens to everyone, more or less, if they live long enough. I
shall be of age myself someday, I dare say, but I will try to bear it
submissively, if not cheerfully. You’ll get over it, Tom. You may
even in time get used to it.”

“Yes, but it will make a great difference to me. For one thing my
apprenticeship to your uncle will be at an end.”

“Oh!” said Dorothy, “Well, I should think you’ll
be glad of that. Uncle is sure to want you to stop on at the
mill—I know he thinks well of you.”

“It is very good of him” said Tom and smiled as he thought
of the day when his master had lifted his riding whip in quick,
passionate anger. But that was long gone bye. “But I don’t
think I shall stop on, in fact I’m sure I shan’t.”

“You won’t leave Holmfirth, will you, Tom?” and she
was surprised at the interest with which she awaited his reply.

“You see,” said Tom, slowly, and colouring as if he were
confessing to a crime “I’ve had a bit of money left and Ben
and me, that is Ben and I.”

“Oh! bother the grammar” cried Dorothy.

“Ben and me’s going into partnership, and there’s a
little mill at Hinchliffe Mill where we can get room and power. Higher
up the river, you know. We will try not to send you more dye-water down
stream than we can help. I shall always think when I draw the plugs that
the water will pass your window, Miss Dorothy.” Tom was distinctly
improving.

“It’s a great venture,” said Dorothy gravely. “A
very great venture. I don’t mean so much for you, you have all
life before you, but for Ben, and what hurts Ben will hurt Lucy. You see
other people besides you can think of Lucy.” Now there was a piece
of malice here, but Dorothy thought she could now cry quits.

“Yes, it’s a venture, Miss Dorothy, a great venture. It is
one that perhaps would never have been made if you had never called me
‘Mr. Pinder,’ so don’t throw cold water on our
scheme. But it isn’t just that I wanted to talk about.
There’s something more.”

“’Pon my word, Tom, you’re worse than the brook. The
teachers have come and the teachers have gone, but you go on for ever.
But in for a penny, in for a pound. What more is there?”

“Well, Ben and I have talked it over and over. Don’t think
me a Pharisee, Miss Dorothy, but we’re going to try to run the
mill on new lines.”

“H’m; that sounds like adding venture to venture,
doesn’t it?”

“Perhaps: you see, Ben and I both belong to the working
class.”

Dorothy bent her head in a somewhat hesitating assent. “I suppose
so,” she said.

“And we know something of what working folk have to put up with,
how hard they have to work, and how little they often get in
return.”

“Come to that,” said Dorothy, “I dare say a
masters’ lot isn’t quite a bed of roses. You’ll find
that out soon enough for yourselves I’m afraid.”

“Granted,” said Tom, ”but fat sorrow’s better
than lean; but I don’t mean to be a master.”

Dorothy rose. “It is later than I thought. Betty must have come in
by this, or Peggy. And the field’s well-nigh deserted.
Whit-Monday’s come and gone, Tom, and I must e’en go too.
You must take the flowers home to Lucy, and give her my love. Say I will
call for the basket some fine day.”

But Tom ventured to touch her arm as she made as though to go.
“Nay, Miss Dorothy, I would I might say my say—but, perhaps,
you don’t care to know our plans?”—this wistfully.

“Oh! but indeed I do. Just five minutes then. And indeed it is
vastly pleasanter here than indoors. No more romping for me this
day,” and Dorothy sat down again.

“I said just now I did not mean to be a master, Ben and I are
indeed going to add venture to venture. You know something about
co-operation?”

“Why, what a question! Of course I do. Doesn’t Mr. Thorpe
tell us every time he comes to see my aunt that the Co-op’s
ruining him—and serve him right, Betty says. Aunt says that things
at the Co-op are nasty without being cheap, for what they give you in
‘divvy’—isn’t that the word?—they take out
in quality. I hope you’re not going to start a Co-op, Tom. I
really cannot fancy you in a white apron, simpering over a counter and
asking me ‘what’s the next article, miss?’”

“Then you would give us your custom?” he asked with a smile.

“Oh! Perhaps I might sneak in occasionally for a trifle—for
Lucy’s sake, you know.”

“But you forget, I told you we had taken part of a mill at
Hinchliffe Mill. It’s there we’re going to have
our

Co-op.”

“Isn’t it rather out of the way? Fancy, having to send all
that way for a pound of candles. Oh! I beg Ben’s pardon;
there’ll be no need of candles with such a luminary as he in the
shops. You’ll be selling philosophy by the yard and theology by
the stone. But seriously, Tom, I don’t see what a Co-op has to do
with a mill.”

“And that’s just what I want to speak to you about. You see
Ben’s a Socialist, and all his life he has been crying out against
capitalists and capital. Now he declares I want to turn him into a
capitalist for we are to be partners in this venture upon a
venture.”

Dorothy shook her head. “I’m just as much in the fog now as
ever,” she said, “I see if I want to know anything about
this wonderful new departure I must ask Lucy. Do get on; you and your
Co-op that isn’t a Co-op after all. But you will not be a very
bloated capitalist, will you, Tom?” she concluded mischievously.

“We aren’t going to be capitalists at all. I’m just
going to start the concern with my bit of a fortune—it
doesn’t look so much of a fortune as it did, now I know what a
little way it will go. But any way Ben and I are going to work in it,
side by side with the hands. We are all going to be hands together. Of
course, in a sense, there’ll be a master; but he will be a master
in a different sense from what we’re all used to. Every one of us
that can do a full man’s work is to have an equal share in the
profit, always provided he does the work he is capable of. There will be
shorter hours and less work for the youngsters. But the share of all
will depend on the profits we make, and no one is to have a greater
share than another.”

“But that seems ridiculous, Tom. If you are to turn manufacturer
like my uncle, why, you must be a manufacturer. You will have to go to
market as he does, and meet and bargain with your customers, to dress
like them, to mix with them as an equal. How can you do that on the
lines you are laying down? I am only a silly girl, may be, and certainly
I don’t know much about business, but go on,—this grows
interesting.”

“I know the difficulties, Miss Dorothy, but the difficulty will
not be in Ben, and I hope not in me. The difficulty will be in getting a
sufficient number of men, capable, reliable, sober, industrious men who
can be brought to see that in our scheme there will not only be an
escape from the thraldom of the capital they denounce so hotly, but a
realization of that equality and fraternity for which men and women have
gone to their graves like bed. The difficulty will be to persuade men
not merely that they will be better off themselves, but that they must
be content to take part of their wage in seeing a worse workman than
themselves better off too. Labour is just as selfish as capital. But in
our mill no matter what a man’s allotted task, so long as he does
his work faithfully, he shall share and share alike.”

“But that seems just a little absurd, don’t you
think?” asked Dorothy, now genuinely interested. “You must
make all this clear to me. You don’t mean to say that if you, say,
are the designer or the traveller, you are to draw no more profit out of
the concern than a teamer?”

“That’s it, exactly—not a stiver. We’re all to
be partners together. We’ll know neither master nor man at our
mill. We’re going to try an experiment in grim earnest, and oh!
Miss Dorothy, for heaven’s sake, don’t shake your head and
look so glum about it. I feel sure we can succeed. We
will
succeed. I
am young and there is no hardship, no sacrifice, no work for which I am
not prepared. Perhaps I might get a situation under another; perhaps in
time I might start on the usual lines and perhaps in time I might make a
fortune for myself. But will it not be a grander thing and in itself a
better, a more heart-satisfying future should we be able to gather round
ourselves a band of workers, all knit together not merely by the selfish
bonds of personal interest, but each rejoicing that he is advancing,
too, his brother’s welfare, and that in his well-being and in his
well-doing each and everyone of us is concerned.”

Tom had risen in the earnestness of his soul’s unburthening, and
now paced the narrow strip of gravelled garden path which skirted the
river-bank. His eyes were lit with unwonted fire, a flush was on his
cheek, his voice gained strength and cadence as the long-pondered
thoughts forced themselves to utterance, and the natural unstudied
motions of his hands kept harmony with the spoken word.

“Oh! Miss Dorothy, it may all be a dream, but if a dream it be,
surely it is such a one as was dreamed by the Lake of Galilee or the
slopes of Olive’s Mount. Is it not meet that old men in the time
to come should dream dreams, and the young men see visions. Had Ben
Garside, good, staunch, true man that I know him to be, had not he
dreamed dreams and seen visions could he have had it in his heart to
strive and suffer as I know he did, not for himself but for the
oppressed ones of his class. And shall not we of a newer time have
our

visions, and mine is of a glad day when the band of man shall be against
his neighbour, when this unresting, cruel strife of brother seeking to
outvie his brother, building ever the fabric of his success upon the
undoing of another shall cease from the land, and the Kingdom of which
seers have dreamed and prophets foretold shall be indeed at hand.”

Dorothy gazed in wrapt regard at the young enthusiast. She drank in the
music of his words with greedy ears, and they sank into her soul. Never
had man so spoken to her before. Words like these, if spoken at all,
were not, in her experience, words for every day life. They should be
reserved to be voiced on Sunday from the pulpit and devoutly ignored and
disregarded on the Monday. But as the unpent stream of cherished
conviction flowed its impetuous course Dorothy felt that she too was
being swept with it, and forgot that she was the daughter of a proud and
exclusive race, and he who paced before her with rapid, agitated stride,
the humblest of her guardian’s henchmen.

But withal Dorothy was a practical common-sense young woman, and as
little likely as any of her very practical sex to forget the stern
necessities of work-a-day life, in a momentary abandon to the
transcendental schemes of an enthusiast.

“Don’t you think we had better know more about your
Co-op?” she said. “These grand ideas may be all very well as
abstract theories. I want to know how you propose to put them into
practice and live. I seem to remember that St. John not only permits
dreams and visions to you men; he also allows us daughters to
prophesy.”

“Well?”

“Now I venture to prophesy that if you and Ben set about your new
venture in the manner you seem to have contemplated, it is not only
good-bye to your small fortune, which, perhaps wouldn’t matter
very much—but it would be to handicap you at the very threshold of
your life with the deadening sense of failure, and perhaps fill your
whole future with the bitterness of blighted hopes and unrealized
aspirations. Now I think I can suggest to you an attainable Utopia. It
would not, perhaps, be such a neck-or-nothing affair as yours, but it
should have enough of other-worldliness in it for a sane man.”

Tom sat down again by Dorothy’s side, but this time he did not
take the edge of the seat. His nervous shyness had vanished in the
abandonment of his speech.

“Ben says women can neither see nor feel an inch outside their own
doorsteps,” he said with a smile.

“And a good thing for men, whose wives at all events are centred
in their homes and families. But I am not Ben’s wife,
nor—nor anyone else’s,” concluded Dorothy lamely,
flushing slightly at some unspoken thought.

“And what is your attainable Utopia, Miss Dorothy?” asked
Tom, very quietly.

“Well, you must let me think, and, as it were, feel my way to a
conclusion; for to tell the truth I have not read or thought much on
such difficult problems as the subject seems to bristle with. Tell me,
at our village Co-op doesn’t a member’s dividend depend on
the amount of his purchases?”

“I believe so.”

“And, roughly speaking, doesn’t a man’s spending power
bear a sort of proportion to his earning power?”

“Practically, no doubt.”

“Then you see that practical co-operation benefits a man according
to his ability and application.”

“Clearly.”

“Well, I think that is right. Now if I understand
your
principle
of Socialism it makes no distinction between the skilled and incapable.
Granting only equality of industry you reward all alike. Now that is not
common justice.”

“I think it is,” said Tom, stoutly, “a man can but do
his best.”

“All the same, it isn’t. Take the case of a man, a designer,
say, in a mill, or a lawyer, or a doctor. He devotes money, time, and
the hard sweating of his brains to becoming master of his calling.
Whilst he is studying he is earning just nothing at all, in fact less
than nothing. When he is qualified for it he rightly expects to be
better paid than a man who knows how to handle a spade or pickaxe when
his life of toil begins, and knows just as much and no more when his
life ends in the workhouse or the grave.”

“You say ‘rightly expects,’ why rightly?” asked
Tom.

“Because when the skilled and educated labourer in whatever sphere
you like
does
begin to be paid it is common justice that he should be
paid, not merely for the present years of harvest, but also for the
years of seeding, cultivation, and growth. It is merely the analogy of
the farmer. It simply means that the toil of preparation is paid for at
a later day. It is payment deferred, but none the less payment of what
is justly due. Now your navvy or artisan gets his payment from the first
day he touches the mattock or throws a shuttle.”

“There seems some justice in what say, Miss Dorothy; but I thought
you were going to show me the way to your attainable Utopia.”

“So I am. I should imagine that the current rate of wages is very
much the measure of a man’s comparative worth in this
life-absorbing soul-cramping pursuit of wealth you call business. When
these are paid and other outlays deducted, there remains, or
doesn’t remain sometimes, what the capitalist calls his
profit?”

Tom nodded.

“And it is against this profit your sensitive soul rebels, your
dainty fingers will not touch?”

“If it pleases you to put it so, Miss Dorothy.”

“Then quell your soul’s rebellion, let not your fingers
touch. Distribute your profit among all the workers in the concern,
yourself and Ben included, for I suppose your stomach will insist on its
elemental right to be filled; but distribute to each a share of the
profits proportioned to his wage. For taking it that a man’s wage
is a rough and ready measure of a man’s share in building up the
wealth, so, too, would it be a rough and ready method of determine your
share in the profits. And now most potent, grave, and reverend seigneur,
thy hand-maiden hath spoken, and lud-ha’-mercy, ’tis sick to
death I am of long faces and your miserable economics. Did ever before a
young man lure a maiden to flowery bower and discourse to her
sweet—political economy! I warrant you have smoother sayings for
Lucy’s ear. And, now, good-night. I heard Betty shouting for me
down the paddock this quarter gone. Don’t forget my love to
Lucy.”

And Dorothy tripped away, and Tom made homewards, carrying the basket
very tenderly; but the rose that Dorothy had toyed with and cast aside
he picked up, pressed to his lips and hid in his pocket-book. Someone
found its yellow leaves years afterwards, and made-believe to be jealous
because of them.

“Law! Betty,” said Dorothy that night, as she uncoiled the
tresses of her gleaming locks. “I declare your Tom Pinder is
as mad as a hatter; and faith, I think it’s catching.”

“Smittling, yo’ meean, miss. Well, some ailments be if
yo’ bide
very
near them as has ’em.”

And Ben and Tom sat long that night talking over their plans for the
near future. Ben conceded there was something in what Miss Dorothy had
said.

“By gow, who’d ha’ thowt yon’ wench had it in
her, to pounce reet daan on th’ weak spot, what yo’ may
ca’ th’ flaw o’th system, all in a jeffy like. But
she’s a head piece in a hundred. It’ll be her uncle
’oo favvers, for her father had more heart nor yead.”

“An’ what for should’nt Dorothy see what yo’ two
men blinked yo’r een at?” asked Hannah indignantly,
“Haven’t aw towd yo’ scores o’ times ’at a
woman ’ll lawp ovver a wall whilst a man’s gooin’
raand gropin’ for th’ gate. Aw’m fain someb’dy
can ding sense into oather on yo’—it doesn’t matter
which, for what one on yo’ says t’other ’ll swear to.
If ’oo’s persuaded Tom theer ’at ther’s sich a
thing as lookin’ after other folks consarns till yo’r
own’s gone to rack an’ ruin, it’s more nor e’er
aw could do bi thee, Ben. Happen aw’d ha’ had more chance if
aw’d tried afore we were wed i’stead o’ after, but
ther’s no tellin’. Some folk are born so; an’ ther
ne’er wer’ a fooil brought into th’ world but there
wer’ a bigger born to match him. But aw see hah it is, we’st
burn more can’les talkin’ abaat th’ new venture, as yo
ca’ it, nor th’ takkin’s ’ll run to i’ a
gooid season. Get thee to bed, Tom, an’ dunnot yo’ forget
yo’re Jabez Tinker’s ’prentice lad yet, whativver
yo’ may be some day when me an’ Ben’s both under
th’ sod.”

The end of Tom’s apprenticeship drew near. Stories of his project
had already been whispered about the village, and some of the quidnuncs
of the barber’s shop, which was the central Exchange of local news
tapped their foreheads significantly. “Talk abaat a slate
off,” the slubber at Wilberlee had been heard to say,
“yon’ Ben Garside’s got a whole roof off, and that
d—d young bastard fro’ Saddleworth’s worse nor
Ben.” But in time the real nature of the new enterprise was
bruited abroad and was much discussed. The novel theme was felt to be a
perfect godsend in a community which, like others of its size, becomes
more agitated over a runaway horse in its main street than over a
European convulsion. The landlord of the Croppers’ Arms began to
feel quite a glow of gratitude towards the sober, drink-shunning Pinder,
so many pints of ale did his nightly customers feel necessary for the
ample criticism of Tom’s scheme.

“Aw know for certain room an’ power’s ta’en at
Hinchliff Mill,” said Jim Thewlis, the landlord. “Th’
agent for lettin’ Denham’s mill, as was, called in on his
way fro’ Huddersfilt’ other day. We wer’
speerin’ abaat this young Pinder. Weel, aw wanted to do fair like
so aw said at th’ country talk wor’ he’d had a
fortin’ left; th’ worst there wer’ agen him, so far as
ivver aw’d heer’d, wer’ ’at he wer’ a
teetotaller. Aw thowt that wer’ enuff, but th’ agent seemed
no ways taken a-back. Said it were common as measles nah a days,”
concluded Jim, heaving a sigh over the degeneracy of the times.

“But what’s all this talk abaat a newfangled road o’
payin’ th’ hands?” asked the village bellman, whose
pimply face and swollen nose seemed to indicate that “Oyez!
Oyez!” were thirsty words.

“They’re all to have a ‘divvy,’ same as they han
at th’ Co-op,” explained one.

“There’ll be a new job for thi, Bellman,” said
another.

“Tha’ll ha to go round th’ village cryin’
th’ divvy at Co-op Mill”

“Aye, aye,” said another, “Oh! yes, Oh! yes, lost,
lost and can’t be found, a han’some divvy thowt safe
an’ sound.’” Thus Josh o’ Jonah’s, the
village wit and poet.

But the light esteem in which their design was held by the topers of the
Croppers’ Arms did not disturb the equanimity of either Ben or
Tom. “Th’ more th’ job’s talked abaat, th’
better for it,” was Ben’s expressed opinion.
“An’ if it’s nobbut fooil’s talk, talk’s
talk, an’ that’s why we want to start a Co-op. When folk get
to know th’ lines we’re bahn to work on, there’ll be
plenty ready to throw in wi’ us,
yo
’ see if ther’
isna, Tom lad. We’ll ha’ th’ pick o’th mill
hands i’ this village if th’ consarn goes—an’ it

mun
go, Tom; it mun go. Aw’st break mi heart if it
doesn’t. We’ll mak it gee if we’n to sell ivvery stick
we’n got to buy coil to fire up wi’. But we’st nooan
need to do that. Aw’ve nooan bin idle, an’ what does ta
think aw’ve getten to tell thee?”

Ben had not indeed been idle. It has been said that he was a popular
character in the district. Men knew him for a shrewd, hard-working man,
“wi’ his yead screwed on th’ reight road, if he
is
a
bit loose i’ th’ tongue.” Of more moment still their
wives knew him for a sober man, and the daughters of a good many of them
evinced a very sympathetic interest in the scheme in which Tom’s
name was so prominently associated. Moreover, Co-ops were appreciated by
the housewives. Co-operative distribution they understood; Co-operative
production they had not before heard of but were quite prepared to take
it on trust, as a sort of twin-brother of the system of trading they
were already familiar with.

“Aw know one thing,” many a good dame declared, “it
wer’ a gooid thing for yar haase ’at aw put into th’
Co-op. Aw allus know th’ rent ’ll be theer at th’
quarter end, an’ there’ll be summat to buy cloes wi’
at Whissunday, an’ a bit o’ summat extra at Kersmas,
an’ it’s all mi eye an’ Peggy Martin abaat th’
stuff bein’ dear an’ nasty. That’s Eph. Thorpe’s
tale, that is. Ther’s nob’dy nah’ll go to Eph’s
bud them as cannot pay ready brass for their stuff.”

More than one good workman, old friends and cronies of Ben’s, had
already had long talks with him about the matter. They were men who had
a bit laid by and were ready to join the enterprise.

“We will have no one with us,” said Tom emphatically,
“but those who work in the mill. We will have no one’s money
unless he gives his labour too. Every worker on the job must have his
flesh and blood in it as well as his money. If we take money at all it
must be as a loan at low interest. The thing is to have every hand a
co-operator in production and a sharer in the profits.”

“Tak’ as few in as possible till yo’ see how th’
job frames,” was Hannah’s prudent counsel. “If it goes
all reet yo’ll ha’ plenty o’ backers, an’ plenty
as’ll want to ha’ a finger i’ th’ paw (pie). Aw
nobbut hope it winnot be like the gradely ‘Holmfirth
paw.’”

“What’s that?” asked Tom.

“Brokken eggs,” said Hannah, shortly,
“cow-pie,—custard, for fine.”

Of course Jabez Tinker heard of the thing. A few days before the
expiration of Tom’s apprenticeship he sent for him into the
office. The indenture was spread on the desk before him.

“Sit down, Tom,” his master said in a not unkindly voice.
“So I suppose you are going to shake the dust of
Wilberlee Mill off your feet.”

“Something like it, sir, I suppose, if you’ve no
objections.”

“Nay, it’s with my leave or without my leave now. Well,
I’ve had no fault to find with you. Are your plans settled once
for all?”

“I’ve put my hand to the plough, sir.”

“Well, of course it’s no concern of mine. But don’t
you think you might have consulted me?”

“I should have been glad of your advice, sir,” said Tom.
Then added firmly, “but you have never given me any reason to
suppose you would have been willing to give it me.”

Mr. Tinker glanced sharply at the youth. He saw nothing of
impertinent suggestion in Tom’s face. Tom had spoken, simply and
plain, what was to him a plain and simple matter of fact.

“What do you mean, Pinder? Have you any complaint to make.
Haven’t I always done my duty by you?”

“I don’t know, sir. If your duty was to let me severely
alone, you have done your duty. You know better than I whether that is a
master’s duty to an apprentice. I’m no lawyer. But
Mr. Black always told me I was to be taught your trade.”

“Well, it seems you fancy you know enough about it to start for
yourself.”

“Little thanks to you,” thought Tom, but what use to say?

“But I didn’t send for you to-day, Pinder, to discuss my
duty or yours. I think you’re foolish to begin on your own
account. I have had it in my mind for some time back to put you forward
in the mill. I’m weary of Sam Buckley and his drunken ways. He
gets beyond bearing. I had thought of putting you in his place—at
a lower wage, of course. ’Twould have been a big lift for you, but
I’ve had my eye on you, and I think you’d have done.”

Tom’s feelings at these unexpected words were of mingled pride,
gratitude, and self-reproach. He had never suspected that his conduct in
the mill was observed by the reserved, self-contained master. He had
done his duty as he conceived it, simply because it was his duty.

He knew, of course, that many of the apprentices shirked their work and
gave as much trouble as possible. In acting otherwise Tom had neither
sought nor expected notice and approbation. He was conscious-stricken
both in that he had attributed Mr. Tinker’s reserve to
callous indifference, and in that the first use he contemplated making
of his freedom was to start in what might seem to be a competition with
one whom he knew now to have had his advancement in view.

“I am getting older,” continued Mr. Tinker, “As
you know I have no son. I must look for a younger man to take some of
the work from my shoulders. Of late I have felt the constant strain more
than I used to. But, there, it’s no use talking, I suppose. I
think you’re a young idiot all the same to start as they say
you’re going to. Take an old man’s word for it,
Tom Pinder, business and philanthropy don’t mix. Make your
money in trade and give what you don’t want yourself in charity,
if you like; but business must be run on business lines. It’s some
of Ben Garside’s hatching, I expect; but then Ben was always
crackbrained.”

“I am sure I don’ know how to thank you, sir,” began
Tom.

“Oh! I don’t want your thanks. I was looking out for myself
as much as you. Nothing for nothing—that’s business
you’ll find. The question is, are you content to stop on at
Wilberlee or ‘gang your ain gate,’ as the Scotch say. Yea or
nay, or would you like to think it over?”

Now Tom knew if he consulted Ben, just the advice that Ben would
give—stop on at Wilberlee. He knew also that though Ben would say
this promptly, and to all seeming cheerfully, it would be the shattering
of the brightest dream his friend had ever dreamed. Besides, to fill Sam
Buckley’s place would bring him very little nearer—he knew
what. No! he could wait and work, and Tom believed in the future
foretold for him who knows
how
to wait.

Mr. Tinker took up the indenture, and seemed to read it.

“H’m,” he said, more to himself than Tom,
“I’ve signed so many of these things that I forget what they
bind a man to. But it’s a mere form.”

“I’ll burn this now, anyway,” he said aloud.
“Put it into the stove, Pinder.”

Tom did as he was bid, and as the stiff paper caught the flames, and the
smell from the wax seals invaded the stuffy office he felt as though
chains fell from his limbs and incense burned on the altar of freedom.

“Well?” said Mr. Tinker at length.

“I think I must go, sir. But I go thanking you from my
heart,” was Tom’s reply.

“So be it,” said Mr. Tinker, curtly. “When
you’re done up dish and spoon don’t come here for work,
that’s all.”

“I won’t,” said Tom, and went.

And as he walked slowly homewards he resolved to keep his own counsel
and say nothing to Ben or Hannah about the offer that had been made to
him. It would disquiet Ben and lead to no good. Best say nothing about
the matter; let it lie between him and Mr. Tinker. Besides if it
got talked of in the village those who believed his statement would call
him a fool, those who didn’t a liar.

It was all the easier to dismiss the subject from his mind when he found
the following letter awaiting him:

“Dear Tom,

Seein it will be your berthday nex Sunday, an you will be twenty-one, me
an Mister Redfearn have fixed it up to have a bit of a do here seein as
it wer here you was borne. An Fairbanks has sent a goos an a turkey, an
Moll has maid a puddin an you are to bring Mester an Missus Garsed wi my
respecks to em an welcome, likewise their dowter too. Also to say as
Fairbanks will send his trap bi Workus Jack for Missus an dowter an yo
an Ben mun cum o Shanks mare. Dinner at nooin an no waitin. So no more
at present hopeing this finds yo well as it leaves me.

Yure affeckshinit,

Betty Schofield”

Go! Of course they would go; all of them. Where else could the
auspicious day be better spent than in the very house he first saw the
light, and among the friends of his infancy. Go! yes though the snow lay
three feet deep on moor and fell, and the wintry wind howled round Pots
and Pans and whirled the stinging atoms in a very blast hurricane and
tornado of blinding blizzard.

“Goa!” exclaimed Hannah, “aw’st goa if
aw’ve to crawl o’ mi han’s an’ knees. Yo’
mun write a letter back, Tom, an’ say we’st be theer at
eleven i’ th’ forenooin if it’s convenient to
Mrs. Schofield, an’ aw’ll gi’ a hand wi’
th’ bastin’ an’ sarvin’ up, so’s ’oo
can cooil dahn afore ’oo sits dahn to th’ table. Aw reckon
aw’st want no cooilin’ dahn long afore we’re ovver
th’ top.”

And then Hannah and Lucy fell to at such a preparation, adjusting,
re-adjusting, snipping, snipeing, cutting, hemming, tuckering of shawls
and dresses, to such a trimming of hat and bonnet, and such a littering
of the house with female finery, that if a wedding or a coronation had
been afoot, matters could not have been worse.

“Aw’st nivver howd aat till Sunday, Tom,” Ben confided
to him. “Aw haven’t set tooith into a turkey sin’ aw
can’t remember when an’ ivvry time aw think on it mi maath
watters soa aw can hardly speik. Do’st think there’ll be
sossidge wi’ it? Tha mieet ha’ just nudged her abaat
th’ sossidge when yo’ wrote if yo’d gi’en it a
thowt, but aw’m feart it’s too lat’ nah. An’
gooise an’ apple sauce, an stuffin’, an’ plum
puddin’ wi’ brandy sauce—eh, lad, it’s a pity
tha cannot come o’ age onst a week. But aw munnot show greedy. Aw
onst knew a felly at a club supper ’at e’t a whull leg
o’ mutton to his own cheek, wi’ capers and onion sauce
an’ breead, an’ supped two gallon o’ ale. They’d
to gie him kester oil for aboon a week at after afore he fair gate shut
on it. Nah! aw ca’ that a fair abuse o’th’ kindly
fruits o’th’ earth. Nah! tha’ll ha’ studied
ettiket nah tha’s ta’en to talkin’ townified. How mony
helpin’s dun yo reely think aw mieet ha’ wi’ out bein
thowt greedy? Aw’m nooan a glutton, like that chap at Gowcar
’at went to a club dinner—Bill o’ Natt’s, aw
think they ca’ed him—an’ when he gate whom he rolled
o’th’ floor, an’ all he could say wer’
‘Howd, belly, howd, for if tha brusts awm done.’ And Ben
looked anxiously at Tom for a reply. But Tom only smiled, for he knew
that Ben was merely talking to let off steam. So the excited little man
went on:

“Tha’ll nooan be teetotal that day, Tom. It ’ud be a
sort o’ slur o’ Missus Schofield. Aw tak’ it at
goin’ to a feeast at a public wi’ a publican an’
ca’in’ for cowd watter ’ud be just as bad manners as
feedin’ wi’ a teetotaller an’ axin for a pint o’
drink. Nah! doesn’t it strike yo’ i’ that leet,
Tom?”

But Tom explained that he had had that point over with his good friend
Betty many a time before and that he wasn’t going to begin his
manhood by breaking the pledge he had taken with himself.
“You’ll have to drink my share too, Ben.”

“An’ Lucy’s, for ’oo’s tarred wi’
th’ same brush as thee, Tom. Aw do believe ’at if yo’
took to runnin’ abaat th’ village wi’ a caa’s
tail atween yo’r teeth like them niggers yo’n read on
o’th’ banks o’th river Ganges, yar Lucy ’ud do
th’ same as well as her legs ’ud let her. An’ thank
God!—an’ yo’, Tom, ’oo can walk wi’out
sticks nah.” And Ben pressed Tom’s arm as caressingly as
ever maiden conveyed message to favoured swain.

“You’ll have to be careful, Ben, if you’re going to
drink for three.”

“Aye, aye, if all’s weel aw’st be poorly th’ day
after, sha’not aw? But wi’ one thing an’ another aw
just feel as if aw cud turn cart wheels slap daan th’ sides
o’ Pots an’ Pans till aw poo’d up at th’

Hanging Gate
. It is na th’ eitin’, lad, nor th’
drinkin’, though them’s nooan things to be sneezed at, let
me tell yo’. It’s thowts at’ mi Tom’s so well
thowt on bi all at’s knowd him sin’ he wer’ a
suckin’ babe. Aw tell thee, lad, mi heart’s so full aw could
blubber like a cawf, if aw didn’t howd missen in.” And then
Tom knew it was time for him to look intently in any direction but that
of honest Ben’s face.

Sunday came, and with Sunday came Workh’us Jack, such a beaming
radiant Jack as never village saw before: Jack, with a great white
rosette on his breast and a white ribbon on the end of the whip with
which he flicked the mare with many a soothing “so-ho,
so-ho,” and hortatory “come up;” an older Jack by many
a biting Winter’s lapse since first we met him; a stouter,
plumper, rosier Jack, but with the same smiling face and unfailing
cheerfulness.

How, with infinite tenderness, Lucy was lifted into the trap, how Tom
smothered her with wraps and shawls, how Hannah declared she would
rather walk through the village because everybody was, she knew,
stopping from chapel on purpose to gaup at her, and how she was hoisted
bodily in under protest; how, as a matter of fact the neighbours and the
neighbour’s children turned out into the street braving the
whipping of the gusty snow or peered from chamber window; how it was all
over Holmfirth in no time that Gentleman Tom and Lucy Garside were
“off over th’ Isle of Skye to be wed at St.
Chad’s,” how every gossip in the village insisted that she
had expected nothing else these months back, and called upon her
neighbour to testify that she had often been heard to say so; how the
demure young maidens declared that Lucy for all her quiet ways was a
deep one and a sly one, and that it was a shame a fine strapping young
fellow should be trapped into wedding a pale faced useless thing, little
better than a cripple; how Ben and Tom walked far ahead of the trap all
the way up the ascent of road to the Isle of Skye, but were overtaken
just as they reached the inn there: how Ben insisted on Jack taking
“summat short” to keep the cold out, and Tom would have
Hannah drink some hot port-wine negus to keep Jack company, and how Jack
had another drink for the good of the house; how the exhilarating
influence of the liquor passed by some mysterious process from the
driver to the driven so that the old mare rattled down from Bill’s
o’ Jack’s to Greenfield, and from Greenfield to the
Church
Inn
, at Saddleworth; how it stopped there of its own accord and
positively refused to budge till Jack descended from his seat and had
another drink; how Hannah made sure that Ben and Tom would be foolish
enough to try a short cut over the moors and untimely perish like
Tom’s mother before them; and how finally the chaise drew up in
fine style before the
Hanging Gate
, and Lucy almost fell into
Betty Schofield’s welcoming arms—all this the reader must
imagine.

And there, sure enough in the big room upstairs, with its mysterious
cupboard labelled R.A.O.B., the sacred room in which the Royal
Antedeluvian Order of Buffaloes declared every lodge night that they
would “hunt the buff, would hunt the buff, would hunt the
buffalo,” though where to find it thereabouts would have puzzled
them to tell. In this great room a glorious fire roared and cast its
welcome warmth and the walls were hung with the Christmas decorations of
the lodge, and the Christmas holly and mistletoe looked yet fresh and
green, and the long narrow table down the centre was white with
Betty’s best napery, and Moll, feigning mighty indignation because
Tom had caught her round the waist and kissed her smackingly under the
mistletoe, busied about making a great clattering of plates and spoons
and knives and forks, whilst a distracting odour of roast goose came up
the narrow staircase. Mr. Redfearn was there betimes, and Aleck,
all in his Sunday best. Then came the down-sitting, Mr. Redfearn at
the table-head, Tom at the foot. Aleck facing Ben, and Hannah, and Lucy
supporting the chair and vice-chair. Moll o’ Stute’s and
Jack had their dinner later on. How many helps of turkey
with
sausage
and of goose
with
stuffing and apple sauce, and of plum-pudding
with

brandy-sauce Ben had I entirely refuse to tell, but only say with all
his talk he came in a very lame second to Aleck.

“It only wanted Mr. Black to make it just perfect,”
said Mr. Redfearn, “but we’ll drink in silence to the
memory of as good a man as ever walked i’ shoe-leather.”

I refuse to tell, too, in what glowing terms Mr. Redfearn proposed
the health of Tom Pinder, and many a happy return of the day, and
of how Tom completely broke down in acknowledging the toast, and of how
Ben proposed Mr. Redfearn’s health, and Mr. Redfearn
Ben’s, and Tom the ladies, and then how they drank
Mrs. Schofield’s and the ladies with a three times three and
God bless ’em, and then started the toast list all over again,
till Lucy was more than glad when Moll brought in the tea-pot and cups,
and they all drew round the fire, and the men lighted their pipes and
sobered down to rational talk.

Be sure Tom had to tell of what he was going to do now he was his own
master, and of how Ben had “weighed in” to help him, and he
had to explain till he was nearly hoarse before Betty could understand
what a co-op mill was to be like. And then nothing would satisfy Betty
but she must offer to put Â£50 “into th’ consarn, sink or
swim, it were all one to her if it ’ud do ’em any
good;” and then Tom had to begin all over again and make it clear
that only the actual workers were to have any interest in the mill.

“An’ wheer are yo’ buyin’ yo’r
wool?” asked Tom o’ Fairbanks.

And Tom and Ben looked grave, for they would have precious little left
for wool-buying when the machinery was bought and set up.

“At Hirst’s, the wool stapler, in Huddersfield, I
suppose,” said Tom.

“Now I don’t take it friendly of you, or either of
you,” commented Mr. Redfearn. “I’ve bales and
bales left over from th’ last shearing, haven’t we,
Aleck?”

And Aleck said “To be sure we have, an’ fair gettin’
maggoty for want o’ usin’.”

“You must take it off my hands, Tom and Co.,” said Redfearn.
“I’ll let you have it cheap, and you can pay me for it when
you’ve had time to turn yourselves round.”

It is very sad that such things should be in a Christian land; but it is
none the less true that the wool which later on Aleck carted to Co-op
Mill had never coated the back of any sheep that grazed on
Fairbank’s field or moors, and why, about the same time, Farmer
Redfearn should be buying wool in Huddersfield, Charles Hirst, the
Huddersfield wool stapler, spent many an hour in vain attempt to divine.

It was a glorious feast and a happy gathering, and happy folk those
whose faces shone in the dancing rays of the glowing fire; but happiest
of all the happy there was Workh’us Jack when Ben and Tom offered
him the post of teamer and handy man at Co-op Mill, for Co-op Mill, the
low grey mill at Hinchliffe Mill, had been christened without informal
ceremony.

“Aw’d ha’ come mysen an’ helped i’th
mill,” confided Aleck to Tom, as he walked a part of the homeward
way with him and Ben. “But yo’ see aw’m th’ only
one ’at stan’s atween th’ mester an’ ower mich
liquor. It’s his only failin’. Nivver thee tak’ to
sperrits Tom. Be teetotal off
them
. Stick to ale an’ nivver sup
more nor five quarts at a sittin’. Tha’ll nooan get fur
wrang on that if th’ ale’s saand. Gooid neet, lad.”

CHAPTER XI

THAT was a grand moment for Ben and Tom when the shuttle of the goit at
Co-op Mill was drawn, and the water from the dam began to stream into
the wheel-race and catch the buckets of the great wheel, transmitting
its revolutions to the main shafting and machines. Little enough stock
of wool and dye wares had they, and few indeed the engines for
transforming by multiple processes the greasy, clotted fleeces into warp
and weft and good broad pieces. But both knew every branch of the
manufacturer’s art, and each was more than willing to take his
part, and more than his part, at scouring, dyeing, scribbling, or
weaving. They employed very few hands, and each of these thoroughly
understood that he was to be paid not only a fair day’s wage for a
fair day’s work, but also a share of the profits; and it did not
take long for Yorkshire shrewdness to discover that the better, the more
thoroughly, each one worked, the better for one and all. There was no
scamping the work, no idling. And there was no breaking time for sprees,
no “laiking” because a chap felt Mondayish, and wanted an
off-day or two to get over the effects of Saturday’s and
Sunday’s debauch. Every hand at Co-op Mill began in a very brief
time to shake off the enervating consciousness of the subservience of a
hired labourer. He would not only not idle himself, he would tolerate no
idling in a fellow labourer. There are tricks in every trade, or every
trade is solely maligned. There are ways of shirking work, of making
time pass in merely
seeming
labour that one would think one as irksome
in the long run to the operative as they are undoubtedly unjust to the
employer. There was none of that at Co-op Mill. Set a thief to catch a
thief, and a man who shirks and dawdles at his work steals the time that
is indeed money. But let the man who works by your side be personally
interested in the work you do, and the way you do it; there is no room
there for shirking and dawdling. The lever of labour is, after all,
self-interest, and so ingrained is self-interest that the only thing
that can be asked of average human nature is that self-interest should
not impinge on the self-interests of another.

Now matters were so arranged at Co-op Mill that self interest was
necessarily and unavoidably altruistic, and when this great truth was
once fairly grasped and assimilated by the hands a spirit prevailed from
scouring house to pressing-room that secured ready, willing abundant and
thorough work, and the quality and the quantity of the work soon made
themselves manifest in the final output. The finished pieces were a
delight to the eye and to the touch. There was no occasion to employ a
traveller to push their goods. The goods sold themselves. It had been
resolved that suit-lengths might be bought at the mill at a little below
ordinary retail prices. This was to contravene the commercial code; but
Tom did not see why a man should be compelled to go to a tailor and the
tailor to a merchant and pay the profits to two middlemen because of a
commercial code that chiefly benefited the middlemen and never the
consumer. No, the difficulty did not consist in finding purchasers; the
difficulty was in putting out goods enough to supply the demand. But as
Ben had predicted, so soon as the system began to be understood, and
especially after the first “divvy” had been declared and
actually taken home by the men and handed to their wives, there was no
lack of proffers of service from men who were able, ready, and willing
to put their “bit” into Co-op Mill. At present there was
some demur to terms—bare interest on invested capital, no
participation in profits over that limit. On this point Ben and Tom were
inexorable, adamantine. “It shall
not
be a capitalists’
concern, it
shall
be a workers’.”

And it was wonderful too, and heartening to note the harmony, the
goodwill, the general sense of brotherhood that prevailed from
counting-house downwards. There was no cringing, no toadying, no
tale-hearing. There was the very presence, spirit, and revelation of a
moral resolution. Nothing so ennobles a man as to feel that, so far as
man can ever be in this network of human organism in which no thread is
self-sufficient and self-dependent, he is his own man, with need to go
cap in hand to no other. It is a feeling that, in Yorkshire is perhaps
apt to run to truculence and the very savagery of self-assertion; but
even so it is better than the cringing, fawning self-abasement of the
rural districts of the midland villages where squire and priest are gods
of earth and heaven.

A man who threw in at the Co-op was a marked and envied man. The pick of
the operatives were willing to take the looms as fast as they could be
put up. It was Lucy who suggested that the new concern should go into
the making of shawls. Everyone who knows the manufacturing districts of
Yorkshire and Lancashire knows the shawl of the mill girl. It is to her
what the cloak is to the Irish butter-woman, the plaid to the Scotch
shepherd, or the mantilla to the Spanish donna. It was Dorothy who
designed the pattern for the first shawl and, as time went on, the warm,
bright-coloured covering might be seen over the head and shoulders of
the women and girls in every mill in the Valley of the Holme. There was
no need to be concerned about the texture or the fastness of the
colours. It was a Co-op shawl. That was guarantee enough.

Tom and Ben worked early and late. Tom indeed had had a bed fixed up in
a small room of the lower story of the mill. Many a night, indeed often
for weeks together every night except Saturday and Sunday, he slept in
the mill. He was the one to open the mill-gate in the morning and greet
the hands as they streamed into the yard and hand them their time
checks. His was the hand that, when the long day, yet all too short for
his endless round of duties, lagged to its weary close, fastened the
gate upon the last of the toilers; and oft and oft, far into the silent
hours, he would bend over stock-book and ledger or, when the moon shone
high above the mill, would walk round the mill dam and up the rugged
hank of the babbling stream that fed it. His constant companion was
Jack, no longer Workh’us Jack, but Jack, plain Jack, or Jack
o’ th’ Co-op, or Tom Pinder’s Jack, anything but
Workh’us Jack; a new, transformed Jack, wearing his corduroys and
smock as proudly as if they had been a Field Marshal’s uniform.
Sometimes a wag, further learned than others, would dub him “Man
Friday;” but it was all one to Jack. He was Tom’s body
servant, his dog, if need be, to fetch and carry. And who so popular all
through that beautiful valley and who so welcome at the hill-side farms
and cottages as cheery, smiling, cherry-faced Jack with his kindly jest
and merry quip and crank? Why, he was worth a dozen commercial
travellers rolled into one. When he led the cart from the mill to the
coal-shoots and back, or went his round with the great red-coloured
barrel on wheels in quest of the ammonia laden refuse of the house-hold
it was a sorry day for Jack when he did not bring back two or three
orders for the pretty, taking shawls, and what insight into the
delightful vanities of lovely maiden Jack did not acquire on his rounds
was really not worth noticing.

But it was on a shawl for Lucy that Jack spent his first week’s
earnings at Co-op Mill, a dainty, modest shawl of softest fleece, a
shawl, Jack declared, you could draw through a finger ring, and perhaps
one might if the finger were one of Jack’s. The rosy-cheeked,
brown-eyed lasses of the little farms and homesteads, and the more
forward wenches of the valley mills wasted their becks and nods and
wreathed smiles on Jack. He took them all as a matter of course; but a
look from Lucy’s soft warm eyes, from which the pathetic
wistfulness of long suffering had not yet worn away, would set Jack
“all of a dither.” It was for Lucy, when the season came,
that he ransacked the hill sides for the peeping snowdrop, and the
hedge-bottoms for the shy primrose; for Lucy that he bore home the
nodding blue-bells and the blushing fox-glove, or the rare wild rose;
for Lucy that he searched the brambles for the luscious blackberry, and
bent his back o’er the purple heather for the nestling bilberry;
for Lucy that he brought the thrilling thrush; for Lucy that he nearly
broke his neck down the steps of the church belfry the day he secured
the wild young jackdaw; and for Lucy that he weaned the perverse bird of
its natural addition to choleric speech and general bad language. In
Jack’s eyes Lucy was fair and beautiful as any angel—and
indeed her pale face was very sweet to look upon—and for him
Lucy’s lightest word—nay, such is the divination of
affection—Lucy’s unspoken thought was as law. And who so
surely as Jack could rouse Lucy from the sad reveries into which her
thoughts would sometimes stray, and bring back to her lips the pleasant
smile and the gentle repartee that had neither sting nor lash? Who was
it but Jack that nearly killed the barman at the

Rose and Crown
because he soiled his lips with an unseemly
jest involving both Tom and Lucy; who but Jack that, however urgent his
business errands might be, never passed Ben’s cottage without
solicitous enquiry as to Lucy’s health, and what sort of a night
she had had, and how she had felt that day; and for whom but Lucy did
Jack forswear cakes and ale?

But now the last wild rose of the summer has blushed in the hedgerows,
and the bracken of the moors is greying to sickly death; the brooks and
rivulets fall from the heights in fuller stream and muttering a gloomier
song and the long nights are at hand when men-folk of a social mind seek
the creature comforts and the good-fellowship of taproom and bar. And
this was the season which Ben and Tom deemed fitting for the launching
of still another experiment. They had resolved of a Saturday
night— that most dangerous of nights, when the wages in the
breeches’ pockets seem as if they would stand any inroad for the
quenching pint throughout the winter months to have night classes at the
mills for their own hands, and for as many of their friends as liked to
come. There were to be first of all lessons in English History, and with
history was to be taught in the only way it can be effectively taught,
the geography of the wide, wide world. And the lessons in history were
to be enlivened and made the more seductive by the reading of books of
fiction and romance, of fable and poem dealing with the period under
study, so that by the light of such heroes as
Hereward the Wake
, and

The Last of the Saxon Kings
, and
The Last of the Barons
, by the
deathless pages of Avon’s Swan, by the muse of Chaucer, of
Spenser, and of Milton, the ages of the past lived before the eyes of
these eager sons of toil, and they dwelt in the stately company of kings
and warriors, cloistered saints and beautiful sinners, and saw, as in a
waking dream, the stately drama of their country’s making.

There were lessons, too, in chemistry: and in the explosions of gases,
the evolving of composite stenches and the pyrotechnics of
phosphorescent combustion the younger hands found a joy that knew no
satiety or abatement. But Tom confined his teaching to the veriest
elements of inorganic chemistry, those whose interest in the subject
clamoured for more must seek their further advancement in the
fascinating subject elsewhere. It was to teach, to drive home, the great
truth of fixed, unchanging, ruthless law that had been, from the first,
the dominating idea. And when his pupils had once grasped thoroughly the
idea of the all-pervading law in the material world, what was easier
than to lead them, without their realising his drift and purpose, to the
conception of the fixed, the immutable in the moral law, and what more
easy to expel from minds so prepared the baneful influence of the
extra-natural creeds that led so many to repose their confidence in the
adventitious, the possible interposition of a
Deus ex machinÃ¢
to
rescue them from the disasters they had courted for themselves. That
twice two make four, neither more nor less, is a great fact; that H and
Cl make hydrochloric acid and not Devonshire cream is also a fact; that
happiness ensues upon well-doing and suffering upon sin, this also is a
fact; but one the churches attenuate to men’s minds by insisting
upon a rote punishment that may be averted by timely repentance. Tom
taught that punishment, mediate or immediate, direct or indirect, is
here, and in this present time.

Now Tom was not such a fool as to dub his discourses Lectures on
Religion. He knew well enough that to do so would be to talk to empty
benches. The orthodox are suspicious of religious instruction unless
they receive it wearing a Sunday dress, and a Sunday face, and in a
conventional conventicle established by the State, or by that force
which is more powerful than the State, the approval of Madam Grundy. The
unorthodox, for quite different reasons, would have shunned his
class-room, though it was the weaving shed at Co-op Mill they would have
suspected a snare to trap them into saintliness. So the astute Tom
called his theses “Lectures on the Science of Living,” and
succeeded insidiously in making his hearers perceive that the Science of
Living and Religion are one and the same thing; by Religion, of course,
not being understood that
olla podrida
, or hotch-potch of legend,
fable, history, surmise poetry, rhapsody, and morals which so many
confound with religion. The expositions of this quite unheard of Science
of Living were delivered on the Sunday afternoons and in the weaving
shed at the mill. Another novelty was that there was no collection. And
the lectures began to be talked about and be popular.

“What are ta’ fidgettin’ abaat, Luke?” a
constant caller at the
Croppers’ Arms
would ask as the
minute-hand of the clock plodded towards the third hour of the Sunday
afternoon.

“A’m nooan fidgettin’; but aw mun be stirring.”

“Sit thee still, mon. There’s time enough afore
turnin’-aat time. Th’ churchwardens wi’not be raand
afore three an’ after. Sup up an’ let’s fly for
another quart. It’ll be a long while till th’ oppenin’
time to-neet.”

“Nay aw’ll ha’ no more. I’m thinkin’
aw’ll just ha’ a bit o’ a stretch to sattle mi
dinner.”

“Aye, weel, aw dunnot mind if aw’ve a bit o’ a walk
missen to stretch mi legs. Which way did ta think o’
takkin’?”

“Weel there’s a nice stretch o’ country up by
Hinchliffe Mill way, an’ we’st get a mouthfu’ o’
fresh air.”

“Tha’s no bahn to th’ Co-op Gospel-shop, are
ta?”

“Weel, aw winnot say but what aw meet look in, just to wind
missen. Its’ a bit o’ a poo’ fro’ here to
th’ Top. An’ there’s no wheer aw can ca’ to-day,
worse luck.”

“Tha’ll get nowt at th’ Co-op, chuse ha. It’s
nobbut dry drinkin’ they han on tap theer, folk say. But aw dunnot
set thi on th’ road a bit, an’ if tha can stand
Tom Pinder’s preichin’ aw reckon aw can. It’s
nooan like a regular chapel tha sees.”

And thus the lecture room filled.

Now there were two men of all others who received the doings at Co-op
Mill with disfavour. One was the Rev. David Jones. That very energetic
preacher did not like to hear anyone’s praises sung but his own.
His Welsh fluency, his striking, daring flights of rhetoric, his
excursions into tempting but dangerous speculations on the fundamental
truths of the creed embodied, consecrated, and enshrined in the Trust
Deed of Aenon Chapel, had secured for him the admiring following of
considerable numbers of men who, whilst still clinging as for dear life
to the shattered remnants of the old dogmas, turned longing eyes to the
rationalism of a new criticism and a faith grounded upon human
experience. They were like the frail ones of the softer sex, who concede
all favours but the last, their heart or their passions consenting,
their timidity restraining. Aenon Chapel was now packed with a new set
of worshippers whose presence was not too welcome to the “old
end,” as the Conservative adherents of Calvinistic theology and
tradition were styled. “Owd fire an’ brimstone” the
irreverent styled their leader and spokesman. But the objections of
those chiefly responsible for the maintenance and carrying on of the
chapel and school, whose father’s money had built and furnished
the edifice in which Mr. Jones declaimed his mild heresies, were
stripped of their accustomed force by one all-persuasive
consideration—the collection box. Never before in all the history
of Aenon Chapel had the anniversaries of church and schools yielded so
profitable a harvest to the anxious treasurer. The debt, without which
it is commonly supposed no religious work can prosper, was reduced. Mr.
Jones’s stipend was increased. The deacons of former days were
consumed with envy, and dolefully acknowledging that Mr. Jones had gone
up like a rocket, expressed their hope that he might not come down like
a stick, but expressed it in a tone that indicated their hope and
expectation were not as one. But the new officers of the chapel exulted
in their swelling money-bags, in the well-filled pews, and idolized the
preacher of the new inspiration.

And not only in his own chapel, but far and near spread the fame of the
Rev. David Jones, and to chapel openings and consecrations, to missions
and special efforts, invitations came in showers. He became the rage,
and though he protested at any term that savoured of Episcopacy and the
Scarlet Woman, he, in his heart of hearts, acknowledged the discernment
of an ardent admirer who had publicly referred to him as the Bishop of
the Holme Valley. At nights he dreamed of the Presidency of the Union.

And now, when all things seemed to go well, people began to talk of the
Sunday meetings at Co-op mill, and of Tom Pinder, who, folk said,
spoke out what Jones only hinted at.

“Aw’ll tell yo’ what it is,” said one shrewd
level-headed critic, “Aw’ve heard that
pea-i’-a-bladder preich at Aenon Chapel, and aw’ve heard
Co-op Tom fro’ th’ same text, but Pinder doesn’t
ca’ it preichin’, he ca’s it explainin’.”

“An’ what wer’ text?”

“Why t’ eleventh commandment, and mi own opinion is
’at Pinder sees as far as th’ purson, an’ spits it aat
like a man, upright and dahnwright, and a babby could tell what he
meeans: but th’ other chap, he goes as far as Pinder, but he beats
abaat th’ bush, an’ he ‘perhaps this’ and
‘may it not be that?’ an’ he watches th’ deacons
an’ th’ chief pew-howders to see ha’ it gooas dahn,
an’ he lets hissen aat an’ he poo’s hissen in like
th’ cap’n of a sailin’ booat wi’ one eye on the
clouds an’ t’other on th’ shoals an’
reefers.”

“Nah, Pinder just says what’s in him, an’ if yo’
dunnot like it yo can lump it. An’ what’s more, at th’
end o’ ivvery lectur’, yo’ can get up an’ just
ha’ a few minnit’s enjoyment o’ yo’r own accaant
an’ pitch into th’ discourse like owd Billy, an’
th’ harder yo’ hit th’ more Pinder seems to like
it.”

“An’ why canno’ Jones speik it aat plain same as
Pinder?”

“Well, there’s some folk so constitooted, yo’ see,
’at they like to swim wi’ th’ tide an’ ’ll
tak’ uncommon gooid care nevver to waste their puff swimmin’
up-stream. An’ then yo’ see, Jones has a large fam’ly,
an’ my misses says ’at Mrs. Jones wi’ her rings
an’ mantles, an’ feathers, an’ faldelals can do
wi’ all ’at Jones can addle an’ more at th’ top
on it.”

Now, of course talk of this kind in a village like Holmfirth not only
circulates, it percolates and in time the gist and substance of it
reached Mr. Jones. He had had hopes of Tom at one time. He had observed
with satisfaction that this very intelligent-looking, well-behaved,
well-spoken, neatly dressed young man had been an attentive listener and
frequent worshipper at his own chapel, and that, on occasions, he had
brought with him that quite-past-praying-for Ben Garside, a notorious
mocker and a scoffer. Mr. Jones had accepted their presence as one of
many just tributes to his zeal and eloquence. One had been rescued from
the tepid waters of the Church, the other was a brand plucked from the
burning depths of infidelity, and Mr. Jones had duly rejoiced.

And lo! now the neophytes had backslided and people “of a
Sunday” would pass the inviting doors of Aenon Chapel and walk
some two miles of a sultry or wintry afternoon to listen to one who was
not only not one of the Covenant, but who was ordained neither by
Bishop, Presbytery, nor Congress. He resolved to speak seriously to this
erring sheep; and chancing to meet Tom one day descending the hill from
Hinchliffe Mill to the village, stopped him, smiling affably and holding
out a condescending hand:

“Good morning, Pinder, I’m glad to see you. How are we this
morning?”

“Very well, thank you, Jones. How are you?”

“Ahem! Mr. Jones, if
you
please.”

“Certainly; Mr. Pinder, if you please.”

“Oh! certainly; you see in my position—”

“Exactly—and in mine.”

Now this was not a very promising beginning.

“Well?” said Tom.

“I’ll turn with you,
Mr
. Pinder. You are doubtless more
pressed for time than I. Parson’s Monday, you know, is
Parson’s Sunday.”

“Parsons seem to have a fair share of Sundays to the week,”
said Tom, but without any malice in the remark. “I remember good
old Mr. Whitelock of St. Chad’s couldn’t bear to see a
visitor on Saturday—preparing for Sunday, I suppose. Then of
course there was Sunday itself, and on Monday every parson I’ve
ever met declares that he feels like a wet rag or a squeezed
orange.”

“Well it takes it out of a man to have to preach two sermons a
day. But you should know something about it. I understand you have a
sort of service at your mill on Sunday afternoons?”

“You can scarcely call our meetings services,” Tom replied.
“We have no hymns, no sermon, and no collection. We have no
preacher and no deacons.”

“But I thought you were the preacher.”

“Then you have been misinformed. It is true that I select some
reading, generally not always, from the Scriptures. Then I try to make
its meaning, or the meaning of some particular verse or verses, clear as
I understand them. That’s all; it’s really more of a chat
than a set discourse.”

“I see.”

“Then again the discoursing or preaching or chatting is not all
done by one man. My experience is that the combined experience and
wisdom of an audience are greater than those of any ordinary individual.
We are so fashioned that most of what we read in the Bible is read by
the light of the reader’s own experience of life, his observations
and his reflection.”

“Well?”

“And so when I get around me twenty or thirty men of divers habits
of thought and each with his own views of life, I have the chance of
getting at twenty or thirty different commentaries on a text. That is a
gain: another is that no single one of
my
commentators is concerned to
square his construction of a passage with a hide-bound creed or with the
convictions of any one of his hearers. The only thing we are concerned
about is to get at the truth.”

“And cannot you get at it in the recognised places of worship.
Doesn’t it savour of conceit to set yourselves apart as people
better and wiser than their neighbours?”

“Oh! Well, come to that, Mr. Jones, you are a Dissenter yourself,
you know. You dissented from established orthodoxy. We aren’t
afraid of dissenting from orthodox dissent.”

“But there must be limits, young man; there must be limits.”

“Yes,” assented Tom. “There must be limits. There are
the limitations of the human mind. We don’t seek to go beyond
them.”

Mr. Jones was now thoroughly roused. He was a man of no mean
intelligence and of a wide range of reading. If also he was a man of
insatiable vanity and inordinate ambition, perhaps the atmosphere of
adulation in which he lived, the incense of incompetent judges, were the
chief causes. He felt now that he was talking to a man of sense and
fearlessness. Now it is a treat to talk with a man who has the sense and
the patience and the disposition to think for himself, and the courage
to speak his thoughts. Mr. Jones walked in silence for a time, Tom
moderating his longer stride to keep time with the cleric’s
shorter pace.

“I hope,” said Mr. Jones, at length, “I hope your
teaching is based on the cardinal principles of Christianity?”

“And those?”

“The Immaculate Conception and the Resurrection of our
Lord.”

“Those are not principles Mr. Jones. They are either facts or
inventions.”

“And you declare them as facts?”

“I don’t myself touch on them at all. I confine myself to
the cardinal principles about which you have enquired.”

“And those?” enquired Mr. Jones, in his turn.

“The fatherhood of God, the majesty, the wisdom, the sanctity of
His laws, and—the brotherhood of man.”

Mr. Jones shook his hand sadly. “That is merely Natural
Religion,” he commented. “Men will find it but a broken reed
in the hour of temptation and the time of sorrow.”

“It suffices,” said Tom “for some of the wisest, the
best-living, the most benevolent of men.”

“Aye?” questioned Mr. Jones.

“The Jews,” said Tom quietly. “Contrast the life of
the average Jew with that of the average Christian. Will you find the
difference always in favour of the Christian?”

“Surely, yes,” said Mr. Jones. “An unbeliever can
never have the impregnable assurance that we find in the crucified
Christ.”

“Not in the loving-kindness of the Father,” said Tom.
“You exalt the Son at the expense of the Father?”

“Dear me, dear me,” said Mr. Jones. “This is worse
than I thought. I am afraid you are all astray, my young friend. I
beseech you consider your ways, reflect on the danger you are in, the
perils that compass you round about. Above all pray without ceasing,
pray for light and guidance.”

“I do pray, Mr. Jones. I pray every day; I pray at my bed-side, I
pray at my work, in my daily walks.”

“Ah! But prayer without faith is but a beating of the air. You
must have an intercessor with your offended God, a sacrifice for His
outraged laws.”

“Mr. Jones, I respect your zeal and think you mean well. I do
sacrifice. I offer myself as a living sacrifice. It is all I have to
offer. When the great account is made up my life must plead for me. If
that will not avail, I have little confidence in any other plea. But I
did not seek this interview, Mr. Jones nor choose this topic, or is
this, main street of Holmfirth, the best place for such discussion as we
have drafted into. My main business to-day is to determine how much a
bale I can afford to give for the best Spanish wool that is the part of
my Master’s business that I am intent on just now. If I remember
that it
is
my Master’s business, I shan’t be so far wrong,
shall I? And I’m going to try to make a bargain with a Jew
wool-stapler, and I’m no more afraid of being overreached than if
he were a Christian. But come up to Co-op Mill, and have a fling at my
class you’ll be made heartily welcome. Fix your own time, but
come.”

“God forbid,” said Mr. Jones, as Tom darted into the railway
station, just in time to catch the Huddersfield train.

Jabez Tinker was as little pleased as his spiritual guide with the
rumours to which he could not well be deaf, concerning the success of
the novel enterprise of his former apprentice. From the first he had
predicted disaster for the venture. It was the crack-brained scheme of
an addle-pated enthusiast and a misguided, self-opinionated youth. That
was his opinion, and he did not keep his opinion to himself. But as time
went on and the bankruptcy he had foretold did not overwhelm the Co-op
Mill; as old and tried hands who had been with him for years, one after
the other, left Wilberlee for the small concern higher up the stream,
Jabez began to feel the irritation of the prophet whose vaticinations
have come to nought. It would not be fair to say that Jabez begrudged
Tom and Ben their success. That success could scarcely be considered to
have injured him in his business. The operations, the rise or fall of
Co-op Mill, were in his eyes beneath anything but contemptuous notice.
But he could not conceal from himself that he would have better pleased
to have seen Tom coming to him, cap in hand, to sue for reinstatement at
Wilberlee. He had a sort of rankling resentment against Tom for refusing
his own proffer of protection and advancement. When he had made that
offer he had plumbed himself on his magnanimity—and, indeed, it
was a generous offer. Jabez Tinker’s pride was wounded, and
Jabez Tinker was a proud man.

One day he chanced to meet Nehemiah Wimpenny, the lawyer. It was
near the time for the elections to the Local Board, of which
Mr. Tinker had been so long the chairman and autocrat that the
other members of the Board might just as well have stopped at home as
attended the monthly meetings. Wimpenny was the clerk.

“Well, we shall soon have the elections upon us, Mr. Tinker,
and I suppose you have heard the news. Rum start, isn’t it? What
next, I wonder.”

“I’ve heard no particular news that I’m aware of,
Wimpenny. I’m no gad-about, as you know.”

“Ah, well! It’s an old saying that we’ve to go from
home to hear news, especially if it happens to concern ourselves. Not
that this is likely to give you much uneasiness.”

“Well what is it?” asked Tinker, uneasily.

“Oh! It’s hardly worth retailing. Sorry I mentioned it; but
they are saying in the village you are to be opposed at the next
election.”

“Me! Opposed! Well, I’m ready, and pray, who is to be my
‘honourable opponent,’—that’s the expression,
isn’t it? ’Pon my word, I’ll relish a good stand-up
fight. I’ve been returned unopposed so often that a good, vigorous
opposition will do me good.”

“Well,” said Wimpenny slowly, “I’m not sure
you’ll think your honourable opponent a foeman worthy of your
steel. You’ll never guess who they’re talking about.”

Mr. Tinker rapidly reviewed, mentally, all men of the neighbourhood
likely to enter the lists against him.

“I’m a bad hand at conundrums,” he said, “I give
it up.”

“What would you say to that insolent young upstart at Co-op
Mill?”

“What! Tom Pinder! confound the puppy. Why, there’d be
little honour in defeating him. D——n his impudence. But
you’re joking, Wimpenny, and I tell you I like joking as little as
conundrums. But there,—the fellow isn’t worth a thought. A
nameless workhouse bastard oppose me! Well, you’ve had your joke,
Wimpenny; next time we meet try and think of a better one.” And
Tinker strode angrily away, without much ceremony.

As a matter of fact there had been talk of nominating Tom for a seat on
the Board, and the matter had been even broached to Tom himself. But Tom
had from the first scouted the idea. He had enough on his hands looking
after his own concerns, and he had sense enough to know that if a man
won’t stick to his business his business won’t long stick to
him. But when it transpired that, had he consented, he would have had to
fight his old master, Tom was indignant. What did people take him for,
he wondered. He felt that for him to pit himself against Mr. Tinker
would have been a gratuitous insult to the man who had been his master
for so many years. He knew that it would be to wound that master in his
most sensitive spot, and he had a respect for family pride all the
greater, perhaps, because he himself had no family ties or traditions to
be proud of. And he shuddered to think what Dorothy might say to his
presumption and ingratitude should the mere suggestion of his possible
candidature reach her ears.

But of Tom’s way of meeting the proposal Mr. Tinker was, of
course, as yet, quite unaware. He had taken it for granted that Wimpenny
was well informed, that he would not have repeated to him a vulgar

canard
.

And Mr. Tinker was therefore in high dudgeon when he spoke to
Dorothy on the subject.

“Does that Tom Pinder live at Garside’s yet?” he
asked.

Dorothy opened her eyes in wonderment. It was the first time she
remembered her uncle to have so much as mentioned Tom’s name to
her.

“I believe so, off and on. But I think Lucy Garside, Ben’s
daughter, told me they see very little of him except on Sunday night. He
seems to spend both day and night at his mill. Lucy says he does the
work of three men.”

“You seem to be very intimate with these Garsides.
‘Lucy’ comes very pat to your lips. Do you see much of them?
Do you ever meet this Pinder there?”

“Oh, yes, sometimes.”

“I think you might remember you are my niece. Such people as we
are not fit associates for the Garsides; still less for their
lodger.”

“Law! uncle, what have they done now? I’ve known Lucy ever
since I could toddle almost.”

“That may be. It’s your aunt’s fault, I suppose. I
can’t attend to everything. And now your aunt’s illness
keeps her at Harrogate you do pretty much as you like, I suppose.”

“When the cat’s away the mice will play,” thought
Dorothy; but only thought it.

“Well,” continued Jabez, “you mustn’t visit the
house any more. I won’t have it. If you don’t respect
yourself, you must respect me. You must drop these Garsides and Pinder
too. By the bye, come to think of it, Wimpenny told me something about
you seeming to be very familiar with Pinder at the Whitsuntide
gathering. I didn’t take much notice of it at the time. But be
good enough to ignore him next time you chance to meet him.”

“I’m sure I’m much obliged to Mr. Wimpenny for his
interest in my movements,” said Dorothy. “Are you acting on
his advice, uncle? Did he charge you
‘six—an’-eight’ for it? He must be very smart,
for I’m sure it isn’t worth half the money.”

“This is no laughing matter miss, I’d have you know, I tell
you, you must drop these Garsides, and that young puppy too.”

“Who? Mr. Wimpenny?”

“D——n Mr. Wimpenny,” roared Jabez. “You
know my meaning very well. See to it that you heed it. People will be
saying next that you are running after the jackanapes.”

Dorothy blushed scarlet. There was an angry gleam in her eye. She drew
herself up proudly.

“I am a Tinker, sir, no less than you. I was left to choose my
friends when I was young and needed, perhaps, a guide. I call Lucy
Garside my friend, and so long as Lucy Garside deems me hers, be sure I
shall not do as you command. As for Mr. Pinder——”

“Your precious Pinder,” snarled Jabez.

“You had better go to him and learn from him how your
brother’s daughter and your niece should be addressed.”
Dorothy swept out of the room.

Oh! Jabez! Jabez! How little you know the heart of woman. It is safe to
say that from that hour Dorothy never thought of the unconscious Tom
without resentment against her uncle, and a feeling that certainly was
not resentment for Tom.

Mr. Tinker felt in anything but a Christian spirit when his niece
so defiantly left the room, and he knit his brow in angry meditation.

“Am I never to be done with that Tom Pinder?” ran his
thoughts. “I pick him up out of the workhouse; he knocks my
overseer head over heels; he refuses the handsomest offer I ever made to
anyone in my life; starts in business on his own account, and now,
forsooth, has the audacity to try conclusions with me at the
polling-booth. I’ve a good mind to let him have a walk-over.
There’ll be no credit in beating him—that I’m sure to
do but if by any chance he should head the poll—but that’s
not to be thought of. I’ll give the cub something else to think of
besides canvassing, or my name’s not Jabez Tinker. If a man
will play at bowls he must expect rubbers.”

And as a result of his deliberations the manufacturer once more found
himself in the office of Mr. Nehemiah Wimpenny.

“Come to sign your will, Mr. Tinker? It’s been ready
for you this—I don’t know how long. I thought you’d
forgotten all about it, and yet you seemed in a precious hurry about it
when you gave me the instructions.”

“No, it’s not about my will I’ve come. That can wait,
I think. In fact I may have to vary my instructions. I’m not quite
satisfied with my niece’s conduct lately. But we won’t go
into that at present. It’s another, a more important one.”

Nehemiah settled himself in his chair and gave all his mind to his
client; but Jabez seemed for the nonce to have lost his usual
promptitude and decision. He had to pick his words.

“It’s a question of water-right,” he said at last.

“H’m, ticklish things, very,” said Nehemiah.
“Nothing more so.”

“So I’ve always understood,” said
Jabez—“and costly.”

“Yes, costly. You might almost pave Holmfirth with the gold
that’s been spent on law over disputes about water. But let me
have the facts. Perhaps it may not be a complicated case at all.”

But his client seemed in no hurry to state the facts. He seemed to be
more interested in the question of cost.

“Suppose I have a complaint to make against a firm higher up the
stream, what are the proceedings to be taken?”

“What do you complain about, fouling or improperly tapping your
supply?”

Mr. Tinker took time to reply. “I don’t quite follow
you,” he said.

“Why,” said Nehemiah, “water-right cases are usually
complaints that a man has fouled the stream with dye-water or chemicals
or by diverting ochre-water from above his own head-goit so that it may
enter the river below his own mill but above his neighbour’s.
That’s one class of case, and a comparatively easy one. The other
is when a mill-owner fancies that the water that has passed over his
neighbour’s water-wheel is not returned to the stream for his own
use lower down the stream. Now that’s always a very delicate
question, and one for experts. And it’s well known that for one
surveyor you get to swear on your side, another can be got to swear on
the other. They’re as bad as vets, in a horse-warranty case. Now
which class of infringement do you complain of?”

Again Mr. Tinker had to pause for a reply. “O both,” he
said. “Yes, certainly, both.”

“Why,” exclaimed Wimpenny, “whose mill is it?”

“The Co-op Mill,” said his client, somewhat shamefacedly, as
the lawyer thought.

“What! That fellow, Pinder! By Jove, I’m glad of this. Gad!
I’m as pleased as if you’d told me I was own brother to the
Prince of Wales. But”—and his face fell.

“But what?” asked Jabez, sharply.

“It’ll be lean picking, even if we win. I don’t
suppose the whole concern’s worth powder and shot.”

“And why are you anxious powder and shot should be spent on
Pinder?” asked Tinker, suspiciously.

“Oh, well I don’t mind telling you, Mr. Tinker. The
fact is, I was rather hard hit by your beautiful niece, if you’ll
excuse my saying so.”

“Well?” said Mr. Tinker, stiffly.

“But she seemed to prefer that low fellow Pinder’s company
to mine, and if she’s no better taste than that, well, I’m
not the one to enter the running against a screw.”

Mr. Tinker winced. “You seem to lose heart very easily, Mr.
Wimpenny. Young men weren’t so easily discouraged in my young
days.”

“Much you know about it,” thought the lawyer. “A
spirited young woman like Dorothy Tinker’s rather a different sort
of an undertaking from old Split’s scarecrow of a daughter.”

By mutual consent to the men reverted the less embarrassing question of
water rights.

“Just explain to me, Wimpenny, what must be done to vindicate my
rights.”

“Well, you must file a Bill in the Court of Chancery, and you must
file affidavits by the oldest inhabitants as to the customary service of
the water, and by analysts as to pollution, and you must go for damages,
and you’ll have to get other manufacturers to assess the damages,
and, oh!—yes, you might try for an
interim
injunction.”

“And Pinder’ll have to set another lawyer on?”

“Of course he will.”

“And that’ll cost
him
money, win or lose?”

“Rather.”

“Then go at him hammer and tongs, and the sooner you begin and the
hotter you go at him, the better you’ll please me.”

“But the evidence?”

“You must find the evidence, sir. I don’t care whether I win
or lose. But Co-op Mill must stop. For want of water if we win: for want
of funds if we lose.”

“Do you understand me?”

“You bet I do, and I’ll tell you this, I never went into a
case with better heart. You may rest easy, Mr. Tinker. Co-op
Mill’s as good as broke.”

It was but a week or so after this interview that Workhouse Jack,
loitering about the mill yard, espied a seedy looking fellow peering in
at the mill-gates. It was a Saturday afternoon. The engine was stopped,
the hands had trooped home, Tom and Ben had gone for a walk, and Jack
was in sole charge. He was dressed in his Sunday best, and meditating a
visit to the village, and, of course, Lucy. He knew the visitor at once
for Wimpenny’s process server. The process server did not know
Jack.

“Can I see Mr. Pinder?” the man asked.

“Aye, if yo’re none blind,” answered Jack.
“What’s your will?”

“Oh, beg your pardon, sir. Didn’t know it was you. This is
for you, sir, and he slipped a paper into Jacks hand.”

“It’s a petition in Chancery filed by our client, Mr.
Jabez Tinker, against you, sir.”

“A ’tition, is it,” said Jack “an’ what
mun aw do wi’ it nah aw’ve getten it?”

“Better see your lawyer about it.”

“Oh! an’ what ’ud ha’ happened, now, just for
argyment’s sake, if yo’d dropped this ere precious dockyment
i’stead o’ ’liverin’ it to me?”

The clerk was not prepared to say. “I don’t know indeed.
Perhaps the action couldn’t go on.”

“Oh! It couldn’t, eh?”

“I’m not sure. But any way, I
have
served it: so
it’s no use going into that.”

“Aye, yo’n sarved it,” assented Jack. “Just step
this way, will yo’, while aw run mi e’en ovver it,”
and so saying, Jack led the way into the boiler-house.

Then Jack deliberately locked the door.

“What does this mean?” asked the clerk.

“It just meeans this. Yo’ look as if a square meeal
’ud do yo’ all th’ gooid i’th’ warld,
an’ aw reckon yo’ve got to eit this bit o’ papper
afore yo’ cum aat.”

Jack flung it at him and sat quietly down.

“Yo’ may ta’ yo’r time, aw’m no ways
pressed mi sen. If yo’ feel it a bit dry aw’ll find
yo’ a can o’ watter to wesh it dahn wi’; but eit it
yo’ do afore yo’ see dayleet agen.”

“But, Mr. Pinder!”

“Mr. Pinder, indeed yo’ gorm fooil. A’m nooan
Mr. Pinder. Mr. Pinder’s a gentleman. Aw’m nobbut
his man. Nah, ger agate: Sooiner yo’r’ at it, an’
sooiner yo’ll ha’ done.”

And in the boiler-house Tom found the custodian of Co-op Mill and his
prisoner. To Jack’s indignation Tom quietly pocketed the petition
and released the clerk with an apology and a solatium.

CHAPTER XII

TO say that the service of the bill in Chancery on Tom was like a bolt
from the blue would be but feebly to describe the consternation with
which he perused the portentous document, and in time realized its
meaning and effect. Tom was absolutely unconscious that either in
thought, word, or deed he had wronged any of his neighbours below
stream. He had not, to his knowledge, turned more dye-water into the
river, or taken more pure water from it than the reasonable working of
his mill demanded, and had been afore-time accustomed by his
predecessor. He had received no complaint from Mr. Tinker, no
request for abatement of any nuisance he might unwittingly have
committed, or infringement he might innocently have caused,
Nehemiah Wimpenny in his zeal to do his client’s behests, and
in the animus he himself cherished against Tom, had even pretermitted
the usual letter of courtesy preceding the firing of the first shot, the
letter which in litigation is like the pourparlers of ambassadors
preparatory to the formal declaration of war—an omission by the
way, which Nehemiah had subsequent occasion to repent in sack-cloth and
ashes. But for the present Nehemiah was jubilant and elate. Affidavits
simply rained upon Tom. Photographers and surveyors swarmed about the
banks of the Holme above and below Co-op Mill, and its waters were
analysed and tested qualitatively and quantitatively as though the fate
of empires depended on the issue. It was plain that Wimpenny meant to
press the motion for an interim injunction, the effect of which would be
to stop, if but temporarily, the work at Co-op Mill, and would of itself
be as disastrous to its tenant as a final decree after full trial.

Tom and Ben discussed the situation in all its bearings.

“Aw’ll tell yo’ what it is,” said Ben,
“it’s nowt but spite. Aw’ve known this stream, man and
boy, for ovver fifty year, an’ th’ Co-op Mill as mony.
An’ a hangel fro’ heaven couldn’t mak’ me
believe as we’n done owt ’at Jabez Tinker’s a
reight to complain on. It’s nowt but spite, Tom, it’s
th’ owd tale ovver agen o’ th’ wolf an’
th’ lamb. He meeans to eit us up flesh an’ bone,
that’s th’ long an’ th’ short on it. An’
what for? That lays ovver me entirely. Tha’s nivver crossed him
i’ owt, has ta, Tom?”

And then, for the first time Tom told his friend of the offer Tinker had
made to him at the close of his apprenticeship.

“An’ what didn’t ta tak’ th’ shop for,
Tom? It ’ud ha’ been a seet easier for thee nor
startin’ at th’ Co-op?”

“Well, you see Ben, we’d made all our arrangements
and—”

“Aye, aye, aw see, lad, tha wer’ feeart aw sud think
tha’d thrown me ovver. Eh, lad, me and yar Hannah an’ Lucy
too, for that matter, ’ud ha’ gone to th’ big house
afore yo’ sud ha’ gone agen yo’r best interests for
us.”

“Oh, nonsense, Ben. I preferred the Co-op scheme. I never enjoyed
my life so much as I have done since we went into it, and I shall never
cast a regretful thought over either the labour or the wee bit money it
has cost me. What worries me, Ben, so I can’t sleep
o’nights, is the thought of the men who have joined us and put
their life-savings into the concern. I shall never hold up my head again
if they are to lose their money through their confidence in me.”

“And i’ me, Tom, i’ me, too. Yo’ see, lad,
yo’ wer’ i’ a manner o’ speikin’ a
stranger; but they’d known me all my life. But aw’m nooan
feeart they’ll blame oather on us, after th’ first
shock’s ovver. But if they dunnot ma’ Jabez Tinker
sweeat for this job, they’re nooan th’ lad’s aw
tak’ ’em for. If yo’ know onybody ’at’s
interested i’ insurance companies just yo’ tell ’em to
fight shy o’ Wilberlee Mill,” answered Ben savagely.

“That’s nonsense, Ben, and yo know it. Now what’s to
be done?”

“Let’s go see Mister Re’fearn,” suggested Ben.

“I’m afraid he may think we want to ask him to help us out.
We must take no money, Ben, from anybody. We’ll keep our good
names if we lose every stick we have.”

“Oh! tha needn’t be so tetchy, Tom, Redfearn’s nooan
fooil enough to lend us money to throw away. But yo’ know
he’s had more deealin’s wi’ th’ law nor us,
an’ though it gooas agen th’ grain, aw expec’
we’st ha’ to put a lawyer on to this job. We mun set a thief
to catch a thief, aw ma’ no daat.”

So Tom and Ben set off for Fairbank’s and were fortunate enough to
find Mr. Redfearn at home. He would hear no talk of business till
all had sat down to a good dinner in his own well-furnished sitting
room. “Folk always look on th’ gloomy side of things when
their belly’s empty,” he observed, “an’ taking
too doleful a way o’ lookin’ at things is just as foolish as
takin’ too cheerful a one,” from which profound truism it
will be seen that the farmer had learned something in the school of life
that is not taught in academies or college. He listened at first to the
story that Tom unfolded with the utmost attention and gravity. He even
insisted on Tom reading to him the Chancery Bill and the pile of
affidavits, but the prolixity and tautology of the legal phrasing
soothed him like a soporific.

“It’s like bein’ i’ Church,” he muttered
drowsily; and presently to complete the analogy, fell into a slumber
from which he was only aroused by the entrance of Mrs. Redfearn with
decanters, lemon, sugar and hot water, and a bottle of home-made rhubarb
wine for the special cheer of Tom, whose habits she knew.

“Yo’ munnot think aw’ve been asleep” said
Fairbanks. “Aw wer’ thinkin’, an’ aw can allus
think best wi’ mi e’en shut. Th’ missus theer
’ll tell yo’ aw speik th’ truth, for ’oo often
thinks awm asleep when ’oo’s givin’ me a leckter
upstairs; but aw know ivvery word oo’s said th’ next
mornin’ better than ’oo does hersen.”

“An’ much good my talkin’ does you, and much notice
you take of it,” said Mrs. Redfearn, “but if yo’

have
been thinkin’ let’s hear what you’ve thowt
on.”

“Tell Aleck to put Bob i’ th’ shafts.
We’r’ bahn to Huddersfilt. This is a lawyer’s job,
Tom, an’ aw think aw know th’ varry man for yo’.
Yo’ know Sykes 0’ Wrigley Mill. He’s a lad i’
Huddersfilt ’at used to be a sort o’ teacher wi’
Mr. Black, an’ then wer’ ’prenticed to a
’torney in th’ taan. He’s started for hissen now.
He’s as full o’ law as an egg’s full o’ meit, so
folk sayn. But he’ll neer ma’ much aat awm feeart, for when
he gets on his hind legs to speik, d— me if he can say boh! to a
gooise. His wits all go a wool gatherin’ but he knows th’
law, none better, aw’m towd. An’ believe me or believe me
not aw do think he’s honest so that wi’ his narvousness
an’ his honesty, he’ll not mak’ much aat as a
’torney. Aw’m feart oather on ’em’s a drawback
i’ his job; but
both
together’s enough to sink a clivverer
man nor Edwin Sykes ’ll ever be.”

It cannot be said that the anxious trio got much comfort from Mr. Sykes.
He told them frankly that at the very best the litigation must be costly
and prolonged, and that in the long run the Court would probably be
guided by the weight and authority of the expert evidence.

“Now that means purse against purse. And I’m afraid,
Mr. Pinder, that our guns are neither so many nor so heavy as our
opponent’s. And Wimpenny won’t give us much rest.”

One grain of consolation they did bear away with them, however. Mr.
Sykes was able to assure them that there was small likelihood of the
Court granting an
interim
injunction.

“The Judge will know that to stop the work at the mill, even
temporarily, would mean a probably irreparable loss. He won’t
prejudge the case on an interlocutary proceeding. That will give you
time to turn yourself round, Mr. Pinder, and I should say your best
plan would be to look out for a mill lower down the stream,
below

Mr. Tinker’s. Then perhaps you can have a fling at him some
fine day.”

“Eh! he’s a deep ’un is Ned for all his quiet ways.
Talks like a judge doesn’t he? What’s that word— inter
summat?”

“Interlocutory,” said Tom.

“An’ just think ’at aw’ve cuffed that lad mony a
time when aw’ve found him moonin abaat Fairbanks wi’ a book
i’ his hand. It’s just wonderful what education ’ll
do.”

It did not remain a secret in Holmfirth that the new Co-op was in
Chancery—name of dread import.
Omne ignotum pro magnifico
. The
utmost that even the fairly well-informed could tell about Chancery was
that it was a bottomless pit from which there was no escape, or a kind
of legal den where the lawyers fed on the oysters called estates,
flinging out the shells for the suitors to quarrel or get reconciled
over. That was the utmost; but it was enough. Tom called a private
meeting of all the hands and told them the facts. Their first feeling
was one of blank dismay, their next and abiding feeling one of dogged
resistance.

“It’s the devil’s plot, and hatched in hell,”
said the spokesman of the men who had money in the concern. “But
we’ll fight to the finish, an’ bi what we’n heard
abaat this here Chancery, th’ finish ’ll be abaat th’
same time as th’ Day o’ Judgment.”

The news reached Dorothy through the faithful Betty.

“Well, the law can’t hurt Mr. Pinder if he’s done
nothing wrong,” said her young mistress “The law is for
evil-doers, and I suppose Mr. Pinder is not an evil-doer.
He’s a very innocent looking one if he is.”

“Ah! it’s little yo’ know about th’ law, or me
oather, come to that. But aw keep mi ears oppen an’ they
do

say,—”

“Which, being interpreted, means ‘Serjeant Ramsden of the
County Constabulary,’” interrupted Dorothy, with an arch
smile. “Well, what do they,
alias
Serjeant Ramsden, say.”

“Why,” answered Betty in no wise abashed. “He, aw
meean they, say ’at it doesn’t matter a brass farden
i’ Chancery whether a man’s i’ th’ reight or
th’ wrang. It’s th’ longest purse at wins i’
th’ long run. Th’ Serjeant says, miss, ’at if Tom wins
i’ one court yo’r uncle can peeal to a higher court,
an’ on an’ on till it reaches th’ Lord Hissen.”

“The Lords, you mean, perhaps, Betty.”

“Weil, it’s all as one, for ought aw can see. It’s
naked we come into th’ world, and naked we go aat on it, an aw
reckon Tom ’ll be stripped pretty stark afore th’ case gets
up to th’ Lords.”

“But what’s it all about, Betty? Dear me, if being in love
makes a woman so tiresome as you are, I hope such a calamity will never
befall me. What
has
Mr. Pinder done?”

“Oh!” said Betty, “there’s no hope o’
yo’r escapin’ it unless so be as yo’r minded to play a
very one-sided game. But if yo’ ax me what th’ law
stir’s abaat, as far as aw can mak’ aat th’
mester

says it’s abaat th’ watter-reets to th’ mill, but

folk
sen it’s nowt but spite, so nah yo’ han it plump
an’ fair.”

“Meaning that my uncle has gone to law with his former apprentice
from some petty feeling of jealousy, or just to cripple him or even ruin
him?”

“That’s th’ talk o’th village, choose ha.”

“Well, I don’t believe it, Betty. My uncle is incapable of
such conduct. But I’ll soon find out for myself. Get me my hat and
cape this moment. I’m going out.” And Dorothy walked with
quick, resolute steps to Ben Garside’s house. She was fortunate
enough to find Lucy alone, and of this she was glad, for she was in no
humour to enjoy Hannah’s garrulous speech.

“What’s this I hear, Lucy, about my uncle going to law with
Mr. Pinder. I can make neither head nor tail of Betty at home, so
I’ve come to you. It seems to me there’s something about law
that forbids people to be intelligible when they’re talking of
it?”

“Your uncle,” said Lucy very gravely, “has served a
Bill in Chancery, I think they call it, on Tom.”

“What in the name of common sense is a Bill in Chancery? I know
what a dressmaker’s bill is, but the other variety is beyond
me.”

“I don’t quite know all the ins and outs of it,”
replied Lucy, still very seriously. “But so far as I can make out
your uncle complains that Tom fouls the stream and takes more water out
than he’s any right to, and of course as Wilberlee is lower down
the stream it must injure your uncle if it’s true.”

“And is it true?” asked Dorothy.

“Both Tom and father say there isn’t a word of truth in
it.”

“And you believe them?”

“Of course I do,” said Lucy simply.

“Then what is there to look so gloomy about? ’Pon my word,
Lucy, if you go on in the dumps like that I’ll shake you. I only
wish somebody would bring a false charge against me. There’s
nothing I should enjoy more than making them prove their words at no end
of trouble and expense, and then laughing at the faces they’d pull
when they failed to do it. If that’s Chancery I call Chancery a
very good joke.”

“Aye, but Tom says it will take all they have in the world to
prove that they’re in the right, and that month after month, for
goodness knows how long, the money that should go for wages and in
carrying on the mill must go to their lawyer. So it means ruin, win or
lose.”

“And that’s what they call law, is it?” exclaimed
Dorothy. “Anybody could see a set of men noodles made it. But what
are they going to do?”

“Just carry on as long as they can, and then I don’t know
what. It doesn’t matter so much for father. He can take to his
hand-loom again, and now I’m so much stronger I hope to be a help
to him. I can spin wonderful. But it will be a sad blow for Tom. His
whole heart and soul were in the mill. Not for the money. I never knew
anyone care less for money than Tom. But the hands were so contented and
father says it was to prove a social and economic revolution, whatever
that may mean.”

“It means apparently,” said Dorothy “ruining yourself
for the general good. Does Tom,—Mr. Pinder, take it much to
heart?”

“He pretends not to, always tries to put a cheerful face on when
he talks to mother. But I know it’s just crushing the youth out of
him. But it’s because those that went in with him may have to lose
their money. And father says there’ll be no room for Tom in these
parts if th’ Co-op’s stopped. The other manufacturers are
sure to side with your uncle, and they’ll none of them give Tom a
job if he asked for it.”

“Oh! they wouldn’t, eh?” Then suddenly. “Is Tom

very
dear to you, Lucy?”

Lucy flushed, and her eyes fell before Dorothy’s questioning look.
But her voice, though low, was very steady as she spoke.

“I love him very much, Dorothy. Next to the love I have for mother
and father there is no one in the world to me like Tom. He is my big
brother, you know,” she added, with a faint smile.

“Oh! Those big brothers have a way of turning into big
lovers,” said Dorothy. “That’s just their artful way.
They get a poor innocent confiding girl to feel like a sister, and then
when she begins to feel she cannot very well do without him, nothing
will do but a ring and a parson. I know them,” said Dorothy
viciously.

“Tom will never be
my
lover, Dorothy,” said Lucy, quietly.

“And why pray, Miss Pale-face?”

“Because he loves someone else. He has loved her for years.”

“What Parson Tom engaged! Tragedy upon tragedy. There are two
blighted beings then; the course of their true love, ruffled by this
dreadful Chancery. And who’s the luckless she? This is a world of
surprises. Tom was not such a bat as to look outside this house for a
prettier face and a sweeter heart than he’ll find inside
it.”

“I didn’t say Tom was engaged,” said Lucy.

“I know you didn’t. Well, if it isn’t I’ll not
venture another guess. Still, I’m a daughter of Eve after all, and
I confess I hope Mr. Pinder is not going to throw himself away on
some good-looking empty-head of a girl—a calf-love. You said it
was a malady of standing, contracted young, if I remember.”

“Yes, she’s good-looking,” said Lucy.

“
And
empty-headed?”

“You wouldn’t like me to say so.”

“I! What have my likes to do with it? It’s no concern of
mine. Really, you stimulate my curiosity. Is it anyone I know? Does she
go to our chapel?”

“Yes, she goes to Aenon,” said Lucy. “But there,
I’ll tell you no more.”

“Oh! I can guess, and thank you for nothing. It’s that
apprentice of Miss Baxter’s, the milliner. Now don’t deny
it. I saw Mr. Pinder looking at her very much the last Sunday he
honoured Aenon. The girl with the green gloves. The taste of some
men—in dress I mean.”

“Have it your own way,” said Lucy, “you’ll find
out someday, perhaps.”

“Oh! Bother Tom Pinder and his lady-loves green gloves as
well. However did we get talking of such a trifle! Now, seriously, Lucy,
do your father and the other want to fight this case, and can they win
if they can fight.”

“They say so. But what’s the use of talking. If ifs and buts
were apples and ducks!”

“And who knows but they are,” said Dorothy, springing to her
feet. She kissed Lucy with a bright face. “Don’t lose heart,
little pale-face. They aren’t beaten yet. Tell them not to give
in. I say so. Now, good-bye,—you’re sure it’s green
gloves?”

“You know I never said so. But good-bye.”

It is never safe to be certain about anything connected with the law;
but the opinion may be hazarded that never in the long years of his
tenancy did the office of Mr. Edwin Sykes receive a fairer client than
the young lady who was closeted with that sedate professor of the gloomy
science not long after the interview just recorded. The young lady did
not seem in the least impressed by the sombre volumes of statutes and
reports that lined the walls of the room, nor yet by the tape-bound
bundles of foolscap, draft, and brief, neatly docketed, that were spread
on a table by the lawyer’s side, so many pot-eggs, the ribald
alleged, to tempt the unwary to lay.

Dorothy had accepted the chair Mr. Sykes had handed her, but flicked its
horse-hair cushion with a delicate cambric handkerchief before complying
with his invitation to be seated.

“How very musty everything is,” she remarked in explanation.
“If I’d walked the length of New Street after sitting on
your chair without first dusting it, everyone would have said either
that I’d been knocked down by a tramp and robbed on my way from
Holmfirth, or been to visit an attorney. There mayn’t be much
difference in the consequences,” she added reflectively,
“but I don’t want all the world to know my business. You can
keep a secret, I suppose, Mr. Sykes?”

“It is part of my business,” the lawyer answered.

“Even from Mrs. Sykes—there is a Mrs. Sykes, I
suppose.”

“Well, yes, as you are good enough to ask, there
is
a Mrs.
Sykes,—and till to-day I thought her the most daring of her
sex” he would have liked to add.

“Ah! That’s a comfort. Now I can tell you everything. You
wouldn’t think now I’m in great trouble, and I want you to
help me out of it, and not a living soul but you must know about
it.” As Dorothy looked radiantly happy as she made this doleful
plaint it may be assumed that Mr. Sykes argued her case was not so
desperate as her words.

“If you will tell me, Miss Tinker, the nature of your trouble I
may be able to prescribe for you. We poor lawyers are not so clever as
the doctors. We can’t diagnose by the looks, or, I confess, I
should not advise you to abandon hope.”

“And this is the lawyer Ben said couldn’t say Boh! to a
goose,” thought Dorothy.

“Now, how shall I begin?” she said.

“Suppose you try the beginning,” he suggested.

“You know Mr. Pinder, of Holmfirth?” asked Dorothy,
glancing at a formidable pile of papers on the desk labelled
“Pinder at the suit of Tinker.”

“If you mean Mr. Tom Pinder, of Co-op Mill, Hinchliff
Mill, I think I may go so far as to say I do.”

“Come, that’s something,” said Dorothy. “You are
so very cautious you might have added ‘without prejudice.’
Now is it a very bad case?” she concluded.

“Really! Miss Tinker.”

“Now I don’t want any humming and ha-ing, you know, Mr.
Sykes. I take a very great interest in Mr. Pinder—well, not
in him you know. That’s ridiculous: but in Lucy, you know”
and Dorothy nodded with great significance, whilst the lawyer felt that
he was getting deeper and deeper into a bog.

“I confess I don’t know,” he said, “and I must
ask you to be a little more explicit.”

“Well,—dear me! How tiresome you are—it’s about
this quarrel between uncle Jabez and Mr. Pinder.”

“Are you Mr. Tinker’s niece? Then really, Miss Tinker,
I think if your uncle wants to open up any negotiations towards a
settlement he’d better send his lawyer.”

“What! Nehemiah Wimpenny! How could he? Didn’t I tell
you no one was to know anything of my visit but you and me, and Mr.
Wimpenny’s the very last man in the world I’d chose for any
errand of mine.”

“But in what can I help you, Miss Tinker? You will understand, of
course, that I cannot discuss my client’s affairs with anyone
without his knowledge and privilege,—no, not though an angel drop
from the clouds.”

“I suppose that’s a
rechauffé
from one of your
pretty sayings to Lizzie Hudson. Oh! Yes! I know all about it Mr. Sykes.
Lizzie and I were at school together, and I thought it just odious of
her not to ask me to her wedding.”

“And only a minute ago she asked me if there were a Mrs.
Sykes,” reflected the harassed young man. “Will she ever get
to her story?”

“And that’s what gave me confidence to come to you, Mr.
Sykes. Not the not being asked to the wedding, but because you were
Lizzie’s husband, and I did think of calling on her and bringing
her with me, but she’d have guessed,”—and here Dorothy
stopped abruptly.

“Yes, she’d have guessed?” said Mr. Sykes,
encouragingly.

“Never you mind what Lizzie would have guessed. It’s about
this lawsuit I’ve come. I suppose I’d better come to the
point.”

“Wish to heaven you would,” thought the lawyer.

“Now which do you think will win, uncle or Mr. Pinder?”

“If law and justice were one, Miss Tinker, there could only be one
answer—Mr. Pinder.”

“But they aren’t,—so that means Tom, that’s
Mr. Pinder, will lose.”

“You really must excuse me, Miss Tinker, I’ve said, even
now, more than I’d any right to say.”

“But don’t you see, I want to help Mr. Pinder to win.
That’s what I came for. Didn’t I tell you? Dear me, I wish
I’d gone to Lizzie first.
She
isn’t slow, at any
rate.”

Mr. Sykes smiled. “No, my wife is not slow-witted, and I’m
afraid I am. Perhaps that’s why she took pity on me.”

“Shouldn’t wonder. Now the question is, how can we help
Mr. Pinder, I mean Lucy, of course.”

Mr. Sykes felt his brain beginning to give way in the vain striving
after his visitor’s drift. “Lucy,” he murmured
hopelessly.

“Yes, Lucy. She’s my dearest friend. And she’s to
marry Tom,—Mr. Pinder I mean. That is to say she would if he
would; but she says he wont, and perhaps she’s right. Anyway, she
wanted him to win this case, and I want him to win this case, and
what’s more, I mean him to win this case,—for Lucy’s
sake, of course, because she says it’s all spite, and neither law
nor justice, and you say so too, don’t you?”

“Yes, I do.”

“Now Lucy says it’s all a matter o’ money, I
don’t mean matrimony; for goodness sake
don’t
repeat that
stupid jest. But I’ve had a long talk with Lucy, and she says it
will cost Tom and Ben, that’s Lucy’s father, you know, heaps
and heaps of money to fight the case to the end, and that’s just
what they haven’t got. You’re the blood-sucker, I
suppose?”

“Yes, Miss Tinker, I’m afraid I’m one of
them—for Lizzie’s sake, of course.”

Dorothy looked sharply at Mr. Sykes, and there was a slight flush of
colour on her cheek as she repeated “Oh, yes, for Lizzie’s
sake, of course.” Was it possible that this very sedate young man
could guess beyond his brief?

“Now
I’ve
got some money; at least I suppose so; though
I’ve never seen it. But I’ve always understood my poor
father that I don’t remember, made a will, and I was the only
child. Now you must get to know all about that, and Mr. Pinder and
Ben are not to go to the wall for want of money. Do you understand
that?”

“But am I really to understand, Miss Tinker, that you propose to
spend your money in helping my clients in fighting your own
uncle?”

“I don’t care if he’s twenty times my uncle, though
once time once is enough, thank you. But if he’s mean enough to
try to ruin Ben Garside—”

“And Mr. Pinder?” put in the lawyer, quite casually.

“And I thought this lawyer stupid,” thought Dorothy, but
ignored the interruption.

“Then I’m mean enough to fight him with his own weapons,
uncle or no uncle.”

“It sounds parlously like champerty and maintenance,” said
Mr. Sykes, more to himself than to Dorothy.

“There’s no sham about it, sir. I mean every word of it.
I’ll let my uncle see he can’t treat me as he does poor
aunt, like dirt under his feet.”

“God grant I’m spared the aunt,” groaned Edwin Sykes
inwardly “what with her Lucy and her own quite bewildering self
there are quite women enough in the case, without introducing an
aunt.”

“If I follow you, Miss Tinker, you are desirous, for your friend
Lucy’s sake, to help my client with money to carry on this
unfortunate litigation. Have you any idea what the costs may amount
to?”

“Not the slightest. But that doesn’t matter. The money shall
be found.”

“I’ve another question to ask, Miss Tinker, and a very
delicate one. May I ask how old you are?”

“And this is the man that can’t say Boh! to a goose,”
again thought Dorothy.

“I suppose if I’d assurance enough for a lawyer I should
tell you I’m as old as my tongue and a little older than my
teeth,” replied Dorothy merrily.

“That’s exactly what I’m driving at,” was the
reply very seriously uttered. “I’m not at all sure that I
should be justified in taking your money without my client’s
knowledge and consent even if you were of full age, but from a
minor!”

“Pshaw, I sha’n’t be a minor all my life. I shall be
twenty one next birthday, and that’s on May 21st.”

“There’s many things may happen between now and your
birthday.’’

“Exactly, your client may be ruined and Lucy may be
broken-hearted, and all because of a silly punctilio.”

“Have you a copy of your father’s will.”

“Ah! Now you’re talking. I haven’t; but I suppose one
can be procured. I should like to see one any way, for even a woman may
be allowed a little curiosity as to her own fortune. After all, I may be
as poor as a church mouse. But you can find out that for me and have no
qualms, I hope.”

“Oh, yes, I shall be pleased to get you a copy of the will. I
apprehend that you come to your inheritance in the general way.”

“And that is?”

“If and when you attain the age of twenty-one years, or marry
under that age. By the way, that suggests one simple solution of the
difficulty, you might marry.”

“Oh! That’s out of the question.”

“Not for, ahem!”—the young lawyer raised his long
white hand to his mouth and coughed very slightly “not for
Lucy’s sake?”

Dorothy rose with some dignity to close the interview. “Let me
know please when have got the copy of the will. Meanwhile, I suppose I
can rely on your discretion,” and Dorothy made to go.

“Nay, Miss Tinker, you have not permitted me to say my say. I am
well aware that Mr. Pinder is a poor man. I am also a poor man. I
had not intended to trouble my client in the event of defeat for more
than the actual costs out of pocket. Those I couldn’t afford to
advance. If you give me your simple word that these shall be paid sooner
or later by someone, no matter who,” and here there was the barest
suspicion of a twinkle in the young man’s eyes as he added,
“or for whose sake, rest assured I shall not allow
Mr. Pinder’s cause to fail for want of professional
assistance. More I cannot promise.”

Dorothy extended her hand. “And you have my word that if I live
you shall not suffer. I do so want Tom, I mean Mr. Pinder, to win
if he’s in the right. I’ll do almost anything rather than he
should be borne down simply by his poverty. I say
almost
anything. I
draw the line at marrying, you know; besides,” and a look of
sudden remembrance sprung to Dorothy’s eyes.

“Yes, besides?”

“Oh, it’s something you wouldn’t understand, about a
horrid girl with green gloves,” and Dorothy tripped away with a
smile and a nod.

“This case fairly bristles with women,” mused Edwin Sykes.
Quintilian was right:
Nulla causa sine femina
.

And the months went by and the trial of the great cause of “Pinder
at the suit of Tinker” seemed as far off as ever. First blood had
been drawn by the defendant: the motion for an
interim
injunction and
an account of profits had been refused by the Court, and the judge had
made certain observation as to the precipitancy with which the action
had been commenced that made that respectable practitioner, Mr.
Nehemiah Wimpenny, who was present at the hearing of the motion,
long that the floor of the Court would gape and swallow him to the
bowels of the earth,—anywhere out of hearing of that calm, gentle
voice dropping vitriol in honeyed accents. In proportion as Tom and Ben
and the friends of Co-op Mill rejoiced, so did Mr. Tinker rage and
storm. From the very filing of the Bill he had regretted that in his
anger he had instituted proceedings that none knew better than himself
were purely vexatious and vindictive. The monitor of the night watches
had left him little peace. In vain he had tried to silence the still
small voice by arguing to himself that to stop Co-op Mill would be to
stop the irreligious services which more and more abundantly attracted
men from the orthodox ministrations of Mr. Jones and the other chapels
of the district. Mr. Tinker was no Jesuit. Again and again he more
than half-resolved to bid Mr. Wimpenny stay his hand he would have been
glad to be quit of the lawsuit, even if he had to pay the
defendant’s costs as well as his own. But now that he was smarting
under a rebuff, and his enemy was exulting in a momentary
triumph,—give way now! No! That was not the stuff
Jabez Tinker was made of. To be bested by a boy, a nobody that owed
all he was and all he had to him, a serpent whom he had warmed in his
breast,—it could not, it should not be.

And Nehemiah Wimpenny artfully fanned the flames of
Mr. Tinker’s wrath. He pooh-poohed the temporary check.

“It wasn’t an engagement, my dear sir; an interlocutory
motion is a mere skirmish, a sort of reconnoitering expedition, a simple
device to draw the enemy’s fire. Now we know where they are. They
have had to show their hand, sir. We know where their weak spots
are.”

“That’s all very fine,” grumbled Tinker, gloomily.
“We may have found
their
weak spot; but it seems to me
they’ve found one or two of ours—and one sore one, too,
judging by the way you squirmed when my Lord rubbed it into you.”

“Oh! That’s nothing,” laughed Wimpenny. “I took
his salt
cum grano
, and I don’t doubt you’ll attach the
same importance to this little
contretemps
. The trial’s the
thing.’’

“You must win this case, Wimpenny, if money can win
it.’’

“Money can do anything in this world,” said Wimpenny,
“at least that’s my professional experience.”

Mr. Tinker left the lawyer’s office in anything but a
tranquil frame of mind. He felt like a conspirator in a sordid crime.
The very paltriness of the issues and the insignificance of his opponent
galled and fretted him. But how retreat now that all the world was
saying that Tom Pinder was more than a match for Jabez Tinker?

CHAPTER XIII.

FROM this time onward for some months there is little to record. The
parties to the great law suit awaited with what patience they might the
final trial of the all-important issue. The failure of the attempt to
stay the work at Co-op Mill pending the final decision secured for
Tom Pinder and his colleagues a welcome breathing space. If it were
possible all hands bent themselves to their respective tasks with
increased energy. The check to the plaintiff gave them heart for the
present and hope for the future. Every precaution was taken to guard
against any fouling or minishing of the stream.

The people of the Holme Valley are even to this day a litigious,
disputatious race. They are law-loving in an inverted sense. An average
native does not feel that he has lived his life unless he has at least
once been prosecutor or plaintiff in a “law do.” With the
poet he may be supposed to sing—

“’Tis better to have sued and lost

Than never sued at all.”

And the pros and cons of any
cause celebre
are discussed wherever men
foregather long before the fierce light of the Courts beat upon the
matter. The “company” of the village public constitute
themselves into an informal jury. Generally each side has its adherents.
The witnesses, or such of them as frequent the houses of entertainment,
tell and tell again the story they are to repeat in Court. The strong
and the weak points of the evidence are discussed, criticized,
cross-examined, as it were, with all the acumen of the native mind, and
all the freedom of irresponsibility, and of the license that ignores the
trammelling confines of the laws of evidence. The peculiar
qualifications of the local lawyers engaged are discussed with a
particularity that would very much surprise, and not always gratify the
gentlemen whose merits and demerits are so freely appraised.
Illustrations drawn from previous forensic contests are liberally drawn
upon. There is generally in the company some man who has purchased by
bitter experience the right to speak with authority, who airs his
knowledge of the intricate mazes of legal proceedings. His conversation
bristles with technical terms. He speaks glibly of writs, summonses,
subpoenas, judgments, appeals, bills of costs and the taxation thereof.
If by good fortune he possesses a copy of an ancient text-book and can
produce text and verse in support of his assertions he is an opponent to
be admired, but shunned. In public-house controversy the man who is most
dogmatic, who can shout loudest and longest is usually adjudged the
victor, especially if he is prepared to back his opinion and table the
money; but even he must yield to the visible
dicta
of the printed
word. By the time the cause is ripe for hearing, bets have been made and
taken; the adherents of the adversaries have ranged themselves; there
are the village Montagues and Capulets, and the local attorney goes into
Court the champion of a score of clients whose very existence he is
unaware of.

Now in Holmfirth Jabez Tinker’s defeat had been celebrated at
the
Cropper’s Arms
by a beast-heart supper. The landlord
had provided the beast-heart in the due recognition of the policy of
throwing a sprat to catch a mackerel. There had been some talk of
inviting Edwin Sykes to preside at the supper, but even Holmfirth
hardihood has its bounds. Tom Pinder, the landlord had shrewdly
surmised, would prove a kill-joy, and as for Ben Garside, though every
feeling of his heart said “yes” to the invitation, he was
kept away partly by his own sense of propriety, but still more by the
emphatic injunctions of his better half.

“Tha’rt nooan bahn to shaat, Ben, afore tha’rt aat
o’ th’ wood, an’ when tha does shaat, tha mun do thi
shaatin’ i’ decent company, an’ not amang yon’
beer-swillin’ hogs at th’
Cropper’s Arms
. What
do they care whether yo’ win or looise? There isn’t one on
’em but ’ud sell yo’ for a quart o’ ale.
Yo’r nooan bahn to lower yo’rsen bi mixin’ amang that
lot, it says i’th Book theer ’at i’ vain the net is
spread i’ th’ seet o’ ony bird; but th’ kind
o’ bird at th’ net o’ th’
Cropper’s
is
set for mun be bats darkened wi’ brewer’s grain, an’
that’s all t’ grain some on ’em feed on.”

It did not lessen Jabez Tinker’s irritation and general sense
of all things being awry that he was in many ways made conscious that
the only public opinion that he really cared about—that of his own
neighbourhood—was dead against him. Mr. Tinker affected to
despise the sentiments of his neighbours, and he certainly could not be
accused of stooping to court popularity. But no man is really
indifferent to the good or ill-word of his own little world. And Jabez
was aware that even his own household was not on his side. To be sure in
the rare visits he paid to his ailing wife at Harrogate he was sure of
one sympathetic listener as he unfolded in brief, terse sentences the
story of his wrongs, in which he had almost persuaded himself to
believe, and of the indignities which he concluded must be patent to
everyone. But Dorothy he knew to be openly and avowedly in the camp of
the enemy, and this was an ever rankling sore. Jabez had declared to
himself that his niece was the illest of all birds fouling its own nest.
She was a Tinker, his brother’s daughter, and it was her bounden
duty to take his side and fight his battle whether he were right or
wrong. The mere stranger and passer-by, they might scan and scrutinize;
but for the girl who slept under his roof and sat at his table to
condemn her heart, was the blackest treason and gross ingratitude Jabez
had never heard of Walpole’s reply to the county member who
promised his vote whenever he should think the member in the right.
“I want men who’ll back me right or wrong: through thick and
thin.” But Jabez had the same views as to the countenance he was
entitled to expect from his niece.

And Dorothy was made to feel that her uncle’s feelings were very
bitter towards her. The subject of the lawsuit was never referred to,
but Jabez, never a demonstrative or genial relative, now became cold,
repellent, caustic. If there was a death in the house, Betty declared,
it could not be gloomier, and if it wasn’t for leaving Miss
Dorothy she wouldn’t care how soon she changed her name and state.

All this was, one may be sure, not conducive to Dorothy’s
serenity. She had, too, at times, a sense of treachery to her uncle. Was
she justified in secretly aiding and abetting his enemy, even if that
enemy were an enemy
malgré lui
? How was she to be certain that
what most people said was true, that her uncle was merely persecuting a
rival in trade to crush him? Could she, indeed, believe that of that
stern, austere man, the pillar of Aenon Chapel, quoted and esteemed
throughout the whole Baptist denomination who of all other men, she had
thought, however unlovable was at least a just man. These considerations
were of themselves sufficient to disquiet a young and sensitive mind.
There was another. Was Dorothy honest with herself? It was Dorothy who
asked the question. And when man or maid has come to the pass of asking
so searching a question it is odds that conscience has a ready
“No.” Was it
par exemple
, quite the truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but the truth, that it was only for her
friend’s sake, and for the triumph of abstract justice against an
unholy conspiracy that Dorothy had so overleaped the bounds of maidenly
reserve and perilled her fortune in the quicksands of the law. And when
Dorothy, in the still watches of the night, thus put Dorothy’s
self into the witness box, and her fluttering heart gave its blunt
reply, Dorothy was fain to draw the coverlet over a winsome face and
hide the crimson blushes e’en from the sightless eyes of night,
and toss and turn upon her uneasy couch courting and yet dreading the
sleep that brought dreams that should not be for maids uncourted and
unwon.

And to nights thus harassed followed days embittered by her
uncle’s harsh, forbidding aloofness, and, to fill her cup to the
brim, by the now unmistakable attentions of Nehemiah Wimpenny. That
young ornament of the law had fully satisfied himself that Dorothy was
worth the winning. He had even gone so far as to transfer his valued
custom from the
Rose and Crown
, and Polly was left lamenting
but sustaining her desertion with more philosophy than Ariadne or Dido.

“Good riddance of bad rubbish,” was all she said, and
forthwith reserved her sweetest smiles and most languishing glances for
the village surgeon, who had long sighed in vain, eclipsed by the
greater attractions or,—may it be suggested?—by the deeper
purse of the village attorney.

Nehemiah was now a constant visitor at Wilberlee, and by
Jabez Tinker was always welcomed with a warmth that increased when
the manufacturer perceived that the attorney’s visits were not
purely professional. Jabez saw in his niece’s marriage relief from
a daily source of irritation. True, the day drew nigh when he must be
prepared to produce and vouch his accounts as executor and trustee of
his late brother. But Jabez flattered himself that if anyone could be
counted on to keep Wilberlee out of Chancery it would be
Nehemiah Wimpenny, if Nehemiah Wimpenny were also
Dorothy’s husband.

“Lawyers are fond of law, but it must be at somebody else’s
expense,” he argued. “Wimpenny won’t be such a fool as
to share my cake with others, when sooner or later he can have it all
himself.”

But Nehemiah found the wooing of Dorothy up-hill work. The Holmfirth
“Don Juan” was accustomed to the easy conquests of the
bar-room and the side-wings of the Huddersfield Theatre. He found it
difficult to teach his tongue the language to which it was a stranger,
and after a painful hour or so spent in the parlour of Wilberlee in the
attempt to interest or amuse the young heiress, his whole being cried
out for the unrestrained freedom of Polly’s conversation, and for
the ready appreciation Polly had always vouchsafed to his jests and
innuendos which even Nehemiah knew would ensure his prompt expulsion
from Wilberlee, probably at the point of the owner’s toe.

But as yet, at all events, he felt himself securely in
Mr. Tinker’s goodwill. He had even gone so far as to drop a
not obscure hint as to the aspirations he cherished in what he was
pleased to call his heart.

“Win this accursed law-suit for me,” Jabez had said,
“and we will talk about matters less important. Meanwhile, you had
better make as sure of my niece’s consent as you may of mine. Not
that Dorothy would stay for that. I wish you joy of her, that’s
all. Women are kittle-cattle to shoe. I don’t think you’ll
find my niece an exception to her sex.”

But Nehemiah, despite the guardian’s favour, confessed to himself
that if he progressed at all in Dorothy’s good graces, his
progress was crab-wise—backwards. What
could
he talk about? He
feigned an interest in the sermons of the Rev. David Jones. But Dorothy
yawned at the very mention of the minister’s name. Then he
affected an interest in her Sunday School class, but Dorothy said Sunday
School classes were generally a combination of scholars who didn’t
want to learn and teachers who didn’t know how to teach, and as
she felt herself to be one of the latter class, she was determined to
give her class up. Then the desperate lover essayed his powers at the
retailing of local gossip, telling with unction how young D— was
supposed to be casting sheep’s eyes at Nancy N—; how the
plain daughter of the vicar’s warden was shamelessly setting her
cap at the new curate, and how the hue of Mrs. J—’s nose-end
was erroneously attributed to poverty of blood.

In one topic only could he prevail on Dorothy to take an interest at
all, and that was a topic on which Nehemiah was eloquent enough at
first, but of which in time he became uncommonly shy,—the vexed
question of water rights, with especial reference to the great case of
“Pinder at the suit of Tinker.”

“So you’ve lost your application for an
interim

injunction?” Dorothy said demurely one night after tea, when her
uncle had hurried off to a deacon’s meeting, promising speedy
return, and hospitably pressing his guest to stay for the substantial
supper of cold meats and pastry with which our hardier fathers braved
the terrors of nightmare and dyspepsia.

“Oh, that’s nothing, Miss Dorothy,” said Nehemiah
jauntily, glad of a subject of conversation in which he flattered
himself he could shine, “nothing at all, I can assure you.”

“Then you expected to lose?”

“Well, not say expect, but fortune of war you know, fortune of
war, glorious uncertainty, and all that, don’tcherknow.”

“But you are certain to win in the end, or is there a glorious
uncertainty about that?”

“Oh! yes, sure to win in the long run. Pinder can’t stand
the racket. Expected he’d have caved in long since. Can’t
understand it. Sykes must be risking more than I’d like to. Sticks
like a leech at all points.”

“There’s an old saying, Mr. Wimpenny, that
Tear’em’s a good dog, but Holdfast’s a better. Perhaps
Mr. Sykes is one of your Holdfast breed.”

“Ah! Ah! very good, indeed, Miss Tinker. Must remember that. But
we shall shake him off yet, you bet.”

“Thank you, I don’t bet.”

“Beg pardon, Miss Tinker, only a way of speaking,
don’tcherknow. No offence,” and Nehemiah told himself that
Dorothy was a very difficult girl indeed.

“So you think you’ll wear Mr. Pinder out. Do you mean
his patience or his means?”

“Oh! patience is cheap enough. I dare say Pinder has plenty of
that. It’s the poor man’s assets,
don’tcherknow.”

“I’m afraid that’s often too true, Mr.
Wimpenny.”

“Well, I could have sworn it was about all the stock-in-trade
Pinder had to break him in. But somebody’s finding the money, or
else Sykes is a bigger fool than I take him to be.”

“Money, money, money, you men seem to talk and think of nothing
but money.”

“And they say, Miss Tinker, that women have a very pretty notion
of spending what the men think and talk about.”

“Well, I for one would rather talk of something else. You’re
sure, now, uncle is going to win this case?”

“Well, of course I
think
so, or I shouldn’t have advised
the proceedings.”

“But I suppose you advised the application for a what-do-you call
it injunction. But you failed in that? Now I want you to tell me all
about uncle’s grievances against Mr. Pinder. It is so
delightful to find a lawyer who can make things so beautifully simple to
a poor ignoramus of a girl like me. I can see now why you have so many
cases in the Courts.”

“Oh! Dorothy, Dorothy.”

And forthwith the willing victim of woman’s guile talked at large
of water encroachment, of unlawful ochre-water diverted from its natural
course so that it passed by the head-goit of Co-op Mill, and only
entered the river as it sped on to Wilberlee, to Mr. Tinker’s
great damage and detriment. Never was Nehemiah more eloquent, never had
he so wrapt and intent a listener.

“She’s just the woman for a lawyer’s wife,”
thought Nehemiah, as he talked. “I’ll practise my speeches
on her.”

“But, after all, it’s no use wearying you with all these
details, Miss Tinker. We shall never reach a final trial. Your uncle
isn’t the man to take a beating, and if we’re trounced in
one Court we shall go to another. Pinder can’t stand the racket. I
call it downright dishonest of him taking the savings of those deluded
Co-opers, as they call them, and spending it on Sykes. Of course
it’s all the better for me. But the whole thing’ll fizzle
out in the Bankruptcy Court, and I take it there’ll be no
necessity to wait for the Court of Chancery’s decision. Want of
shekels will decide the question before we’re much older, mark my
words.”

“How very charming!” quoth Dorothy. “Really, Mr.
Wimpenny, I don’t know how to thank you for making everything so
clear to me. Now these water-foulings by Mr. Pinder, I suppose
anyone can see them? You’ve interested me so much I’ve a
good notion to turn myself into an amateur expert; if that isn’t a
contradiction in terms.”

“Not more anomalous than a woman with sense,” reflected
Nehemiah. But he said with something of an effort.

“Well, the fact is Miss Tinker, there isn’t very much to
see. It’s the eye of science, don’tcherknow, that we go by
in these cases. The eye of science,” he repeated, evidently
pleased with that phrase.

“Well, anyway, I’ll try what the eye of a woman can see some
fine day. Perhaps I may find out something that has escaped all you
clever men, and then you’ll have to take me up to London as a
witness, I hope.”

It was, perhaps, in pursuance of this quite commendable resolve, that
Dorothy one bright, cloudless day in August, clad in a close-fitting
costume that permitted the graceful movement of her limbs without
concealing the charming lines of her form came suddenly upon
Tom Pinder in the neighbourhood of the Isle of Skye. Dorothy, who
had, as far as the nature of the ground permitted, followed the course
of the stream as it flowed from its source down the valley, was warm and
flushed from the toilsome ascent, but the glow of health was on her
cheek and its sparkle in her eye. Tom, on the contrary, was pale and
careworn. Too sedulous devotion to his necessary work, too little rest
of mind and body, but above all the constant anxiety and uncertainty for
the future were telling their tale upon his robust, vigorous, elastic
frame. But a glad light sprang to his eyes, and a happy smile to his
lips as he met Dorothy’s outstretched hand.

“You are quite a stranger, Mr. Pinder; it is ages since I
caught more than a glimpse of you. Betty is quite fretting that you
never go to see her now. Vows she is wearing to skin and bone; but it
must be by the eye of faith she attests the process.”

“No. I do not often get to Betty’s kitchen now,” said
Tom, with something very like a sigh. “More’s the pity; you
see, I can’t very well go openly, and you wouldn’t have me
go like a thief in the night.”

“No, I would not. It’s all this wretched law business, of
course. But which way were you going, uphill, or down?”

“Bilberry! Well, there’ll be a breeze from the water’s
face. But I think I ought to be turning homewards.”

“May I accompany you, Miss Tinker? You pass near my own mill, you
know.”

“La!
my
mill! how grand it sounds. I think I should like to say

my
mill, and to feel that the hands were
my
people. ’Tis a
relic of feudalism, I suppose.”

Tom raised his eyebrows almost imperceptibly. He had not credited
Dorothy with much historical knowledge.

“Oh, you needn’t look so superior, Mr. Wiseacre. I’ve
read a book or two, though I don’t teach classes on Sunday, like a
naughty, defiant unbeliever, as some folk are. But there, you
shan’t accompany me homewards. That will perhaps teach you to veil
your superiority.”

“I assure you, Miss Tinker,” began Tom, but boggled at his
disclaimer, for he was a poor liar, and Dorothy had; divined his
thoughts shrewdly.

“Instead,” said Dorothy, enjoying his confusion,
“instead I will go on with you to Bilberry Reservoir: I’ve
as much right to the cool breeze from its surface as you have, and if
you’ve no very great objection, Mr. Pinder, you may give me
your arm up the hill.”

Tom flushed to the brow and, feeling weak as water, hoped that
Dorothy’s ears were not as quick, as her eyes, for sure she would
have heard the beating of his heart.

“Do you know, Miss Dorothy, I think it’s the very first time
I’ve been asked to give a lady my arm.”

“Been asked?” said Dorothy, and part withdrew her little
hand.

“Or given it, of course. I should never dream of giving it
unasked.”

“Oh!” said Dorothy, and her hand stole back again.
“What, not to Lucy?”

“Oh, well, you know. Well, perhaps Lucy may have taken it
sometimes when she felt overdone can’t say for sure. One
doesn’t think of these things.”

“Oh! don’t they?” queried Dorothy, and her hand again
made for retreat.

“Not with Lucy, I mean,” added Tom.

“Oh!” and the hand now was restful.

They walked slowly towards the reservoir, leaving the highway, and
treading on the soft close-cropped grass that fringed the moor. A
grouse, occasionally, whirring low near the heather, cried its alarmed
“Go-back, go-back,” and the faint sound of the
sportsman’s gun was borne upon the wind. Silence fell upon the
two, a silence that Tom knew not, nor cared to break.

“And what about Miss Baxter’s apprentice?” at last
spoke Dorothy, very softly.

Tom did not seem to hear. In truth he walked in a blissful trance. The
question fell upon his ear, but the words, as words will when the mind
is dreaming, tarried ere they reached his senses.

It seemed to Dorothy as if there had been a long gap in their
conversation when he spoke.

“I beg your pardon, what did you say, Miss Dorothy?”

“I said, what about Miss Baxter’s apprentice?” and
there was no mistaking the withdraw of the hand now.

“Miss Baxter’s apprentice!” said Tom, blankly.
“Miss Baxter, the milliner, you mean.”

“Of course I mean her
and
her apprentice.”

“Well, what about them?” asked Tom, “and how came we
to be talking about them?”

“What’s her name? I hope it’s a pretty one.”

“Why, Miss Baxter, to be sure.”

“Stupid! I mean her apprentice. The one that wears green gloves.
She’s one of the teachers in our Sunday school. Oh! You know very
well, sir.”

“I suppose you mean Miss Pounder.”

“What a horrid name: but what could you expect from a girl that
wears green gloves. You really must buy her a pair of another colour.
But there’s no great change from Pounder to Pinder. That will be
one comfort for her. But I meant her Christian name.”

“Upon my word,” said Tom, “I haven’t an idea. It
may be Jezebel for aught I know or care.”

“But I thought….”

“Yes, you thought?”

“Oh! nothing,” said Dorothy, “and here, thank
goodness, we’re at the reservoir at last. Oh! isn’t the view
down the valley just lovely?”

“It is,” said Tom, but his eyes were on Dorothy’s
beaming face.

They lingered for some moments on the embankment of the vast sheet of
water, each wrapt in thought. It was Dorothy who spoke.

“Wherever does all the water come from and how could they manage
to trap it like this?”

“Oh, this reservoir is almost made by Nature. Yonder is
Hoobrook Hill and there is Lum Bank. It needed but to throw a
bank across the intervening space, and behold, the reservoir was made.
The water comes from Holme Moss and the hills running up to
Saddleworth. You would scarce think that this huge dam contains nigh a
hundred million gallons of water, and that there is a pressure of
several hundred thousand ton weight on the bank on which we
stand.”

“Oh! Tom! if it were to burst!”

Pinder looked very grave. “I have often thought of that. It would
be a calamity such as daunts the heart but to think of. I come here
often of a moonlight night when I have made up my books for the day. It
is sweet to be alone with God, and thoughts that come from God and turn
to Him. But there seems some weird fascination that draws my steps
hitherwards. Had I ever contemplated suicide….”

Dorothy’s hand sought his involuntarily “Never that Tom,
never that.”

“I should have thought there was an unseen hand beckoning, me
hither. This great expanse of water, so still, when the clouds brood
over it, so sullen, so seeming peaceful confined, so terrible for
infinite woe if it should I o’erleap its barrier, has cast its
spell over me.”

“How gloomily you talk, Mr. Pinder!”

“It was ‘Tom’ but a moment gone.”

“Well, Tom, then—as we are such old friends.”

“Yes, Miss Dorothy, my heart misgives me about this slumbering
giant. I doubt the strength of his chains. See here”—and he
led toward the centre of the embankment. “Where we stand the
surface is nearly a yard lower than the mouth of the culvert.”

“What’s the culvert for?” asked Dorothy.

“It is the safety valve of the reservoir.”

“I’m afraid I’m rather stupid.”

“You see, when the reservoir gets over full the excess should go
down the culvert. As things are it would begin to overflow just where we
stand. Indeed, more than once when the wind has set this way, I’ve
seen the water trickle over here. Let that trickle be but continuous and
a rill would become a gap, the gap a yawning aperture and this huge
burthen of Nature’s most innocent fluid would hurl itself down the
valley, and what or who could withstand it!”

“But, Tom, whose duty is it to see to these things?”

“The Commissioners. Your uncle is one of them.”

“Oh! I will speak to him, I promise you, and that right urgently.
Would you, could you speak instead of me? Uncle is very wroth with me
these days, and, oh! Tom, life is so dree at Wilberlee, I could find it
in my heart at times to cry my very eyes out. And it’s all your
fault.”

“
My
fault!” he repeated.

“Yes, yours, Tom why couldn’t you let uncle alone with your
horrid law. You know he will have his own way, and, I think, your having
been his apprentice makes it more galling.”

“And a workhouse brat at that,” said Tom, bitterly.

“Oh! never think of that, Tom. No one does. I don’t, and I
don’t care if I do. It isn’t  that: but uncle cannot
bear to be thwarted. Can’t you let it drop?”

“Faith, I’d only be too glad. But it is Mr. Tinker that
attacked me, and there is only one way to stop the law that I know of.
Your uncle must give the word. But he wont, and I can’t.”

“Couldn’t you just let him have his own way; it will please
him, and it won’t hurt you, nor your precious Co-op either.”

“I don’t know what you call hurting me: it will just ruin
me, and what’s worse it will ruin a dozen others or so, poor Ben
Garside among them.”

“But couldn’t you go lower down the stream? Mr.
Sy——, I mean somebody,…. I mean” and here
Dorothy lost herself altogether, and stood dumb-founded.

But Tom’s mind had seized upon the first suggestion of her words
and he was unconscious of her embarrassment.

“Yes, if some good fairy would transport Co-op Mill below
Wilberlee, we might manage very well. Say we had that carpet we read of
in the
Arabian Nights
. But what’s the use of talking? I cannot
stop the litigation, and your uncle wont.”

“Couldn’t you allow him the name of a victory if he promised
to let things go on just as they were, and you had nothing to pay those
greedy lawyers? I’m sure he is not an unreasonable man, only
you’ve crossed him, somehow, Tom.”

“I couldn’t send him more water or power if I tried, I know
that.”

“And do you think he doesn’t know it? Will you just go to
him and humble yourself to him. I’ll engage he shall meet you
half-way.”

“I’m shot if I do,” said Tom stoutly, “he began
it and he must end it.”

“I thought you preached the gospel, Tom.”

“Aye, aye, that’s all very well; but there’s nothing
in the Bible about eating dirt, or letting a man make a door mat of you
for him to wipe his feet on. Besides, there’s others to think of,
Miss Dorothy. There’s Ben, for one, and all those whose money is
in the concern. They’d never be willing.”

“You shan’t hide behind Ben, nor yet the others. You know
very well they’ll say aye to anything you said. I know I should,
Tom.”

Is there ought so subtle in this world as a woman’s cozening
tongue.

“Do promise, Tom,” and here Dorothy seemed parlously near
letting flow the tears she had threatened a while back; “for
Ben’s sake, for Lucy’s sake.”

“I cannot, Miss Dorothy, do not ask me. You do not know how hard
it is for me to say you nay.”

“For
my
sake, Tom; because
I
ask you. Oh! I am so unhappy amid
it all. I know not what I say, nor ask.”

“For your sake? Miss Dorothy, for your sake!”

“For mine, Tom,” whispered Dorothy, with down cast eyes and
burning cheek.

How Tom at that moment constrained himself, and withheld the words that
leapt to his lips, he could never tell.

“For your sake then, Dorothy,” was all he said.

She placed her hand within his arm, and in a silence that neither cared
to break, they turned by mutual impulse to descend the hill homewards.

CHAPTER XIV.

Tom Pinder lost no time in waiting upon his solicitor and
acquainting him with his desire that the proceedings should be stayed
even if to stay them meant an ignominious surrender. Mr. Sykes did not
conceal his surprise.

“What about the plaintiff’s costs?” he asked. Tom said
he had reason to hope these would not be insisted on. “It is yours
I’m much concerned about.”

“As to them, make your mind easy. I shall make out an account of
my actual disbursements, and you must pay me off by such instalments as
you find convenient.”

“But your labour?” protested Tom, “the days of manna
are over long ago, and I suppose that if popular opinion were ought to
go by lawyers would be the last body of men in the world for whom a
special dispensation from the general rule would be made.”

“Ah well! popular opinion is sometimes wrong, let us hope, despite
the saying,
Vox populi vox Dei
.”

“I thought you were a Radical, Mr. Sykes.”

“Yes, yes, but I am not so ardent a lover as to be blind to the
faults of my mistress. But about this stay of proceedings. I must sound
Wimpenny. I’m afraid he’ll be for his pound of flesh and all
the other blood he can squeeze out of you. He’s very sore about
that interim injunction and the judge’s remarks at the time would
scarcely be as balm of Gilead to him.”

“I suppose Mr. Wimpenny will take his orders from his
client.”

“Oh! of course. Well, we shall see what we shall see. That’s
oracular, if it doesn’t convey much information. What about your
scheme of Co-operative production on advanced lines? Is that to die an
untimely death? It seemed to me a most promising essay in social
economics. So long as you were content to work like a slave and be a
poor man, with no prospect of being anything but a poor man, the system
seemed flawless.”

“Systems for the regulation of human affairs will never be
flawless, Mr. Sykes, till the men and women who are the flesh and blood
of all systems are also flawless. Now I am far from being that.”

“I presume not,” said the lawyer, with something like a
sigh. “I suppose you’ve got tired of this sacrificial altar
and have secured a lucrative berth, and, like all the others, are going
to worship the golden calf.
Sic transit gloria mundi
. I shed a tear to
the memory of Co-op Mill and all the high resolves it enshrines. Who
shall write its cold ‘
Hic jacet
.’”

“Nay, Mr. Sykes, I am not a Latin scholar; but if you will change
your goose quill for the graver’s chisel, you shall inscribe on
the corner stone of Co-op Mill a proud, a defiant
Resurgam
.”

“What! You intend to try again?”

“Certainly, I am already looking for premises
below

Mr. Tinker’s Mill. Unless the Holme takes to flowing uphill,
I shall be safe from my present adversary, at all events.”

Mr. Sykes rose and grasped his client’s hand warmly. “That
is good hearing, Mr. Pinder; you are a man. Ah! I don’t
wonder at Miss —”; but here the man of law checked himself.

“Confound it. The murther was nearly out,” he muttered.

“I’ll write to Wimpenny at once,” he said, “but
I mustn’t seem too hot for a settlement or he’ll hold out
for all he knows. I shall begrudge him every penny that goes from your
pocket to his. Well, good day. I wish I were a manufacturer, I’d
turn world-mender too.”

“Oh! If you shew the world the example of one lawyer who has an
idea beyond his bill of costs, you’ll have done your share,”
laughed Tom. “Convert nine others and Huddersfield need not fear
the fate of Sodom and Gomorrah.”

Pinder had more trouble with Ben Garside and his colleagues than he had
encountered from his solicitor. Ben was for a fight to the finish.
“Tinker’s shewing th’ blue feather,” he opined.
“What’s come ovver thee, Tom? Tha’rt nooan bahn to
duff when things are lookin’ up a bit? Besides, th’ best
terms we can mak ’ll be to pay us own ’torney an’
gi’ up Co-op Mill. We med as weel be hanged for a sheep as a lamb,
and if we’re to be ruined we med as well be ruined gradely as hauf
ruined. Aw reckon th’ bailies ’ll be bun to leeave us a bed
to lig on, an we’st scrat along some rooad till they put th’
coffin lid ovver us. Aw say feight to th’ deeath. Talk abaat
bowin’ th’ knee to Baal?”

“Baal!” quoth Hannah curtly. “Baal wer’ a
respectable sort compared wi Jabez Tinker; an’ as for that
Wimpenny, oh! If aw wer’ a man, wouldn’t aw just.
That’s all.”

What “just” the irate dame would have done, words failed her
to express, but judging from Hannah’s gestures it was something
that would not have improved Nehemiah’s personal appearance.

But the negotiations with that gentleman which Mr. Sykes opened up did
not promise to bear immediate fruit. It is possible that Mr. Wimpenny
saw everything to be gained and nothing to be lost—by
himself—in the sweetness long drawn out of proceedings in
Chancery. The defendant’s overtures were not met in a conciliatory
spirit, and Sykes advised that nothing further should be attempted in
that direction. Tom felt that he could do no more, and when he told
Dorothy the steps he had taken to fulfil the promise she had wrung from
him, Dorothy expressed herself content.

“You can hold out till May 21st?” She only asked.

“Oh, dear me, yes. From what I can judge when a lawyer in a
Chancery suit contemplates a move in the proceedings, he takes a month
to think it over, then he takes counsel’s opinion, then he takes
another month to think over counsel’s opinion, then he rests for a
month to recuperate his energies after their unwonted strain, then he
writes to his London agent indicating the step he wishes to be taken,
the agent takes a month to think over his principal’s letter, and
another month to reply to it, and at the end of all the country
solicitor changes his mind, and the process circumbendibus begins
de
novo
.”

“You ought to have been a lawyer, Tom,” commented Lucy.
“You have been thinking over a certain step to my knowledge for
more than twelve months, and you haven’t taken it yet.”

“And what’s that, Lucy?” asked Dorothy.

“Oh! you’ll know soon enough when he takes it,” was
the most explicit answer that Dorothy could obtain, and with that she
had to be content.

“I wonder why Dorothy mentioned the twenty-first of May
next?” asked Tom of Lucy, when they were alone together.

“Why she comes of age then, stupid,” said Lucy, as shortly
as ever she was known to speak.

But some months must elapse before that eventful day was due in the
ordinary progress of the leaden-footed months. The Christmas of 1851 was
for all in whose fortunes we are concerned, but a cheerless and anxious
season. Work continued fairly good, and on that score there was nothing
much to complain of. The winter months were open and depressing. The old
adage that a green Yule makes a fat churchyard was amply verified. Low
fevers were rife. The strains of the waits on Christmas Eve failed to
arouse the sense of Christmas in the heart. Plum pudding and roast beef
failed to stimulate to cheerfulness when all around was a damp, drizzly,
clinging blanket of rain-charged atmosphere. For days together a pall of
moisture settled over the Valley. The moors were soaked, and oozed like
surcharged sponges. Every rill became a rivulet, every rivulet a river.
The lower lands contiguous to the Holme were flooded. The dams were
charged to the brinks, and in the mill-races the pressing waters
strained the stoutest shuttles. From the hillsides the swollen streams
brought rocky fragments rolling, tumbling, splashing. It was a
man’s work to watch the river immediately below the tail-goits of
every mill, to prevent the goit being blocked by the flotsam of the
stream, and the water-wheel thrown into back-water.

It was an anxious time for Tom and Ben on more than one account. The
apprehensions that had long possessed Tom as to the safety of Bilberry
reservoir did not leave him. Rather he saw daily reasons for the more
concern. The new year of 1852 saw little improvement in the weather,
Almost daily Tom made his way to the banks of the great dam, surveying
it with anxious eye. When he spoke his fears to old residents, they were
pooh-poohed. It was the old cry of “Wolf.” The people in
most immediate danger had been told so often that something was wrong
with Bilberry embankment, and for so long had the gloomy predictions of
the local Cassandras come to nought, that Tom spoke to deaf ears. None
heeded him. Even Ben accorded him only the attention of politeness. The
people lower down the Valley based their indifference to his suggestions
of possible peril upon the indifference of those nearer the reservoir.
If the people who lived cheek by jowl as it were with the big dam could
afford to laugh at Tom’s dismal forebodings, why should they put
themselves about. They recommended Tom to permit the Commissioners to
know something about their business, and more than hinted that he had
enough to do to look after his own particular concerns without worrying
himself about what was after all a matter for the public authorities. It
did not occur to them to reflect that if a man is drowned it does not
matter much to him whether he has met his death through public or
private defeasance.

On Tuesday, the 4th of February Tom had been as usual to market. He had
done his business early in the afternoon, but had been detained in town
by the necessity of seeing Mr. Sykes in connection with the eternal
lawsuit. Then he had to wait for a train so that it was long past the
hour for the evening meal when he reached Ben Garside’s house in
Holmfirth. The tea-things had long been cleared away, but Hannah was
soon bustling about preparing an appetising meal of broiled rashers,
poached eggs, and tea and toasted teacake. The meal was grateful after
the long wearying day. It had been a depressing day. The market had been
slackly attended: the weather had something to do with that. It had
rained pitilessly all day, a steady, persistent, dogged downpour,
ceasing at times for the fragment of an hour, only to commence again,
and so on, as if it never meant to stop. And as it was on the Tuesday,
so it had been for three or four days before. At the
“ordinary” at the Queen Hotel, kept by Mrs. Beevers, in the
Market Street, the manufacturers from the valleys of the Colne and the
Holme were full of talk of choked tail-goits water piled back into the
wheel-race so that the wheel refused to turn upon its axis. The
merchants shook their heads gloomily over the mild, open weather. They
declared, as their grandchildren declare to-day, that when they were
boys winter was winter; but now there was no depending on the weather,
and the almanac was a snare and a delusion.

Tom lingered over his meal, luxuriating in the warmth of the room, and
the pleasing rest of mind and body. But about nine o’clock the
rain abated. The moon glided high in the heavens, sailing in and out
among the masses of the drifting clouds. It looked as if the weather
might take up after all. It was time it did. But wet or fine Tom had
work to do he had fixed to do that night, work which could only be done
at the mill, and which were better done that night. That done, the
morrow would be clear for the morrow’s work. He would have an hour
at his account books, he told Ben, and sleep at the mill, and
Jack—you have not, reader, forgotten Work’us
Jack—should bear him company. Hannah protested in vain that
“Tom was killing himself with overwork. Flesh and blood
couldn’t stand it, and Tom would never make old banes if he went
on at that noit. It was bad enough to kill one’s self to keep
one’s self, but it was ten times worse to kill one’s self
building a house o’ cards, only to be blown down by that
Jabez Tinker.”

So Tom and Jack turned out into the night and set forth up the valley
toward Hinchliffe Mill. Their road lay at times by the winding
serpentine course of the river, and when the watery moon glanced
downwards with bleared eye from among the clouds they could see the
swollen waters. They met scarce a soul. It was late and a’ready
the lights in the village and on the hillsides were being extinguished
in the “house” or chamber. An occasional cur sadly bayed the
moon. The swollen waters of the river rolled in their bed with sullen
sob. It was a night of dread through which the growing wind wailed amid
its tears. The gloom of the hour and scene fell upon the comrades.
Scarce a word passed between them, as with bent heads and cloaks close
drawn they made their way through the mire of the high-road and the
sloughs of known bye-paths little trod. It was hard on ten of the night
when the mill was reached. Jack kindled a fire in the office-grate and
sat beside it for a time to dry his shoon. He made a brew of strong
coffee for his master to cheer him through his task. Then Jack in
stocking-feet sought the wool-hole where he had improvised a bed of
unscoured pieces, greasy, but snug and warm, and anon his loud breathing
might be heard above the beating of the storm without.

Up to something near the weird midnight hour Tom bent over his invoices
and books, fighting against the waywardness of thoughts that seemed
intent on anything but accounts. At length he abandoned his task half
done. He felt strangely wake and alert. At all times able to do with
little sleep,—that is a feature of your mill-worker—to-night
he felt that he should woo slumber in vain. Donning his pilot jacket
that had been steaming and drying on a chair-back before the fire, and
lighting a lanthorn and taking in his hand his stout gnarled shillelagh,
bought from an Irish hay-maker last harvest-time, he set forth alone on
his usual round of the mill-yard, leaving the outer door of the mill on
the latch. His round finished, led by what impulse, moved by that
presentment he did not stay to consider, he left the mill-yard and began
to climb the hill towards Bilberry reservoir. He walked sharply, for the
night air was biting shrewdly, and Tom was a noted walker. His long
strides soon covered the distance that lay between the mill and the
reservoir bank. Tom hummed an air to keep him company in that vast
solitude. The sky was clearer now than an hour or two before, but the
night was still dark enough to make the feeble glimmer of the lanthorn
grateful. Tom moderated his pace as he neared the embankment. Was it
worth while to climb its steep face or should he turn his steps
downhill. He could hear the water above his head lapping against the
copings of the bank. Still, as he had come so far he might, he thought,
as well walk the round of the embankment. He was on the huge abutment
that turned its breast towards the valley the long barricade that cooped
up the vast pile of water, and slowly, the lanthorn dangling by his side
and swaying in the wind, he began to tread the path on the embankment
top, slowly for in the uncertain light, a slip might cost him a sousing,
and it was no hour for a cold bath. But, as he walked, peering ahead to
pierce the gloom, and watching carefully his steps by the
lanthorn’s pale glimmer, he came, midway in his course, upon a
sight that checked him with sudden halt, and made his heart stand still.
There, at his very feet the water was trickling over the bank, and down
the outside. A thin flow, perhaps, a couple of feet in width, had worn
the upper soil, and now a continuous stream, not a quarter of an inch in
depth, was gently, silently ebbing over the embankment. Even as Tom
gazed spell-bound, he was sensible that the opening widened, the water
that overflowed was deeper, and its escape in quicker time. A great fear
seized on Tom, a dreadful thought well-nigh crushed his brain. He felt
powerless to move. Then, with a cry, he rushed heedless along the
embankment to the culvert. Not a drop of water flowed over the
culvert’s lip. The pent giant had found an outlet for itself, and
was making for it. Tom ran back to the gap he had but just left. Even by
this faint light he saw the breach was wider, the furrow deeper. Sick at
heart, scarce realising what he did, Tom with stick and hand tried to
tear up stones, cobbles, or sods that might stem the growing current. He
spent his time and in vain. Fast as he made his tiny barrier, the
licking wavelets undermined it and washed it gently down the embankment
side; and the stream that now, oh! so silently, so grimly wore away the
surface layers, bit and gnawed into the vast barrier and the clinging
earthwork. But to Tom, with action had come perception. Vivid as
lightning’s flash the whole sequence of the possible, nay, the
seeming inevitable, was borne upon his mind. He sprang to his feet,
dashed down the embankment side. Not two hundred yards below the
reservoir some houses stood darkling in the night, their inmates locked
in sleep. With fist and stick Tom hammered at the door, thrust his
stick, his fist through the windows of the bottom room, where oft the
turn-up bed was stretched.

“Rouse ye, rouse ye!” he cried. “The reservoir! Flee
for your lives!” Down to the Co-op Mill he dashed, racing as sure
only as those do speed who know that Death follows hard upon their
heels, and ever as he sped and passed some silent, lowly cot he paused a
breathing space to rend the midnight silence with wild, yet wilder cry,
“The flood! The flood! Haste ye, save yourselves.” He
reached the gates of his own mill, dashed to the corner where Jack still
slept in dreamless sleep. He kicked his prostrate form, he shook him,
dragged him to his feet.

“Don yo’r breeches. Here’s yo’r’ clogs.
Haste, man! Bilberry’s brust. Damn yo’ wakken. Ar’t
deead?”

In that time of frenzied haste the language of his childhood came back
to his lips.

Then as Jack, half awake, bewildered, donned his nether garments with
but one idea, that Co-op Mill was on fire, Tom rushed to the stable
where their one horse was housed. He threw a halter over its head; there
was no time, no need for saddle. Jack had followed, thrusting his arms
into his coat sleeves as he came. Tom sprang to the horse’s back.
The gate still opened wide.

“Clutch mi leg, Jack, an’ stick to me an’ yell
wi’ all thi might.”

Tom’s first thought had not been of Ben or his household; but
gratitude, duty alike, made them his first care. He must reach Ben at
any cost. The horse, urged by Tom’s prodding heels and by the
sticks that beat upon its flanks, galloped down the hill. Jack could not
keep pace; panting, gasping, clinging, he stumbled and fell.

“Make for Ben Garside’s,” shouted Tom, and was
swallowed up in the night, the horse’s hoof beating the rain
washed road with dull thuds, its heavy pants audible afar.

It was one o’clock and after when Tom made Ben’s cottage He
thundered at the door, and in a marvellously short time that seemed
eternity to Tom, the upper window was raised, and Ben’s capped
head thrust forth.

“Th’ pub’s lower dahn, tha’ druffen
fooil,” said Ben’s voice drowsily.

“Open, Ben, open for God’s sake. Th’
embankment’s burst at Bilberry.”

But ere Ben had ceased to gape out of the lattice, Hannah, in her
petticoat, had run down the slender, narrow stairs, and unbolted the
door.

“Quick, quick, where’s Lucy? Wakken her! Don yo’,
Hannah. Ben, Ben, haste thee, man. Oh, here’s Jack; that’s
reight lad, aw feart tha’d be longer.”

Lucy, pale, trembling, but calm, had come down, part dressed.

“Ar’t sure, Tom?” asked Ben.

“It’s giving bi inches, it cannot howd. What shall we do?
Oh! What shall we do?”

“Mak’ for th’ hills, for sure,” gasped Jack, as
he drew deep draughts of breath.

Then Tom felt a quiet hand upon his own, and Lucy by his side drew him
part aloof.

“There’s Dorothy lower down,” she whispered,
“and if flood come, oh! Woe is me for all at Wilberlee. Hark! the
alarm is spread. Race to Wilberlee; and Tom! kiss me, it may be
good-bye.”

Tom kissed the tremulous lips raised to his. “God keep you, Lucy,
God keep us all. I cannot leave you.”

But Hannah, too, had thought of Wilberlee. “There’s Dorothy.
Yo’ mun give th’ alarm at Wilberlee.”

“And you?” asked Tom: but even as he asked he had turned to
the door where the horse, all untethered, stood.

“Ben an’ me ’ll manage,” said jack. “Up
wi’ thee, Tom. By gosh! hark to ’em screechin’ up the
valley.”

Aye, aye, the warning cries had been heard and heeded, and as Tom wrung
Ben’s hand and vaulted to patient Bess’s back the wind bore
to his ears the startled cry, “The flood! The flood! It’s
come at last,” and as the mare, spinning cobbles and pebbles
behind its clattering feet, galloping as though the foul fiend pursued,
dashed past farm and mill and house Tom cried loud and ever tender,
“Oh, rouse yo’, good folk, rouse yo’. Bilberry’s
on yo’. The bank’s brust,” and the small-paned windows
were raised with quick grasp from within, and startled faces with
widening eyes peered forth into the night, and still Tom raised the cry,
now hoarse, now shrill, in voice that almost failed. “The flood,
the flood!” And loud and louder still behind him grew the cries,
deep toned of men, anguished shrill of women, wailing tones of children
roused from cradle and from cot. The sleepy valley behind him slept no
more. It had roused to panic, to the sudden apprehension of ravage,
ruin, death. Whither flee? How save the little hoarded wealth; how bear
the infirm mother, who by inglenook declined daily to her grave cheered
by the babbling prattle of her daughter’s bairns; how save the
bairns themselves! And even as Tom rode the cries behind him swelled in
volume till they fell upon his ears as a hoarse roar, broken by shrill
and piercing shriek, and if his ears betrayed him not, above the din of
human voice he heard the growl of gathered waters loosed. No use to look
behind, the darkening skies veiled the sight. Thank God! Here is
Wilberlee. Well Tom knew the entrance to the yard. Pray God the gate
yielded to his thrust! It did. By there, through the yard, was the
shortest cut to the house. He swung from the back of the beast, now
blown and trembling. The panic had seized upon it. Grasping its mane Tom
led it through the yard, round the mill gable. Here the noises from
above were broken by the mill’s flank and hushed. Not a light
shone through the windows of the house. All was silent within, but at
the garden foot the river roared, and Tom in the dim light saw that on
its foaming breast it bore objects, strange, hideous, torn from the
fields, floating stacks of hay, ponderous engines and machines, the dark
outline of animals swept quickly by.

“Oh! rouse yo’! rouse yo’!” shrieked Tom. He
tore a boulder from a rockery by, and with it crashed at the stout outer
door. It shook and groaned but yielded not. Tom remembered that the
window of the sitting-room or drawing-room came to within a foot’s
step from the ground. It was a moment’s work to dash the window
open with his feet, and Tom amid the falling of the glass and the
creaking crash of wood-work was within the dark room, his clothes rent,
his face scratched, his hands bleeding. There were sounds above of
awakening life. Tom sprung to the foot of the passage stairs, finding
the inner door he knew not how. “Wake ye, wake ye,” he cried
hoarsely.

Then a light glimmered above, on the landing. It was Jabez Tinker
in his dressing gown. A candle was in his hand that he shaded from the
upward current.

“Thank God, yo’re up,” shouted Tom, bounding up the
steps. “Dress yo’, quick. Rouse the house. Bilberry’s
burst. Oh! hark yo’.”

Some building higher up the river had fallen with a groan into the
stream and frantic cries rent the leaden skies mingling with the crash
of stone and iron and stout timbers torn like mere sprigs.

Suddenly from the well of darkness shone the gleam of a lanthorn. It was
impossible to see who held it. Mr. Tinker cried out:

“Who’s that?”

“It’s me, Sergeant Ramsden,” said a calm, stentorian
voice. “Glad you’re up, sir. Time to flit. Had to wade here.
Where’s Betty?”

“I’m here, George; but yo’ munnot think o’
coming up till aw’ve med mysen some bit like.”

But the tramp of the sergeant was on the stairs already. His was a
welcome presence. The hurry and agitation of the past hour had told on
Tom. He felt sorely the need of help. Mr. Tinker seemed paralysed
not so much from fear as the sudden waking from sleep to stand face to
face with what perils none could tell. Betty clung to her constable, but
he was probably used to being clung to for protection by the weaker sex.

“Where’s Peggy?” asked Tom.

“Gone to Harrogate to fetch aunt home.”

It was Dorothy who spoke. She had partially dressed, but her long,
curling, beautiful glossy hair fell like a veil upon her shoulders to
her waist she was pale and anxious, but she retained a great measure of
composure. She had drawn to her uncle’s side but her eyes were on
Tom.

“Are we safe here?” asked Mr. Tinker. “Is there
any chance of my being able to get across the yard to the office?”

“Can’t be done, sir,” said the Sergeant, touching his
high hat as well as he could with the hand that held the lanthorn. His
other arm supported Betty.

“The garden’s three feet deep and more. Same in mill yard,
no doubt, and rising every second; had to wade in. Glad to find window
broken down.”

There was a sudden shriek from Betty. Through the door of the parlour
that opened into the passage at the stair feet came a torrent of water
nigh as high as the doorway itself. It flooded the passage, and, step by
step, quicker than a man could mount them, scaled the staircase to the
landing on which they stood. Small articles of furniture and ornaments
were borne from the room, tossing and colliding as if in a grotesque
dance.

“Make for the attic,” said Mr. Tinker, and led the way,
followed by the women. Tom was hard upon them. The sergeant followed
with an agile departure from his professional staidness, deliberation,
and dignity of gait that only stress of circumstances constrained. If a
withering glance could have arrested it the rapidly rising, gaining
flood would have stayed its inroad.

The attic was a low, barely furnished room, immediately under the roof.
It was lighted from above by a thick sky-window. It held two low beds of
plain deal—the chaste couches of Betty and Peggy. There were two
chests of drawers, one doubtless sacred to each maid. There were two
chairs, a washstand, a portrait of the sergeant, staff-in-hand, and the
like of a soldier over which Peggy was supposed to weep out her heart in
moments of despondency.

“I doubt we’re not out of it here,” whispered the
sergeant to Tom. He cast his light through the doorway. “See, the
water mounts quickly. ’Twill be on us, and we mun drown like rats
in a hole.”

“Can you swim?” asked Tom, under his breath.

The sergeant nodded.

“Doff your boots; keep your cloak and breeches nothing else. Get
into that corner. Give me the light. Don’t let them see you doff.
They’re fleyed enough.”

There was no time even for suspense. The water was already in the attic.
Tom dragged a bed beneath the skylight and with a blow from his stick
shivered the thick glass.

“Yo’ mun get through th’ skylight, Ramsden,” he
bawled. The turmoil of the waters drowned all lower speech.
“I’ll pass t’others to you.”

Ramsden nodded. The habit of discipline is invaluable in the hour of
emergency. Tom had taken the command even in his old master’s
house, and it seemed natural that he should order and others obey.

With difficulty he twisted the portly constable through the aperture. It
was a tight squeeze.

“Tear up some of the slates. Widen th’ hole,” shouted
Tom, as he dragged a trunk to the top of the bed to stand on. “Now
Dorothy,” he whispered, “you next.”

“No, uncle,” she said, drawing back. This was no hour for
ceremony. Tom almost lifted Mr. Tinker bodily on to the trunk, the
sergeant from above seized his wrists, and Tom, with a mighty heave,
hoisted him aloft.

“Now you, Betty,” said Dorothy.

It was well for Betty the stone slabs had been wrenched with little
difficulty from the sounding lines of the aperture. She was stout and
heavy as seemeth a cook, and if there had not been strong braced thighs
on the stack, and arms like iron beneath her, Betty would have slept
that morn her last sleep on earth in the tiny attic she had known so
long.

“Now, Dorothy,” said Tom. She was already on the chest. He
pressed her hand tenderly as she turned her face towards the gap through
which the Sergeant had passed. Tom lifted her through almost bodily.
“Come you, now,” she said as she left his arms.

“Here, sergeant,” bawled Tom, “take these blankets and
things. It’ll be cold up there.” And Tom hastily passed
blankets, sheets, and counterpanes through the window. Then those above
heard him tearing at the bedsteads like one possessed. He rove them
asunder by main force and passed the sections to the sergeant. Then
springing on to the chest he thrust his arms to either side of the roof,
and with a thrust of the feet that sent the box flying, forced and
prised himself to the roof.

They could see little even by the light which the constable still
retained. They were sure only that Wilberlee House was all but
submerged, and that the devouring waters as they swept by them crawled
up the sloping roof. From the thick darkness came shouts and wails and
cries, and the thundering crash of falling buildings. By the
lanthorn’s glare and the casual glimpsing of the moon they saw, as
they strained their visions to pierce the black encircling pall, what
looked like huge pieces of machinery that broke from the tomb of the
night before their eyes and then were gone again. More than once, almost
level with the house eaves, a face of a man or woman, a white, pallid,
drawn face, with eyes distended in speechless horror, would flash above
the waters and then be borne away like chaff in a mighty blast, or the
long white trailing of a woman’s dress would shoot beneath their
feet, come and go ere they realised it was come. And ever and anon those
awful, thrilling, sickening cries, whose dread import they but too
surely guessed. The night was bitter cold. They clung together,
crouching low, their absorbing thought—would the house stand the
shock of those pounding waters, would the dinning flood go on for ever?

Tom only had been engaged. Getting what hold he could by the low chimney
of the house, he fastened together with the cording of the beds the
disjointed laths, making a very passable raft. This he lowered to the
verge of the roof. It might be needed, who might say? The very house
seemed to shake under them as they crouched and waited in agonised
suspense. Had it been less stoutly built it must ere this have been
swept bodily away as rows upon rows of houses that night of doom were
swept away by the devouring torrent—many bearing with them
husband, wife and child, scarce roused from sleep ere the flood clasped
them in the embrace of death.

And still the surging water rose higher and higher, now creeping slowly
up the thatch, now sweeping swiftly upwards and now falling as suddenly
for a foot or two, giving a momentary hope the violence of the storm was
over—but only to surge nearer and nearer to those who now clung to
the ridge of the arched roof. Tom contrived to crawl cautiously to
Mr. Tinker’s side. With difficulty making the dazed man hear
him above the roar of the waters and the dinn that stunned their sense,
Tom made him understand that they must now trust to the frail raft he
had improvised.

“It’s our only chance, sir. The bindings of the roof are
giving. And look, look!”

Tom pointed across the mill-yard. The moon was clear of the clouds, and
for a few moments the scene of desolation and the waste of waters might
be seen by the silver light.

Mr. Tinker’s gaze followed the direction of the outstretched
arms. Across the yard towered the long mill chimney, and it was rocking
and swaying like a drunken man. There was not a moment to be lost. The
sergeant and Tom slipped the raft on to the bosom of the racing flood.
It was all but torn from their grasp.

“Get you on it with the women,” cried Tom. Betty was with
difficulty placed upon the frail support. Mr. Tinker followed her.
The sergeant, obedient to Tom’s gesture, sprang upon it.

“Now, Dorothy, jump for your life”; but even as the words
left his lips, the bark was torn from his grasp. There was a shriek of
terror from those aboard, and Ramsden cried, “The chimney. Oh!
God! It’s falling!”

Tom breathed a prayer.

“It’s you and me for it, Dorothy. Can you trust me?”
He passed his arm around her; she pressed her lips to his, and Tom, with
his almost unconscious charge, leaped far out into the centre of the
headlong current. And even as he leaped the great chimney-stack, its
base destroyed, swayed towards the house, and in one unbroken mass fell
upon the roof that had been their refuge, and Tom and Dorothy were lost
in the crested billows that leaped with angry roar to meet the very
skies.

CHAPTER XV.

SOME ten days or so after the events recorded in the last chapter, a
stout woman past the middle age sat by a large four-posted bed in a
spacious and well-furnished bedroom. The eider-down coverlet of the bed,
its damask hangings, the prie-dieu by its side, the rich covering of the
walls, the silken curtaining of the windows, the full pile of the
carpets, the costly paintings on the walls indicated the abode of wealth
and refinement. The woman by the bedside, on whom fell the genial rays
of a bright-burning fire, was plainly but neatly dressed. The anxious
glances she cast upon the figure stretched upon the bed seemed to
bespeak a greater, a tenderer concern than that of the ordinary
professional nurse. There was no sound in the room save the ticking of
the massive marble clock upon the mantel, and the regular breathing of
the patient. The nurse turned the pages of a ponderous family Bible, but
as her attention was confined to the highly coloured illustrations it is
probable the printed page was a dead letter to her eyes.

So absorbed was she in the contemplation of the ornate plate depicting
the sale of Joseph by his brethren that she almost dropped the heavy
book from her knees as a faint voice issued from between the curtain
folds.

“Has th’ buzzer gone, Hannah?”

“Sakes, alive! If he isn’t wakken,” the nurse
exclaimed, drawing back the curtain. “Eh! Tom, lad, it’s
fain aw am to yer thi voice. But tha munnot talk nor fash thisen.”

“Has th’ buzzer gone?” the invalid asked again. Then
his eyes wandered slowly and somewhat vacantly about the room.

“Where am I?” he asked.

“Aye, tha may weel ax, lad. Thou’rt at Mester Willie
Brooke’s at Northgate House i’ Honley, an’ here
tha’s been awmost ivver sin they sammed thi up i’th
churchyard all swoonded away; an’ long it wer’ afore they
knowed reightly whether tha wer’ wick or deead.”

“Have I been poorly?” asked Tom. “What am I doing
here? Where’s Ben? Is he at th’ mill? There’s those
pieces for Skilbeck’s want ’livering. Why isn’t Lucy
here?”

“Poorly! Tha may weel say that, an’ off thi yed for days
together, an’ of all th’ stuff ’at ivver a man talked,
all abaat ’junctions, an’ love, an’ ferrets, an’
rabbits, an’ then tryin’ to swim, an’ it took two on
us to howd thi i’ bed. But theer, it’s time tha had thi
physic, an’ then thi mun go to sleep agen, an’ th’
cook ’ll mak thi some arrowroot, an’ thou’rt to have a
glass o’ port wine in it, th’ doctor says, teetotal or no
teetotal, which aw nivver did howd wi’ i’ time o’
sickness, an’ agen th’ law o’ natur’ in a way
o’ speikin’.” But Hannah’s views on this grave
question were lost upon the invalid. He had again sunk into deep and
refreshing sleep, and as Hannah laid her hand gently upon his brow, the
slight moisture told that the fever in which he had tossed and raved had
succumbed to care and treatment.

When Tom awoke Hannah’s place had been taken by a tall,
grey-haired man of spare form, broad shoulders and slightly bent, his
forehead lined with the tracery of time and care. His eyes had been long
fixed upon the features of the sleeping youth and seemed from their
expression to seek for some flitting transient likeness they bore a
moment but to lose the next. It was Jabez Tinker. From the face so
often, so minutely scanned, the eyes of the watcher turned at times to a
small gold locket he held in his palm. It bore in pearls the letters.

A.J.

It was the locket taken by Moll o’ Stuarts from the slender neck
of the way-worn woman the
Hanging Gate
had received more than
twenty years before, the locket confided to Tom by Mr. Black, and
which, ever since, night and day, sleeping or waking, he had worn
beneath his vest. Presently Mr. Tinker became aware by that subtle
uneasy sense we all have felt, that Tom’s eyes were fixed
inquiringly on his face. He rose somewhat stiffly to his feet and bent
over the bed. He took the hand that lay upon the coverlet.

“Are you better, Tom?” he asked, very gently. “We have
been very anxious about you.”

Tom looked upon the features, usually so stern, with puzzled interest.
He seemed to be searching for some elusive memory of the past.

“I dreamed you were dead, drowned,” he said at length.
“But I seem to remember so many strange things for an instant or
two. Then it is all blank again. But mostly I seem to be fighting with
some awful, pitiless enemy that tosses and whirls and throttles me till
I choke. And then again all is dark and vague, and I remember
nothing.”

“Well, you see, I am not dead yet, Tom, thanks be to God, and
under God to you. ’Tis you, Tom, that have been nearer Jordan than
I.”

“Jordan!” said Tom, musingly. “Jordan! I was right
then. I knew there was a flood, somehow, but I thought it was Bilberry
burst.” Then, as if the very words brought a flash of crowding
memory and peopled his mind with vivid visions, he cried aloud:

“Dorothy! Dorothy! Where is Dorothy! Oh God, I’ve let her
slip again,” and a look of anguish, of hopeless despair was on his
face, and with trembling hands he covered his face, and burying his head
in the pillow, sobbed as though his whole being would dissolve in tears.

Mr. Tinker beckoned to one who stood by the door. She had entered
the room very quietly, fearing to wake the patient. It was Dorothy,
looking frail and fragile, but not unhappy, for Hannah had told her that
Tom was coming to his senses, and the long, weary waiting and fearing
was at an end. As Dorothy with noiseless step approached the bed
Mr. Tinker drew aside. Dorothy touched gently the hand bent upon
the pillow, and stooped low, very low, so that her lips were very near,
and her breath played upon his cheek.

“No, Tom!” she whispered. “Not lost—won.”
And as Tom raised his face and gazed upon her as men upon the lineaments
that are dearer to them than life, when life is sweetest, her eyes
drooped beneath his ardent gaze, and the mantling colour suffused her
cheek. She stole her hand into his, and for a while they were still.
Jabez came and stood by his niece’s side.

“Leave us for a time, Dorothy,” he said. It was the voice of
Jabez; but not the voice she had so long been used to hear. It was
almost caressing in its gentleness. Dorothy smiled her assent.

“I’m to bring your arrowroot up, Tom, and I’ve made it
myself. I know the port wine’s nice. I tasted it. Don’t let
the food be spoiled, uncle, and, remember, Tom’s not to be
bothered or upset. If he is, won’t Hannah give it you,
that’s all,” and she tripped away with a glance at Tom that
did him more good belike than arrowroot or wine.

Mr. Tinker waited until the door had closed upon her, then he drew
a chair to the bedside.

“I mustn’t agitate you, Tom,” he spoke. “But,
oh! If you could realise what my feelings have been since you have lain
between life and death, my dread lest you might pass away and make no
sign, the fears, the hopes alternate holding sway, the doubts, the
prayers you would forgive much to an old and stricken man.” He
opened the hand in which he still held the locket. Involuntarily Tom
raised his to feel for the trinket he had so long cherished.

“Can you tell me the meaning of this locket? It was found upon
your neck, they say, when you were picked up unconscious, scarce
breathing, your heart but flickering, in the churchyard yonder, after
the Flood had abated. You had saved Dorothy, how, she scarce seems to
know. But she lay very near to you, her head upon your breast. They
thought you both dead. But Dorothy was soon no worse. But this locket,
speak, Tom, what does it mean?”

“It was my mother’s,” said Tom.

“And she?”

“She died the night I was born.”

“But her name? Who was she? For heaven’s sake, Tom, tell me
all you know. You cannot divine how much hangs on your words. They mean
perhaps as much to me as you.”

Then Tom told him the tale of the night on which this story opened.

“And Fairbanks, the landlady, the midwife? They can tell me more,
they can speak to this. Does this Moll o’ Stute’s still
live?”

“Oh, yes, Moll’s safe enough. Did you know my mother,
Mr. Tinker?”

“Know her! Oh! my God, know her! But ask me no more now, Tom. Not
a moment must be lost. Brook will lend me a horse. Mine went with the
Flood. I’ll see you to-morrow. Now have your arrowroot and sleep
and get strong and well. Whether my hopes are well founded or not,
you’re my son from this day, Tom, for you saved my life, lad, and
you saved Dorothy’s. And I’m proud of you, lad, I’m
proud of you—Tom Pinder, foundling, and there isn’t a
man in the valley that wouldn’t like to call you son, nor a girl
you couldn’t win. Hannah and Dorothy’ll look after you till
tomorrow, then.”

It was the afternoon of the next day before Jabez Tinker returned
from his quest. In the interval between his departure and return, Hannah
had yielded to Tom’s importunity, and sent for Ben.

“Eh! Lad,” was Ben’s greeting, as he wrung the
invalid’s hand with a grip that made Tom wince, “aw could
awmost find it i’ mi heart to call it an answer to prayer.
Yo’ munnot let on to Hannah, but mony a time a day this last ten
days an’ more, aw’ve been dahn o’ my marrow-bones a
prayin’ tha med be spared Th’ laws o’ natur’s
all vary weel, Tom, for th’ intellec’ but there’s
times, lad, when th’ heart o’ man turns to its Maker like a
babby to its mother i’ its pain. An’ this has been sich a
time, aw reckon. Eh! man! its fair heart-breakin’ to gooa dahn
th’ valley. Near on eighty folks drahned, caantin’ th’
childer in, an’ as for th’ damage to property, a quarter
million pund willn’t cover it, folk sayn. Th’ Co-op.
Mill’s gone, choose yah, an’ Wilberlee House an’ all.
Yar bit o’ a whomstid’s safe, an’ that’s summat
to be thankful for; but, eh, mon, aw dunnot know wheer we’st all
ha’ to turn for summat to do, there’s thaasan’s
an’ thaasan’s o’ folk aat o’ wark, an’ no
prospec’ o’ ther getting onny, an’ i’ thick
o’ winter, too.”

“It’s all a dreadful muddle to me, Ben, I can’t seem
to remember much about it. How did you escape, and how came I
here?”

“Well, aw nivver did!” exclaimed Ben. “Didn’t
yo’ com’ an’ wakken me up, an’ didn’t Jack
an’ me awmost carry th’ missus an’ yar Lucy till we
gate ’em on to th’ ’ill-side. An’ if we
couldn’t see mich on account o’ th’ dark we could hear
enough. By God! aw thowt th’ end o’ th’ world
wer’ come. An’ th’ skrikin’! Eh! lad, it
wer’ enough to freeze th’ blood i’ yo’r veins.
But that didn’t last long. It were short shrift for most on
’em. An’ then wonderin’ an’ wonderin’ what
had come on yo’. Aw thowt Lucy’d go fair daft abaat
yo’. That’s a heart for feelin’, if yo’ like.
Then Jack couldn’t stand it no longer. He said he could swim down
to Wilberlee if he could nobbut be sure of findin’ th’ road.
He said ’at if tha wer’ deead he’d as lief be deead,
too, an’ aat o’ th’ gate. An’, by gosh, he off,
an’ ’atween runnin’ an’ wadin’ an’
swimmin’ he gate theer, but theer wer nooa signs o’ thee, or
onybody else, for that matter, an’ nowt but part o’
th’ mill truck to be seen. Th’ chimbley wer’ clean
gone. But it wer’ Jack that fun’ thee all th’ same up
in Honley churchyard liggin’ ovver a gravestooan. An’
Miss Dorothy. Gow! lad, ha tha mun ha’ hugged her. It’s a
mercy tha didn’t squeeze th’ life aat on her. Aw’ve
nooan seen ’em missen, ’t isn’t likely,” and,
Ben winked; “but yar Hannah says oo’s black an blue wheer
thi arm held her. But oo’ll think none th’ worse of thee for
that.”

“Get on with your story, Ben, and don’t be frivolous.
Where’s Jack?”

“Oh, Jack’s all reight, barrin’ ’at he says
he’s supped soa mich watter o’ late that nowt but owd ale
an’ plenty on it ’ll tak’ th’ taste aat of his
maath.”

“But you mustn’t let Jack get into evil courses Ben.”

“Oh! Jack ’ll be reight enough when he’s getten summat
to do. But it’s the owd tale. ‘Satan finds some mischief
still for idle hands to do.’ Yo’ see ther’s a seet
o’ folk come fro’ all th’ parts o’ Yorkshire
an’ Lancashire to see th’ course o’ th’ flood
and th’ deborah, as th’ newspapper ca’d th’ muck
an’ th’ rubbish ’at’s left. Holmfirth’s
more like a fair nor owt else. It’s as bad as Honley Feeast time.
An’ all th’ seet-seers ’at can get howd o’ Jack
mun treeat him. If he does get a bit fuddled afore bed-time it’s
little wonder. Aw’ve often noticed ’at folk ’ll pay
for a pint o’ ale for a chap ’at wouldn’t gi’
him a penny-teea-cake if he wer clammin’. Dun they let yo’
smoke i’ this fine room, Tom? Aw’m fair dyin’ for a
reek o’ baccy.”

But now Dorothy entered with a tray covered with a napkin snowy-white
and on it a basin of arrowroot, and Ben slipped his clay and flat tin
box into his pocket.

“Aw rekkon aw’ll be gooin’, Tom, or Hannah ’ll
be flytin’ me. Nivver yo’ get wed, Tom, if yo’ want to
ca’ yo’r soul yo’r own. It’s just awful’
th’ way a felly’s put on after he’s once getten
th’ noose raand ’is neck. Tak a frien’s advice Tom
an’ be warned i’ time.”

And with a wink that meant volumes, Ben conveyed himself away, walking
on tip-toe, as if afraid of waking a sleeper to whom sleep might mean
life or death.

“Now, Tom, you’ve got to eat this just now,” said
Dorothy, “wait till I see if it’s cool enough,” and
she touched the lip of the spoon with hers and affected to taste the
odorous compound with the air of a connoisseur. “It’s just
nice, sir, and if that doesn’t cure you, nothing will.”

“I could drink a bucketful,” protested Tom. Couldn’t I
have a chop or a steak? I’m as hungry as a hunter.’’

“Chop, indeed! I should think not. Later on you shall have a cup
of chicken-broth and the weest slice of toast. You’ve no idea how
ill you are.” Dorothy spoke lightly, but suddenly the woman gushed
into her eyes, and it was a poor, faltering voice that said, “But
you’re better now, thank God. Oh! Tom, if you had died!”

“Would you have cared very much, Dorothy?” asked Tom.

“Is that what you call eating arrowroot, sir? Listen, that’s
uncle. How soon he’s back.” Dorothy had gone to the window
and drawn aside the curtains. “The horse is covered with foam, and
uncle looks ten years younger and as glad as a bridegroom.”

A quick step was heard on the stairs, and Jabez Tinker stood at the
door of the sick-room.

“Is he awake, Dorothy?” whispered Mr. Tinker.

“Awake, yes, and likely to be, as far as I can see, what with one
and another. Call this a sick-room. Better call it a show and charge for
admission. It takes one maid’s time to attend to the door. If Mr.
Brooke doesn’t send in a bill for a new knocker and fresh paint,
he’s a saint.”

“There, there, chatterbox,” exclaimed Jabez, gaily.
“Out you go, Dorothy, and don’t come up again till I ring.
Then you may come, no one else.”

Mr. Tinker looked radiant, and, as Dorothy had said, younger by ten
good years. In his impatience he almost pushed his niece from the room.
Then he strode to the bed and held out both his hands to Tom.

“It’s true, Tom, it’s true, every word of it. Oh! that
ever I should live to see this day. I’ve dreamed of it, I’ve
prayed for it, and now it has come to me, this my great joy, out of the
deep waters. Truly God moves in a mysterious way.”

Tom had risen to a sitting posture. Jabez flung a loose shawl—it
was Dorothy’s—over his shoulders.

“You mustn’t risk taking cold,” he said, very gently.
“Are you quite sure you feel strong enough to hear a rather long
story, Tom, or would you rather wait?”

“I would rather hear it now, sir.”

“Then hear me to the finish and don’t judge me too harshly.
God knows I’ve suffered enough without your condemnation. But it
might have been worse, it might have been worse.”

Mr. Tinker was silent for a time, as if to arrange his thoughts or
choose his words. Then very gravely he spoke:

“My father, Tom, was a very strict, stern man”
(“I’m not surprised to hear that,” thought his
listener) “and with an overweening sense of family pride. He was
very proud that he was a Tinker, and, indeed, Tom, we are as old a
family as there is in the valley. Never forget that. And we have an
unsullied name. My father had another failing, if failing it be called.
He was inordinately fond of money. He expected, he took it for granted,
that both Dick and myself would marry not for money, of course, but
where money was.

“But both his sons disregarded their father’s wishes. I,
secretly, while he yet lived; Richard, as you know, after his death. It
was my fate, at the house of a customer in Liverpool, to meet sweet
Annie Lisle, the family governess. She was an orphan, alone and
unfriended, in the world. What else she was, how sweet, how winsome, how
patient, how true and how trustful I cannot bear to think of, still less
speak. I won her love. I dared not speak of my passionate devotion at
home. My father with the burden of age had become each year more
exacting, less tolerant of opposition to his will. I feared to anger
him. It was in his power to disinherit me by his will. I was absolutely
dependent on him. The homestead was his, the mill, the business, were
his. I was not man enough to face poverty, expulsion from my home, loss
of social status—not even for my loved one’s sake. Call me a
poltroon, Tom, a coward, a cur, if you like. I have used bitterer words
than those to myself. I knew it would be hopeless to ask my
father’s consent. He would have had one
word—‘Go!’ Then I began, with a satisfaction I strove
in vain to banish, to observe, nay, to gauge, the sign of my
father’s failing health. I persuaded myself he was not long for
this world, and in my heart of hearts I was glad. But my passion ill
brooked delay. I urged Annie to a secret wedding. Reluctantly she
consented. She procured a week’s holiday from her employer, and we
were married by special license at the parish church of Seaford, on the
south coast, a small fishing hamlet little frequented by the tourist or
holiday-maker. It was a week of Paradise. Then my wife returned to her
employment, I was to find a favourable opportunity of breaking the news
to my father. Meantime anything might happen. I conjured my wife to keep
our secret. I kept the certificate of our marriage, so afraid was I lest
it should fall into another’s hand. My wife was not even to write
to me lest my father’s suspicions should be aroused. I continued
to call on my Liverpool customer as usual, and when he asked me as usual
to dine or sup at his house, I treated my own wife with the distant
courtesy one shows to a governess. One day, early in the winter of 1830,
I called at the house of Mr.——, I was determined to take my
wife away. My father had softened much during the past few months. He
had agreed to pay me a fixed salary, instead of doling out a pound or
two for pocket money. I had resolved to place Annie in some small
cottage not far from Holmfirth I had thought of Greenfield. I could see
her there each week. And there was another reason why another home
should be found for her. Judge of my consternation when Mrs.—, in
answer to the inquiry which I made with assumed indifference as to the
health of the children and their governess, told me that Miss Lisle had
been dismissed her service, dismissed ignominiously, without a
character. I controlled myself as well as I could. Mrs. ——
said enough to convince me that my darling had been dismissed under the
darkest suspicion that can rest upon a pure, unsullied woman. But even
then I did not disclose the truth. My wife had vanished and left no
trace behind her. She had been true to her promise to me, even when a
word would have cleared her name and confounded the angry jealous woman
who spurned her from her home. Almost penniless she turned into the
world. She never wrote to me or sent me word. Judge how I searched in
all places likely and unlikely for her. Secretly, with what scant means
I could procure. I instituted inquiries on every side; but my wife had
disappeared as effectively as though she had never been. She had never
worn her wedding ring; she had borne my name only during all that too
brief week of wedded bliss at Seaford. Time went by; I knew my wife, if
she still lived, must be a mother. I feared, then at last I persuaded
myself, that in her shame and grief she had destroyed herself. I called
upon my head the curse of the Almighty, but God seemed heedless of my
blasphemous ravings. From that time life for me had lost its savour. I
lived only for work, for business success. They were my distraction.
Then, as you know, I married. But of that I need not speak. My wife bore
me no children, and when I took Dorothy as my ward I almost hated the
child because I could not love her as my own.”

There was a long silence. Tom feared to speak. He guessed the rest too
surely.

“One present only had I given to my sweetheart. It was a locket
with our initials intertwined, and a love-knot of our hair inside. It
was a whim of Annie’s. Tom, my boy, my son, you have worn that
locket about your neck. Can you forget the wrong I did your mother, and
forgive the father who can never forgive himself?”

“Nay, Mr. Tinker, nay, father, if indeed I am your
son,” faltered Tom.

“I’ve seen Moll o’ Stute’s. I’ve seen
Mrs. Schofield. They remembered the features of your mother as
though she died but yesterday. Besides—but there can be no
question of it.”

“Well, father,” said Tom, very solemnly, “I thank God
that I am indeed your son. It is not for me to judge or to forgive. I
will try to be to you all your son should be.”

Jabez bent over the bed and kissed Tom’s brow, and the tears
streamed down the face of the elder man, his pride humbled, his cold
reserve broken down, the man of iron melted to a gentleness he had never
known before.

“Do you know, Tom,” he half laughed, half sobbed,
“you’re not unlike what I was at your age. You’re a
Tinker, whether you like it or not.”

“And a Lisle,” added Tom, and lay back upon his pillow in
great comfort. Then he added:

“So Dorothy’s my cousin.”

Jabez nodded.

“Can I come in?” spoke Dorothy’s voice outside.
“Open the door, uncle, I’ve both hands full.”

“I’ll leave you together, Tom. I know more than you think I
know,” whispered the old man, and quitted the room.

“Of all the born conspirators commend me to Jabez Tinker,
Esq., J.P., of Wilberlee Mill, that was, and to
Mr. Tom Pinder, of Co-op. Mill, also that was. Here’s
your chicken-broth, sir, and you’re to drink a glass of
champagne—doctor’s orders.”

“Put it on the table, Dorothy, for a moment. I want to speak to
you. Come, stand here, please.”

Dorothy pouted, but obliged, “Behold, thine handmaiden,” she
said, “what wills my lord?”

“Dorothy, be serious for a moment. Your uncle has told me a
strange story. I cannot repeat it all. Can you credit it? I am your
cousin!”

“Oh! poor fellow, he’s raving again. I knew how it would be,
all this talking. I’m sorry to hear it, Tom—I do so hate
cousins. I’ve dozens of ’em, and not one nice one in the
lot.”

“And I’m not Tom Pinder, either.”

“And who may you please to be?”

“Only Tom Tinker, son of Jabez Tinker, of
Wilberlee Mill that was and is to be.”

Dorothy part withdrew from the bedside and looked long and fixedly on
Tom.

“And is that all you have to tell me,
Mr. Tom Tinker?”

“No, Dorothy, I have another secret to tell you. But you must come
closer, closer still. Dorothy, I love you. I have loved you for years.
Will you be my wife?”

Dorothy made answer none. But when Tom drew her face to his she suffered
him.

“My darling, oh, my darling! I love you more than life,”
murmured Tom in her ear.

“And is that what you call telling me a secret? You silly boy,
I’ve known it ever so long.”

“And you, Dorothy, how long have you loved me?”

“Ah! that’s my secret.”

The story I set about to tell is told. Another house stands by
Wilberlee Mill; another mill stands upon the ruins of Wilberlee,
and Tom Tinker is master of the mill, and nominal master of the
house. There is a Young Jabez plays about an old man’s knee, and a
sweet fair-haired Lucy prattles and babbles on its godmother’s
knee. Lucy Garside was bridesmaid at Dorothy’s wedding, and was
sponsor for her daughter at the font. She remained unmarried through her
life, and she, too, had a secret; it was one that was never told.

Wilberlee Mill prospered. The hands were paid on the same
principles as Tom and Ben had introduced at Co-op. Mill, and prospered
with the mill. If Tom was never rich as this world counts riches, he was
rich in a wealth above a miser’s dream.

“What about the action ‘Pinder at the suit of
Tinker,’” asked Nehemiah Wimpenny of his client.

“Judgment for the defendant with costs,” was the curt reply.

“Happy to draw the marriage settlements,” ventured the
unabashed attorney.

“Thank you, Edwin Sykes will do that,” was the reply.

Wimpenny returned to his siege of the facile heart of the lively Polly,
and in time wedded her. But their marriage was not a happy one.
Nehemiah’s attachment to the bar of the
Rose and Crown

survived Polly’s translation to a loftier sphere of life. He
became a confirmed tippler, and his clients left him one after the
other. He became in time that most pitiable of objects—a pot-house
lawyer, and only escaped the last disgrace of a lawyer’s life
because no one would trust him with their money.

Ben Garside took to Methodism in his old age, and wore glossy
black-cloth o’ Sundays. But he always averred that he had fallen
from his best ideals, and suffered the fear for his own soul to deaden
his concern for the souls of others. He and Jack smoked many a pipe
together in the calm summer months of peaceful and prosperous years,
seated on the crumbling walls of Co-op. Mill, and mourning over a
vanished dream.

The last sage dictum of Ben to be recorded in this narrative suggested
its title. It was uttered on the eve of his friend’s wedding.

“Aw reckon, Tom, as ha’ tha’ll be goin’ to Aenon
Chapel after tha’rt wed?”

“Why so?” asked Tom

“Cost tha’rt one o’ th’ elect.”

“I don’t take you, Ben.”

“Why, mon, doesn’t elect mean chossen.”

“I suppose so, Ben.”

“Why, doesn’t ta see, tha’rt Dorothy’s
choice?”

THE END.

THE HOLMFIRTH FLOOD.

As many of the readers of “Dorothy’s Choice” may not
be conversant with the facts upon which that story is based, and as
those who are may wish to have in concise form a historical narrative of
that great catastrophe the following account, taken from the
author’s “History of Huddersfield and Its Vicinity,”
is appended:— “The Bilberry Reservoir is situated at the
head of a narrow gorge or glen, leading from the Holme Valley, at Holme
Bridge, to a high bluff of land called Good Bent, and was supplied by
two streams flowing through the cloughs running to the north-east and
south-east of Good Bent, and draining the Moors of Holme Moss on the one
side and the hills running up to Saddleworth on the other, including
some thousands of acres of moorland. The confluence of the streams takes
place between two large hills, called Hoobrook Hill and Lum Bank, and
which run parallel to each other for a distance of about one hundred and
fifty yards, when they open out and form an extensive oval basin of not
less than three hundred yards diameter. The reservoir formed by blocking
up the valley below the basin enclosing some twelve acres of surface. It
was defective in its original construction, and was for a long time
known to be in a most dangerous condition. At the time when the
embankment gave way the quantity of water in the reservoir would not be
less than eighty-six million two hundred and forty-eight thousand
gallons or the enormous and fearful amount of three hundred thousand
tons in weight. It burst a little before one o’clock in the
morning of February 5th, 1852. The moon shone bright over the varied and
romantic landscape; the streamlets swollen by recent heavy rains, filled
the river to its banks; the industrious population were recruiting their
wasted energies by sleep, when all at once, in a moment, the ponderous
embankment was carried away by the force and weight of the pent-up
waters, and desolation, ruin, and death overspread the rich and fertile
valley for miles around. Trees were torn up by the roots and hurried
onwards by the rush of waters, roaring with renewed fury as they swept
each successive obstruction. The death-shrieks of scores were hushed as
the flood passed forwards to new scenes of destruction and death,
leaving in its track ponderous pieces of rock weighing many tons; the
dead carcases of horses, cows, goats, and other cattle; here and there
broken machinery, bags of wool, carding machines, dye pans, steam engine
boilers, timber, spars, looms, furniture, and every variety of wreck. It
would seem as if the whole body of accumulated waters had tumbled down
the valley together, sweeping all before them, throwing a four-storey
mill down like a thing of nought, tossing steam engine boilers about
like feathers, and carrying death and destruction in their progress. In
consequence of the narrowness between the mountain bluffs on either
side, a vast volume of water was kept together, which spent its force
upon Holmfirth, where the mass of houses, shops, mills, warehouses, and
other buildings was expected to present a formidable barrier to its
further progress. The check, however, was but momentary for the flood,
with the mass of floating wreck which it carried in its bosom, shot
through buildings, gutted some, and tumbled others down, until it found
a further outlet and passed on, doing more or less damage lower down the
valley at Thongs Bridge, Honley, and Armitage Bridge. After passing the
last place mentioned the flood got more into the open country spreading
itself out in the fields, and swelling the river down below
Huddersfield. Much might be written on the details and incidents
connected with the catastrophe. A few of the most striking may be
mentioned. A few hundred yards below the reservoir stood a small
building two storeys high called Bilberry Mill, the occupation of Joseph
Broadhead, and used as a scribbling and dressing mill. The end of the
mill was caught by the sudden swell, and about ten feet in length and
its gable were washed down the valley. A little further down the valley,
and on the same side as Bilberry Mill, stood Digley Upper Mill, lately
occupied by Mr. John Furniss, woollen manufacturer. The building was a
block of stone work, consisting of a factory, a large house, farm
buildings, and outhouses. The end of the mill was washed away, a
quantity of machinery, and a large amount of property in the shape of
pieces, warps, etc., destroyed, and the gable end of the house, which
was comparatively new, and the farm buildings swept away. In the latter
were twelve tons of hay, three cows, a horse, and several head of
poultry, which were all carried down the stream. A short distance below
stood Digley Mill property, which consisted of a large building sixty
yards square, four storeys high, built of stone; a weaving shed,
containing thirty-four looms and other machinery; two dwelling-houses,
seven cottages, farm, and other outbuildings, making altogether a small
town. Adjacent to it in the valley and on the hill side were several
fields of rich and fertile land; the whole forming a secluded but
compact estate, valued at from twelve to fifteen thousand pounds. In one
of the houses built on the river side, resided Mrs. Hirst, widow of the
late George Hirst; and in the other resided Henry Beardsall, her
son-in-law. The cottages were occupied by work people. The buildings
formed a mass of solid stone work; but the torrent swept it away like a
straw, carrying its ponderous machinery down the valley, and tossing its
boilers about with the greatest ease. The engine was carried from its
place, and became embedded in the mud lower down in the valley. The
house built on the hill-side remained, but the cottages and all the
other buildings were carried away, except a tall engine chimney. With
the buildings were swept away four cows and a valuable horse. Bank End
Mill was the next building in the valley. Its gable end and one window
from the top to the bottom of the building were washed away. It was
completely gutted in the lower rooms and the machinery in the upper
storeys was thrown together in heaps. The dye house and stove, about
twenty yards long, were completely cleared away, leaving nothing of them
standing above the ground. The property belonged to Joe Roebuck whose
loss was estimated at from two to three thousand pounds. The valley here
widens until it reaches Holme Bridge, a small village composed of a few
hundred inhabitants. The stream here is crossed by a bridge of one arch,
about forty yards on one side of which stands Holme Church, in the
centre of a graveyard; and about the same distance on the other side
stood a toll gate and a number of dwellings. The bridge was swept away
to its foundations. The wall surrounding the church was ravished by the
speeding torrent, and the few trees planted in the yard were uprooted
and carried down the stream. The interior of the church and the
graveyard, as seen a day or two after the flood, presented a melancholy
spectacle. Inside the church the water had risen about five feet. The
floor was torn up—the pews had been floating, and the floor was
covered with sand and mud several inches thick. In the centre of the
aisle was laid the body of a goat which had been washed from Upper
Digley Mill, and within a few feet of it, resting on the seat of one of
the pews, lay the coffin and remains of a full grown man. Both these
relics, with others not found, had been washed up from their graves by
the whirlpools formed by the current, as it passed over the churchyard.
The roads and fields from the reservoir downwards to this point were
almost covered with huge masses of stone and other loose substances, of
which the bank of the reservoir had been formed. Down to this point no
human life appears to have been lost; but a little lower down, at the
village of Hinchliffe Mill, the loss of life was very great. This
village was on the left bank of the river, and consisted principally of
cottage houses. The factory, which gave its name to the village, was a
large building five storeys high, built on the opposite side of the
river, and which remained, though the water had passed its first and
second floor, and done great damage to the machinery. The mill was for
some time blocked up to the windows in the second storey with huge
pieces of timber, broken machinery, and wreck of various descriptions,
which the torrent brought down from the mills above. On the village side
of the river, six dwellings which formed “Water Street,”
were swept down and hurled forward with the flood, and thirty-five of
the inmates perished. The following is the list of the occupants of the
houses that were swept down. The first house was occupied by Miss
Marsden and three others; the second by Joseph Todd, his wife and
children; the third by J. Crosland and seven others; the fourth by James
Metternick, and nine others; the fifth by Joshua Earnshaw, his little
girl, and two sons; and the sixth by John Charlesworth, and nine others.
The houses in this neighbourhood not washed down, were in some cases
flooded into the chambers; and in one of them—the endmost left
standing—were sixteen individuals, who saved their lives by
getting on an adjoining roof. In the adjoining houses, five persons
perished. Of the five persons who were overcome by the waters in the
houses above Hinchliffe, three were drowned in one house,
viz.—James Booth, his wife, and a lodger. In the same pile of
buildings, the wife of Joseph Brook (who was endeavouring to save
herself and child) was drowned with her infant in her arms. The country
grows wilder below the last-mentioned place; and in the centre of a wide
valley stood Bottom’s Mill. From the open country here offered to
the stream, the factory, which was a very large one, sustained
comparatively little damage. After leaving the mill, the torrent
assailed the machine shops and works of Messrs. Pogson and Co.;
proceeding thence to Harpin’s Victoria woollen mill, doing great
damage. Machinery was broken, cottages carried away, and much property
destroyed. At the time of the calamity twenty persons were in these
cottages, and were only rescued by a communication being opened up
through the walls with the end house which was rather higher up away
from the flood. Here in one chamber, the poor creatures were huddled
together expecting momentary death, when at last the water abated
sufficiently to allow of their being removed which was scarcely effected
before the house fell in. Within a short distance of Victoria Mill stood
Dyson’s Mill, which was occupied by Mr. Sandford in the yard of
which Mr. Sandford resided. His house was swept away, and with it
himself, his two children, and servant. The factory sustained very
serious damage, both in its walls and machinery. Mr. Sandford was a
person of considerable property, and is said to have had three or four
thousand pounds in the house at the time. However this may be, it is
known that he had just before been in treaty for the purchase of a
considerable estate at Penistone, and that he had only that very week
given instructions to a share broker at Huddersfield to buy for him a
large amount of London and North Western Railway Stock. His life was
also insured for a large sum. The bodies of Mr. Sandford’s two
daughters and his housekeeper were found a few days after the flood; but
the body of Mr. Sandford was not found till February 20th. His friends
wished to find the body in order to prove his death, without which they
would not have been entitled to receive the amount secured by his policy
of insurance. A reward of ten pounds was therefore offered in the first
instance for the recovery of his body, which sum was increased to one
hundred pounds. Procklington or Farrars’ Upper Mill stood next,
the large dyehouse of which was completely destroyed. The damage was
estimated at two, or three thousand pounds; and one of the boilers,
weighing six tons, was carried by the water to Berry Brow, a distance of
three miles. These were the property of Mr. J. Farrar. The factory known
as the Tower Mill, situate a little below, was built across the stream;
but the torrent rushed onward and carried the greater portion of the
mill along with it, leaving the two ends standing. The mill was filled
with valuable machinery and woollen material, and was the property of
Mr. Hodson Farrar. In the factory yard two children were drowned, and a
little further down a third child was found dead. At the
George
Inn,
near this place, nine bodies, principally recovered from the stream,
were laid. At Holmfirth, hundreds of dwellings were inundated, some of
them were filled to the top storey, compelling the inmates to escape
through and get upon the roof for safety; indeed, the houses were
thoroughly gutted. Happily no lives were lost; but the most
heart-rending scenes occurred to the inhabitants of some of the houses
on the opposite side of the street. On the left hand side of what the
day previous was a narrow street stood the toll-bar house, kept by S.
Greenwood, who, with his wife and child, were swept away. He was seen to
come out of the house with a lighted candle in his hand return into the
house, close the door after him, and in a moment or two not a vestige of
the house was to be seen. Lower down, on the same side of the street,
was an extensive warehouse occupied by Messrs. Crawshaw, carriers, which
was swept away. To the left were some extensive blue dye works; the
destruction of these premises was most complete. A little above the mill
and between that building and a stable, stood two small cottages, one
occupied by S. Hartley and his family, the other by R. Shackleton and
family. All the members save three of these families, were swept away
with the cottages. Victoria Bridge was dismantled. On the right hand
side, over the bridge, was a new row of shops, built in the modern
style, every one of which was flooded. The loss sustained by the various
occupants was great. At Smithy Place (a hamlet about two miles
north-east of Holmfirth) the water rose to a fearful height, and but for
the alarm which had been given, the loss of life must have been great.
Whole families had to leave their beds and betake themselves out of the
way of the flood with no other covering than what they slept in some
quite naked; and the shrieks and cries of children for their parents,
and parents for their children, were heartbreaking. The damage done in
this place was very great. From Honley to Armitage Bridge the wreck was
fearful, the front and back walls of St. Paul’s Church, at the
latter place, being completely destroyed. Two children were found dead
above the “Golden Fleece” Inn, one of them on the water
side, the other washed into a tree; they were conveyed to the inn. A
young woman, about eighteen years of age, was found dead and naked in a
field near Armitage Fold. Beyond this part there was some slight damage
done. From a statement published soon after the occurrence, it appears,
that so far as could be ascertained, 77 lives had been lost, 38 of them
being adults, and 39 children; 26 were married, 12 unmarried, and 12
children were left destitute. The estimated damage and summary of
property, in addition to the loss from devastated land under tillage was
as follows:—Buildings destroyed: 4 mills, 10 dyehouses, 3 stoves,
27 cottages, 7 tradesmen’s houses, 7 shops, 7 bridges, 10
warehouses, 8 barns and stables. Buildings seriously injured: 5
dyehouses, 17 mills, 3 stoves, 129 cottages, 7 tradesmen’s houses,
44 large shops, 11 public-houses 5 bridges, 1 county bridge, 4
warehouses, 13 barns, 3 places of worship, and 2 iron foundries. Hands
thrown out of work: Adults, 4,896; children, 2,142 total, 7,038. The
total loss of property was estimated at Â£250,000. The coroner’s
jury, who viewed the bodies of the persons drowned by the flood, in
addition to the usual verdict of “Found drowned,” made a
statement to the effect that the Holme Reservoir Commissioners had been
guilty of great and culpable negligence in allowing the reservoir to
remain for several years in a dangerous state, with a full knowledge
thereof, and that had they been in the position of a private individual
or firm they would certainly have subject themselves to a verdict of
“Manslaughter.” Generous subscriptions were raised for the
sufferers in various parts of the country, amounting altogether to
Â£68,000. A large surplus of the fund was left after relieving the
sufferers, which was devoted towards the erection of five almshouses,
the first stone being laid in 1856. A brass plate bears the following
inscription:—

“The foundation stone of the Holmfirth Monumental Alms Houses,
erected to commemorate the great flood caused by the bursting of the
Bilberry Reservoir, on the 5th of February, 1852 (by which upwards of
eighty lives were lost), and also the munificent liberality of the
British public, was laid by the Provincial Grand Lodge of Freemasons of
West Yorkshire, on Monday, the 24th of April, 1856, 5856.”

Glossary

Towzer,

a lock-up or a police-cell.

End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Tom Pinder, Foundling, by
Daniel Frederick Edward Sykes

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TOM PINDER, FOUNDLING ***

***** This file should be named 54121-h.htm or 54121-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/4/1/2/54121/

Produced by John Parkinson

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.

*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).

Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License.  You must require such a user to return or
destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.

Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.

Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate

Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.