The Project Gutenberg EBook of Baron d'Holbach, by Max Pearson Cushing

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

Title: Baron d'Holbach
A Study of Eighteenth Century Radicalism in France

Author: Max Pearson Cushing

Release Date: March 18, 2009 [EBook #5621]
Last Updated: January 26, 2013

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BARON D'HOLBACH ***

Produced by David Ross and Richard Farris

BARON D'HOLBACH

A Study of Eighteenth Century Radicalism in France

By Max Pearson Cushing

Submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements
for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy, in
the Faculty of Political Science,
Columbia University

New York

1914

Press of
The New Era Printing Company
Lancaster, PA

Contents

(DETAILED) TABLE OF CONTENTS

BARON D'HOLBACH

INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER I. HOLBACH, THE MAN.

CHAPTER II. HOLBACH'S WORKS.

CHAPTER III. THE SYSTÈME DE LA NATURE.

APPENDIX

[ENDNOTES]

BIBLIOGRAPHY—PART I.

BIBLIOGRAPHY PART II.

VITA

(DETAILED) TABLE OF CONTENTS

Introduction.
CHAPTER I. HOLBACH THE MAN.
Early Letters to
John Wilkes.
Holbach's family.
Relations with Diderot,
Rousseau, Hume, Garrick
and other important persons of the
century.
Estimate of Holbach. His character and personality.

CHAPTER II. HOLBACH'S WORKS.
Miscellaneous Works.

Translations of German Scientific Works.
Translations of English
Deistical Writers.
Boulanger's
Antiquité dévoilée
.

Original Works:
Le Christianisme devoilé
.

Théologie
portative
.

La Contagion sacrée
.

Essai sur les
préjugés
.

Le bons-sens
.
CHAPTER III. THE
Système
de la Nature
AND ITS PHILOSOPHY.
Voltaire's correspondence on
the subject.
Goethe's sentiment.
Refutations and criticisms.

Holbach's philosophy.
APPENDIX. HOLBACH'S CORRESPONDENCE.

Five unpublished letters to John Wilkes.
[ENDNOTES]

BIBLIOGRAPHY.
Part I. Editions of Holbach's works in Chronological
Order.
Part II. General Bibliography.

BARON D'HOLBACH

A une extréme justesse d'esprit il joignait une simplicité
de moeurs tout-à-fait antique et patriarcale.

J. A. Naigeon,
Journal de Paris
, le 9 fev. 1789

INTRODUCTION

Diderot, writing to the Princess Dashkoff in 1771, thus analysed the
spirit of his century:

Chaque siècle a son esprit qui le caractérise. L'esprit du nôtre semble
être celui de la liberté. La première attaque contre la superstition a été
violente, sans mesure. Une fois que les hommes ont osé d'une manière
quelconque donner l'assaut à la barrière de la religion, cette barrière la
plus formidable qui existe comme la plus respectée, il est impossible de
s'arrêter. Dès qu'ils ont tourné des regards menaçants contre la majesté
du ciel, ils ne manqueront pas le moment d'après de les diriger contre la
souveraineté de la terre. Le câble qui tient et comprime l'humanité est
formé de deux cordes, l'une ne peut céder sans que l'autre vienne à
rompre. [Endnote 1:1]

The following study proposes to deal with this attack on religion that
preceded and helped to prepare the French Revolution. Similar phenomena
are by no means rare in the annals of history; eighteenth-century atheism,
however, is of especial interest, standing as it does at the end of a long
period of theological and ecclesiastical disintegration and prophesying a
reconstruction of society on a purely rational and naturalistic basis. The
anti-theistic movement has been so obscured by the less thoroughgoing
tendency of deism and by subsequent romanticism that the real issue in the
eighteenth century has been largely lost from view. Hence it has seemed
fit to center this study about the man who stated the situation with the
most unmistakable and uncompromising clearness, and who still occupies a
unique though obscure position in the history of thought.

Holbach has been very much neglected by writers on the eighteenth century.
He has no biographer. M. Walferdin wrote (in an edition of Diderot's
Works, Paris, 1821, Vol. XII p. 115): "Nous nous occupons depuis longtemps
à rassembler les matériaux qui doivent servir à venger la mémoire du
philosophe de la patrie de Leibnitz, et dans l'ouvrage que nous nous
proposons de publier sous le titre "D'Holbach jugé par ses contemporains"
nous espérons faire justement apprécier ce savant si estimable par la
profondeur et la variété de ses connaissances, si précieux à sa famille et
à ses amis par la pureté et la simplicité de ses moeurs, en qui la vertu
était devenue une habitude et la bienfaisance un besoin." This work has
never appeared and M. Tourneux thinks that nothing of it was found among
M. Walferdin's papers. [2:2] In 1834 Mr. James Watson published in an
English translation of the
Système de la Nature
,
A Short Sketch
of the Life and the Writings of Baron d'Holbach
by Mr. Julian Hibbert,
compiled especially for that edition from Saint Saurin's article in
Michaud's
Biographie Universelle
(Paris, 1817, Vol. XX, pp.
460-467), from Barbier's
Dict. des ouvrages anonymes
(Paris, 1822)
and from the preface to the Paris edition of the
Système de la Nature

(4 vols., 18mo, 1821). This sketch was later published separately (London,
1834, 12mo, pp. 14) but on account of the author's sudden death it was
left unfinished and is of no value from the point of view of scholarship.
Another attempt to publish something on Holbach was made by Dr. Anthony C.
Middleton of Boston in 1857. In the preface to his translation to the
Lettres
à Eugenia
he speaks of a "Biographical Memoir of Baron d'Holbach which
I am now preparing for the press." If ever published at all this
Memoir

probably came to light in the
Boston Investigator
, a free-thinking
magazine published by Josiah P. Mendum, 45 Cornhill, Boston, but it is not
to be found. Mention should also be made of the fact that M. Assézat
intended to include in a proposed study of Diderot and the philosophical
movement, a chapter to be devoted to Holbach and his society; but this
work has never appeared. [3:3]

Of the two works bearing Holbach's name as a title, one is a piece of
libellous fiction by Mme. de Genlis,
Les Diners du baron d'Holbach

(Paris, 1822, 8vo), the other a romance pure and simple by F. T. Claudon
(Paris, 1835, 2 vols., 8vo) called
Le Baron d'Holbach
, the events
of which take place largely at his house and in which he plays the rôle of
a minor character. A good account of Holbach, though short and incidental,
is to be found in M. Avézac-Lavigne's
Diderot et la Société du Baron
d'Holbach
(Paris, 1875, 8vo), and M. Armand Gasté has a little book
entitled
Diderot et le cure de Montchauvet, une Mystification
littéraire chez le Baron d'Holbach
(Paris, 1895, 16vo). There are
several works which devote a chapter or section to Holbach. [3:4] The
French critics and the histories of philosophy contain slight notices;
Rosenkranz's "Diderot's Leben" devotes a chapter to Granval, Holbach's
country seat, and life there as described by Diderot in his letters to
Mlle. Volland; and he is included in such histories of ideas as Soury, J.,
"Bréviaire de l'histoire de Matérialisme" (Paris, 1881) and Delvaille, J.,

Essai sur l'histoire de l'idée de progrès
(Paris, 1910); but
nowhere else is there anything more than the merest encyclopedic account,
often defective and incorrect.

The sources are in a sense full and reliable for certain phases of his
life and literary activity. His own publications, numbering about fifty,
form the most important body of source material for the history and
development of his ideas. Next in importance are contemporary memoirs and
letters including those of Voltaire, Rousseau, Diderot, Grimm, Morellet,
Marmontel, Mme. d'Epinay, Naigeon, Garat, Galiani, Hume, Garrick, Wilkes,
Romilly and others; and scattered letters by Holbach himself, largely to
his English friends. In addition there is a large body of contemporary
hostile criticism of his books, by Voltaire, Frederick II, Castillon,
Holland, La Harpe, Delisle de Sales and a host of outraged ecclesiastics,
so that one is well informed in regard to the scandal that his books
caused at the time. Out of these materials and other scattered documents
and notices it is possible to reconstruct—though somewhat
defectively—the figure of a man who played an important rôle in his
own day; but whose name has long since lost its significance—even in
the ears of scholars. It is at the suggestion of Professor James Harvey
Robinson that this reconstruction has been made. If it shall prove of any
interest or value he must be credited with the initiation of the idea as
well as constant aid in its realization. For rendering possible the
necessary investigations, recognition is due to the administration and
officers of the Bibliothèque Nationale, the British Museum, the Library of
Congress, the Libraries of Columbia and Harvard Universities, Union and
Andover Theological Seminaries, and the Public Libraries of Boston and New
York.

M. P. C. NEW YORK CITY,

July, 1914.

CHAPTER I. HOLBACH, THE MAN.

Paul Heinrich Dietrich, or as he is better known, Paul-Henri Thiry, baron
d'Holbach, was born in January, 1723, in the little village of Heidelsheim
(N.W. of Carlsruhe) in the Palatinate. Of his parentage and youth nothing
is known except that his father, a rich parvenu, according to Rousseau,
[5:5] brought him to Paris at the age of twelve, where he received the
greater part of his education. His father died when Holbach was still a
young man. It may be doubted if young Holbach inherited his title and
estates immediately as there was an uncle "Messire Francois-Adam, Baron
d'Holbach, Seigneur de Héeze, Léende et autres Lieux" who lived in the rue
Neuve S. Augustin and died in 1753. His funeral was held at Saint-Roch,
his parish church, Thursday, September 16th, where he was afterward
entombed. [5:6] Holbach was a student in the University of Leyden in 1746
and spent a good deal of time at his uncle's estate at Héeze, a little
town in the province of North Brabant (S.E. of Eindhoven). He also
traveled and studied in Germany. There are two manuscript letters in the
British Museum (Folio 30867, pp. 14, 18, 20) addressed by Holbach to John
Wilkes, which throw some light on his school-days. It is interesting to
note that most of Holbach's friends were young Englishmen of whom there
were some twenty-five at the University of Leyden at that time. [6:7]
Already at the age of twenty-three Holbach was writing very good English,
and all his life he was a friend of Englishmen and English ideas. His
friendship for Wilkes, then a lad of nineteen, lasted all his life and
increased in intimacy and dignity. The two letters following are of
interest because they are the only documents we have bearing on Holbach's
early manhood. They reveal a certain sympathy and feeling—rather
gushing to be sure—quite unlike anything in his later writings, and
quite out of line with the supposedly cold temper of a materialist and an
atheist.

[Footnote: These letters, contrary to modern usage, are printed with all
the peculiarities of eighteenth century orthography. It was felt that they
would lose their quaintness and charm if Holbach's somewhat fantastic
English were trifled with or his spelling, capitalization and punctuation
modernized.]

HOLBACH TO WILKES

HÉEZE Aug. 9, 1746

Dearest Friend

I should not have felt by half enough the pleasure your kind letter gave
me, If I had words to express it; I never doubted of your friendship, nor
I hope do you know me so little as to doubt of mine, but your letter is
full of such favorable sentiments to me that I must own I cannot repay
them but by renewing to you the entire gift of my heart that has been
yours ever since heaven favour'd me with your acquaintance. I need not
tell you the sorrow our parting gave me, in vain Philosophy cried aloud
nature was still stronger and the philosopher was forced to yield to the
friend, even now I feel the wound is not cur'd. Therefore no more of that—
Hope

is my motto. Telling me you are happy you make me so but in the middle of
your happiness you dont forget your friend, What flattering thought to me!
Such are the charms of friendship every event is shar'd and nothing nor
even the greatest intervals are able to interrupt the happy harmony of
truly united minds. I left Leyden about 8 or 10 days after you but before
my departure I thought myself obliged to let Mr Dowdenwell know what you
told me, he has seen the two letters Mr Johnson had received and I have
been mediator of ye peace made betwixt the 2 parties, I don't doubt but
you have seen by this time Messrs Bland & Weatherill who were to set
out for Engelland the same week I parted with them. When I was leaving
Leyden Mr Vernon happen'd to tell me he had a great mind to make a trip to
Spa. So my uncles' estate being on ye road I desir'd him to come along
with me, he has been here a week and went on afterwards in his journey, at
my arrival here, I found that General Count Palfi with an infinite number
of military attendants had taken possession of my uncles' house, and that
the 16 thousd men lately come from Germany to strengthen the allies army,
commanded by Count Bathiani and that had left ye neighborhood of Breda a
few days before and was come to Falkenswert (where you have past in your
journey to Spa) one hour from hence. Prince Charles arrived here the same
day from Germany to take ye command of the allies, the next Day the whole
army amounting to 70thd men went on towards the county of Liège to prevent
the French from beseiging Namur, I hear now that the two armies are only
one hour from another, so we expect very soon the news of a great battle
but not without fear, Count Saxes army being, by all account of hundred
ten thoud. men besides. Prince Counti's army of 50 thd. this latter
General is now employ'd at the siege of Charleroy, that can't resist a
long while, it is a report that the King of France is arrived in his army,
I hope this long account will entertain you for want of news papers: Mr.
Dowdeswell being left alone of our club at Leyden I Desir'd him to come
and spend with me the time of his vacations here, which proposal I hope he
will accept and be here next week. What happy triumvirat would be ours if
you were to join: but that is impossible at present; however those who
cant enjoy reality are fond of feeding their fancies with agreable Dreams
and charming pictures; that helps a little to sooth the sorrow of absence
and makes one expect with more pati[ence] till fortune allows him to put
in execution the cherish'd systems he has been fed upon fore some [time] I
shall expect with great many thanks the books you are to send me; it will
be for me a dubble pleasure to read them, being of your choice which I
value as much as it deserves, and looking at them as upon a new proof of
your benevolence, as to those I design'd to get from Paris for you, I
heard I could not get them before my uncles' return hither all commerce
being stopt by the way betwixt this country and France.

A few days before my departure from Leyden I receiv'd a letter from Mr
Freeman from Berlin, he seams vastly pleas'd with our Germany, and chiefly
with Hambourg where a beautiful lady has taken in his heart the room of
poor Mss. Vitsiavius, my prophesy was just; traveling seems to have
alter'd a good deal his melancholy disposition as I may conjecture by his
way of writing. He desired his service to you. As to me, Idleness renders
me every day more philosopher every passion is languishing within me, I
retain but one in a warm degree, viz, friendship in which you share no
small part. I took a whim to study a little Physic accordingly I purchased
several books in that Way, and my empty hours here are employ'd with them.
I am sure your time will be much better employ'd at Alesbury you'll find
there a much nobler entertainment Cupid is by far Lovlier than Esculapius,
however I shall not envy your happiness, in the Contrary I wish that all
your desires be crown'd with success, that a Passion that proves fatal to
great many of men be void of sorrow for you, that all the paths of love be
spred over with flowers in one Word that you may not address in vain to
the charming Mss. M. I am almost tempted to fall in love with that unknown
beauty, 't would not be quite like Don Quixotte for your liking to her
would be for me a very strong prejudice of her merit, which the poor
Knight had not in his love for Dulcinea.

I shall not ask your pardon for the length of this letter I am sure
friendship will forgive the time I steal to Love however I cannot give up
so easily a conversation with a true friend with whom I fancy to speak yet
in one of those delightfull evening walks at Leyden. It is a dream, I own
it, but it is so agreable one to me that nothing but reality could be
compared to the pleasure I feel: let me therefore insist a little more
upon't and travel with my Letter, we are gone! I think to be at Alesbury!
there I see my Dear Wilkes! What a Flurry of Panions! Joy! fear of a
second parting! what charming tears! what sincere Kisses!—but time
flows and the end of this Love is now as unwelcome to me, as would be to
another to be awaken'd in the middle of a Dream wherein he is going to
enjoy a beloved mistress; the enchantment ceases, the delightfull images
vanish, and nothing is left to me but friendship, which is of all my
possessions the fairest, and the surest, I am most sincerely Dear Wilkes

Your affectionate friend and humble servant
DE HOLBACH
Heze the 9th august 1746 N. S.

I shall expect with impatience the letter you are to write me from
Alesbury. Will it be here very soon!

HOLBACH TO WILKES [HÉEZE Dec. 3rd. 1746]

Dearest Wilkes

During a little voyage I have made into Germany I have received your
charming letter of the 8th. September O. S. the many affairs I have been
busy with for these 3 months has hindered me hitherto from returning to
you as speedy an answer as I should have done. I know too much your
kindness for me to make any farther apology and I hope you are enough
acquainted with the sincerety of my friendship towards you to adscribe my
fault to forgetfulness or want of gratitude be sure, Dear friend, that
such a disposition will allways be unknown to me in regard to you. I don't
doubt but you will be by this time returned at London, the winter season
being an obstacle to the pleasures you have enjoyed following ye Letter at
Alesbury during the last Autumn. I must own I have felt a good deal of
pride when you gave me the kind assurance that love has not made you
forget an old friend, I need not tell you my disposition. I hope you know
it well enough and like my friendship for you has no bounds I want
expressions to show it. Mr Dowdeswell has been so good as to let me enjoy
his company here in the month of August, and returned to Leyden to pursue
his studies in the middle of September. We often wished your company and
made sincere libations to you with burgundy and Champaigne I had a few
weeks there after I set out for Germany where I expected to spend the
whole winter but the sudden death of my Uncle's Steward has forced me to
come back here to put in order the affairs of this estate, I don't know
how long I shall be obliged to stay in the meanwhile I act pretty well the
part of a County Squire, id est, hunting, shooting, fishing, walking every
day without to lay aside the ever charming conversation of Horace Virgil
Homer and all our noble friends of the Elysian fields. They are allways
faithfull to me, with their aid I find very well how to employ my time,
but I want in this country a true bosom friend like my dear Wilkes to
converse with, but my pretenssions are too high, for every abode with such
a company would be heaven for me.

I perceive by your last letter that your hopes are very like to succeed by
Mss Mead, you are sure that every happines that can befall to you will
make me vastly happy. I beseech you therefore to let me know everytime how
far you are gone, I take it to be a very good omen for you, that your
lovely mistress out of compliance has vouchsafed to learn a harsh
high-dutch name, which would otherwise have made her starttle, at the very
hearing of it. I am very thankful for her kind desire of seeing me in
Engelland which I dont wish the less but you know my circumstances enough,
to guess that I cannot follow my inclinations. I have not heard hitherto
anything about the books you have been so kind as to send me over by the
opportunity of a friend. I have wrote about it to Msrs Conrad et Bouwer of
Rotterdam, they answered that they were not yet there. Nevertheless I am
very much oblided to you for your kindness and wish to find very soon the
opportunity of my revenge. Mr Dowderswell complains very much of Mrs Bland
and Weatherill, having not heard of them since their departure from
Leyden. I desire my compliments to Mr Dyer and all our old acquaintances.
Pray be so good as to direct your first letter under the covert of Mr
Dowderwell at Ms Alliaume's at Leyden he shall send it to me over
immediately, no more at Mr Van Sprang's like you used to do. I wish to
know if Mr Lyson since his return to his native country, continues in his
peevish cross temper. If you have any news besides I'll be glad to hear
them by your next which I expect very soon.

About politicks I cannot tell you anything at present, you have heard
enough by this time the fatal battle fought near Liège in 8ber last;
everybody has little hopes of the Congress of Breda, the Austrian and
Piedmontese are entered into provence, which is not as difficult as to
maintain themselves therein, I wish a speedy peace would enable us both to
see the rejoicings that will attend the marriage of the Dauphin of France
with a Princess of Saxony. I have heard that peace is made between England
and Spain, which you ought to know better than I. We fear very much for
the next campaign the siege of Maestrich in our neighborhood. These are
all the news I know. I'll tell you another that you have known a long
while viz. that nobody is with more sincerity My Dear Wilkes

Your faithfull humble Servant and Friend
HOLBACH
Heeze the 3 d Xber 1746 ns

By 1750 Holbach was established in Paris as a young man of the world. His
fortune, his learning, his sociability attracted the younger literary set
toward him. In 1749 he was already holding his Thursday dinners which
later became so famous. Among his early friends were Diderot, Rousseau and
Grimm. With them he took the side of the Italian
Opera buffa
in the
famous musical quarrel of 1752, and published two witty brochures
ridiculing French music. [12:9] He was an art connoisseur and bought
Oudry's
Chienne allaitant ses petits
, the
chef d'oeuvre
of
the Salon of 1753. [12:10] During these years he was hard at work at his
chosen sciences of chemistry and mineralogy. In 1752 he published in a
huge volume in quarto with excellent plates, a translation of Antonio
Neri's
Art of Glass making
, and in 1753 a translation of Wallerius'

Mineralogy
. On July 26, 1754, the Academy of Berlin made him a
foreign associate in recognition of his scholarly attainments in Natural
History, [12:11] and later he was elected to the Academies of St.
Petersburg and Mannheim.

All that was now lacking to this brilliant young man was an attractive
wife to rule over his salon. His friends urged him to wed, and in 1753 he
married Mlle. Basile-Genevieve-Susanne d'Aine, daughter of "Maître
Marius-Jean-Baptiste Nicolas d'Aine, conseiller au Roi en son grand
conseil, associé externe de l'Acad. des sciences et belles letters de
Prusse." [12:12] M. d'Aine was also Maître des Requêtes and a man of
means. Mme. d'Holbach was a very charming and gracious woman and Holbach's
good fortune seemed complete when suddenly Mme. d'Holbach died from a most
loathsome and painful disease in the summer of 1754. Holbach was
heart-broken and took a trip through the provinces with his friend Grimm,
to whom he was much attached, to distract his mind from his grief. He
returned in the early winter and the next year (1755) got a special
dispensation from the Pope to marry his deceased wife's sister, Mlle.
Charlotte-Susanne d'Aine. By her he had four children, two sons and two
daughters. The first, Charles-Marius, was born about the middle of August,
1757, and baptized in Saint-Germain-l'Auxerrois, Aug. 22. He inherited the
family title and was a captain in the regiment of the Schomberg-Dragons.
[13:13] The first daughter was born towards the end of 1758 and the second
about the middle of Jan., 1760. [13:14] The elder married the Marquis de
Châtenay and the younger the Marquis de Nolivos, "Captaine au régiment de
la Seurre, Dragons." Their Majesties the King and Queen and the Royal
Family signed their marriage contract May 27, 1781. [13:15] Of the second
son there seem to be no traces. Holbach's mother-in-law, Madame d'Aine,
was a very interesting old woman as she is pictured in Diderot's
Mémoires
,
and there was a brother-in-law, "Messire Marius-Jean-Baptiste-Nicholas
d'Aine, chevalier, conseiller du roi en ses conseils, Maître des requêtes
honoraire de son hôtel, intendant de justice, police, et finances de la
généralité de Tours," who lived in rue Saint Dominique, paroisse
Saint-Sulpice. There was in Holbach's household for a long time an old
Scotch surgeon, a homeless, misanthropic old fellow by the name of Hope,
of whom Diderot gives a most interesting account. [14:16] These are the
only names we have of the personnel of Holbach's household. His town house
was in the rue Royale, butte Saint-Roch. It was here that for an almost
unbroken period of forty years he gave his Sunday and Thursday dinners.
The latter day was known to the more intimate set of encyclopedists as the

jour du synagogue
. Here the
église philosophique
met
regularly to discuss its doctrines and publish its propaganda of
radicalism.

Holbach had a very pleasant country seat, the château of Grandval, now in
the arrondisement of Boissy St. Léger at Sucy-en-Brie. It is pleasantly
situated in the valley of a little stream, the Morbra, which flows into
the Marne. The property was really the estate of Mme. d'Aine who lived
with the Holbachs. Here the family and their numerous guests passed the
late summer and fall. Here Diderot spent weeks at a time working on the
Encyclopedia, dining, and walking on the steep slopes of the Marne with
congenial companions. To him we are indebted for our intimate knowledge of
Grandval and its inhabitants, their slightest doings and conversations;
and as Danou has well said, if we were to wish ourselves back in any past
age we should choose with many others the mid-eighteenth century and the
charming society of Paris and Grandval. [14:17]

Holbach's life, in common with that of most philosophers, offers no
events, except that he came near being killed in the crush and riot in the
rue Royale that followed the fire at the Dauphin's wedding in 1770.
[15:18] He was never an official personage. His entire life was spent in
study, writing and conversation with his friends. He traveled very little;
the world came to him, to the
Café de l'Europe
, as Abbé Galiani
called Paris. From time to time Holbach went to Contrexéville for his gout
and once to England to visit David Garrick; but he disliked England very
thoroughly and was glad to get back to Paris. The events of his life in so
far as there were any, were his relations with people. He knew intimately
practically all the great men of his century, except Montesquieu and
Voltaire, who were off the stage before his day. [15:19] Holbach's most
intimate and life-long friend among the great figures of the century was
Diderot, of whom Rousseau said, "À la distance de quelques siècles du
moment où il a vécu, Diderot paraîtra un homme prodigieux; on regardera de
loin cette tête universelle avec une admiration mêlée d'étonnement, comme
nous regardons aujourd'hui la tête des Platon et des Aristote." [15:20]
All his contemporaries agreed that nothing was so charged with divine fire
as the conversation of Diderot. Gautherin, in his fine bronze of him on
the Place Saint-Germain-des-Près, seems to have caught the spirit of his
talk and has depicted him as he might have sat in the midst of Holbach's
society, of which he was the inspiration and the soul. Holbach backed
Diderot financially in his great literary and scientific undertaking and
provided articles for the Encyclopedia on chemistry and natural science.
Diderot had a high opinion of his erudition and said of him, "Quelque
système que forge mon imagination, je suis sur que mon ami d'Holbach me
trouve des faits et des autorités pour le justifier." [16:21] Opinions
differ in regard to the intellectual influence of these men upon each
other. Diderot was without doubt the greater thinker, but Holbach stated
his atheism with far greater clarity and Diderot gave his sanction to it
by embellishing Holbach's books with a few eloquent pages of his own.
Diderot said to Sir Samuel Romilly in 1781, "Il faut
sabrer
la
théologie," [16:22] and died in 1784 in the belief that complete
infidelity was the first step toward philosophy. Five years later Holbach
was buried by his side in the crypt of the Chapel of the Virgin behind the
high altar in Saint-Roch. No tablet marks their tombs, and although
repeated investigations have been made no light has been thrown on the
exact position of their burial place. According to Diderot's daughter,
Mme. Vandeuil, their entire correspondence has been destroyed or lost.
[16:23]

Holbach's relations with Rousseau were less harmonious. The account of
their mutual misunderstandings contained in the
Confessions
, in a
letter by Cerutti in the
Journal de Paris
Dec. 2, 1789, and in
private letters of Holbach's to Hume, Garrick, and Wilkes, is a long and
tiresome tale. The author of
Eclaircissements relatifs à la publication
des confessions de Rousseau...
(Paris, 1789) blames the
club
holbachique
for their treatment of Rousseau, but the fault seems to
lie on both sides. According to Rousseau's account, Holbach sought his
friendship and for a few years he was one of Holbach's society. But, after
the success of the
Devin du Village
in 1753, the
holbachiens

turned against him out of jealousy of his genius as a composer. Visions of
a dark plot against him rose before his fevered and sensitive imagination,
and after 1756 he left the Society of the Encyclopedists, never to return.
Holbach, on the other hand, while admitting rather questionable treatment
of Rousseau, never speaks of any personal injury on his part, and bewails
the fact that "l'homme le plus éloquent s'est rendu ainsi l'homme le plus
anti-littéraire, et l'homme le plus sensible s'est rendu le plus
anti-social." [17:24] He did warn Hume against taking him to England, and
in a letter to Wilkes predicted the quarrel that took place shortly after.
In writing to Garrick [17:25] he says some hard but true things about
Rousseau, who on his part never really defamed Holbach but depicted him as
the virtuous atheist under the guise of Wolmar in the
Nouvelle Heloïse
.
Their personal incompatibility is best explained on the grounds of the
radical differences in their temperaments and types of mind and by the
fact that Rousseau was too sensitive to get on with anybody for any great
length of time.

Two other great Frenchmen, Buffon and d'Alembert, were for a time members
of Holbach's society, but, for reasons that are not altogether clear,
gradually withdrew. Grimm suggests that Buffon did not find the young
philosophers sufficiently deferential to him and to the authorized powers,
and feared for his dignity,—and safety, in their company.
D'Alembert, on the other hand, was a recluse by nature, and, after giving
up his editorship on the Encyclopedia, easily dropped out of Diderot's
society and devoted himself to Mlle. Lespinasse and Mme. Geoffrin. Holbach
and Helvetius were life-long friends and spent much time together reading
at Helvetius's country place at Voré. After his death in 1774, Holbach
frequented Mme. Helvetius' salon where he knew and deeply influenced
Volney, Cabanis, de Tracy, and the first generation of the Ideologists who
continued his and Helvetius' philosophical doctrines. Among the other
Frenchmen of the day who were on intimate relations with Holbach and
frequented his salon were La Condamine, Condillac, Condorcet, Turgot,
Morellet, Raynal, Grimm, Marmontel, Colardeau, Saurin, Suard,
Saint-Lambert, Thomas, Duclos, Chastellux, Boulanger, Darcet, Roux,
Rouelle, Barthès, Venel, Leroy, Damilaville, Naigeon, Lagrange and lesser
names,—but well known in Paris in the eighteenth century,—d'Alinville,
Chauvelin, Desmahis, Gauffecourt, Margency, de Croismare, de Pezay, Coyer,
de Valory, Charnoi, not to mention a host of others.

Among Holbach's most intimate English friends were Hume, Garrick, Wilkes,
Sterne, Gibbon, Horace Walpole, Adam Smith, Benjamin Franklin, Dr.
Priestley, Lord Shelburne, Gen. Barré, Gen. Clark, Sir James MacDonald,
Dr. Gem, Messrs. Stewart, Demster, Fordyce, Fitzmaurice, Foley, etc.
Holbach addressed a letter to Hume in 1762, before making his
acquaintance, in which he expressed his admiration of his philosophy and
the desire to know him personally. [18:26] In 1764 Hume came to Paris as
secretary of the British Embassy and immediately called on Holbach and
became a regular frequenter of his salon. It was to Holbach that he wrote
first on the outbreak of his quarrel with Rousseau and they corresponded
at length in egard to the publication of the
Exposé succinct
, which
was to justify Hume in the eyes of the French. Hume and Holbach had much
in common intellectually, although the latter was far more thoroughgoing
in his repudiation of Theism.

David Garrick and his wife were frequent visitors at the rue Royale on
their trips to Paris where they were very much liked by Holbach's society.
Nothing is more cordial or gracious than the compliments passed between
them in their subsequent correspondence. There are two published letters
from Holbach in Mr. Hedgecock's recent study of Garrick and his French
friends, excellent examples of the happy spontaneity and sympathy that
were characteristic of French sociability in the eighteenth century.
[19:27] Holbach in turn spent several months with Garrick at Hampton.

Holbach's early friendship for Wilkes has already been mentioned. Wilkes
spent a great deal of time in Paris on the occasion of his exiles from
England and became very intimate with Holbach. They corresponded up to the
very end of Holbach's life and there was a constant interchange of
friendly offices between them. [19:28] Miss Wilkes, who spent much time in
Paris, was a very good friend of Mme. Holbach and Mlle. Helvetius. Adam
Smith often dined at Holbach's with Turgot and the economists; Gibbon also
found his dinners agreeable except for the dogmatism of the atheists;
Walpole resented it also and kept away. Priestley seems to have gotten on
very well, although the philosophers found his materialism and
unitarianism a trifle inconsistent. It was at Holbach's that Shelburne met
Morellet with whom he carried on a long and serious correspondence on
economics. There seem to be no details of Holbach's relations with
Franklin, who was evidently more assiduous at the salon of Mme. Helvetius
whom he desired to marry.

Holbach's best friend among the Italians was Abbé Galiani, secretary of
the Neapolitan Embassy, who spent ten years in the salons of Paris. After
his return to Naples his longing for Paris led him to a voluminous
correspondence with his French friends including Holbach. A few of their
letters are extant. Beccaria also came to Paris at the invitation of the
translator of his
Crimes and Punishments
, Abbé Morellet, made on
behalf of Holbach and his society. Beccaria and his friend Veri, who
accompanied him, had long been admirers of French philosophy, and the
Frenchmen found much to admire in Beccaria's book. One
avocat-général
,
M. Servan of the Parlement of Bordeaux, a friend of Holbach's, tried to
put his reforms in practice and shared the fate of most reformers. Holbach
was also in correspondence with Beccaria, and one of his letters has been
published in M. Landry's recent study of Beccaria.

Among the other Italians whom Holbach befriended were Paulo Frizi, the
mathematician; Dr. Gatti; Pincini, the musician; and Mme. Riccoboni,
ex-actress and novelist; whose lively correspondence with Garrick whom she
met at Holbach's sheds much light on the social relations of the century.

Among the other foreigners who were friends or acquaintances of Holbach
were his fellow countrymen, Frederich Melchon Grimm, like himself a
naturalized Frenchman and the bosom friend of Diderot; Meister, his
collaborator in the
Literary Correspondence
; Kohant, a Bohemian
musician, composer, of the
Bergère des Alpes
and Mme. Holbach's
lute-teacher; Baron Gleichen, Comte de Creutz, Danish and Scandinavian
diplomats; and a number of German nobles; the hereditary princes of
Brunswick and Saxe Gotha, Baron Alaberg, afterwards elector of Mayence,
Baron Schomberg and Baron Studitz.

Among the well known women of the century Holbach was most intimate with
Mme. d'Epinay, who became a very good friend of Mme. Holbach's and was
present at the birth of her first son, and, in her will, left her a
portrait by Rembrandt. He was also a friend of Mme. Geoffrin, attended her
salon, and knew Mlle. de Lespinasse, Mme. Houderot and most of the
important women of the day.

There are excellent sources from which to form an estimate of this man
whose house was the social centre of the century. Just after Holbach's
death on January 21, 1789, Naigeon, his literary agent, who had lived on
terms of the greatest intimacy with him for twenty-four years, wrote a
long eulogy which filled the issue of the
Journal de Paris
for Feb.
9. There was another letter to the
Journal
on Feb. 12. Grimm's
Correspondance
Littéraire
for March contains a long account of him by Meister, and
there are other notices in contemporary memoirs such as Morellet's and
Marmontel's. All these accounts agree in picturing him as the most
admirable of men.

It must be remembered that Holbach always enjoyed what was held to be a
considerable fortune in his day. From his estates in Westphalia he had a
yearly income of 60,000
livres
which he spent in entertaining. This
freedom from economic pressure gave him leisure to devote his time to his
chosen intellectual pursuits and to his friends. He was a universally
learned man. He knew French, German, English, Italian and Latin extremely
well and had a fine private library of about three thousand works often of
several volumes each, in these languages and in Greek and Hebrew. The
catalogue of this library was published by Debure in 1789. It would be
difficult to imagine a more comprehensive and complete collection of its
size. He had also a rich collection of drawings by the best masters, fine
pictures of which he was a connoisseur, bronzes, marbles, porcelains and a
natural history cabinet, so in vogue in those days, containing some very
valuable specimens. He was one of the most learned men of his day in
natural science, especially chemistry and mineralogy, and to his
translations from the best German scientific works is largely due the
spread of scientific learning in France in the eighteenth century. Holbach
was also very widely read in English theology and philosophy of the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries and derived his anti-theological
inspiration from these two sources. To this vast fund of learning, he
joined an extreme modesty and simplicity. He sought no academic honors,
published all his works anonymously, and, had it not been for the pleasure
he took in communicating his ideas to his friends, no one would have
suspected his great erudition. He had an extraordinary memory and the
reputation of never forgetting anything of interest. This plenitude of
information, coupled with his easy and pleasant manner of talking, made
his society much sought after. Naigeon said of him (in his preface to the
works of Lagrange):

Personne n'était plus communicatif que M. le baron d'Holbach; personne ne
prenait aux progrès de la raison un intérêt plus vif, plus sincère, et ne
s'occupait avec plus de zèle et l'activité des moyens de les accélérer.

Également versé dans la plupart des matières sur lesquelles il importe le
plus à des êtres raisonnables d'avoir une opinion arrêtée, M. le baron
d'Holbach portait dans leur discussion un jugement sain, une logique
sévère, et une analyse exacte et précise. Quelque fut l'objet de ses
entretiens avec ses amis, ou même avec des indifférens, tels qu'en offrent
plus ou moins toutes les sociétés; il inspirait sans effort à ceux qui
l'écoutaient l'enthousiasme de l'art ou de la science dont il parlait; et
on ne le quittait jamais sans regretter de n'avoir pas cultivé la branche
particulière de connaissances qui avait fait le sujet de la conversation,
sans désirer d'être plus instruit, plus éclairé, et surtout sans admirer
la claret, la justesse de son esprit, et l'ordre dans lequel il savait
présenter ses idées.

This virtue of communicativeness, of
sociabilité
, Holbach carried
into all the relations of life. He was always glad to lend or give his
books to anyone who could make use of them. "Je suis riche," he used to
say, "mais je ne vois dans la fortune qu'un instrument de plus pour opérer
le bien plus promptement et plus efficacement." In fact Holbach's whole
principle of life and action was to increase the store of human well
being. And he did this without any religious motive whatsoever. As Julie
says of Wolmar in
La Nouvelle Heloïse
, "Il fait le bien sans espoir
de récompense, il est plus vertueux, plus désintéressé que nous." There
are many recorded instances of Holbach's gracious benevolence. As he said
to Helvetius, "Vous êtes brouillé avec tous ceux que vous avez obligé,
mais j'ai gardé tous mes amis." Holbach had the faculty of attaching
people to him. Diderot tells how at the Salon of 1753 after Holbach had
bought Oudry's famous picture, all the collectors who had passed it by
came to him and offered him twice what he paid for it. Holbach went to
find the artist to ask him permission to cede the picture to his profit,
but Oudry refused, saying that he was only too happy that his best work
belonged to the man who was the first to appreciate it. Instances of
Holbach's liberality to Kohant, a poor musician, and to Suard, a poor
literary man, are to be found in the pages of Diderot and Meister, and his
constant generosity to his friends is a commonplace in their Memoirs and
Correspondence. Only Rousseau was ungrateful enough to complain that
Holbach's free-handed gifts insulted his poverty. His kindness to
Lagrange, a young literary man whom he rescued from want, has been well
told by M. Naigeon in the preface to the works of Lagrange (p. xviii).

But perhaps the most touching instances of Holbach's benevolence are his
relations with the peasants of Contrexéville, one of which was published
in the
Journal de Lecture
, 1775, the other in an anonymous letter
to the
Journal de Paris
, Feb. 12, 1789. The first concerns the
reconciliation of two old peasants who, not wanting to go to court,
brought their differences to their respected friend for a settlement.
Nothing is more simple and beautiful than this homely tale as told in a
letter of Holbach's to a friend of his. The second, which John Wilkes said
ought to be written in letters of gold, deserves to be reproduced as a
whole.

L'éloge funèbre que M. Naigeon a consacré à la mémoire de M. le Baron
d'Holbach suffit pour donner une idée juste de ses lumières, mais le
hasard m'a mis à portée de les juger encore mieux. J'ai vu M. le Baron
d'Holbach dans deux voyages que j'ai faits aux eaux de Contrexéville.
S'occuper de sa souffrance et de sa guérison, c'est le soin de chaque
malade. M. le Baron d'Holbach devenait le médecin, l'ami, le consolateur
de quiconque venait aux eaux et il semblait bien moins occupé de ses
infirmités que de celles des autres. Lorsque des malades indigens
manquaient de secours, ou pécuniaires ou curatifs, il les leur procurait
avec un plaisir qui lui faisait plus de bien que les eaux. Je me promenais
un soir avec lui sur une hauteur couverte d'un massif de bois qui fait
perspective de loin et près duquel s'élève un petit Hermitage. Là, demeure
un cénobite qui n'a de revenu que les aumônes de ceux dont il reçoit les
visites. Nous acquittâmes chacun notre dette hospitalière. En prenant
congé de l'Hermite, M. le Baron d'Holbach me dit de le précéder un instant
et qu'il allait me suivre. Je le précédai, et comme il ne me suivait pas
je m'arrêtai, pour l'attendre sur un terte exhaussé d'où l'on découvre
tout le pays. Je contemplais le canton que je dominais, plongé dans une
douce rêverie. J'en fus tiré par des cris et je me retournai vers
l'endroit d'òu ils partaient. Je vis M. le Baron d'Holbach environné d'une
vieille femme et de deux villageois, l'un vieux comme elle et l'autre
jeune. Tous trois, les larmes aux yeux, l'embrassaient hautement. Allez
vous-en donc, s'écrait M. le Baron d'Holbach; laissez moi, on m'attend, ne
me suivez pas, adieu; je reviendrai l'année prochaine. En me voyant
arriver vers eux, les trois personnes reconnaissantes disparurent. Je lui
demandai le sujet de tant de bénédictions. Ce jeune paysan que vous avez
vu s'etait engagé, j'ai obtenu de son colonel sa liberté en payant les
cents écus prescrits par l'ordonnance. Il est amoureux d'une jeune
paysanne aussi pauvre que lui, je viens d'acheter pour eux un petit bien
qui m'a coûté huit cent francs. Le vieux père est perclus, aux deux bras,
de rhumatismes, je lui ai fourni trois boîtes du baume des Valdejeots, si
estimé en ce pays-ci. La vieille mère est sujetté à des maux d'estomac, et
je lui ai apporté un pot de confection d'hyacinthe. Ils travaillaient dans
le champ, voisin du bois, je suis allé les voir tandis que vous marchiez
en avant. Ils m'ont suivi malgré moi. Ne parlez de cela à personne. On
dirait que je veux faire le généreux et le bon philosophe, mais je ne suis
que humain, et mes charités sont la plus agréable dépense de mes voyages.

This humanity of Holbach's is the very keynote of his character and of his
intellectual life as well. As M. Walferdin has said, the denial of the
supernatural was for him the base of all virtue, and resting on this
principle, he exemplified social qualities that do the greatest honor to
human nature. He and Madame Holbach are the only conspicuous examples of
conjugal fidelity and happiness among all the people that one has occasion
to mention in a study of the intellectual and literary circles of the
eighteenth century. They were devoted to each other, to their children and
to their friends. Considering the traits of Holbach's character that have
been cited, there can scarcely be two opinions in regard to completeness
with which he realized his ideal of humanity and sociability. M. Naigeon
has well summed up in a few words Holbach's relation to the only duties
that he recognized, "He was a good husband, a good father and a good
friend."

CHAPTER II. HOLBACH'S WORKS.

Holbach's published works, with the exception of a few scattered ones, may
be divided into three classes, viz., translations of German scientific
works, translations of English deistical writings, and his own works on
theology, philosophy, politics and morals. Those which fall into none of
these categories can be dealt with very summarily. They are:

1. Two pamphlets on the musical dispute of 1752;
Lettre à une dame d'un
certain âge sur l'état présent de l'Opéra
, (8vo, pp. 11) and
Arrêt
rendu à l'amphithéâtre de l'Opéra
, (8vo, pp. 16,) both directed
against French music and in line with Grimm's
Petit Prophète
and
Rousseau's
Lettre sur la musique française
.

2. A translation in prose of Akenside's
The Pleasures of Imagination

(Paris, 1759, 8vo).

3. A translation of Swift's
History of the Reign of Queen Anne
in
collaboration with M. Eidous (Amsterdam, 1765, 12mo, pp. xxiv + 416).

4. Translations of an
Ode on Human Life
and a
Hymn to the Sun

in the
Variétés littéraires
(1768).

5. Articles on natural science in the
Encyclopédie
and article
Prononciation
des langues
in the
Dictionnaire de Grammaire
of the
Encyclopédie
méthodique
.

6. Translation of Wallerius'
Agriculture reduced to its true principles

(Paris, 1774, 12mo).

7. Two
Facéties philosophiques
published in Grimm's
Correspondence
Littéraire. L'Abbé et le Rabbin
, and
Essai sur l'art de ramper, à
l'usage des courtisans
.

8. Parts of Raynal's
Histoire philosophique des deux Indes
.

9. Notes to Lagrange's
Vie de Senèque
.

Holbach's translations of German scientific works are as follows:
(Complete titles to be found in Bibliography, Pt. I.)

1.
Art de la Verrerie de Neri, Merret, et Kunckel
(Paris, Durand,
1752). Original work in Italian. Latin translation by Christopher Merret.
German translation by J. Kunckel of Löwenstern. Holbach's translation
comprises the seven books of Antionio Neri, Merret's notes on Neri,
Kunckel's observations on both these authors, his own experiments and
others relative to glass-making. The translation was dedicated to
Malesherbes who had desired to see the best German scientific works
published in French. In his
Préface du Traducteur
Holbach writes:

L'envie de me rendre utile, dont tout citoyen doit être animé, m'a fait
entreprendre l'ouvrage que je présente au Public. S'il a le bonheur de
mériter son approbation, quoiqu'il y ait peu de gloire attachée au travail
ingrat et fastidieux d'un Traducteur, je me déterminerai à donner les
meilleurs ouvrages allemands, sur l'Histoire Naturelle, la Minéralogie, la
Métallurgie et la Chymie. Tout le monde sait que l'Allemagne possede en ce
genre des trésors qui ont été jusqu'ici comme enfouis pour la France.

2.
Minéralogie ou Description générale du règne mineral par J. G.
Wallerius
(Paris, Durand, 1753) followed by
Hydrologie
by the
same author. Second edition, Paris, Herrissant, 1759. Originally in
Swedish (Wallerius was a professor of chemistry in the University of
Upsala). German translation by J. D. Denso, Professor of Chemistry,
Stargard, Pomerania. Holbach's translation was made from the German
edition which Wallerius considered preferable to the Swedish. He was
assisted by Bernard de Jussien and Rouelle, and the work was dedicated to
a friend and co-worker in the natural sciences, Monsieur d'Arclais de
Montamy.

3.
Introduction à la Minéralogie... oeuvre posthume de M. J. F. Henckel
,
Paris, Cavelier, 1756, first published under title
Henckelius in
Mineralogiâ redivivus
, Dresden, 1747, by his pupil, M. Stephani, as an
outline of his lectures. Holbach's translation made from a German edition,
corrected, with notes on new discoveries added.

4.
Chimie métallurgique... par M. C. Gellert
. Paris, Briasson,
1758, translated earlier. Approbation May 1, 1753, Privilege Dec. 21,
1754. Originally a text written by Gellert for four artillery officers
whom the King of Sardinia sent to Freyburg to learn mining-engineering.

5.
Traités de physique, d'histoire naturelle, de mineralogy et de
métallurgie
. Paris, Herrissant, 1759, by J. G. Lehmann, three vols. I.
L'Art des Mines, II. Traité de la formation des métaux, III. Essai d'une
histoire naturelle des couches de la terre. In his preface to the third
volume Holbach has some interesting remarks about the deluge, the irony of
which seems to have escaped the royal censor, Millet,
Docteur en
Théologie
.

"La description si précise et si détaillée que Moïse fait du Deluge dans
la Genèse, ayant une autorité infaillible, puis qu'elle n'est autre que
celle de Dieu même, nous rend certains de la réalité et de l'universalité
de ce châtiment terrible. Il s'agit simplement d'examiner si les
naturalistes, tels que Woodward, Schenchzer, Buttner et M. Lehmann
lui-même ne se sont points trompés, lorsqu'ils ont attribué à cet
événement seul la formation des couches de la terre et lorsqu'ils s'en
sont servis pour expliquer l'état actuel de notre globe. Il semble que
rien ne doit nous empêcher d'agiter cette question; l'Ecriture sainte se
contente de nous apprendre la voie miraculeuse dont Dieu s'est servi pour
punir les crimes du genre humain; elle ne dit rien qui puisse limiter les
sentiments des naturalistes sur les autres effets physiques que le déluge
a pu produire. C'est une matière qu'elle paroît avoir abandonnée aux
disputes des hommes." He then proceeds to question whether the deluge
could have produced the results attributed to it and argues against
catastrophism which, it must be remembered, was the received geological
doctrine down to the days of Lyell. "Les causes les plus simples sont
capables de produire au bout des siècles les effets les plus grands,
surtout lorsqu'elles agissent incessament; et nous voyons toutes ces
causes réunies agir perpétuellement sous nos yeux. Concluons, donc, de
tout ce qui précède, que le déluge, seul et les feux souterrains seuls ne
suffisent point pour expliquer la formation des couches de la terre. On
risquera toujours de se tromper, lorsque par l'envie de simplifier on
voudra dériver tous les phénomènes de la nature d'une seule et unique
cause."

6.
Pyritologie
by J. F. Henkel, Paris, Herrissant, 1760, a large
volume in quarto, translated by Holbach. It contains
Flora Saturnisans

(translated by M. Charas and reviewed by M. Roux), Henkel's
Opuscules
Minéralogiques
and other treatises. Original editions:
Pyritologia
,
Leipzig, 1725, 1754;
Flora Saturnisans
, Leipzig, 1721;
De
Appropriatione Chymica
, Dresden, 1727, and
De Lapidum origine
,
Dresden, 1734, translated into German, with excellent notes, Dresden,
1744, by M. C. F. Zimmermann, a pupil of M. Henkel. Holbach's translations
seem to have been well received because he writes in this preface: "Je
m'estimerai heureux si mon travail peut contribuer à entretenir et
augmenter le goût universel qu'on a conçu pour le saine physique."

7.
Oeuvres métallurgiques
de M. J. C. Orschall, Paris, Hardy, 1760.
Orschall still accepted the old alchemist tradition but was sound in
practice and was the best authority on copper. Holbach does not attempt to
justify his physics which was that of the preceding century. Orschall was
held in high esteem by Henckel and Stahl.

8.
Recueil des mémoires des Académies d'Upsal et de Stockholm
,
Paris, Didot, 1764. These records of experiments made in the Royal
Laboratories of Sweden, founded in 1683 by Charles XI, had already been
translated into German and English. Holbach's translation was made from
the German and Latin. He promises further treatises on Agriculture,
Natural History and Medicine.

9.
Traité du Soufre
by G. E. Stahl, Paris, Didot, 1766. In speaking
of Stahl's theories Holbach says: "Il ne faut pas croire que ces
connaissances soient des vérités stériles propres seulement à satisfaire
une vaine curiosité, elles ont leur application aux travaux de la
métallurgie qui leur doivent la perfection où on les a portés depuis
quelques temps." Holbach understood very clearly the utility of science in
his scheme of increasing the store of human well-being, and would
doubtless have translated other useful works had not other interests
prevented. There is a MSS. note of his in the Bibliothèque Nationale to M.
Malesherbes, then Administrateur de la Librairie Royale; suggesting other
German treatises that might well be translated. (MSS. 22194).

HOLBACH TO MALESHERBES

Monsieur

J'ai l'honneur de vous envoyer ci-joint la liste des ouvrages dont M.
Liège fils pourrait entreprendre la traduction. Je n'en connais
actuellement point d'autres qui méritent l'attention du public. M. Macquer
m'a écrit une lettre qui a pour objet les mêmes choses dont vous m'avez
fait l'honneur de me parler, et je lui fais la même réponse.

J'ai l'honneur d'être avec respect, Monsieur,

Votre très obéissant serviteur
D'HOLBACH
à Paris ce 6 d'avril 1761

The list of books was as follows:

1. Johann Kunckel's
Laboratorium Chymicum
, 8vo.

2. Georg Ernest Stahl's
Commentary on Becher's Metallurgy
, 8vo.

3.
Concordantia Chymica Becheri
, 40º, published by Stahl.

4.
Cadmologia
, or the
Natural History of Cobalt
, by J. G.
Lehmann, Berlin, 1760, 4°.

After 1760 Holbach became interested in another line of intellectual
activity, namely the writing and translation of anti-religious literature.
His first book of this sort really appeared in 1761 although no copies
bear this date. From 1767 on however he published a great many works of
this character. It is convenient to deal first with his translations of
English deistical writers. They are in chronological order.

1.
Esprit du clergé, ou le Christianisme primitif vengé des entreprises
et des excès de nos Prêtres modernes
. Londres (Amsterdam), 1767. This
book appeared in England in 1720 under the title of
The Independent
Whig
; its author was Thomas Gordon (known through his Commentaries on
Sallust and Tacitus) who wrote in collaboration with John Trenchard. The
book was partially rewritten by Holbach and then touched up by Naigeon,
who, according to a manuscript note by his brother, "atheised it as much
as possible." It was sold with great secrecy and at a high price—a
reward which the colporters demanded for the risk they ran in peddling
seditious literature. The book was a violent attack on the spirit of
domination which characterized the Christian priesthood at that time.

2.
De L'imposture sacerdotale, ou Recueil de Pièces sur le clergé
,
Londres (Amsterdam), 1767. Another edition 1772 under title
De la
Monstruosité pontificale
etc.

Contains translations of various pamphlets including Davisson,
A true
picture of Popery
; Brown,
Popery a Craft
, London 1735; Gordon,

Apology for the danger of the church
, 1719; Gordon,
The Creed of
an Independent Whig
, 1720.

3.
Examen des Prophéties qui servent de fondement à la religion
Chrétienne
, Londres (Amsterdam), 1768. Translation of Anthony Collins,

A Discourse on the Grounds and Reasons of the Christian Religion
,
London, 1724. Contains also
The Scheme of literal Prophecy considered
,
1727, also by Collins in answer to the works of Clarke, Sherlock,
Chandler, Sykes, and especially to Whiston's
Essay towards restoring
the text of the Old Testament
, one of the thirty-five works directed
against Collins' original
"Discourse"
. Copies of this work have
become very rare.

4.
David, ou l'histoire de l'homme selon le coeur de Dieu
. Londres
(Amsterdam), 1768. This work appeared in England in 1761 and is attributed
to Peter Annet, also to John Noorthook. Some English eulogists of George
II, Messrs. Chandler, Palmer and others, had likened their late King to
David, "the man after God's own heart." The deists, struck by the
absurdity of the comparison, proceeded to relate all the scandalous facts
they could find recorded of David, and by clever distortions painted him
as the most execrable of Kings, in a work entitled
David or the Man
after God's Own Heart
, which formed the basis of Holbach's
translation.

5.
Les prêtres démasqués ou des iniquités du clergé chrétien
.
Londres, 1768. Translation of four discourses published under the title
The
Ax laid to the root of Christian Priestcraft by a layman
, London, T.
Cooper, 1742. A rare volume.

6.
Lettres philosophiques...
Londres (Amsterdam, 1768). Translation
of J. Toland's
Letters to Serena
, London, 1704. The book, which had
become very rare in Holbach's time, had caused a great scandal at the time
of its publication and was much sought after by collectors. It contains
five letters, the first three of which are by Toland, the other two and
the preface by Holbach and Naigeon. The matters treated are, the origin of
prejudices, the dogma of the immortality of the soul, idolatry,
superstition, the system of Spinoza and the origin of movement in matter.

Diderot said of these works, in writing to Mlle. Volland Nov. 22, 1768 (
Oeuvres
,
Vol. XVIII, p. 308): "Il pleut des bombes dans la maison du Seigneur. Je
tremble toujours que quelqu'un de ces téméraires artilleurs-là ne s'en
trouve mal. Ce sont les
Lettres philosophiques
traduites, ou
supposées traduites, de l'anglais de Toland; c'est
l'Examen des
prophéties
; c'est la
Vie de David ou de l'homme selon là coeur de
Dieu
, ce sont mélle diables déchainés.—Ah! Madame de Blacy, je
crains bien que le Fils de l'Homme ne soit à la porte; que la venue d'Elie
ne soit proche, et que nous ne touchions au règne de l'Anti-christ. Tous
les jours, quand je me lève, je regarde par ma fenêtre, si la grande
prostituée de Babylone ne se promène point déjà dans les rues avec sa
grande coupe à la main et s'il ne se fait aucun des signes prédits dans le
firmament."

7.
De la Cruauté religieuse
, Londres (Amsterdam).
Considerations
upon war, upon cruelty in general and religious cruelty in particular
,
London, printed for Thomas Hope, 1761.

8.
Dissertation critique sur les tourmens de l'enfer
printed in an
original work,
L'Enfer détruit
, Londres (Amsterdam), 1769. A
translation of Whitefoot's
The Torments of Hell, the foundation and
pillars thereof discover'd, search'd, shaken and remov'd
. London,
1658.

9. In the
Recueil philosophique
edited by Naigeon, Londres
(Amsterdam), 1770. I. Dissertation sur l'immortalité de l'âme. Translated
from Hume. II. Dissertation sur le suicide (Hume). III. Extrait d'un livre
Anglais qui a pour titre le Christianisme aussi ancien que le monde.
(Tindal, Christianity as old as Creation.)

10.
Esprit de Judaïsme, ou Examen raisonné de la Loi de Moyse
.
Londres (Amsterdam), 1770 (1769), translated from Anthony Collins. With
the exception of some of Holbach's own works this is one of the fiercest
denunciations of Judaism and Christianity to be found in print. In fact,
it is very much in the style of Holbach's anti-religious works and shows
beyond a doubt that Holbach derived his inspiration from Collins and the
more radical of the English school. The volume has become exceedingly
rare.

After outlining the history of Judaism the book ends thus:

Ose, donc enfin, ô Europe! secouer le joug insupportable des préjugés qui
t'affligent. Laisse à des Hébreux stupides, à des frénétiques imbéciles, à
des Asiatiques lâches et dégradés, ces superstitions aussi avilissantes
qu'insensées: elles ne sont point faites pour les habitans de ton climat.
Occupe-toi du soin de perfectionner tes gouvernemens, de corriger tes
lois, de réformer tes abus, de régler tes moeurs, et ferme pour toujours
les yeux à ces vraies chimères, qui depuis tant de siècles n'ont servi
qu'à retarder tes progrès vers la science véritable et à t'écarter de la
route du bonheur.

11.
Examen critique de la vie et des ouvrages de Saint Paul
,
Londres (Amsterdam), 1770. A free translation of Peter Annet's
History
and character of St. Paul examined
, written in answer to Lyttelton.
New edition 1790 and translated back into English "from the French of
Boulanger," London, R. Carlile, 1823. A rather unsympathetic account, but
with flashes of real insight into "le système religieux des Chrétiens dont
S. Paul fut évidemment le véritable architecte." (Epître dédicatoire.)

Annet said of Paul's type of man "l'enthousiaste s'enivre, pour l'ainsi
dire, de son propre vin, il se persuade que la cause de ses passions est
la cause de Dieu (p. 72), mais quelque violent qu'ait pu être
l'enthousiasme de S. Paul, il sentait très bien que la doctrine qu'il
prêchait devait paraître bizarre et insensée à des êtres raisonnables" (p.
141).

12.
De la nature humaine, ou Exposition des facultés, des actions et
des passions de l'âme
, Londres (Amsterdam), 1772. (Thomas Hobbes.)
Reprinted in a French Edition of Hobbes' works by Holbach and Sorbière,
1787. Appeared first in English in 1640, omitted in a Latin Edition of
Hobbes printed in Amsterdam. In spite of its brevity, Holbach considered
this one of Hobbes' most important and luminous works.

13.
Discours sur les Miracles de Jesus Christ
(Amsterdam, 1780?).
Translated from Woolston, whom Holbach admired very much for his
uncompromising attitude toward truth. He suffered fines and imprisonments,
but would not give up the privilege of writing as he pleased. The present
discourse was the cause of a quarrel with his friend Whiston. He died Jan.
27, 1733, "avec beaucoup de fermeté... il se ferma les yeux et la bouche
de ses propres mains, et rendit l'esprit." This work exists in a
manuscript book of 187 pages, written very fine, in the Bibliothèque
Nationale (Mss. français 15224) and was current in France long before
1780. In fact it is mentioned by Grimm before 1770, but the dictionaries
(Barber, Quérard) generally date it from 1780.

Before turning to Holbach's original works mention should be made of a
very interesting and extraordinary book that he brought to light,
retouched, and later used as a kind of shield against the attacks of the
parliaments upon his own works.

In 1766 he published a work entitled
L'Antiquité dévoilée par ses
usages, ou Examen critique des principales Opinions, Cérémonies et
Institutions religieuses et politiques des différens Peuples de la Terre
.
Par feu M. Boulanger, Amsterdam, 1766. This is a work based on an original
manuscript by Boulanger, who died in 1759, preceded by an excellent letter
on him by Diderot, published also in the
Gazette Littéraire
.

The use made by Holbach of Boulanger's name makes it necessary to consider
for a moment this almost forgotten writer. Nicholas Antoine Boulanger was
born in 1722. As a child he showed so little aptitude for study that later
his teachers could scarcely believe that he had turned out to be a really
learned man. As Diderot observes, "ces exemples d'enfans, rendus ineptes
entre les mains des Pédans qui les abrutissent en dépit de la nature la
plus heureuse, ne sont pas rares, cependant ils surprennent toujours" (p.
1). Boulanger studied mathematics and architecture, became an engineer and
was employed by the government as inspector of bridges and highways. He
passed a busy life in exacting outdoor work but at the same time his
active intellect played over a large range of human interests. He became
especially concerned with historical origins and set himself to learn
Latin and Greek that he might get at the sources. Not satisfied that he
had come to the root of the matter he learned Arabic, Syriac, Hebrew and
Chaldean. Diderot says "Il lisait et étudiait partout, je l'ai moi-même
rencontré sur les grandes routes avec un auteur rabinnique à la main." He
made a
mappemonde
in which the globe is divided in two hemispheres,
one occupied by the continents, the other by the oceans, and by a singular
coincidence he found that the meridian of the continental hemisphere
passed through Paris. Some such rearrangement of hemispheres is one of the
commonplaces of modern geography. He furnished such articles as,
Deluge,
Corvée, Société
for the Encyclopedia and wrote several large and
extremely learned books, among them
Recherches sur l'origine du
Despotisme oriental
and
Antiquité dévoilée
. He died from
overwork at the age of thirty-seven.

Boulanger's ideas on philosophy, mythology, anthropology and history are
of extraordinary interest today. Diderot relates his saying—"Que si
la philosophie avait trouvé tant d'obstacles parmi nous c'était qu'on
avait commencé par où il aurait fallu finir, par des maximes abstraites,
des raisonnemens généraux, des réflexions subtiles qui ont révolté par
leur étrangeté et leur hardiesse et qu'on aurait admises sans peine si
elles avaient été précédées de l'histoire des faits." He carried over this
inductive method into realm of history, which he thought had been
approached from the wrong side, i.e., the metaphysical, "par consulter les
lumières de la raison" (p. 8). He continues, "j'ai pensé qu'il devait y
avoir quelques circonstances
particulières
. Un fait et non une
spéculation métaphysique m'a toujours semblé devoir être et tribut naturel
et nécessaire de l'histoire." Curiously enough the central fact in history
appeared to Boulanger to be the deluge, and on the basis of it he
attempted to interpret the
Kulturgeschichte
of humanity. It is a
bit unfortunate that he took the deluge quite as literally as he did; his
idea, however, is obviously the influence of environmental pressure on the
changing beliefs and practices of mankind. Under the spell of this new
point of view, he writes, "Ce qu'on appelle l'histoire n'en est que la
partie la plus ingrate, la plus uniforme, la plus inutile, quoi qu'elle
soit la plus connue. La véritable histoire est couverte par le voile des
temps" (p. 7). Boulanger however was not to be daunted and on the firm
foundation of the fact of some ancient and universal catastrophe, as
recorded on the surface of the earth and in human mythology, he proceeds
to inquire into the moral effects of the changes in the physical
environment back to which if possible the history of antiquity must be
traced. Man's defeat in his struggle with the elements made him religious,

hinc prima mali labes
. "Son premier pas fut un faux pas, sa
première maxime fut une erreur" (p. 4 sq). But it was not his fault nor
has time repaired the evil moral effects of that early catastrophe. "Les
grandes révolutions physiques de notre globe sont les véritables époques
de l'histoire des nations" (p. 9). Hence have arisen the various
psychological states through which mankind has passed. Contemporary
savages are still in the primitive state—Boulanger properly
emphasizes the relation of anthropology to history—"On aperçoit
qu'il y a une nouvelle manière de voir et d'écrire l'histoire des hommes"
(p. 12) and with a vast store of anthropological and folklorist learning
he writes it so that his assailant, Fabry d'Autrey, in his
Antiquité
justifiée
(Paris, 1766) is obliged to say with truth, "Ce n'est point
ici un tissus de mensonges grossiers, de sophismes rebattus et bouffons,
appliqués d'un air méprisant aux objets les plus intéressants pour
l'humanité. C'est une enterprise sérieuse et réfléchie" (p. 11).

In 1767 Holbach published his first original work, a few copies of which
had been printed in Nancy in 1761. This work was
Le Christianisme
dévoilé ou Examen des principes et des effets de la religion Chrétienne
.
Par feu M. Boulanger. Londres (Amsterdam), 1767. There were several other
editions the same year, one printed at John Wilkes' private press in
Westminster. It was reprinted in later collections of Boulanger's works,
and went through several English and Spanish editions. The form of the
title and the attribution of the work to Boulanger were designed to set
persecution on the wrong track. There has been some discussion as to its
authorship. Voltaire and Laharpe attributed it to Damilaville, at whose
book shop it was said to have been sold, but M. Barbier has published
detailed information given him by Naigeon to the effect that Holbach
entrusted his manuscript to M. De Saint-Lambert, who had it printed by
Leclerc at Nancy in 1761. Most of the copies that got to Paris at that
time were bought by several officers of the King's regiment then in
garrison at Nancy, among them M. de Villevielle, a friend of Voltaire and
of Condorcet. Damilaville did not sell a single copy and even had a great
deal of trouble to get one for Holbach who waited for it a long time. This
circumstantial evidence is of greater value than the statement of Voltaire
who was in the habit of attributing anonymous works to whomever he
pleased. [39:2]

The edition of 1767 was printed in Amsterdam as were most of Holbach's
works. We have the details of their publication from Naigeon
cadet
,
a copyist, whose brother, J. A. Naigeon, was Holbach's literary factotum.
In a manuscript note in his copy of the
Système de la Nature
he
tells how he copied nearly all Holbach's works, either at Paris or at
Sedan, where he was stationed, and where his friend Blon, the postmaster,
aided him, passing the manuscripts on to a Madame Loncin in Liège, who in
turn was a correspondent of Marc-Michel Rey, the printer in Amsterdam.
Sometimes they were sent directly by the diligence or through travellers.
This account agrees perfectly with information given M. Barbier orally by
Naigeon
aîné
. After being printed in Holland the books were
smuggled into France
sous le manteau
, as the expression is, and
sold at absurd rates by colporters. [40:3]

Diderot writing to Falconet early in 1768 [40:4] says: "Il pleut des
livres incrédules. C'est un feu roulant qui crible le sanctuaire de toutes
parts... L'intolérance du gouvernment s'accroit de jour en jour. On dirait
que c'est un projet formé d'éteindre ici les lettres, de ruiner le
commerce de librairie et de nous réduire à la besace et à la stupidité...

Le Christianisme dévoilé
s'est vendu jusqu'à quatre louis."

When caught the colporters were severely punished. Diderot gives the
following instance in a letter to Mlle. Volland Oct. 8, 1768
(Avézac-Lavigne,
Diderot
, p. 161): "Un apprenti avait reçu, en
payment ou autrement, d'un colporteur appelé Lécuyer, deux exemplaires du

Christianisme dévoilé
et il avait vendu un de ces exemplaires à son
patron. Celui-ci le défère au lieutenant de police. Le colporteur, sa
femme et l'apprenti sont arrêtés tous les trois; ils viennent d'être
piloriés, fouettés et marqués, et l'apprenti condamné à neuf ans de
galères, le colporteur à cinq ans, et la femme à l'hôpital pour toute sa
vie."

There are two very interesting pieces of contemporary criticism of
Le
Christianisme dévoilé
, one by Voltaire, the other by Grimm. Voltaire
writes in a letter to Madame de Saint Julien December 15, 1766 (
Oeuvres
,
XLIV, p. 534, ed. Garnier): "Vous m'apprenez que, dans votre société, on
m'attribue
Le Christianisme dévoilé
par feu M. Boulanger, mais je
vous assure que les gens au fait ne m'attribuent point du tout cet
ouvrage. J'avoue avec vous qu'il y a de la clarté, de la chaleur, et
quelque fois de l'éloquence; mais il est plein de répétitions, de
négligences, de fautes contre la langue et je serais très-fâché de l'avoir
fait, non seulement comme académicien, mais comme philosophe, et encore
plus comme citoyen.

"Il est entièrement opposé à mes principes. Ce livre conduit à l'athéisme
que je déteste. J'ai toujours regardé l'athéisme comme le plus grand
égarement de la raison, parce qu'il est aussi ridicule de dire que
l'arrangement du monde ne prouve pas un artisan suprême qu'il serait
impertinent de dire qu'une horloge ne prouve pas un horloger.

"Je ne réprouve pas moins ce livre comme citoyen; l'auteur paraît trop
ennemi des puissances. Des hommes qui penseraient comme lui ne formeraient
qu'une anarchie: et je vois trop, par l'example de Genève, combien
l'anarchie est à craindre. Ma coutume est d'écrire sur la marge de mes
livres ce que je pense d'eux, vous verrez, quand vous daignerez venir à
Ferney, les marges de
Christianisme dévoilé
chargés de remarques
qui montrent que l'auteur s'est trompé sur les faits les plus essentiels."
These notes may be read in Voltaire's works (Vol. XXXI, p. 129, ed.
Garnier) and the original copy of
Le Christianisme dévoilé
in which
he wrote them is in the British Museum (c 28, k 3) where it is jealously
guarded as one of the most precious autographs of the Patriarch of Ferney.

Grimm's notice is from the
Correspondance Littéraire
of August 15,
1763 (Vol. V, p. 367). "Il existe un livre intitulé
le Christianisme
dévoilé ou Examen des principes et des effets de la religion Chrétienne
,
par feu M. Boulanger, volume in 8º. On voit d'abord qu'on lui a donné ce
titre pour en faire le pendant de
l'Antiquité dévoilée
; mais il ne
faut pas beaucoup se connaître en manière pour sentir que ces deux
ouvrages ne sont pas sortis de la même plume. On peut assurer avec la même
certitude que celui dont nous parlons ne vient point de la fabrique de
Ferney, parce que j'aimerais mieux croire que le patriache eût pris la
lune avec ses dents; cela serait moins impossible que de guetter sa
manière et son allure si complètement qu'il n'en restât aucune trace
quelconque. Par la même raison, je ne crois ce livre d'aucun de nos
philosophes connus, parce que je n'y trouve la manière d'aucun de ceux qui
ont écrit. D'òu vient-il donc? Ma foi, je serais fâché de le savoir, et je
crois que l'auteur aura sagement fait de ne mettre personne dans son
secret. C'est le livre le plus hardi et le plus terrible qui ait jamais
parti dans aucun lieu du monde. La préface consiste dans une lettre où
l'auteur examine si la réligion est reéllement nécessaire ou seulement
utile au maintien ou à la police des empires, et s'il convient de la
respecter sous ce point de vue. Comme il établit la négative, il
entreprend en conséquence de prouver, par son ouvrage, l'absurdité et
l'incohérence du dogme Chrétien et de la mythologie qui en résulte, et
l'influence de cette absurdité sur les têtes et sur les âmes. Dans la
seconde partie, il examine la morale chrétienne, et il prétend prouver que
dans ses principes généraux elle n'a aucun avantage sur toutes les morales
du monde, parce que la justice et la bonté sont recommandées dans tous les
catéchismes de l'univers, et que chez aucun peuple, quelque barbare qu'il
fut, on n'a jamais enseigné qu'il fallût être injuste et méchant. Quant à
ce que la morale chrétienne a de particulier, l'auteur pretend démontrer
qu'elle ne peut convenir qu'à des enthousiastes peu propres aux devoirs de
la société, pour lesquels les hommes sont dans ce monde. Il entreprend de
prouver, dans la troisième partie, que la religion chrétienne a eu les
effets politiques les plus sinistres et les plus funestes, et que le genre
humain lui doit tous les malheurs dont il a été accablé depuis quinze à
dix-huit siècles, sans qu'on en puisse encore prévoir la fin.

Ce livre est écrit avec plus de véhémence que de véritable éloquence; il
entraine. Son style est châtié et correct, quoique un peu dur et sec; son
ton est grave et soutenu. On n'y apprend rien de nouveau, et cependant il
attache et intéresse. Malgré son incroyable témérité, on ne peut refuser à
l'auteur la qualité d'homme de bien fortement épris du bonheur de sa race
et de la prospérité des sociétés; mais je pense que ses bonnes intentions
seraient une sauvegarde bien faible contre les mandements et les
réquisitions." This is a clear and fair account of a book that is without
doubt the severest criticism of the theory and practice of historical
Christianity ever put in print.

The church very naturally did not let such a book pass unanswered. Abbé
Bergier, a heavy person, triumphantly refuted Holbach in eight hundred
pages in his
Apologia de la Religion Chrétienne contre l'Auteur du
Christianisme dévoilé
, Paris, 1769, which finishes with the fatal
prophecy, "Nous avons de surs garans de nos espérances: tant que le sang
auguste de S. Louis sera sur le trône,
il n'y a point de révolutions à
craindre ni dans la Religion ni dans la politique
. La religion
Chrétienne fondée sur la parole de Dieu... triomphera des nouveaux
Philosophes. Dieu qui veille sur son ouvrage n'a pas besoin de nos faibles
mains pour le soutenir" (Psaume 32, vs. 10, 11).

2. There already existed in 1767 another work by Holbach entitled
Théologie
portative ou Dictionnaire Abrégé de la Religion Chrétienne. Par Mr Abbé
Bernier
. Londres (Amsterdam), 1768 (1767). This book went through many
editions and was augmented by subsequent authors and editors. Voltaire was
already writing to d'Alembert about it August 14, 1767. [44:5]

In a letter to Damilaville, October 16, he writes (Vol. XIV, p. 406):

Depuis trois mois il y a une douzaine d'ouvrages d'une liberté extrême,
imprimés en Hollande.
La Théologie portative
n'est nullement
théologique: ce n'est qu'une plaisanterie continuelle par ordre
alphabétique; mais il faut avouer qu'il y a des traits si comiques que
plusieurs théologiens mêmes ne pourront s'empêcher d'en rire. Les jeunes
gens et les femmes lisent cette folie avec avidité. Les éditions de tous
les livres dans ce goût se multiplient.

And on February 8, 1768, he wrote:

On fait tous les jours des livres contre la religion, dont je voudrais
bien imiter le style pour la défendre. Y a-t-il de plus salé, que la
plupart des traits qui se trouvent dans la
Théologie portative
? Y
a-t-il rien de plus vigoreux, de plus profondément raisonné, d'écrit avec
une éloquence plus audacieuse et plus terrible, que le
Militaire
philosophe
, ouvrage qui court toute l'Europe? [by Naigeon and Holbach]
Lisez la
Théologie portative
, et vous ne pourrez vous empêcher de
rire, en condammant la coupable hardiesse de l'auteur. Lisez
l'Imposture
sacerdotale
—vous y verrez le style de Démosthène. Ces livres
malheuresement inondent l'Europe; mais quelle est la cause de cette
inondation? Il n'y en a point d'autre que les querelles théologiques qui
ont révolté les laïques.
Il s'est fait une révolution dans l'esprit
humain que rien ne peut plus arrêter: les persécutions ne pourraient
qu'irriter le mal
. [Footnote: the italics are mine.]

It is to be noted however that Voltaire's sentiments varied according to
the point of view of the person to whom he was writing. In a letter to
d'Alembert, May 24, 1769 (Vol. LXV, p. 453), he calls the
Théologie
portative
"un ouvrage à mon gré, très plaisant, auquel je n'ai
assurément nulle part, ouvrage que je serais très fâché d'avoir fait, et
que je voudrais bien avoir été capable de faire." But in a letter to the
Bishop of Annecy June, 1769, he writes (Vol. XXVIII, p. 73): "Vous lui [M.
de Saint Florentin] imputez, à ce que je vois par vos lettres, des livres
misérables, et jusqu'à
la Theologie portative
, ouvrage fait
apparemment dans quelque cabaret; vous n'êtes pas obligé d'avoir du goût,
mais vous êtes obligé d'être juste" (Vol. XXVIII, p. 73). Diderot even
said of the book: "C'est un assez bon nombre de bonnes plaisanteries
noyées dans un beaucoup plus grand nombre de mauvaises" and this criticism
is just. A few examples of the better jokes will suffice:

Adam:
C'est le premier homme, Dieu en fait un grand nigaud, qui
pour complaire à sa femme eut la bêtise de mordre dans une pomme que ses
descendans n'ont point encore pu digérer.

Idées Innées:
Notions inspirées des Prêtres de si bonne heure, si
souvent répétées, que devenu grand l'on croît les avoir eu toujours ou les
avoir reçus dès le ventre de sa mère.

Jonas:
La baleine fut à la fin obligée de le vomir tant un Prophète
est un morceau difficile à digérer.

Magie:
Il y en a de deux sortes, la blanche et la noire. La
première est très sainte et se pratique journellement dans l'église.

Protestants:
Chrétiens amphibies.

Vierge:
C'est la mère du fils de Dieu et belle-mère de l'église.

Visions:
Lanternes magiques que de tout temps le Père Eternel s'est
amusé à montrer aux Saintes et aux Prophètes.

3. Holbach furnished the last chapter of Naigeon's book
Le Militaire
philosophe, ou Difficulties sur la religion
, Londres (Amsterdam),
1768. Voltaire ascribed the work to St. Hyacinthe. Grimm recognized that
the last chapter was by another hand and considered it the weakest part of
the book. It attempts to demonstrate that all supernatural religions have
been harmful to society and that the only useful religion is natural
religion or morals. The book was refuted by Guidi, in a "
Lettre a M. le
Chevalier de... [Barthe] entraîné dans l'irreligion par un libelle
intitulé Le Militaire philosophe
(1770, 12mo).

4. Holbach's next book was
La Contagion sacrée ou l'Histoire naturelle
de la Superstition
, Londres (Amsterdam), 1768. In his preface Holbach
attributed the alleged English original of this work to John Trenchard but
that was only a ruse to avoid persecution. The book is by Holbach. It has
gone through many editions and been translated into English and Spanish.
The first edition had an introduction by Naigeon. According to him
manuscripts of this book became quite rare at one time and were supposed
to have been lost. Later they became more common and this edition was
corrected by collation with six others.

[PG transcriber's note: at this point there appears to be a break
in the original text.  A sentence introducing the fifth book in
this list, "Letters to Eugenie", has evidently been lost.]

The letters were written in 1764, according to Lequinio (
Feuilles
posthumes
), who had his information from Naigeon, to Marguerite,
Marchioness de Vermandois in answer to a very touching and pitiful letter
from that lady who was in great trouble over religion. Her young husband
was a great friend of the Holbachs, but having had a strict Catholic
bringing up she was shocked at their infidelity and warned by her
confessor to keep away from them. "Yet in their home she saw all the
domestic virtues exemplified and beheld that sweet and unchangeable
affection for which the d'Holbachs were eminently distinguished among
their acquaintances and which was remarkable for its striking contrast
with the courtly and Christian habits of the day. Her natural good sense
and love for her friends struggled with her monastic education and
reverence for the priests. The conflict rendered her miserable and she
returned to her country seat to brood over it. In this state of mind she
at length wrote to the Baron and laid open her situation requesting him to
comfort, console, and enlighten her." [47:7] His letters accomplished the
desired effect and he later published them in the hope that they would do
as much for others. They were carefully revised before they were sent to
the press. All the purely personal passages were omitted and others added
to hide the identity of the persons concerned. Letters of the sort to
religious ladies were common at this time. Fréret's were preventive,
Holbach's curative, but appear to be rather strong dose for a
dévote
.
Other examples are Voltaire's
Epître à Uranie
and Diderot's
Entretien
d'un Philosophe avec la Maréchale de...
.

6. In 1769 Holbach published two short treatises on the doctrine of
eternal punishment which claimed to be translations from English, but the
originals are not to be found. The titles are
De l'intolérance
convaincue de crime et de folie
as it is sometimes given, and—

7.
L'Enfer détruit ou Examen raisonné du Dogme de l'Eternité des Peines
.
Londres, Amsterdam, 1769. This letter was translated into English under
the title
Hell Destroyed!
"Now first translated from the French of
d'Alembert without any mutilations," London 1823, which led Mr. J. Hibbert
to say, "I know not why English publishers attribute this awfully sounding
work to the cautious, not to say timid d'Alembert. It was followed by
Whitefoot's
'Torments of Hell,'
now first translated from the
French." [47:8]

Of Holbach's remaining works on religion two,
Histoire critique de
Jésus Christ
and
Tableau des Saints
, date from 1770 when he
began to publish his more philosophical works.

8. The
Histoire critique de Jésus Christ ou Analyse raisonnée des
Evangiles
was published without name of place or date. It was preceded
by Voltaire's
Epître à Uranie
. It is an extremely careful but
unsympathetic analysis of the Gospel accounts, emphasizing all the
inconsistencies and interpreting them with a literalness that they can ill
sustain. From this rationalistic view-point Holbach found the Gospels a
tissue of absurdities and contradictions. His method, however, would not
be followed by the critique of today.

9. The
Tableau des Saints
is a still more severe criticism of the
heroes of Christendom. Holbach's proposition is "La raison ne connaît
qu'une mesure pour juger et les hommes et les choses, c'est l'utilité
réelle et permanente, qui en résulte pour notre espèce," (p. 111). Judged
by this standard, the saints with their eyes fixed on another world have
fallen far short. "Ils se flattèrent de mériter le ciel en se rendant
parfaitement inutile à la terre" (p. xviii). Holbach much prefers the
heroes of classical antiquity. The book is violent but learned throughout,
and deals not only with the Jewish patriarchs from Moses on but with the
church fathers and Christian Princes down to the contemporary defenders of
the faith. After a rather one-sided account of the most dreary characters
and events in Christian history, Holbach concludes: "Tel fut, tel est, et
tel sera toujours l'esprit du Christianisme: il est aisé de sentir qu'il
est incompatible avec les principes les plus évidens de la morale et de la
saine politique" (p. 208).

10. In
Recueil philosophique
, Londres (Amsterdam), 1770, edited by
Naigeon. Réflexions sur les craintes de la Mort. Problème important—La
Religion est-elle nécessaire à la morale et utile à la Politique. Par M.
Mirabaud.

11.
Essai sur les préjugés, ou De l'influence des opinions sur les
moeurs et sur le bonheur des Hommes
. Londres (Amsterdam), 1770, under
name of Dumarsais. The book pretended to be an elaboration of Dumarsais'
essay on the
Philosophe
published in the
Nouvelles libertés de
penser
, 1750.

The special interest connected with it was the refutation Frederick the
Great published under the title
Examen de l'Essai sur les préjugés
,
Londres, Nourse, 1770 (16 mo). The King of Prussia writing from the point
of view of a practical, enlightened despot, took special exception to
Holbach's remarks on government. "Il l'outrage avec autant de grossièreté
que d'indécence, il force le gouvernement de prendre fait et cause avec
l'église pour s'opposer à l'ennemi commun. Mais, quand avec un acharnement
violent et les traits de la plus âcre satire, il calomnie son Roi et le
gouvernement de son pays, on le prend pour un frénétique echappé de ses
chaînes, et livré aux transports les plus violens de sa rage. Quoi,
Monsieur le philosophe, protecteur des moeurs et de la vertu, ignorez vous
qu'un bon citoyen doit respecter la forme de gouvernement sous laquelle il
vit, ignorez vous qu'il ne convient point à un particulier d'insulter les
Puissances..." (p. 28).

"Non content d'insulter à toutes les têtes couronnés de l'Europe, notre
philosophe s'amuse, en passant, à répandre du ridicule sur les ouvrages de
Hugo Grotius. J'oserais croire qu'il n'en sera pas cru sur sa parole, et
que le
Droit de la guerre et de la paix
ira plus loin à la
postérité que
l'Essai sur les préjugés
" (p. 39).

Holbach in his anti-militaristic enthusiasm had used the words "bourreaux
mercenaires"; "epithète élégante," continues Frederick, "dont il honore
les guerriers. Mais souffrions nous qu'un cerveau brûlé insulte au plus
noble emploi de la Societé?" (p.49). He goes on to defend war in good
old-fashioned terms. "Vous déclamez contre la guerre, elle est funeste en
elle-même; mais c'est un mal comme ces autres fléaux du ciel qu'il faut
supposer nécessaires dans l'arrangement de cet univers parce qu'ils
arrivent périodiquement et qu'aucun siècle n'a pu jusqu'à présent d'en
avoir été exempt. J'ai prouvé que de tout temps l'erreur a dominé dans ce
monde; et comme une chose aussi constante peut être envisagée comme une
loi général de la nature, j'en conclus que ce qui a été toujours sera
toujours le même" (p. 19).

Frederick sent his little refutation to Voltaire for his compliments which
were forthcoming. A few days after Voltaire wrote to d'Alembert:

Le roi de Prusse vous a envoyé, sans doute, son petit écrit contre un
livre imprimé cette année, intitulé
Essai sur les préjugés
, ce roi
a aussi les siens, qu'il faut lui pardonner; on n'est pas roi pour rien.
Mais je voudrais savoir quel est l'auteur de cet
Essai
contre
lequel sa majesté prussienne s'amuse à écrire un peu durement. Serait-il
de Diderot? serait-il de Damilaville? serait-il d'Helvetius? peut-être ne
le connaissez-vous point, je le crois imprimé en Hollande (Vol. LXVI, p.
304).

D'Alembert answered:

Oui, le roi de Prusse m'a envoyé son écrit contre
l'Essai sur les
préjugés
. Je ne suis point étonné que ce prince n'ait pas goûté
l'ouvrage; je l'ai lu depuis cette réfutation et il m'a paru bien long,
bien monotone et trop amer. Il me semble que ce qu'il y de bon dans ce
livre aurait pu et dû être noyé dans moins de pages et je vois que vous en
avez porté à peu près le même jugement (Vol. LXVI, p. 324).

In spite of these unfavorable judgments the
Essai
was reprinted as
late as 1886 by the Bibliotheque Nationale in its
Collection des
meilleurs auteurs anciens et modernes
, still attributed to Dumarsais
with the account of his life by "le citoyen Daube" which graced the
edition of the year I. (1792)

12. Early in 1770 appeared Holbach's most famous book, the
Système de
la Nature
, the only book that is connected with his name in the minds
of most historians and philosophers. It seems wiser, however, to deal with
this work in a chapter apart and continue the account of his later
publications.

13. The next of which was
Le bon-sens, ou idées naturelles opposées aux
idées surnaturelles. Par l'Auteur du Système de la Nature
, Londres
(Amsterdam), 1772. This work has gone through twenty-five editions or more
and has been translated into English, German, Italian and Spanish. As
early as 1791 it began to be published under the name of the curé Jean
Meslier d'Etrépigny, made so famous by Voltaire's publication of what was
supposed to be his last will and testament in which on his death bed he
abjured and cursed Christianity. Some editions contain in the preface
Letters by Voltaire and his sketch of Jean Meslier. The last reprint was
by De Laurence, Scott & Co., Chicago, 1910. The book is nothing more
or less than the
Système de la Nature
, in a greatly reduced and
more readable form.

Voltaire, to whom it was attributed by some, said to d'Alembert, "Il y a
plus que du bon sens dans ce livre, il est terrible. S'il sort de la
boutique du
Système de la Nature
, l'auteur s'est bien
perfectionné." D'Alembert answered: "Je pense comme vous sur le
Bon-sens

qui me paraît un bien plus terrible livre que le
Système de la Nature
."
These remarks were inscribed by Thomas Jefferson on the title page of his
copy of
Bon-sens
. The book has gone through several editions in the
United States and was sold at a popular price. The German translation was
published in Baltimore on the basis of a copy found in a second-hand book
store in New Orleans. The most serious work written against it is a long
and carefully written treatise against materialism by an Italian monk,
Gardini, entitled
L'anima umana e sue proprietà dedotte da soli
principi de ragione, dal P. lettore D. Antonmaria Gardini, monaco
camaldalese, contro i materialisti e specialmente contro l'opera
intitulata, le Bon-Sens, ou Idées Naturelles opposées aux idées
Surnaturelles. In Padova MDCCLXXXI Nella stamperia del Seminario. Appresso
Giovanni Manfré, Con Licenza de Superiori e Privilegio
(8vo, p. xx +
284).

14. In 1773 Holbach published his
Recherches sur les Miracles
, a
much more sober work than his previous writings on religion. In this book
he raises the well known difficulties with belief in miracles and brings a
great deal of real learning and logic to bear on the question. The entire
work is in a reasonable and philosophic spirit. His conclusion is that
"une vraie religion doit avoir au défaut de bonnes raisons, des preuves
sensibles, capables de faire impression sur tout ceux qui la cherchent de
bonne foi. Ce ne sont pas les miracles." The same year he published two
serious but somewhat tiresome works on politics.

15.
La politique naturelle
.

16.
Système social
in which he attempts to reduce government to the
naturalistic principles which were the basis of his entire philosophy. The
first is also attributed to Malesherbes. There is a long and keen
criticism of the
Système Social
by Mme. d'Epinay in a letter to
Abbé Galiani Jan. 12, 1773 (Gal.
Corresp.
, Vol. II, p. 167).

But the most interesting reaction upon it was that of the Abbé Richard who
criticized it from point of view of the divine right of kings in his long
and tiresome work entitled
La Défense de la religion, de la morale, de
la vertu, de la politique et de la société, dans la réfutation des
ouvrages qui ont pour titre, l'un Système Social etc. Vautre La Politique
Naturelle par le R. P. Ch. L. Richard, Professeur de Théologie
, etc.,
Paris, Moulard, 1775.

In a preface of forty-seven pages the fears of the conservative old Abbé
are well expressed. The aim of these modern philosophers who are poisoning
public opinion by their writings is to "démolir avec l'antique édifice de
la religion chrétienne, celui des moeurs, de la vertu, de la saine
politique etc. rompre tous les canaux de communication entre la terre et
le ciel, bannir, exterminer du monde le Dieu qui le tira du néant, y
introduire l'impiété la plus complète, la licence la plus consomnée,
l'anarchie la plus entière, la confusion la plus horrible."

17. Holbach's next work,
Ethocratie ou Gouvernement fondé sur la Morale
,
Amsterdam, Rey, 1776, is interesting mainly for its unfortunate dedication
and peroration, inscribed to Louis XVI, who was hailed therein as a long
expected Messiah.

18. Holbach's last works dealt exclusively with morals. They are
La
morale universelle ou les devoirs de l'homme fondés sur la nature
,
Amsterdam, 1771, and

19. A posthumous work,
Elements de la Morale universelle, ou catechisme
de la nature
, Paris, 1790. This is a beautiful little book. It is
simple and clear to the last degree. There have been several translations
in Spanish for the purposes of elementary education in morals in the
public schools. It was composed in 1765. Holbach's attitude towards morals
is indicated by his
Avertissement
—"La morale est une science
dont les principes sont susceptibles d'une démonstration aussi claire et
aussi rigoureuse que ceux du calcul et de la géometrie."

CHAPTER III. THE SYSTÈME DE LA NATURE.

Early in 1770 appeared the famous
Système de la Nature, ou Des Loix du
Monde Physique et du Monde Morale, Par M. Mirabaud, Secrétaire Perpétuel
et l'un des Quarante de l'Académie Française
, Londres (Amsterdam),
1770. This work has gone through over thirty editions in France, Spain,
Germany, England and the United States. No book of a philosophic or
scientific character has ever caused such a sensation at the time of its
publication, excepting perhaps Darwin's
Origin of Species
, the
thesis of which is more than hinted at by Holbach. There were several
editions in 1770. A very few copies contain a
Discours préliminaire de
l'Auteur
of sixteen pages which Naigeon had printed separately in
London. The
Abrégé du Code de la Nature
, which ends the book was
also published separately and is sometimes attributed to Diderot, 8vo, 16
pp. [54:1]

There is also a book entitled
Le vrai sens du Système de la Nature
,
1774, attributed to Helvetius, a very clear, concise epitome largely in
Holbach's own short and telling sentences, and much more effective than
the original because of its brevity. Holbach himself reproduced the
Système
de la Nature
in a shortened form in
Bon-sens
, 1772, and Payrard
plagiarized it freely in
De la Nature et de ses Lois
, Paris, 1773.
The book has been attributed to Diderot, Helvetius, Robinet, Damilaville
and others. Naigeon is certain that it is entirely by Holbach, although it
is generally held that Diderot had a hand in it. It was published under
the name of Mirabaud to obviate persecution. The manuscript, it was
alleged, had been found among his papers as a sort of "testament" or
philosophical legacy to posterity. This work may be called the bible of
scientific materialism and dogmatic atheism. Nothing before or since has
ever approached it in its open and unequivocal insistence on points of
view commonly held, if at all, with reluctance and reserve. It is
impossible in a study of this length to deal fully with the attacks and
refutations that were published immediately. We may mention first the
condemnation of the book by the
Parlement de Paris
, August 18,
1770, to be burned by the public hangman along with Voltaire's
Dieu et
les Hommes
, and Holbach's
Discours sur les Miracles
,
La
Contagion sacrée
and
le Christianisme dévoilé
, which had
already been condemned on September 24, 1769. [55:2]

The
Réquisitoire
of Seguier,
avocat général
, on the occasion
of the condemnation of the
Système de la Nature
was so weak and
ridiculous that the
Parlement de Paris
refused to sanction its
publication, and it was printed by the express order of the King. As Grimm
observed, it seemed designed solely to acquaint the ignorant with this
dangerous work, without opposing any of its propositions. One would look
in vain for a better example of the conservatism of the legal profession.
[55:3]

Le poison des nouveautés profanes ne peut corrompre la sainte gravité des
moeurs qui caractérise les vrais Magistrats: tout peut changer autour
d'eux,
ils restent immuables avec la loi
(page 496).

N'est-ce pas ce fatal abus de la liberté de penser, qui a enfanté cette
multitude de sectes, d'opinions, de partis, et cet esprit d'indépendance
dont d'autres nations ont éprouvé les sinstres révolutions. Le même abus
produira en France des effets peut-être plus funestes. La liberté
indéfinie trouveroit, dans la caractère de la nation, dans son activité,
dans son amour pour la nouveauté, un moyen de plus pour préparer les plus
affreuses révolutions (p. 498).

The most interesting private attacks on the
Système de la Nature

came from two somewhat unexpected quarters, from Ferney and Sans Souci.
Voltaire, as usual, was not wholly consistent in his opinions of it, as is
revealed in his countless letters on the subject. Grimm attributed his
hostility to jealousy, and the fear that the
Système de la Nature

might "renverse le rituel de Ferney et que le patriarcat ne s'en aille au
diable avec lui." [56:4] George Leroy went so far as to write a book
entitled
Réflexions sur la jalousie, pour servir de commentaire aux
derniers ouvrages de M. de Voltaire
, 1772. Frederick II naturally felt
bound to defend the kings who, as Voltaire said, were no better treated
than God in the
Système de la Nature
. [56:5]

Voltaire's correspondence during this period is so interesting that it
seems worth while to quote at length, especially from his letters to
Fredrick the Great. In May 1770, shortly after the publication of the
Système
de la Nature
Voltaire wrote to M. Vernes: [56:6] "On a tant dit de
sottises sur la nature que je ne lis plus aucun de ces livres là." But by
July he had read it and wrote to Grimm: [56:7] "Si l'ouvrage eut été plus
serré il aurait fait un effet terrible, mais tel qu'il est il en a fait
beaucoup. Il est bien plus éloquent que Spinoza... J'ai une grande
curiosité de savoir ce qu'on en pense à Paris." In writing to d'Alembert
about this time he seemed to have a fairly favorable impression of the
book. "Il m'a paru qu'il y avait des longueurs, des répétitions et
quelques inconséquences, mais il y a trop de bon pour qu'on n'éclate avec
fureur contre ce livre. Si on garde le silence, ce sera une preuve du
prodigieux progrès que la tolérance fait tous les jours." [57:8] But there
was little likelihood that philosophers or theologians would keep silent
about this scandalous book. Before the end of the month Voltaire was
writing to d'Alembert about his own and the king of Prussia's refutations
of it, and the same day wrote to Frederick: "Il me semble que vos
remarques doivent être imprimées; ce sont des leçons pour le genre humain.
Vous soutenez d'un bras la cause de Dieu et vous écrasez de l'autre la
superstition." [57:9] Later Voltaire confessed to Frederick that he also
had undertaken to rebuke the author of the Système de la Nature. "Ainsi
Dieu a pour lui les deux hommes les moins superstitieux de l'Europe, ce
que devrait lui plaire beaucoup" (p. 390).

Frederick, however, hesitated to make his refutation public, and wrote to
Voltaire: "Lorsque j'eus achevé mon ouvrage contre l'athéisme, je crus ma
réfutation très orthodoxe, je la relus, et je la trouvai bien éloignée de
l'être. Il y a des endroits qui ne saurait paraître sans effaroucher les
timides et scandaliser les dévots. Un petit mot qui m'est échappé sur
l'éternité du monde me ferait lapider dans votre patrie, si j'y étais né
particulier, et que je l'eusse fait imprimer. Je sens que je n'ai point du
tout ni l'âme ni le style théologique." [57:10] Voltaire, in his "petite
drôlerie en faveur de la Divinité" (as he called his work) and in his
letters, could not find terms harsh enough in which to condemn the
Système
de la Nature
. He called it "un chaos, un grand mal moral, un ouvrage
de ténèbres, un péché contre la nature, un système de la folie et de
l'ignorance," and wrote to Delisle de Sales: "Je ne vois pas que rien ait
plus avili notre siècle que cette énorme sottise." [58:11] Voltaire seemed
to grow more bitter about Holbach's book as time went on. His letters and
various works abound in references to it, and it is difficult to determine
his motives. He was accused, as has been suggested, by Holbach's circle
"de caresser les gens en place, et d'abandonner ceux qui n'y sont plus."
[58:12] M. Avenel believed that he suspected Holbach himself of making
these accusations. Voltaire's letter to the Duc de Richelieu, Nov. 1,
1770, [58:13] seems to give them foundation.

A very different reaction was that of Goethe and his university circle at
Strasburg to whom the
Système de la Nature
appeared a harmless and
uninteresting book, "grau," "cimmerisch," "totenhaft," "die echte
Quintessenz der Greisenheit." To these fervent young men in the youthful
flush of romanticism, its sad, atheistic twilight seemed to cast a veil
over the beauty of the earth and rob the heaven of stars; and they
lightheardedly discredited both Holbach and Voltaire in favor of
Shakespeare and the English romantic school. One would look far for a
better instance of the romantic reaction which set in so soon and so
obscured the clarity of the issues at stake in the eighteenth century
thought. [58:14]

The leading refutations directed explicitly against the
Système de la
Nature
are:

1. 1770, Rive, Abbé J. J., Lettres philosophiques contre le
Système de
la Nature
. (Portefeuille hebdomadaire de Bruxelles.)

2. Frederick II,
Examen critique du livre intitulé, Système de la
Nature
. (Political Miscellanies, p. 175.)

3. Voltaire, Dieu, Réponse de M. de Voltaire au
Système de la Nature
.
Au château de Ferney, 1770, 8 vo, pp. 34.

4. 1771, Bergier, Abbé N. F., Examen du matérialisme, ou Réfutation du
Système
de la Nature
. Paris, Humbolt, 1771, 2 vols., 12mo.

5. Camuset, Abbé J. N., Principes contre l'incrédulité, a l'occasion du
Système
de la Nature
. Paris, Pillot, 1771, 12mo, pp. viii + 335.

6. Castillon, J. de (Salvernini di Castiglione), Observations sur le livre
intitulé,
Système de la Nature
. Berlin, Decker, 1771, 8vo. (40 sols
broché.)

7. Rochford, Dubois de, Pensées diverses contre le système des
matérialistes, à l'occasion d'un écrit intitulé;
Système de la Nature
.
Paris, Lambert, 1771, 12mo.

8. 1773, L'Impie démasqué, ou remontrance aux écrivains incrédules.
Londres, Heydinger, 1773

9. Holland, J. H., Réflexions philosophiques sur le
Système de la
Nature
. Paris, 1773, 2 vols., 8vo.

10. 1776, Buzonnière, Nouel de, Observations sur un ouvrage intitulé le
Système
de la Nature
. Paris, Debure, père, 1776, 8vo, pp. 126. (Prix 1 livre,
16 sols broché.)

11. 1780, Fangouse, Abbé, La religion prouvée aux incrédules, avec une
lettre à l'auteur du
Système de la Nature
par un homme du monde.
Paris, Debure l'aîné, 12mo, p. 150. Same under title Réflexions
importantes sur la religion, etc., 1785.

12. 1788, Paulian, A. J., Le véritable système de la nature, etc.,
Avignon, Niel, 2 vols., 12mo.

13. 1803, Mangold, F. X. von, Unumstossliche Widerlegung des Materialismus
gegen den Verfasser des
Systems der Natur
. Augsburg, 1803.

Of these and other refutations of materialism such as Saint-Martin's
Des
erreurs et de la vérité
, Dupont de Nemours'
Philosophie de
l'univers
, Delisles de Sales'
Philosophie de la nature
, etc.,
which are not directed explicitly against the
Système de la Nature
,
the works of Voltaire and Frederick the Great are the most interesting but
by no means the most serious or convincing. Morley finds Voltaire very
weak and much beside the point, especially in his discussion of order and
disorder in nature which Holbach had denied. Voltaire's argument is that
there must be an intelligent motor or cause behind nature (p. 7). This is
God (p. 8). He admits at the outset that all systems are mere dreams but
he continues to insist with a dogmatism equal to Holbach's on the validity
of his dream. He repeatedly asserts without foundation that Holbach's
system is based on the false experiment of Needham (pp. 5, 6), and even
goes so far as to ridicule the evolutionary hypothesis altogether (p. 6).
He speaks of the necessity of a belief in God, by a kind of natural logic.
God and matter exist in the nature of things, "Tout nous announce un Être
suprême, rien ne nous dit ce qu'il est." God himself seems to be a kind of
fatalistic necessity. "C'est ce que vous appellerez Nature et c'est ce que
j'appelle Dieu." At the end he shifts the argument from the base of
necessity to that of utility. Which is the more consoling doctrine? If the
idea of God has prevented ten crimes I hold that the entire world should
embrace it (p. 27). As Morley has said, such arguments could scarcely have
convinced Voltaire himself.

Frederick was surprised that Voltaire and D'Alembert had found anything
good in the book. His refutation was more methodical than that of
Voltaire, who called it a "homage to the Divinity" but wrote to D'Alembert
that it was written in the style of a notary. Two other refutations
emanating from the Academy of Berlin were those of Castillon and Holland.
The first of these is a very heavy and learned work, formidable and
forbidding in its logic. Castillon reduces Holbach's propositions to
three. The self-existence of matter, the essential relation of movement to
it, and the possibility of deriving everything from it or some mode of it.
Castillon concludes after five hundred pages of reasoning that matter is
contingent, movement not inherent in it, and that purely spiritual beings
exist in independence of it. Hence the
Système de la Nature
is a
"long and wicked error." Holland's is a still more serious work, which the
Sorbonne recommended strongly as an antidote against Holbach's
Système

which it qualified as "une malheureuse production que notre siècle doit
rougir d'avoir enfantée." But when it was discovered that Holland was a
Protestant his work was condemned forthwith, Jan. 17, 1773.

Bergier's refutation is interesting as an attack from a churchman of
extraordinary keenness and insight into the progress of the new
philosophy. In the
Système de la Nature
he recognized the hand of
the author of
La Contagion sacrée
and the
Essai sur les préjugés

and dealt with it as he did the
Christianisme dévoilé
. Buzonniere,
Rochfort and Fangouse are milder and more naive in their demonstrations
and their works are of no weight or interest.
L'Impie démasqué
is a
brutal work which qualifies Holbach as a "vile apostle of vice and crime,"
and the
Système de la Nature
as the most impudent treatise on
atheism that has yet dishonored the globe—one which covers the
century with shame and will be the scandal of future generations.

The work of Paulian is of a different sort. Coming comparatively late, it
attempted to review the hostile opinions of many years and then mass them
in an overwhelming final attack on the
Système de la Nature
. To
this end Paulian rewrites the entire book chapter by chapter, giving the
"true version." He then reviews Holland's outline and Bergier's comments,
together with seven articles directed explicitly against the
Système de
la Nature
in such works as the
Lettres Helviennes
, of Abbé
Barruel,
Dict. des Philosophes
,
Dict. anti-philosophe
, his
own
Dict. théologique
, etc., besides many other writings against
the new philosophy in general. He then reviews articles by members of the
philosophic school against materialism and then goes back to Holbach's
sources, Diderot, Bayle, Spinoza, Lucretius, Epicurus, etc. The work is
not scholarly but comprehensive and evidently discouraged further formal
refutations.

The
Système de la Nature
had many critics in the stormy days that
followed 1789. Delisle de Sales found it a monstrosity—a
fratras
;
La Harpe called it an infamous book, "un amas de bêtises qu'on ose appeler
philosophie, inconcevables inepties, un immense échafaudage de mensonge et
d'invective"; M. Villemain is much more calm and fair; Lord Brougham, like
Damiron, Buzonnière, and many others, found it seductive but full of false
reasoning; Lerminier was so severe that St.-Beuve was moved to defend
Holbach against him. Samuel Wilkinson, the English translator of 1820, is
one of the few whose criticism is at all favorable. Holbach has always
appealed to a certain type of radical mind and his translators and editors
have generally been men who were often over-enthusiastic. For example, Mr.
Wilkinson says of the
Système de la Nature
, [64:15] "No work,
ancient or modern, has surpassed it in the eloquence and sublimity of its
language or in the facility with which it treats the most abstruse and
difficult subjects. It is without exception the boldest effort the human
mind has yet produced in the investigation of Morals and Theology. The
republic of letters has never produced another author whose pen was so
well calculated to emancipate mankind from all those trammels with which
the nurse, the school master, and the priest have successively locked up
their noblest faculties, before they were capable of reasoning and judging
for themselves."

It seems unnecessary to analyze the
Système de la Nature
. This has
been done by Damiron, Soury, Fabre, Lange, Morley, the historians of
philosophy, and encyclopaedists; and the book itself is easily available
in the larger libraries. The substance of Holbach's philosophy is
susceptible of clearer treatment apart from it or any one of his books,
although it permeates all of them.

M. Jules Soury has said, in describing a certain type of mind: "Il est
d'heureux esprits, des âmes fortes et saines, que n'effraie point le
silence éternel des espaces infinis où s'anéantissait la raison de Pascal.
Naïves et robustes natures, mâles et vigoureux penseurs, qui gardent toute
la vie quelque chose des dons charmants de la jeunesse et de l'enfance
même, une foi vive dans le témoinage immédiat de nos sens et de notre
conscience, une humeur alerte, toute de joyeuse ardeur, et comme une
intrépidité d'esprit que rien n'arrête. Pour eux tout est clair et uni; ou
à peu près, et là où ils soupçonnent quelque bas-bond insondable, ils se
détournent et poursuivent fièrement leur chemin. Comme cet Epicurien dont
parle Cicéron au commencement du
De natura deorum
, ils ont toujours
l'air de sortir de l'assemblée des dieux et de descendre des intermondes
d'Epicure."

Such was Holbach. His philosophy is based on the child-like assumption
that things are as they seem, provided they are observed with sufficient
care by a sufficient number of people. This brings us at once to the very
heart of Holbach's method which was experimental and inductive to the last
degree. Holbach was nourished on what might be called scientific rather
than philosophical traditions. As M. Tourneux has pointed out, he had been
a serious student of the natural sciences, especially those connected with
the constitution of the earth. These studies led him to see the disparity
between certain accepted and traditional cosmologies and a scientific
interpretation of the terrestrial globe and the forms of life which
flourish upon it. Finding the supposed sacred and infallible records
untrustworthy in one regard, he began to question their veracity at other
points. Being of a critical frame of mind, he took the records rather more
literally than a sympathetic, allegorical apologist would have done,
although it cannot be said that he used much historical insight. After
having studied the sacred texts for purposes of writing or having
translated other men's studies on Moses, David, the Prophets, Jesus, Paul,
the Christian theologians and saints, miracles, etc., he concluded that
these accounts were untrustworthy and mendacious. He knew ancient and
modern philosophy and found in the greater part of it an unwarranted
romantic or theological trend which his scientific training had caused him
to suspect. It must be admitted that however false or illogical Holbach's
conclusions may be considered, he was by no means ignorant of the subjects
he chose to treat, as some of his detractors would have one believe. His
theory of knowledge was that of Locke and Condillac, and on this
foundation he built up his system of scientific naturalism and dogmatic
atheism.

His initial assumption is, as has been suggested, that experience
(application réitérée des sens) and reason are trustworthy guides to
knowledge. By them we become conscious of an external objective world, of
which sentient beings themselves are a part, from which they receive
impressions through their sense organs. These myriad impressions when
compared and reflected upon form reasoned knowledge or truth, provided
they are substantiated by repeated experiences carefully made. That is, an
idea is said to be true when it conforms perfectly with the actual
external object. This is possible unless one's senses are defective, or
one's judgment vitiated by emotion and passion.

Holbach's contention is that if one applies experience and reason to the
external universe, or nature, "ce vaste assemblage de tout ce qui existe";
it reveals a
single objective reality
, i. e.,
matter
, which
is in itself essentially active or in a state of motion.

From matter in motion are derived all the phenomena that strike our
senses. All is matter or a function of it. Matter, then, is not an effect,
but a cause. It is not caused; it is from eternity and of necessity. The
cardinal point in Holbach's philosophy is an inexorable materialistic
necessity. Nothing, then, is exempt from the laws of physics and
chemistry. Inorganic substance and organic life fall into the same
category. Man himself with all his differentiated faculties is but a
function of matter and motion in extraordinary complex and involved
relations. Man's imputation to himself of free will and unending
consciousness apart from his machine is an idle tale built on his desires,
not on his experiences nor his knowledge of nature. This imputation of a
will or soul to nature, independent of it or in any sense above it, is a
still more idle one derived from his renunciation of the witness of his
senses and his following after the phantoms of his imagination. It is
ignorance or disregard of nature then that has given rise to supernatural
ideas that have "no correspondence with true sight," or, as Holbach
expressed it, have no counterpart in the external object. In other words,
theology, or poetry about God, as Petrarch said, is ignorance of natural
causes reduced to a system.

Man is a purely natural or physical being, like a tree or a stone. His
so-called spiritual nature (l'homme moral) is merely a phase of his
physical nature considered under a special aspect. He is all matter in
motion, and when that ceases to function in a particular way, called life,
he ceases to be as a conscious entity. He is so organized, however that
his chief desires are to survive and render his existence happy. By
happiness Holbach means the presence of pleasure and the absence of pain.
In all his activity, then, man will seek pleasure and avoid pain. The
chief cause of man's misery or lack of well being is his ignorance of the
powers and possibilities of his own nature and the Universal Nature. All
he needs is to ascertain his place in nature and adjust himself to it.
From the beginning of his career he has been the dupe of false ideas,
especially those connected with supernatural powers, on whom he supposed
he was dependent. But, if ignorance of nature gave birth to the Gods,
knowledge of nature is calculated to destroy them and the evils resulting
from them, the introduction of theistic ideas into politics and morals. In
a word, the truth, that is,
correct ideas of nature
is the one
thing needful to the happiness and well-being of man.

The application of these principles to the given situation in France in
1770 would obviously have produced unwelcome results. Holbach's theory was
that religion was worse than useless in that it had inculcated false and
pernicious ideas in politics and morals. He would do away completely with
it in the interest of putting these sciences on a natural basis. This
basis is self-interest, or man's inevitable inclination toward survival
and the highest degree of well-being, "L'objet de la morale est de faire
connaître aux hommes que leur plus grand intérêt exige qu'ils pratiquent
la vertu; le but du gouvernement doit être de la leur faire pratiquer."

Government then assumes the functions of moral restraint formally
delegated to religion; and punishments render virtue attractive and vice
repugnant. Holbach's theory of social organization is practically that of
Aristotle. Men combine in order to increase the store of individual
well-being, to live the good life. If those to whom society has delegated
sovereignty abuse their power, society has the right to take it from them.
Sovereignty is merely an agent for the diffusion of truth and the
maintenance of virtue, which are the prerequisites of social and
individual well-being. The technique of progress is enlightenment and good
laws.

Nothing could be clearer or simpler than Holbach's system. As Diderot so
truly said, he will not be quoted on both sides of any question. His
uncompromising atheism is the very heart and core of his system and
clarifies the whole situation. All supernatural ideas are to be abandoned.
Experience and reason are once for all made supreme, and henceforth refuse
to share their throne or abdicate in favor of faith. Holbach's aim was as
he said to bring man back to nature and render reason dear to him. "Il est
tempts que cette raison injustement dégradée quitte un ton pusillamine qui
la rendront complice du mensonge et du délire."

If reason is to rule, the usurper, religion, must be ejected; hence
atheism was fundamental to his entire system. He did not suppose by any
means that it would become a popular faith, because it presupposed too
much learning and reflection, but it seemed to him the necessary weapon of
a reforming party at that time. He defines an atheist as follows: "C'est
un homme, qui détruit des chimères nuisibles au genre humain, pour ramener
les hommes à la nature, à l'expérience, à la raison. C'est un penseur qui,
ayant médité la matière, ses propriétés et ses façons d'agir, n'a pas
besoin, pour expliquer les phénomènes de l'univers et les opérations de la
nature, d'imaginer des puissances idéales, des intelligences imaginaires,
des êtres de raison; qui loin de faire mieux connaître cette nature, ne
font que la rendre capricieuse, inexplicable, et méconnaissable, inutile
au bonheur des hommes."

APPENDIX

HOLBACH'S CORRESPONDENCE

The following letters of Holbach are extant:

Holbach to Hume, Aug. 23, 1763.
Holbach to Hume, Mar. 16, 1766.
Holbach to Hume, July 7, 1766.
Holbach to Hume, Aug. 18, 1766.
Holbach to Hume, Sept. 7, 1766.

These were printed in Hume's
Private Correspondence
, London, 1820,
pp. 252-263, and deal largely with Hume's quarrel with Rousseau.

Holbach to Garrick, June 16, 1765.
Holbach to Garrick, Feb. 9, 1766.

These two letters are in manuscript in Lansdowne House,
Coll. Forster, and were published by F. A. Hedgcock,

David Garrick et ses amis français
. Paris, 1911, pp. 251-253.

Holbach to Wilkes, Aug., 1746, 9 (Brit. Mus. Mss., Vol. 30867, p. 14).
Holbach to Wilkes, Dec. 10, 1746 (Brit. Mus. Mss., Vol. 30867, p. 18).
Holbach to Wilkes, May 22, 1766 (Brit. Mus. Mss., Vol. 30869, p. 39)
Holbach to Wilkes, Nov. 9, 1766 (Brit. Mus. Mss., Vol. 30869, p. 81).
Holbach to Wilkes, Dec. 10, 1767 (Brit. Mus. Mss., Vol. 30869, p. 173).
Holbach to Wilkes, July 17, 1768 (Brit. Mus. Mss., Vol. 30870, p. 59).
Holbach to Wilkes, Mar. 19, 1770 (Brit. Mus. Mss., Vol. 30871, p. 16).
Holbach to Wilkes, April 27, 1775, 9 (Wilkes,
Correspondence
,
London, 1804, Vol. IV, p. 176).

The first seven of these letters are published for the first time
in the present volume, pp. 6-11 and pp. 75-80.

Holbach to Galiani, Aug. 11, 1769 (
Critica
, Vol. I, pp. 488 sq.).

Galiani to Holbach, April 7, 1770 (Galiani,
Correspondence
, Paris,
1890, Vol. I, p. 92).

Galiani to Holbach, July 21, 1770 (Galiani,
Correspondence
, Paris,
1890, Vol. I, p. 199).

Holbach to Galiani, Aug. 25, 1770 (
Critica
, Vol. I, p. 489).

There are references to other letters in
Critica
which I have not
been able to find.

Holbach to Beccaria, Mar. 15, 1767, published by M. Landry

Beccaria, Scritte e lettre inediti
, 1910, p. 146.

Holbach to Malesherbes, April 6, 1761 (hitherto unpublished). See
present volume, p. 30.

HOLBACH TO HUME
(Hume, Private Correspondence, London, 1820, pp. 252-263)
PARIS, the 23rd. of August, 1763

Sir,
—

I have received with the deepest sense of gratitude your very kind
and obliging letter of the 8th. inst: favors of great men ought to
give pride to those that have at least the merit of setting the value
that is due upon them.  This is my case with you, sir; the reading
of your valuable works has not only inspired me with the strongest
admiration for your genius and amiable parts, but gave me the highest
idea of your person and the strongest desire of getting acquainted
with one of the greatest philosophers of my age, and of the best friend
to mankind.  These sentiments have emboldened me to send formally,
though unknown to you, the work you are mentioning to me.  I thought
you were the best to judge of such a performance, and I took only
the liberty of giving a hint of my desires, in case it should meet
with your approbation, nor was I surprized, or presumed to be
displeased, at seeing my wishes disappointed.  The reasons appeared
very obvious to me; not withstanding the British liberty, I conceived
there were limits even to it.  However, my late friend's book has
appeared since and there is even an edition of it lately done in
England: I believe it will be relished by the friends of truth,
who like to see vulgar errors struck at the root.  This has been
your continued task, sir; and you deserve for it the praises of all
sincere wellwishers of humanity: give me leave to rank myself among
them, and express to you, by this opportunity you have been so kind
as to give me, the fervent desire we have to see you in this country.
Messrs. Stuart, Dempster, Fordyce, who are so good as to favor me
with their company, have given me some hopes of seeing you in this
metropolis, where you have so many admirers as readers, and as many
sincere friends as there are disciples of philosophy.  I don't doubt
but my good friend M. Helvétius will join in our wishes, and prevail
upon you to come over.  I assure you, sir, you won't perceive much
the change of the country, for all countries are alike for people that
have the same minds.

I am, with the greatest veneration and esteem, sir, your most
obedient and most humble servant.
D'HOLBACH.
Rue Royale, butte St. Roch, à Paris.

HOLBACH To GARRICK
(Coll. Forster, Vol. XXI; pub., Hedgcock, p. 253)
PARIS, Feb ye 9th, 1766.

I received, my very Dear Sir, with a great deal of pleasure, your
agreeable letter of ye 24th of January, but was very sorry to hear
that you are inlisted in the numerous troup of
gouty
people.  Tho'
I have myself the honour of being of that tribe I dont desire my
friends should enter into the same corporation.  I am particularly
griev'd to see you among the invalids for you have, more than any
other, occasion for the free use of your limbs.  However, don't be
cross and peevish for that would be only increasing you distemper;
and I charge you especially of not scolding that admirable lady
Mrs Garrick, whose sweetness of temper and care must be a great
comfort in your circumstances.  I beg leave to present her with my
respects and ye compliments of my wife, that has enjoyed but an
indifferent state of health, owing to the severity of the winter.
Mr and Made Helvetius desire you both their best wishes and so do
all your friends, for whom I can answer that every one of them
keeps a kind remembrance of your valuable persons.  Dr. Gem thinks
you'll do very well to go to Bath, but his opinion is that a thin
diet would be more serviceable to you than anything else; believe
he is in the right.  Abbé Morellet pays many thanks for the answers
to his queries, but complains of their shortness and laconism;
however it is not your fault.  He is glad to hear you have receiv'd
his translation of Beccaria's book,
Des délits et des peines
and
the compliments of our friend Dr Gatti to whom I gave your direction
before he went to London.  Our friend Suard has entered his neck into
the matrimonial halter; we are all of us very sorry for it for we know
that nothing combin'd with love, will at last make nothing at all.

I was not much surpris'd at the particulars you are pleas'd to mention
about Rousseau.  According to the thorough knowledge I have had of
him I look on that man as a mere philosophical quack, full of
affectation, of pride, of oddities and even villainies; the work he
is going to publish justifies the last imputation.  Is his memory so
short as to forget that Mr Grimm, for those 9 years past, has taken
care of the mother of his wench or
gouvernante
whom he left to starve
here after having debauch'd her daughter and having got her 3 or 4
times with child.  That great philosopher should remember that
Mr. Grimm has in his hands letters under his own hand-writing that
prove him the most ungrateful dogg in the world.  During his last
stay in Paris he made some attempts to see Mr Diderot, and being
refused that favor, he pretended that Diderot endeavoured to see
him, but that himself had refused peremptorily to comply with his
request.  I hope these particulars will suffice to let you know what
you are to think of that illustrious man.  I send you here a copy of
a letter supposed to come from the King of Prussia, but done by
Mr Horace Walpole, whereby you'll see that gentleman has found out
his true character.  But enough of that rascal who deserves not to be
in Mr Hume's company but rather among the bears, if there are any in
the mountains of Wales.

I am surprized you have not receiv'd yet the
Encyclopédie
, for a
great number of copies have been sent over already to England unless
you have left your subscription here, where hitherto not one copy has
been delivered for prudent reasons.

We have had in the French Comedy a new play called
Le Philosophie sans
le savoir
done and acted in a new stile, quite natural and moving: it
has a prodigious success and deserves it extremely well.  Marmontel
will give us very soon upon the Italian stage his comical opera of

La Bergère des Alpes
.  I hope it will prove very agreeable to the
Publick, having been very much delighted by the rehearsal of it; the
music was done by Mr Cohaut who teaches my wife to play on the luth.
We expect a tragedy of the Dutch Barnvelt.

Mr Wilkes is still in this town, where he intends to stay until you
give him leave to return to his native country.  We have had the
pleasure of seeing Mr Chanquion, your friend, who seems to be a very
discerning gentleman and to whom in favor of your friendship I have
shown all the politeness I could.  I hear that Sr James Macdonald has
been ill at Parma, but is now recovered and in Rome.  Abbé Galliani is
still at Naples and stands a fair chance of being employ'd in the
ministry there.

Adieu, very dear Sir and remember your affectionate friend
D'HOLBACH

HOLBACH TO WILKES
(Brit. Mus. Mss., Vol. 30869, p. 39)
PARIS the 22d Of May (1766)

My dear Sir

I am extremely glad to know your lucky passage and happy arrival
in your native country.  I hope you know too well the sincere
dispositions of my heart as to doubt of the friendship I have
vowed to you for life; it has been of too long a duration to be
shaken by any circumstances, and especially by those that do honor
to you.  I shall be very happy if your affairs (that seem to be in
a fair way) permit you to drop over very soon to spend some time
in this place along with Miss Wilkes to whom Made D'Holbach and I
pay our best compliments.  I can easily paint to my imagination
the pleasure you both felt at your first meeting; everybody that
has any sensibility must be acquainted with the grateful pangs in
those moving circumstances.

Your case with the hawker at your entry in London is very odd and
whimsical you did extremely well to humour the man in his opinion
about Mr. Wilkes.  I dare say if you had done otherwise his fist
would have convinc'd you of the goodness of your cause, and then it
would have been impossible for you to pass for a dead man any longer;
which however, I think was very necessary for you in the beginning.
I expect with great eagerness the settlement of your affairs with
the ministry to your own satisfaction; be persuaded, Dear Sir, that
nobody interests himself in your happiness than myself, and nothing
will conduce more to it than your steady attachment to the principles
of honor and patriotism.

If you don't find a way of disposing of the little packet, you need
not take much trouble about it, and you may bring it back along with
you, when you come to this place, as to the kind offers you are so
good as to make me about commissions, experience has taught me that
it is unsafe to trust you with them, so I beg leave with gratitude
to decline your proposals as that point.

All our common friends and acquaintances desire their best
compliments to you, and believe me, my dear Sir.

Your affectionate oblig'd humble servant
D'HOLBACH

HOLBACH TO WILKES
(Brit. Mus. Mss., VOL 30869, p. 81)
PARIS 9ber 10th 1766

My very Dear Sir

I receiv'd with the greatest pleasure the news of your lucky arrival
in Engelland.  You know the sentiments of my heart, and are undoubtedly
convinc'd how much I wish for the good success of all your enterprises
tho I am to be a great looser by it.  I rejoice very heartily at the
fine prospect you have now in view and don't doubt but the persons you
mention will succeed if they are in good earnest: which is allways a
little doubtful in people of that Kidney.

We have had the pleasure of seeing Miss Wilkes three or four times since
your departure, she is extreamly well and longs for the return of her
friend Mlle Helvetius the 20th of this month.

Rousseau will very likely hate the English very cordially for making
him pay so dear for his books, it is however a sign that he told us a
lye when he pretended in his writings to have no books at all, as to
his guitar he should buy a new one to tune his heart a little better
than he did before.

We have no news here, except the Election of Mr Thomas as a member of
the french academy.  Marquis Beccaria is going to leave us very soon
being obliged to return to Milan: Count Veri will at the same time set
out for England.

I'll be oblig'd to you for a copy or two of the book printed in holland
you mentioned in your letter you may send it by some private opportunity
to Miss Wilkes, with, proper directions.  A gentleman of our Society
should be glad to get 2 copies of Baskervilles' virgil
in octavo
.

Tho Mr Davenport and Rousseau seem to be pleased very much with one
another, I suppose they may very soon be tired of their squabbling,
and the latter like the apostles will shake of against the barbarous
Britons the dust of his feet.

Receive the hearty compliments of my wife and all our friends.  You
know the true sentiments of my heart for you,
Dear Sir.  I am with great sincerity
your most obedient humble Servant
D'HOLBACH

HOLBACH TO WILKES
(Brit. Mus. Mss., Vol. 30869, p. 173)

Dear Sir

I receiv'd with a great deal of pleasure your friendly letter from
Ostende of the 26th. nov. I was extreamly glad to hear your happy
arrival at that place, and do not doubt but you met with a lucky
passage to Dover the following day, we are now enjoying the conversation
of your British friends about elections; that will not be tedious for
you if, according to your hopes, you should succeed in your projects.

I see by your letter that instead of coming back directly by Calais
you intend to travel with Miss Wilkes through Antwerp and the Low
countries, which I should think not very advisable in this rigorous
season of the year, for generally at that time the waters are lock'd
up by the frost and travelling is bad et tedious and may be would
prove hurtful to your tender fellow traveler to whom my wife and I
desire our best compliments.  Such a scheme will be more advantagious
for you both and more conformable to the wishes of your friends in
this place.

I hope your arrival in London will contribute to reconcile abbé
Galliani to that place, where he complains of having not heard of
the sun since he set his foot on British shore, however he may
comfort himself for we have had very little of it in this country.
The Abbé must be overjoy'd at the news of the Jesuits being expell'd
from his Native country for now he may say
Gens inimica mihi
Tyrrhenum navigat aquor
.  We have no material news in this country,
except that the queen continues to be in a very bad state of health.

If there is some good new romance I'll be oblig'd to bring it over
along with you as, well as a couple of french books call'd

Militaire philosophe
and
Théologie portative
in case you may
easily find them in London, for we cannot get them here.  I am told
the works of one Morgan have been esteem'd in your country but I don't
know the titles of them, if you should know them and meet with them
with facility, I should be very much oblig'd to you provided you make
me pay a little more than you have done hitherto for your commissions.

All our common friends beg their compliments and I wish for your
speedy return, and I am Sincerely
Dear Sir
Your faithful affectionate humble servant
D'HOLBACH
PARIS the 10th of decemb. 1767

HOLBACH TO WILKES
(Brit. Mus. Mss., Vol. 30870, p. 59)
GRANDVAL, 17th of July 1768

Dear Sir

I receiv'd with a great deal of pleasure your very agreeable letter
of the 28th of last month.  I am extreamly glad that your generous
soul is very far from sinking under the weight of these Misfortunes,
and to see that you don't give up the hopes of carrying triumphantly
your point notwithstanding the discouragements you have met with lately.
I need not tell you how much your friends in Paris and I in particular
interest ourselves in all the events that may befall you.  Our old
friendship ought to be a sure pledge of my sincere sentiments for you,
and of my best wishes for your good success in all your undertakings.
I believe you can do no better but to keep strictly to the rules you
have laid down for your conduct, and I don't doubt but you'll find it
will answer the best to your purpose.

I am very much oblig'd to you, Dear Sir, for the kind offers you make
in your friendly letter.  I have desir'd already Mr Suard to bring over
a few books lately published in your metropolis.  I am very glad to hear
that Gentleman is pleas'd with his journey.

There's no possibility of getting for you a compleat sett of Callots
engravings.  Such a collection must be the business of many years; it
is to be found only after the decease of some curious men who have taken
a great deal of trouble to collect them.  I found indeed in two shops 8
or 10 of them, but the proofs (les épreuves) were very indifferent and
they wanted to sell them excessively dear; in general 200 guineas would
procure a collection very far from being compleat.

My wife and all our common acquaintence desire their best compliments
to you and to Miss Wilkes and you know the sentiments wherewith I am
for ever
Dear Sir
your affectionate friend and
very humble servant
D'HOLBACH

HOLBACH TO WILKES
(Brit. Mus. Mss., Vol. 30871, p. 16)
PARIS the 19th of March 1770

Dear Sir

I receiv'd with a due sense of gratitude the favour of your last
letter, and was overjoy'd to hear from yourself that your long
confinement has not been able hitherto to obstruct the lively flow
of your spirits.  A little more patience and you'll reach the end
of all your misfortunes, that have been faithfully partaken by your
friends in England and abroad, for my own part I wish most sincerely
that everything for the future may turn to your profit and welfare,
without hurting that of your country, to whom, as a lover of mankind,
I am a well wisher.

My wife desires her best compliments to you and your beloved Daughter,
whom we both expect to see again with a great deal of pleasure in
this country next month.  Notwithstanding our bad circumstances we
are making very great preparations for the Wedding of the Dauphin,
and our metropolis begins already to be filled with foreigners that
flock hither from all parts of the world.  Our friend Mr D'Alainville
is to set out at the end of April to fetch the Archdutchess at
Strasbourg and bring mask (ed) (?) her different stages on the road
to Versailles.

We have no news in the literary world except that Voltaire
is become lately
le père temporal
, that is to say the benefactor
of the
Capucins du pays de Gex
where he lives, a title of which
all his pranks seemd to exclude him, but grace you know, is omnipotent,
and monks are not over nice when there is something to be got by
their condescension.

If the hurry of affairs whould leave you any moments to read
curious books I would advise you to peruse two very strange
works lately publish'd viz
Recherches philosophiques sur les
américains
, le
Système de la Nature
par Mirabaud.  I suppose
you'll find them cheaper and more easily in London that at
Paris.

All your late acquaintances in this Town desire me to present
you with their sincere compliments and best wishes; as to mine
you know that they have no other object but your Welfare.

I am, Dear Sir, for ever
your most affectionate friend
and humble servant
D'HOLBACH

P. S. I'll be very much oblig'd to you for sending over to me in
2 vol. small octavo.

HOLBACH TO WILKES
(Wilkes, Correspondence, London, 1805, Vol. 4, p. 176)
PARIS, April 27; 1775

"
My Lord
,

"I received with the utmost gratitude your lordship's friendly
letter of the 28th of March. (1775?)  I should have done
myself the honor of answering sooner to your kind propositions,
if I had not been prevented by some gouty infirmities that have
assailed in the beginning of this spring.  I esteem myself very
happy to find that the hurry of business, and your exhaltation
to the rank of chief-magistrate, could not make you forget your
friendship to me; though my present circumstances do not permit
me to make use of your friendly invitation, be persuaded my very
dear lord that Madame D'Holbach and myself shall forever keep
these signs of your kindness, in very grateful remembrance.

We both desire our best compliments to your very amiable
lady-mayoress: who acted so well her part lately in the Egyptian
hall, to the satisfaction of that prodigious crowd you have
been entertaining there.  All members of our society that have
had the happiness of being acquainted with you, desire to be
kindly remembered; and a continuation of your valuable friendship
shall for ever be the utmost ambition
my lord
of your most sincerely devoted
D'HOLBACH"

GALIANI To HOLBACH
(Galiani, Corresp., Vol. I, p. 199)
NAPLES, le 21 juillet, 1770

Bonjour, mon cher Baron,

J'ai vu le
Système de la Nature
.  C'est la ligne où finit la
tristesse de la morne et sèche vérité, au-delà commence la gaieté
du roman.  Il n'y a rien de mieux que de se persuader que les dés
sont pipés: cette idée en enfante milles autres, et un nouveau
monde se régénère.  Le M. Mirabaud est un vrai abbé Terray
de la métaphysique.  Il fait des réductions, des suspensions,
et cause la banqueroute du savoir, du plaisir et de l'esprit
humain.  Mais vous allez me dire qu'aussi il y avait trop de
nonvaleurs: on était trop endetté, il courait trop de papiers non
réels sur la place.  C'est vrai aussi, et voilà pourquoi la crise
est arrivée.

Adieu, mon cher baron.  Ecrivez-moi de longues lettres, pour que
le plaisir en soit plus grand.  Embrassez moi longuement la
baronne, et soyez longue dans tout que vous faites, dans tout
ce que vous patientez, dans tout ce que vous espérer.  La
longanimité est une belle vertu; c'est elle qui me fait espérer
de revoir Paris.
Adieu.

HOLBACH To GALIANI
(Critica, Vol. I, 1903, p. 489)

GRANDVAL, le 25 d'août 1770

Bonjour, mon très délicieux abbé,

J'ai bien reçu votre très-précieuse lettre du 21 de juillet qui
m'accuse la réception de celle que je vous avais écrite le 3 de
juin.  Je vois que celle-ci a été longtemps en route, attendu
que M. Torcia à qui M. Diderot s'était chargé de la remettre, a
encore traînassé quelque temps à Paris, suivant la louable
coutume des voyageurs qui nous quittent toujours avec peine.

Je suis bien aise que vous ayez lu le livre de Mirabaud qui fait
un bruit affreux dans ce pays.  L'abbé Bergier l'a déjà
réfuté très-longuement et sa réponse paraîtra cet hiver.  La
Sorbonne est, dit-on, occupée à détruire ce maudit
Système
qui
lui paraît au moins hérétique.  Voltaire lui-même se prépare
à le pulvériser; en attendant nos seigneurs du Parlement y
viennent d'y répondre par des fagots, ainsi qu'à quelque autres
ouvrages de même trempe.  Ce qu'il y a de fâcheux c'est que
l'ouvrage de V. qui a pour titre
Dieu et les hommes
a été
enveloppé dans la même condamnation, ce qui doit déplaire
souverainement à l'auteur.  Je me rappelle à cette occasion ce
que M. Hume dit d'un catholique que Henri VIII fit conduire au
bûcher avec quelques hérétiques, et dont le seul chagrin était
d'être brûlé en si mauvaise compagnie.  Nonobstant toutes ces
réfutations, il parait tous les jours quelques nouveaux ouvrages
impies, au point que je suis très surpris que la récolte ait été
si bonne dans le royaume.  En dernier lieu on vient de publier un
ouvrage sous le titre de
Droit des souverains sur les biens du
clergé
, qui, sans contenir des impiétés n'en est pas moins déplaisant
pour cela: Il va droit à la cuisine, et veut que pour liquider
la dette nationale on vende tous les biens ecclésiastiques et
que l'on met nos pontifes à la pension.  Vous sentez qu'une
proposition si mal sonnante n'a pu manquer de mettre le ciel en
courroux; sa colère s'est déchargé sur cinq ou six libraires et
colporteurs qui ont été mis en prison.

[ENDNOTES]

[1:1] Diderot,
Oeuvres
, ed. Assézat et Tourneaux, Vol. XX, p. 28.

[2:2] Grimm,
Corr. Lit.
, Vol. XV, p. 421.

[3:3] Diderot,
Oeuvres
, Vol. XX, p. 95.

[3:4] Among the most important are Damiron J. P.,
Mémoires pour
servir à l'histoire de la philosophie au dix-huitième siècle
(Paris,
1858, 3 vols., 8vo); Lange,
Geschichte des Materialismus
(Eng. tr.,
Boston, 1877); Morley,
Diderot and the Encyclopedists
(N. Y., 1891,
2 vols., 12mo); Plekhanow, G.,
Beiträge zur Geschichte des Materialismus

(Stuttgart, 1896); Hancock, A. E.,
The French Revolution and the
English Poets
(N. Y., 1899); Tallentyre,
The Friends of Voltaire

(London, 1906); Fabre,
Les Pères de la Révolution
(Paris, 1910), etc.

[5:5] Confessions,
Oeuvres
, Vol. XXIV, p. 338.

[5:6] Bib. Nat. mss.
Pièces originales,
1529, d'Holbach, 34, 861.

[6:7] Carlyle, Rev. Dr. A.,
Autobiography
, ed. Burton, Boston, 1861,
p. 137 sq. for Holbach's English friends mentioned in his letters to
Wilkes.

[12:9] See Chap. II and Bibliography, Pt. I, for these and his other works.

[12:10] Grimm
Cor. Lit.
, Vol. II, p. 283.

[12:11]
Gazette de France
, Aug. 10, 1754.

[12:12] Jal,
Dict. Critique
, p. 685.

[13:13] His career is somewhat doubtful.  He travelled in Italy in 1779
and Abbé Galiani, an old friend of Holbach's, got a very agreeable
impression of him.  John Wilkes, in a letter to his daughter in 1781,
seems to imply that he had not turned out very well, and hopes that the
baron's second son will make good the deficiencies of the first.  In
1806 he published a translation of Weiland's
Oberon
or
Huon de
Bordeaux
which went thru another edition in 1825, but those are the
only details that have come to light.

[13:14] Diderot, in writing to Mlle Volland Sep. 17, 1760 says: "On
nourrit, à Chenvières, les deux filles de Madame d'Holbach.  L'aînée
est belle comme un chérubin; c'est un visage rond, de grands yeux
bleus, des levres fines, une bouche riante, la peau la plus blanche
et la plus animée, des cheveux châtains qui ceignent un très joli
front.  La cadette est un peloton d'embonpoint où l'on ne distingue
encore que du blanc et du vermillon."

[13:15] Gazette de France, June 1, 1781.

[14:16] Holbach's intendant was [a] Jew, Berlise.  After his death several
of his old servants Vincent, David, and Plocque, contested Holbach's will,
in which they thought they were legatees.  The case was in the courts
for several years and was finally decided against them.  Douarche,

Les tribunaux civil de Paris pendant la révolution
, Paris, 1905, Vol. I.,
pp. 141, 261, 325, 689.

[14:17] Avézac-Lavigne,
Diderot
, p. 5.

[15:18]
Critica
, Vol. I, p. 48, note.

[15:19] He met Voltaire in Paris in 1778, however, and Naigeon relates
that Voltaire greeted him very cordially and said that he had long
desired to make his acquaintance.

[15:20] Collignon,
Diderot
, p. 1.

[16:21] Avézac-Lavigne,
Diderot
, p. 75, note.

[16:22] Romilly,
Memoirs
, Vol. I, p. 179.

[16:23] Diderot,
Oeuvres
, Vol. I, p. lxvi, note.

[17:24] Journal de Paris, Dec. 2, 1789.

[17:25] See appendix, p. 73, p. 77.

[18:26] See appendix, p. 71.

[19:27] See appendix, p. 72.

[19:28] See p. 6 sq. and appendix pp. 75 sq.

[39:2] Barbier,
Dict.
, Vol. I, p. 175 sq.

[40:3] Barbier, Vol. I, p. xxxiii, note.

[40:4]
Oeuvres
, Vol. XVIII, p. 265.

[44:5]
Oeuvres
, Vol. XIV, p. 352.

[47:7] Middleton's translation, preface.

[47:8] Cf. p. 94. [Bibliography Part I]

[54:1] Morley,
Diderot
, Vol. II, p. 155.

[55:2] Later
Bon-sens
and
Théologie portative
were doomed to the
flames by the condemnations of Jan. 10, 1774, and February 16, 1776.

[55:3]
Système de la Nature
, ed. 1771, Vol. II, p. 496.

[56:4] Grimm,
Cor. Lit.
, Vol. IX, p. 167.

[56:5] Voltaire,
Oeuvres
, ed. Beuchot, Vol. LXVI, p. 404.  Subsequent
references to Voltaire are from this edition.

[56:6] Vol. LXVII, p. 265.

[56:7] Grimm,
Cor. Lit.
, Vol. IX, p. 90.

[57:8] Vol. LXVI, p. 432.

[57:9] Vol. LXVI, p. 563.

[57:10] Vol. LXVI, p. 386.

[58:11] Vol. LXVI, p. 394.

[58:12] Vol. XXVIII, p. 493.

[58:13] Vol. LXVI, p. 469.

[58:14] Goethe,
Wahrheit und Dichtung
, 11th Book, Goethe's
Werke
,
Stuttgart, Vol. 19, p. 55.

Auf philosophische Weise erleuchtet und gefödert zu werden, hatten
wir keinen Trieb noch Hang: über religiöse Gegenstände glaubten wir
uns selbst aufgeklärt zu haben, und so war der heftige Streit
französischer Philosophen mit dem Pfafftum uns ziemlich gleichgültig.
Verbotene, zurn Feuer verdaminte Bücher, welche damals grossen Lärmen
machten, übten keine Wirkung auf uns.  Ich gedenke statt aller des

Système de la Nature
, das wir aus Neugier in die Hand nahmen.  Wir
begriffen nicht, wie ein solches Buch gefährlich sein könnte.  Es kam
uns so grau, so cimmerisch, so totenhaft vor, das wir Mühe hatten,
seine Gegenwart auszuhalten, dass wir davor wie vor einern Gespenste
schauderten.  Der Verfasser glaubt sein Buch ganz eigens zu empfehlen,
wenn er in der Vorrede versichert, dass er, als ein abgelebter Greis,
soeben in die Grube stiegend, der Mit- und Nachwelt die Wahrheit verkünden
wolle.  Wir lachten ihn aus: denn wir glaubten bemerkt zu haben, dass
von alten Leuten eigentlich an der Welt nichts geschätzt werde, was
liebenswürdig und gut an ihr ist.  "Alte Kirchen haben dunkle Gläser"
"Wie Kirschen und Beeren schmecken, muss mann Kinder und Sperlinge
fragen"—dies waren unsere Lust und Leibworte: und so schien uns jenes
Buch, als die rechte Quintessenz der Greisenheit, unschmachhaft, ja
abgeschmackt Alles sollte notwendig sein und deswegen kein Gott.
"Könnte es denn aber nicht auch notwendig einen Gott geben?" fragten
wir.  Dabei gestanden wir freilich, das wir uns den Notwendigkeiten der
Tage und Nächte, der Jahrszeiten, der klirnatischen Einflusse, der
physichen und animalischen Zustände nicht wohl entziehen könnten: doch
fühlten wir etwas in uns, das als vollkommene Willkür erschien, und
wieder etwas, das sich mit dieser Willkür ins Gleichgewicht zu setzen
suchte.  Die Hoffnung, immer vernünftiger zu werden, uns von den aussern
Dingen, ja von uns selbst immer unabhängiger zu machen, konnten wir
nicht aufgeben.  Das Wort Freiheit klingt so schon, dass mann es nicht
entbehren könnte und wenn es einen Irrtum bezeichnete.

Keiner von uns hatte das Buch hinausgelesen; denn wir fanden uns in
der Erwartung getäuscht, in der wir es auf geschlagen hatten.

System der Natur
ward angekündigt und wir hofften also wirklich
etwas von der Natur, unsere Abgötten, zu erfahren.  Physik und Chemie,
Himmels- und Erdbeschriebung, Naturgeschichte und Anatomie und so
manches andere hatte nun zeit Jahren und bis auf den letzten Tag uns
immer auf die geschmüchte grosse Welt hingeweisen, und wir hatten gern
von Sonnen und Sternen, von Planeten und Monden, von Bergen, Thälern,
Flüssen und Meeren und von allem, was dann lebt und webt, das Nähere
sowie das Allgemeinere erfahren.  Das hierbei wohl manches vorkommen
müsste, was dem gemeinen Menschen als schädlich, der Geistlichkeit als
gefährlich, dem Staat als unzulässig erschienen möchte, daran hatten wir
keinen Zweifel, und wir hofften, dieses Büchlein sollte nicht unwürdig
die Feuerprobe bestauden haben.  Allein wie hohl und leer ward uns in
deiser tristen Atheistischen Halbnacht zu Mute, in welcher die Erde mit
allen ihren Gebilden, der Himmel mit allen seinen Gestirnen verschwand!
Eine Materie sollte sein von Ewigkeit und von Ewigkeit her bewegt, und
sollte nun mit dieser Bewegung rechts und links und nach allen Seiten
ohne weiteres die unendlichen Phänomene des Daseins hervorbringen.
Dies alles wären wir sogar zufrieden gewesen, wenn der Verfasser
wirklich aus seiner bewegten Materie die Welt vor unsern Augen
aufgebaut hätte.  Aber er mochte von der Natur so wenig wissen als wir;
denn indem er einige allgemeine Begriffe hingepfahlt, verlässt er sie
sogleich, um dasjenige, was höher als die Natur oder als höhere
Natur in der Natur erschient, zur materiellen schweren, zwar bewegten,
aber doch richtungs- und gestaltlosen Natur zu verwandeln, und glaubt
dadurch recht viel gewonnen zu haben.  Wenn uns jedoch dieses Buch
einigen Schaden gebracht hat, so war es der, das wir allen
Philosophie, besonderers aber der Metaphysick recht herzlich gram
wurden, und bleiben, dagegen aber auf lebendige Wissen, Erfahren,
Thun und Dichten uns nur desto lebhafter und leidenschaftlicher hinwarfen.

[64:15] Vol. II, p. 261, ed. 1820.

BIBLIOGRAPHY—PART I.

EDITIONS OF HOLBACH'S WORKS IN CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER.

As the works of Holbach are not yet cataloged in the Bibliothèque
Nationale, the following list is doubtless incomplete.  The numbers
given are those of the Bibliothèque Nationale and the British Museum
where the books were used, except in cases where they were available
in Boston, New York or Washington.

ABBREVIATIONS

B. N., Bibliothèque Nationale.
B. M., British Museum.
L. C., Library of Congress.
C. U., Columbia University.
H. U., Harvard University.
U. T. S., Union Theological Seminary.
G. T. S., General Theological Seminary.
A. T. S., Andover Theological Seminary.
N. Y., New York Public Library.
B. P., Boston Public Library.

Of about 120 editions consulted, C. U. had 13; U. T. S. 7; N. Y. 7;
H. U. 6; B. P. 5; L. C. 4; A. T. S. 3; G. T. S. I.  There are 20 or more
editions in existence that were not to be found in the library catalogs
consulted.

1752.  Lettre à une dame d'un certain âge sur l'état présent de l'Opéra.
En Arcadie aux dépens de l'Académie Royale de Musique, (Paris, 8vo, pp. 11.)
B. M. 1103 b 21 (2).

1752.  Arrêt rendu à l'amphithéâtre de l'Opéra, sur la plainte du
milieu du parterre intervenant dans la querelle des deux coins.
(Paris, 1752, 8vo, pp. 16.)
B. N. Yf 7726 (attributed to Diderot).

1752.  Art de la Verrerie, De Neri, Merret et Kunckel; auquel on a
ajouté Le
Sol Sine Veste
D'Orschall;
L'Helioscopium videndi sine
veste solem Chymicum
; Le
Sol Non Sine Veste
: Le Chapitre XI du

Flora Saturnizans
de Henckel, Sur la Vitrification des Végétaux;
Un Mémoire sur la manière de faire le Saffre; Le Secret des vraies
Porcelaines de la Chine et de Saxe; Ouvrages où l'on trouvera la
manière de faire le Verre et le Crystal, d'y porter des Couleurs,
d'imiter les Pierres Précieuses, de préparer et colorer les Emaux,
de faire la Potasse, de peindre sur le Verre, de préparer des Vernis,
de composer de Couvertes pour des Fayances et Poteries, d'extraire la
Couleur Pourpre de l'Or, de contrefaire les Rubis, de faire le Soffre,
de faire et peindre les Porcelaines, etc.  Traduits de l'Allemand Par
M. D... A Paris Durand, rue St. Jacques, au Griffon.  Pissot, Quai des
Augustins, à la Sagesse.  Avec Approbation et Privilège du Roi (in quarto).
B. N. V. 11028.
C. U. A. n H 35 (Avery Library).

1753.  Minéralogie, ou description générale des substances du règne
minéral.  Par Mr. Jean Gotshalk Wallerius, Professeur Royale de
Chymie, de Métallurgie et de Pharmacie dans l'Université d'Upsal,
de l'Académie Impériale des Curieux de la Nature.  Ouvrage traduit
de l'Allemand, A Paris, Chez Durand, rue S. Jacques, au Griffon.
Pissot, Quai de Conti, à la Croix d'Or, MDCCLII.  Avec Approbation
et Privilège du Roi (2 vols., 8vo, pp. xlvii + 569 + 284).  Followed
by (second title page) Hydrologie, ou description du règne aquatique,
divisés par classes, gendres, espèces et variétés, avec la manière de
faire l'essai des eaux (256 p.).
B. N., S. 1992 (2).
B. M. 987 h. 9-10.

—Ibid.  (Paris, Herissant, Durand, 1759, 2 vols., 8vo.) N. Y., P. W. D.
H. U. Geol. 7257-59.
B. M. 970 h.l.

1756.  Introduction à la Minéralogie; ou connoissance des eaux, des
sucs terrestres, des sels, des terres, des pierres, des minéraux, et
des métaux: avec une description abrégée des opérations de métallurgie.
Ouvrage posthume de M. J. F. Henckel, publié sous le titre de
Henckelius
in Mineralogiâ redivivus
et traduit de l'Allemand.  A Paris, Chez Guillaume
Cavelier, Libraire, rue S. Jacques, au Lys d'Or.  MDCCLVI.  Avec Approbation
et Privilège du Roi.  (2 vols., 12vo, pp. lxxi + 204 + 371.)
B. N. 19930 (1).

1758.  Chimie métallurgique, Dans laquelle on trouvera la Théorie et
la Pratique de cet Art.  Avec des Experiences sur la Densité
des Alliages des Métaux, et des demi-Métaux; et un Abrégé de
Docimastique.  Avec Figures.  Par M. C. E. Gellert, Conseiller
des Mines de Saxe et de l'Académie Imperiale de Petersbourg.
Ouvrages traduits de l'Allemand.  A Paris, Chez Briasson, rue
Saint Jacques; Avec Approbation et Privelège.  (2 vols., 12mo,
pp. xii + 296 + xvii + 351.)
B. N., R. 37032 (3).

1759.  Traités de physique, d'histoire naturelle, de minéralogie et de
métallurgie.  (Paris, 1759, 3 vols., 12mo.)  (General title.)
Tome I.  L'Art des Mines, ou Introduction aux connoissances
nécessaires pour l'exploitation des mines métalliques avec un traité
des exhalaisons minérales ou moufettes, et plusieurs mémoires sur
differens sujets d'Histoire Naturelle-Avec figures.  Par
M. Jean Gotlob Lehmann, Docteur en Médecine, Conseiller des
Mines de Sa Majesté Prussienne, de l'Académie Royale des
Sciences de Berlin et de celle des Sciences utiles de Mayence.
Traduit de l'Allemand.  A Paris, Chez Jean Thomas Herrisant
MDCCLIX.  Avec Approbation et Privilège du Roi.
Tome II.  Traité de la formation des métaux et de leurs
matrices ou minières, ouvrage fondé sur les principes de la
physique et de la minéralogie et confirmé par des expériences
chymiques.  Par M. J. G. Lehmann, etc.  Traduit de l'Allemand.
Tome III.  Essai d'une Histoire Naturelle des couches de la
terre.  Dans lequel on traite de leur formation, de leur situation,
des minéraux, des métaux et des fossiles qu'elles contiennent.
Avec des considerations physiques sur les causes des Tremblements
de Terre et de leur propagation.  Ouvrages traduits de l'Allemand,
et augmentés de Notes du Traducteur etc.
H. U., M, Z.
B. M. 990 c. 16-18.

1759.  Les plaisirs de l'imagination, poème en trois chants, par
M. Akenside.  Traduit de l'anglais.  A Amsterdam, Arkstée et Merkus,
et se trouve à Paris chez Pissot, Quai de Conti MDCCLIX (8vo).
B. N. 2 ex. Yk 2362 et 2498.
B. M. 1162 f 20.

—Ibid.  Les plaisirs de l'imagination, poème en trois chants, Par
Akenside, traduit de l'Anglais par le baron d'Holbach, augmenté de
Notes historiques et littéraires, de la vie de l'auteur et du Traducteur,
par Pissot.  Paris, Hubert MDCCCVI (1806-18vo).
B. N. Yk 2363.
B. M. 1065 b 20 (2).

1760.  Pyritologie, ou Histoire Naturelle de la Pyrite, ouvrage dans
lequel on examine l'origine, la nature, les propriétés et les usages
de ce Minéral important, et de la plupart des autres Substances du même
Règne: on y a joint le Flora Saturnisans où L'Auteur dèmontre l'Alliance
qui se trouve entre les Végétaux et les Minéraux; et les Orpuscules
Minéralogiques, Qui comprennent un Traité de l'Appropriation, un Traité
de L'Origine des Pierres, plusieurs Mémoires sur la Chymie et l'Histoire
Naturelle, avec un Traité des Maladies des Mineurs et des Fondeurs.
Par M. Jean-Frederic Henkel, Docteur en Médicine, Conseiller des Mines
du Roi de Pologne, Electeur de Saxe; de l'Académie Imperiale des Curieux
de la Nature et de celle de Berlin.  Ouvrages Traduit de l'Allemand [by
Baron d'Holbach and M., Charas] à Paris, Chez jean Thomas Hérissant,
Libraire, Rue S. Jacques, à S. Paul et à S. Hilaire. MDCCLX.  Avec
Approbation et Privilège du Roi.  (Paris, 1760, quarto, pp. xvi + 524.)
B. N. 5324.
B. M. 34 c 15.

1760.  Oeuvres Métallurgiques de M. Jean-Christian Orschall, Inspecteur
des Mines de S. A. S. le Land-grave de Hesse-Cassel.  Contenant
I. L'Art de la Fonderie; II. Un Traité de la Siquation;
III.  Le Traité de la Macération des Mines; IV. Le Traité
des Trois Merveilles; (Traduit de l'Allemand) Le prix est de 50
sols broché et de 3 liv. relié. A Paris, Chez Hardy, Libraire, rue
S. Jacques au dessus de celle de la Parcheminerie à la Colonne
d'Or.  MDCCLX.  Avec Approbation et Privilège du Roi.
(12mo, pp. + 394.)
B. N., S 19,992.

1764.  Recueil des mémoires les plus intéressants de chymie, et d'histoire
naturelle, contenus dans les actes de l'Académie d'Upsal, et dans les
Mémoires de l'Académie Royale des Sciences de Stockholm; Publiés depuis
1720 jusqu'en 1760.  Traduits du Latin et de l'Allemand.  A Paris, Chez
Pierre-Fr. Didot, le jeune, Quai des Augustins, à S. Augustin.  MDCCLXIV.
Avec Approbation et Privilège du Roi. (2 vols., 12mo, pp. viii + 687.)
B. N. R 15483 (4).

1765.  Histoire du règne de la Reine Anne d'Angleterre, contenant Les
Négociations de la paix d'Utrecht, et les démêlés qu'elle occasionna
en Angleterre.  Ouvrage posthume du Docteur Jonathan Swift.  Doyen de
S. Patrice en Irelande: Publié sur un Manuscrit corrigé de la propre
main de l'Auteur, et traduit de l'Anglais par M... [d'Holbach and Eidous].
A Amsterdam, Chez Marc-Michel Rey, et Arkstée et Merkus. MDCCLXV.
(12mo, pp. xxiv + 416.)
B. N. 8vo Nc 1718.

1766.  Traité du Soufre, ou Remarques sur la dispute qui s'est élevée
entre les chymistes, au sujet du Soufre, tant commun, combustible
ou volatil, que fixe, etc.  Traduit de l'Allemand de Stahl.
A Paris, Chez Pierre-Francois Didot, le jeune.  Quai de
Augustins à Saint-Augustin.  MDCCLXVI.  Avec Approbation
et Privilège du Roi.  (12mo, pp. 392.)
B. N., R 51709.
B. M. 233 b 15.

1766.  L'Antiquité dévoilée par ses usages, ou Examen critique des
principales Opinions, Cérémonies et Institutions réligieuses et
politiques des différens Peuples de la Terre.  Par feu M., Boulanger.
Homo, quod rationis est particeps, consequentiam cernit causas rerum
videt, earumque progressus et quasi antecessiones non ignorat,
similitudines compare, rebus praesentibus adjungit at anectit futuras.
—Cicero, De Offic. Lib. I. C. 4.
A Amsterdam, Chez Marc-Michel Rey, MDCCLXVI. (Quarto pp. viii + 412.)
B. N., E 690.
C. U., A P. B 66 (Avery Library).

—Ibid.  (1766, 3 vols., 12mo.)
B. N. *E 2446-2448.

—Ibid.  (1772, 3 Vols., (12mo.)
B. N. *E 2445 (VIII).
B. M. 4506 a 1.

—Ibid.  (Amsterdam, 1777, 3 vols., 12mo, pp. lx + 355 + 391 + 396.)
B. M. 696 b 35.

—Ibid.  In Oeuvres de Boulanger T. I-IV En Suisse.
De l'Imprimerie Philosophique MDCCXCI. (4 vols., (12mo.)
B. N., Z 24316-24319.

—Ibid.  In
Oeuvres de Boulanger
T. I-II Amsterdam.
(Paris, 2 vols., 8vo.) (Quérard.)

1767.  Le Christianisme dévoilé, ou Examen des principes et des effets
de la religion Chrétienne.  Par feu M. Boulanger.  Superstitio error
infanus est, amandos timet, quos colit violat; quid enim interest,
utrum Deos neges, an infames?  Senec. Ep. 12.
A Londres, MDCCLVI (Nancy, Leclerc, 1761, 8vo, pp. xxviii + 295).
B. N., D2 5305.
B. M. 4016 bb 6.
B. M., C 2863 (another copy with MS. notes by Voltaire).

—Ibid.  (Londres, 1767, 8vo, pp. xx + 236.)  Printed at John Wilkes'
private press in George St. Westminster, according to MS. note in
title page.
B. M. 4017 de. 13.

—Ibid.  (Londres, 1767, 8vo, pp. 244.)
A. T. S. 6 11.

—Ibid.  (A Paris, Chez les Libraires Associés, 1767, 8vo,
pp. xvii + 218.)
B. N., D2 8364.

—Ibid.  (Londres [Amsterdam], 1767, 12mo.)
B. M. 696 b 34

—Ibid.  Oeuvres de Boulanger T. VII.  (En Suisse de l'Imprimerie
philosophique, 1791, 12mo.)
B. N., Z 23421.

—Ibid.  Oeuvres de Boulanger T. V, 1793.

—Christianity Unveiled; being an examination of the principles and
effects of the Christian Religion, from the French of Boulanger,
Author of
Researches into the Origin of Oriental Despotism
, by
W. M. Johnson. New York, 1795, printed at the Columbian Press by
Robertson and Gowan for the editor and sold by the principal book
sellers in the United States. (12mo, pp. ix + 238.)
B. M. 4017 de 4.
B. M. 900 i. 1, (7) another copy with MS. Notes.
B. P.... 7490 a 22.

—Ibid.  London, printed and published by R. Carlile, 55 Fleet St.
1819 (8vo, pp. 98.)
B. M. 4016 d. 13.

—Ibid.  The Deist, etc. Vol. II, published by R. Carlile, 1819.
(8vo, pp. vii + 125.)
B. M. 4015 f 11.

—El Cristianismo a descurbierto, ó examen de los principios y efectos
de la religion cristiana.  Escrito en Francés por Boulanger y traducido
al castellano por S. D. V.... Londres en la emprenta de Davidson, 1821.
(12mo, pp. xxvi + 246.)
B. M. 4016 df 6.

1767.  L'Esprit du clergé, ou Le Christianisme primitif vengé des
entreprises et des excès de nos Prêtres modernes.  Traduit de
l'Anglois à Londres (Amsterdam) MDCCLXVII (2 vols. 8vo,
pp. 2 + 10 + 240).
B. M. pp. 54.

1767.  De l'imposture sacerdotale, ou Recueil de Pièces sur le Clergé.
Traduites de l'Anglois. Londres (Amsterdam) MDCCLXVII.
(12mo, pp. 144.)
B. N., D2 8368 (7).

Contains, Tableau fidèle des papes.
Traduit d'une Brochure
Anglaise
de M. Davisson, Publie sous le titre de
a true picture
of Popery
, pp. 1-35.

De l'insolence pontificale, ou des Prétentions ridicules du
Pape et des Flatteurs de la Cour de Rome.
Extrait de la
Profession de Foi du célèbre Giannone
, par. M. Davisson, pp. 36-54.

Sermon.  Sur les fourberies et les impostures du Clergé
Romain,
Traduit de l'Anglois sur une Brochure publiée à
Londres en 1735
par M. Bourn Birmingham, Sous le titre de

Popery a Craft
, pp. 55-84.

Le Prêtrianisme opposé au Christianisme.  Ou la Religion
des Prêtres comparée à celle de Jésus-Christ, ou examen de la
différence qui se trouve entre les Apôtres et les Membres du
Clergé moderne.
Publié en Anglois en 1720 sous le titre de

Priestanity.  Or a View of the disparity between the Apostles
and the Modern Clergy, pp. 85-108.

Des Dangers de l'Eglise,
Traduit de Anglois sur une Brochure
Publiée eu 1719
.  Par M., Thomas Gordon, Sous le titre
d'
Apology for the danger of the Church
, etc., pp. 109-128.

Le Simbole d'un Laïque, ou Profession de Foi d'un homme
désintéressé.  Traduit de l'Anglois de M. Gordon, Sur une
brochure publiée en 1720.  Sous le titre de
the creed of an
independent Whig
, pp. 129-144.

—Ibid.  Published under title De La Monstruosité pontificale, ou
Tableau fidèle des Papes.
Traduit de l'Anglois
Londres
MDCCLXXII.  (16vo, pp. 55.)
B. N., H. 19859.

1768.  Examen des Prophéties qui servent de fondement à la religion
chrétienne, avec un Essai de critique sur les Prophètes et les
Prophéties en général.  Ouvrages traduits de l'Anglois.
Londres MDCCLXVIII.  (8vo, pp. 234.)
B. N., D2 5190.
B. M. 4017 de 18.

Contains, Discours sur les fondements de la religion chrétienne, pp. 1-111.

Extrait De l'Ouvrage qui a pour titre: Examen du Septème de ceux
qui prétendent que les Prophéties se sont accomplies à la lettre.
The Scheme of literal Prophecy considered, etc., 1727. (8vo, pp. 118-234.)

1768.  David, ou l'Histoire de l'homme selon le coeur de Dieu, ouvrage
traduit de l'Anglois.  Saül, et David, tragédie en 5 actes d'après
l'Anglois.... (Londres, 1768, 8vo.)
B. N. 3 ex. LD2 5194, Hz 1542, et Rès Z. Beuchot 798 (2).
B. M. 4014 a 67 (1).

1768.  Les Prêtres démasqués, ou des iniquités du clergé chrétien.
Ouvrage traduit de l'Anglois.  Londres.  MDCCLXVIII.
(16vo, pp. 180.)
B. N., D2 4639.
B. M. 4017 de 29.

1768.  Lettres philosophiques, sur l'origine des Préjugés, du Dogme de
l'Immortalité de l'Ame, de l'Idolâtrie et de la Superstition; sur
le Système de Spinoza et sur l'origine du mouvement dans la
matière.  Traduites de l'Anglois de J. Toland.

Opinionum commenta delet dies, naturae judicia confirmat.
Cicero, de Nat. Deor. lib. II.  A Londres (Amsterdam). 1768.
MDCCLXVIII. (8vo, pp. 267.)
B. N., D2 5203.
B. M. 4015 de 48.

Containing, Préface ou Lettre à un ami, en lui envoyant les
Dissertations suivantes, dans laquelle l'Auteur rend compte des
motifs qui les ont fait écrire. (pp. 12-26.)

Première Lettre.  De L'origine et de la Force de ces Préjugés.
(pp. 27-44.)

Seconde Lettre.  Histoire du dogme de l'Immortalité de
l'Ame Chez les Payens. (pp. 45-93.)

Troisième Lettre.  Sur l'origine de l'Idolâtrie et sur les
fondements de la Religion Payenne. (pp. 94-152.)

Quartrième Lettre.  A un Gentilhomme Hollandois pour lui
prouver que le système de Spinoza est dépourvu de fondements
et pèche dans ses principes. (pp. 154-186.)

Cinquième Lettre.  Dans laquelle on prouve que le mouvement
est essentiel à la Matière; en réponse à quelques remarques
qui ont été faites à l'Auteur au sujet de sa réfutation du
Système de Spinoza.

Nunc quae mobilitas fit reddita Materiaë Corporibus paucis
licet hinc cognoscere, Memmi.  Lucret., lib. II, vers 142.
(pp. 187-267.)

1768.  Théologie portative, ou Dictionnaire Abrégé de la Religion
Chrétienne.  Par Mr. l'Abbé Bernier, Licencié en Théologie.

Audite hoc Sacerdotes, et attendite Domus Israël, et Domus
Regis auscultate; quia vobis Judicium est, quoniam Laquens
facti estis Speculationi et rete expansum super Thabor. Osée,
Chap. V, Vers. I.  Londres (Amsterdam), MDCCLXVIII (1767),
(12mo, pp. 243).
B. N., D2 14334.
B. M. 703 a 25.

—Ibid. Londres (Suisse), 1768.

—Ibid.  A Rome, MDCCLXXV (8vo, pp. 213).
B. N., D2 8370.

—Ibid.  Augmentée d'un Volume.  A Rome, avec permission et privilège
du Conclave.  (2 vols., 12mo (1776).)
B. N., D2 8371.

—Ibid.  Under title.  Manuel Théologique, en form de Dictionnaire.
Ouvrage très utile aux personnes des deux sexes pour le salut de leurs
âmes, par l'abbé Bernier etc.  Rome, 1785 Au Vatican de l'Imprimerie du
Conclave. (2 vols., 8vo.)

—Ibid.  1802.

1768.  Le Militaire philosophe, ou Difficultés sur la Religion,
proposées au R. P. Malebranche, Prêtre de l'Oratoire.  Par un ancien
Officier.  Londres (Amsterdam) MDCCLXVIII.  (8vo, pp. 193.)
C. U. 201 N 14.

—Ibid.  1770 (8vo).
B. M. 4015 bb 32.

—Ibid.  1776 (8vo).
B. M. 4015 de 34.
(Last chapter by d'Holbach.)

1768.  La Contagion sacrée, ou Histoire Naturelle de la Superstition.
Ouvrage traduit de l'Anglois.
Prima mali labes
.  Londres
(Amsterdam), MDCCLXVII. (2 vols. in 1, 8vo.)
B. N., D2 5195.
C. U. 194 H 69 P.

—Ibid.  Avec des notes relatives aux Circonstances.  Nouvelle
Edition.  A Paris, de l'Imprimerie de Lemaire, rue d'Enfer no. 141,
An 5 de la Republique (1797).  (2 vols. in 1, 8vo, pp. 179-190.)
U. T. S. 441
B. H. 723 C.

—El Contagion sagrado, ó Historia natural de la supersticion.
Paris, Rodriguez, 1822.  (2 vols., 8vo.)  (Quérard.)

1768.  Lettres à Eugénia, ou Préservatif contre les préjugés... arctis
Relligionum animos nodis exsolvere pergo.—Lucret. de rer. nat., Lib. 4,
v. 6-7.  A Londres, MDCCLXVIII. (2 vols., 8vo, pp. xii + 188 + 167)

—Ibid.  Oeuvres de Nicolas Fréret, T. I, pp. 1-359. Paris, 1792.  (8vo.)
H. U. 19-30, vol. I.

—Cartas á Eugenia, por Mr. Freret.  Paris.  Imprenta de F. Didot,
1810 (8vo, pp. viii + 358).
B. M. 4015 de 23.

—Letters to Eugenia on the absurd, contradictory and demoralizing
Dogmas and Mysteries of the Christian Religion.  Now first translated
from the French of Fréret, but supposed to be written by Baron Holbach,
author of the System of Nature, Christianity Unveiled, Common Sense,
Universal Morality, Natural Morality.  R. Carlile, The Deist, etc.,
Vol. II, 1819, etc.  (8vo, pp. 185.)
B. M. 4015 f. 11.

—Cartas à Eugenia.  Madrid, 1823, por Don Benito Cano.  2v.
N. Y., Z F F.

—Letters to Eugenia on the absurd, contradictory and demoralizing
Dogmas and Mysteries of the Christian Religion, by Baron d'Holbach,
New York, published by H. M. Dubecquet, No. 190
William Street, 1833.  (12vo, pp. 236.)
U. T. S. 326 B.

—Letters to Eugenia etc., translated by Anthony C. Middleton,
M.D. Boston, Josiah P. Mendum, 1857.
B. P. 5484 2.

1769.  De la Cruauté religieuse.  A Londres, MDCCLXIX. (16vo, pp. 228.)
B. N., D2 8365.
B. M. 4017 aa 25.
U. T. S. H 723.

—Ibid.  Amsterdam, 1775, 12vo.

1769.  Le la Tolérance dans la Religion, ou de la Liberté de conscience
par Crellius.  L'Intolérance convaincue de crime et de folie.
Ouvrage traduit de l'Anglois, Londres, MDCCLXIX.  (12vo, pp. 174.)

Contains De la Tolérance dans la religion, ou de la liberté de
conscience (Crellius).

De l'Intolérance dans la Religion (d'Holbach), p. 88.

Enfer détruit ou Examen Raisonné du Dogme de l'Eternité
des peines.  Ouvrages, tr. de L'Anglois à Londres, MDCCLXIX, p. 1.

Dissertation critique sur les tourmens de l'enfer.  Traduit de
L'Anglois, p. 96 (by Whitefoot).
B. N., D2 5154.

—Ibid.  Hell destroyed!  Now first translated from the French of
d'Alembert without any mutilations.  London.  Printed and published
by J. W. Trust, 126 Newgate St., 1823. (8vo, pp. 47.)
(Followed by Whitefoot's Torments of Hell, "now first translated
from the French," to p. 83.)

1770.  L'Esprit du judaïsme, ou Examen raisonné de la Loi de Moyse,
et de son influence sur la Religion Chrétienne.
Atque utinam nunquam Judaea sub acta fuisset Pompeii
bellis, imperioque Titi.
Latius excisae pestes contagie serpunt, Victoresques suos
natio victa premit.  Rutilius, Itinerar.  Lia I, vs. 394, Londres,
MDCCLXX. (12mo, pp. xxii + 201.)
B. N., D2 5191.
B. M. 4034 bb 38.

1770.  Examen critique de la vie et des ouvrages de saint Paul, Avec
une dissertation sur saint Pierre par feu M. Boulanger.
Londres, 1770 (8vo), (by Peter Annet).
B. N. 3ex. [D2 5349 (2) 8367 et H. 7551].
B. M. 48o8 aa 7.

—Ibid.  Nouvelle Edition, Londres, 1790. (8vo.)
B. N. [H 13032].

—Critical Examination of the Life of St. Paul.  Translated from
the French of Boulanger.  "Paul, thou art beside thyself, much
learning doth make thee mad."  Acts, chap, 26, v 24.  London.
Printed and published by R. Carlile, 5 Water Lane, Fleet St.,
1823.  (8vo, pp. 72.)
B. M. 4372 h g (4).

1770.  Histoire critique de Jésus-Christ, ou Analyse raisonnée
des Evangiles.  Ecce Homo.
Pudet me humani generis, cuius mentis et aures talia ferre
potuerunt.  S. Augustin. (No date [Amsterdam, 1770?], 16mo,
pp. viii + xxxii + 298.)
B. N, 7,549.
B. M. 4017 a. 45.
U. T. S. 465 H 723.

—Ecce Homo! or a critical enquiry into the history of Jesus Christ,
being a Rational Analysis of the Gospels.  Edinburg, 1799.

—Ecce Homo! or a critical enquiry into the history of Jesus Christ,
being a Rational Analysis of the Gospels.  (2d ed.) London, 1813.
Printed, published and sold by D. I. Easton.
G. T. S. 232 G. H. 69.

—Historia critica de Jesus Christo, o anáilisis razonado le los
evangelios.  Traducida del Frances, por el P. F. de T, ex-jesuita.
Ecce Homo.  Vel. aqui el hombre.  S. Juan, cap. 19,

v. 5. Londres, en la imprenta de Davidson, 1822.  (2 vols., 12mo,
pp. xiii + 200 + 280.)

Contains Advertencia del Traductor.

1770.  Tableau des Saints, ou examen de l'esprit, de la conduite, des
maximes, et du mérite des personnages que le Christianisme révère et
propose pour modèles.
Hoc admonere simplices etiam potest,
Opinione alterius ne quid ponderent;
Ambitio namque diffidens mortalium
Aut gratiae subscribunt, aut odio suo;
Erit ille nottis, quem per te cognoveris.
Phaed., Lib. III, Fab. 10.

A Londres, MDCCLXX.  (2 Vols., 12mo, pp. xxviii + 280 + 286.)
B. N., H 7,552.
B. M. 4,824 a a a a 27.

1770.  Recueil philosophique, ou Mélange de Pièces sur la Religion et
la Morale.  Par différents Auteurs (ed. Naigeon).

Ovando enim ista observans quieto et libero animo esse poteris,
ut ad vem gerendam non Superstionem habeas, sed Rationem ducem.
—Cicero, de Divinat., Lib. 2.  Londres, MDCCLXX.  (2 vols., 12mo.)
B. N., D2 5309.

Vol. I, p. 129 (VI), Réflexions sur les Craintes de la Mort.

Vol. II, p. 34 (IX), Dissertation sur l'Immortalité de l'âme.
Traduite de l'Anglais.

Vol. II, p. 50 (X), Dissertation sur le suicide.  Traduit de l'Anglais.

Vol. II, p. 70 (XI).  Problème important.  La Religion est
elle nécessaire à la Morale et utile à la Politique?  Par M.
Mirabaud.

Vol. II, p. 125 (XIII).  Extrait d'un Ecrit Anglais qui a pour
titre
le christianisme aussi ancien que le monde
.

1770.  Essai sur les préjugés, ou, De l'influence des opinions sur les
moeurs et sur le bonheur des hommes.  Ouvrage contenant l'apologie
de la philosophie par Mr. D. M.

Assiduite quotidiana et consuetudine oculorum assuescunt animi,
neque admirantur, neque requerunt rationes earum rerum quas vident.
—Cicero de Nat. Deorum, Lib. II.  Londres, MDCCLXX. (8vo, pp. 394.)
B. N., R 20 553.
B. M. 8463 b b b 16.
H. U. Phil. 264840.

—Ibid.  Paris Desray an 1 (1792).  (2 vols., 8vo, Cortina.)

—Ibid.  Oeuvres de Dumarsais. Paris, Pougin, 1797.  T. VI
8vo, pp. 43-352.
B. N., Z 23766-72.
H. U. 9578 13 VI.

—Ibid.  Paris, Niogret, 1822.
C. U. 3045 D 89.

—Essayo sobre las preocupaciones ó del influjo de las opiniones
en las costumbres y felicidad de las hombres.  Por Dumarsais.
En Paris.  Hallase en la casa de Rosa, Librero.  Gran pacio del
Palacio Real.  1823.  (8vo, pp. 391.)
B. N., R 34,366.

—(Bibliothèque Nationale. Collection des meilleurs auteurs
anciens et modernes.)  Dumarsais.  Essai sur les Préjugés.
Précédé d'un Discours préliminaire et d'un Précis historique de
la vie de Dumarsais par le citoyen Daube.  Paris.  Librairie de
la Bibliothèque Nationale.  Rue de Richelieu 8, Près le
Théâtre Francais. Ci-devant rue de Valois 1886.  Tous droits
resérvés (25 centimes).
B. N. 8vo R. 15952.

1770.  Système de la Nature, ou Des Loix du Monde Physique et du
Monde Moral. Par M. Mirabaud, Secrétaire Perpétuel et l'un
des Quarante de l'Académie Française.

Natura rerum vis atque majestas in omnibus momentis fide
caret, si quis modè partes ejus, ac non totam complectatur
animo.—Plin. Hist., Lib. VII. Londres, MDCCLXX.
(2 vols., 8vo, pp. 370 + 412.)
B. M. 4017 f 32
U. T. S. 321 H 7235.

—Ibid, Londres, MDCCLXX. (Second edition, 2 Vols., in 8vo,
pp. 366 + 408.)
B. M., D2 5166-5167.
Contains Discours préliminaire de l'Auteur (pp. 16).  Avis de
l'Editeur. Préface de l'Auteur, etc.

—Abrégé du Code de la Nature, par M., Mirabaud, Secrétaire
Perpétuel et l'un des Quarante de l'Académe Française.
Londres. MDCCLXX. (8vo, 16 p.)

—Ibid.  Nouvelle Édition augmentée par l'auteur à laquelle on a
joint plusieurs pièces des meilleurs Auteurs relatives aux
mêmes objets, etc.  (Ed. Naigeon.)  Londres, MDCCLXXI.
(2 vols. in 8vo, pp. 397-500.)

Contains Vol. II, p. 455, Réquisitoire, sur lequel est intervenu
l'Arrêt du Parlement du 18 Août 1770 qui condamne à
être brûlés, differens Livres ou Brochures, intitulés.

1. La Contagion sacrée...
2. Dieu et les hommes.
3. Discours sur les Miracles.
4. Examen des Apologistes.
5. Examen impartial des principales religions du Monde.
6. Christianisme dévoilé.
7. Système de la Nature.
Imprimé par ordre exprès du Roi.
B. M., D2 5168.
Reprinted in 1774, 1775-1777.

—Ibid.  Nouvelle Édition.  Londres,  1780, 8vo, pp. xii + 371 + 464.

Contains
Sentiments de Voltaire sur le Système de la Nature
.
Séguier's
Réquisitoire
and Holbach's
Réplique
.
B. M. 528 1. 2526.

—Ibid.  Nouvelle Édition. Londres, 1781. (2 vols. in 8vo, pp. 316 + 385.)
B. N., D2 516g.

—Ibid.  German Translation, Schreiter.  Leipzig and Frankfort, 1783.

—Ibid.  Paris, An. III (1795).  (3 vols. in 8vo.)

—The System of Nature.  Translated from the French of M. Mirabeau.
London, 1797.  Printed for G. Kearsley.
L. of C. B 2053-S G E-12 11-15959.

—Ibid.  Philadelphia, 1808.  Pub. by R. Benson.
L. of C., B 2053-S G 3 E 13-11-1595 G.

—Nature and Her Laws, as Applicable to the Happiness of Man Living
in Society, Contrasted with Superstitions and Imaginary Systems.
Done from the French of M. Mirabaud.  London in 1816.  W. Hodgson.
C. U. 194 H 69 S.
L. of C., B 2053 S g 3 E 14-11.15960

—Système de la Nature,... Avec notes de Diderot.  Nouvelle édition.
Ed. Lemonnier, Paris, 1820.  B. Roquefort.  (2 vols. in 8vo.)

—The System of Nature, or the Laws of the Moral and Physical World.
Translated by Samuel Wilkinson from the original French of M. Mirabaud.
Printed and published by Thomas Davison. (Vols. 2, 3, R. Helder, 1821.)
London, 1820.
3 vols in 8vo, pp. xi + 348-311-273.)  Contains Life of Mirabaud,
Vol. 3, pp. 263-273.
B. M. 804. de 20?
U. S. 321. H 723.

—Système de la Nature... par le Baron d'Holbach.
Nouvelle Edition avec des notes et des corrections par Diderot.
Paris, Etienne Ledoux, 1821.  (2 vols. in 8vo, pp. xvi + 507 +502.)
B. N., D2 5170.
B. M. 124 9 i. 26.
C. U, 194 H 69. R.
N. Y., Y C O.
Contains extract of Grimm's Literary Correspondence, Aug. 10, 1789.

—Système de la Nature, ou des lois du monde physique et du monde
morale, par le Baron d'Holbach.  Nouvelle Édition avec des notes et
des corrections par Diderot etc.  Paris, Domère, 1822. (4 vols. in 12mo.)
Contains Avis de Naigion.  Avertissement du nouvel éditeur, pp. 11-29.
Pièces diverses, pp. 30-46.

—Sistema de la Naturaleza, con notas y correcciones por Diderot;
trad, al castell. por F. A. F....  Paris, Masson hijo, 1822,
4 vols. in 18mo.
B. N., D2 5172.

—Selections from Mirabaud's System of Nature in the Law of Reason, etc.
London, 1831.  (16mo, pp. 231.)
Selections from Bon-Sens, pp. 39-81, 82-112.
B. M. 1387. b. 3.

—Nature and her Laws, as Applicable to the Happiness of Man Living
in Society, Contrasted with Superstitions and Imaginary Systems.
From the French of M. de Mirabaud.  James Watson.  London, 1834.
(2 vols. in 12mo, pp. xxiv + 287 + 320.)
Sold for 7 s. 6 d.
B. M. 1133 b 29.
Contains
1. Publisher's Preface (by James Watson).
2. Preface.
3. A short account of the life and writings of the Baron d'Holbach
(by Julian Hibbert).

—System of Nature, new and improved edition with notes by Diderot.
Translated by H. D. Robinson.  New York, 1835, published by Matsell.
N. Y., Y B X.

—System of Nature, or the laws of the moral and physical world,
from the French of M. Mirabaud.  (New edition, pp. 8 + 520.)
London, 1840.
C. U. 194 H 69. R 1.

—System der Natur von Mirabaud. Deutsch bearbeitet und mit Anmerkungen
versehen von Biedermann.  Leipzig, 1841.
(8vo, pp. 604.) Georg. Wigands Verlag.
T. S. (Andover 23).

—System der Natur....  Translated by Schreiter, 1843.

—System of Nature, new and improved edition with notes by Diderot,
translated by H. D. Robinson.  Stereotype edition, Boston, 1848,
in 8vo.  Published by J. P. Mendum.
B. P. 00.80-6105.5.

—System der Natur..., tr. Allhusen, 1851.

—System of Nature..., tr. Robinson, Boston. 1853. Published by
J. P. Mendum.
B. P. 3600.48.
N. Y., Y C O 11-15957/
L. of C., B. 2053. S g 3 E 6.

—The System of Nature; or, The Laws of the Moral and Physical World,
by the baron d'Holbach, originally attributed to M. de Mirabaud with
memoir by Charles Bradlaugh.  Reprinted verbatim from the best edition.
London.  Published by E. Truelove, 256 High Holborn, 1884. In 8vo,
pp. xi + 520.
B. M. 8467 a a 33.

1772.  Le Bon-sens ou idées naturelles opposées aux idées surnaturelles.
Detexit quo doloso vaticinandi furore Sacerdotes
mysteria, illis saepe ignota, audacter publicant.
—Petronii Satyricon.
Londres (Amsterdam) 1772, 8vo, pp. xii - 515.
U. T. S. 321 H. 7236.

—Ibid.  Le Bon-sens du curé J. Meslier d'Etrépigny.  Rome
(Paris), 1791, 8vo.

—Ibid.  Another edition, 1772, 8vo, pp. x-250.

—Ibid. Londres (Amsterdam), 1774, 16mo, pp. xii-302.
U. T. S. 321 H. 7236.

—Ibid.  Le Bon-sens du curé Meslier d'Etrépigny.  Rome
(Paris), 1791, 8vo.

—Ibid.  Nouvelle édition, suivi du Testament du curé Meslier.
Paris, Bouqueton, l'an I de la République.  (1792, 2 vols., 12mo.)

—Ibid.  Le Bon-sens du curé J. Meslier suivi de son Testament.
Paris, 1802, 8vo, pp. 380.
C. U. 843 M 56 D 1.

—Ibid.  Paris, Palais des Thermes de Julien, 1802 (1822), 12mo.

—Ibid.  Paris, Guillaumin, 1830, 12mo.

—Ibid.  Paris, Guillaumin, 1831, 12mo.

—Common Sense, H. D. Robinson, New York, circa 1833.

—Le Bon-sens du curé J. Meslier, etc.  Paris, Bacquenois, 1833, 12mo.

—Ibid.  Paris, Guillaumin, 1834, 12mo.

—Ibid.  Nancy, Haener, 1834, 12mo.

—Der gesunde Menschenverstand.  Baltimore, 1857.

—Ibid.  Baltimore, 1859 (second edition), H. U.

—Ibid.  Tr. into German by Miss Anna Knoop. circa 1878.

—Ibid., under title, Superstition in all ages; by Jean Meslier...
who left to the world the following pages entitled
Common Sense
.
Translated from the French original by Miss Anna Knoop, New York, 1878.
C. U. L. 211 M.

—Ibid.  New York, Peter Eckler, 1890, pp. vi-339.
U. T. S.

—Le Bon-sens du curé J. Meslier, Paris, Palais des Thermes de
Julien, 1802.  (Garnier Frères, 1905.)
H. U.

—Superstition in all ages, etc.  Translated from the French original
by Miss Anna Knoop; arranged for publication in its present form and
manner with new title-page and preface by Dr. L. W. deLaurence.  Same
to now serve as "text-book" number five for "the congress of ancient,
divine, mental and Christian masters," Chicago, Ill., DeLaurence,
Scott & Co., 1910, pp. xx-17-339.
L. of C. 1910, A 26880.  L. W. de Laurence.

1772.  De la nature humaine, ou Exposition des facultés, des actions
et des passions de l'âme, et de leurs causes, déduites d'après des
principes philosophiques qui ne sont communément ni reçus ni connus.
Par Thomas Hobbes; Ouvrage traduit de l'Anglois.
Londres (Amsterdam), MDCCLXXII. (8vo, pp. iv + 171.)
B. M. 8403 c c 15.
(Bookmark of Richard Chase Sidney.)

—Ibid.  Oeuvres philosophiques et politiques de Thomas Hobbes.
1787. (2 vols., 8vo.)  (Tr. by Sorbière and Holbach.)
B. M. 528 2223.

1773.  Recherches sur les Miracles.  Par l'auteur de l'Examen des
Apologistes de la Religion Chrétienne.  A Genus attonitum.
Ovid.  Metam.  Londres, MDCCLXXIII.  (8vo. pp. 172.)
B. M. 4015 de 44.

1773.  La politique naturelle, ou, Discours sur les vrais principes du
Governement.  Par un ancien Magistrat.
Vis consili expers mole ruit suâ. —Horat., Ode IV, lib. III, vers. 65
Londres (Amsterdam), MDCCLXXIII. (2 vols. in 8vo.
pp. vii + 232 + 280.)
B. M. 521 h. 8.
U. S. 269 E. H. 723 (ex libris Baron Carl de Vinck, Ministre de Belgique).
C. U. 320 H. 691.
(Ascribed also to C. G. Lamoignon de Malesherbes.)

—Ibid.  Londres, 1774.  (2 vols, in 8vo.)

—La Politica Naturale: discorsi sui veri principi di governo.
Traduzione di Luigi Salvadori.  Mantova, Balbiani e Donelli,
'78-80.  (2 vols., 16 (L. 5).)

1773.  Système Social, ou principes naturels de la moral et de la
politique, avec un examen de l'influence du governement sur les moeurs.
Discenda virtus est, ars est bonum fieri; erras si existimas
vitia nobiscum nasci; supervenerunt in gesta sunt. —Seneca, Epis. 124.
Londres, MDCCLXXIII.  (8vo, pp. 218 + 174 + 166, in three parts.)
B. N., R 20275.76 E 1919.
C. U. 320. H. 69.
N. Y. SC.

—Ibid.  Par l'auteur du Système de la Nature, Londres, 1774.
(3 vols., 8vo, pp. 208 + 174 + 167.)
B. M. 8403. h 23.

—Ibid.  A Paris, Servière, 1795.  (2 vols., 8vo, pp. 472 + 403.)
B. M. 8404 dc. 25 (ex libris J. Gomez de la Cortina et amicorum.
Fallitur hora legendo).

—Ibid....par le baron d'Holbach.  Paris, Niogret, 1882.
(2 vols, 8vo.)
C. U. 320.  H. 690.

1774.  Agriculture réduit à ses vrais principes par Jean Gottschalk
Wallerius, Paris, Lacombe, 1774. (12mo.)

1776.  Ethocratie ou le gouvernement fondé sur la morale.
Constituit bonos mores civitati princips. —Seneca, de Clementia, Lib. I.
A Amsterdam.  Chez Marc Michel Rey.  MDCCLXXVI.
(8vo, pp. 10 + 293 + 2.)
C. U. 320. 1 H 69.

1776.  Morale universelle, ou Les devoirs de l'homme fondés sur la nature.
Naturâ duce utendum est: hanc ratio observe, hanc
consulit, idem est ergo beatè vivere et secundum naturam. —Seneca
de Vita beata, Cap. VIII init.
A Amsterdam.  Chez Marc-Michel Rey, MDCCLXXVI.
(3 vols., 8vo, pp. 416 + 334 + 364.)
B. N., R 18596-7-8..
B. M. 231 h-3

—Ibid.  A Tours, Chez Letourmy le jeune et compagnie, A Angers,
De l'Imprimerie de Jahyer et Geslin.  Imprimeurs-Libraries, rue
Milton, 1792. (8vo.)
B. M. 527.  K. 1-3H.
U. Phil. 2648.50.

—Ibid.  Paris, Smith (Rey et Gravier), an 6, 1798. (3 vols., 8vo.)

—Ibid.  Par le baron d'Holbach. Paris, Masson et fils.  Libraires,
Rue de Tournon, No. 6, 1820.  (3 vols., 8vo, pp. xxxii + 314 + 266 + 300.)
C. U. 170 H 2.
B. M. 8411 k 7.

—Moral universal ódeberes del hombre, fundatos en su naturaleza.
Obra escrita en francès por el baron de Holbach y traducida al
castellano por D. Manuel Diaz Moreno Zaragoza, 1838, imp. de
M. Heras. (3 vols., 8vo.)

—La moral universel por el baron de Holbach.  Madrid, 1840,
imp. y lib. del Establecimiento Central. (2 vols. in 4to.)

—Ibid.  Translated into German by Johann Umminger.  Leipzig, 1898.

1790.  Elements de la morale universelle, ou catechisme de la nature.
Par feu M., le Baron d'Holbach des académies de Pétersbourg de Manheim
et de Berlin.
Numquam aliud natura aliud sapientia dicit.—Juvenal.
A Paris.  Chez G. de Bure.  Rue Serpente, No. 6, MDCCXC.
(24vo, pp. vi + 208.)
B. M. 528. a. 27.
B. P., G. 3537.14.

—Elementos de la moral universel, ó catecismo de la naturaleza,
por el baron de Holbach.  Madrid, 1820, imp. que fué de Fuentenebro,
lib de Sanchez en 8vo past.

—Principios de moral, ó manuel de los deberes del hombre fundados
en la naturaleza.  Obra póstuma de baron de Holbach.  Traducida al
espanol por D. L. M. G. adoptada en su mayor parte de la escuelas
de primera educacion para instruccion de los ninos.  Madrid, 1837,
imp. de Ferrer y compania lib de J Sanz.  (In 16mo.)

BIBLIOGRAPHY PART II.

GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY.

Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie.

Avézac-Lavigne, Diderot et la société du Baron d'Holbach.  Paris, 1875.

Bachaumont, Mémoires secrètes.  Paris, 1859.

Barbier, Dictionnaire des ouvrages anonymes et pseudonymes.  Paris, 1822.

Barni, Histoire des idées morales et politiques en France au
dix-huitième siècle.  Paris, 1865.

Barruel, Mémoire pour servir à l'histoire de Jacobinisme.  Hamburg, 1798.

Lettres helviennes.  Hamburg, 1798-1799.

Bartholmess, Histoire philosophique de l'Académie de Prusse.  Paris, 1851.

Bergier, Apologie de la Religion Chrétienne contre l'auteur du

Christianisme dévoilé
.  Paris, 1769.
Examen du matérialisme, ou Réfutation du
Système de la Nature
.
Paris, 1771.

Bibliothèque Nationale, Pièces originales.  1529 d'Holbach.
Manuscrits Français, 15224, 22149 (Col. Anisson).

Boiteau, Mémoires de Mme. d'Epinay.  Paris.

British Museum Manuscript Index, 1876-1881.  Mss. Folios 30867-69, 70, 71.

Brougham, A Discourse of Natural Theology.  London, 1835.

Brunel, Les philosophes et l'Académie Française.  Paris.

Brunet, Manuel du Librairie.  Paris, 1865.

Bucherberger, Kirche-Lexikon.

Burton, Life and Correspondence of David Hume.  Edinburgh, 1846.
Letters of Prominent Persons addressed to David Hume.
Edinburgh and London, 1849.

Buzonnière, Observations sur un ouvrage intitulé le
Système de la Nature
.
Paris, 1776.

Camuset, Principes contre l'incrédulité, à l'occasion du

Système de la Nature
.  Paris, 1771.

Carlile, The Deist.  London, 1819.

Carlyle, Rev. Dr. Alexander, Autobiography, Ed. Burton.  London, 1861.

Castillon, Observations sur un livre intitulé,
Système de la Nature
.
Berlin, 1771.

Catalogue des manuscrits français dans les bibliothèques départementales.

Chaudon, Dictionnaire anti-philosophique etc.  Avignon, 1767.

Claudon, Le Baron d'Holbach.  Paris, 1835.

Collignon, Diderot.  Paris, 1907.

Critica, 1903-1904

Damiron, Mémoires pour servir à l'histoire de la philosophie au 18me
siècle.  Paris, 1858.
Etudes sur la philosophie de d'Holbach.  Mémoires de l'Académie
des sciences morales et politiques, Vol. IV du Compte rendu des Séances.

Debure, Catalogue des livres de la bibliothèque du feu
M. le baron d'Holbach.  Paris, 1789.

Delisle de Sales, Philosophie de la Nature.  Paris, 1770.
Mémoire en faveur de Dieu.  Paris, 1802.

Delvaille, Essai sur l'histoire de l'idée de progrès.  Paris, 1910.

Diderot, Oeuvres, ed Brière.  Paris, 1822.
Mémoires, correspondance, et ouvrages inédits de Diderot.  Paris, 1830.
Oeuvres complètes de Diderot, ed. Assézat et Tourneux.  Paris, 1877.

Douarche, Les tribunaux civils de Paris pendant la Révolution.
Paris, 1905-1907.

Dupont de Nemours, Philosophie de l'univers.  Paris, l'An IV (1796).

Duprat, Les Encyclopédists.  Paris, 1865.

Duvoisin, L'Autorité des livres du Nouveau Testament contre les
incrédules.  Paris, 1775.
L'Autorité des livres de Moïse, etc.  Paris, 1778.

Eclaircissements relatifs à la publication des
Confessions
de
Rousseau, avec des réflexions sur les apologies de MM. Cerutti et
d'Holbach etc.  Paris, 1789.

Encyclopédie des sciences religieuses.

Epinay, Mme. d' Mémoires et correspondance.  Paris, 1818.

Fabre, Les Pères de la Révolution.  De Bayle à Condorcet.  Paris, 1910.

Fabry d'Autrey, Antiquité justifiée etc.  Paris, 1766.

Fangouse, La religion prouvée aux incrédules, etc.  Paris, 1780.

Ferraz, Histoire de la philosophie pendant la Révolution.  Paris, 1889.
Histoire de la philosophie en France au 19me siecle.  Paris, 1882.

Fitzmaurice, Life of William, Earl of Shelburne.  London, 1875.

Fortnightly Review, Vol. XXVIII, 1877.

Frederick II, King of Prussia, Examen critique du livre
intitulé
Système de la Nature
.  Berlin, 1770.

Fréret, Lettre de Thrasybule à Leucippe.

Funck, Les sophistes français et la révolution européenne.  Paris, 1905.

Galiani, Lettres, ed. E. Asse.  Paris.
Correspondance, ed. Perey et Maugras.  Paris, 1910.

Garrick.  Private Correspondence.  London, 1833.

Gasté, Diderot et le curé de Montchauvet, etc.  Paris, 1898.

Garat, Mémoires historiques sur le 18me siècle.  Paris, 1821.

Gazette de France, Aug. 10, 1754.  June 1, 1781.

Genlis, Mme de, Les dîners du Baron d'Holbach, etc.  Paris, 1822.

Gibbon, Autobiography, ed. Murray.  London, 1897.
Private Letters, 1753-1794, ed Prothero.  London, 1897.

Grande Encyclopédie.

Grimm, Correspondance littéraire et critique.  Paris, 1878.
Nouveaux mémoires secrets et inédits, etc.  Paris, 1834.

Hammard, Mme. de Genlis.  New York, 1913.

Hancock, The French Revolution and the English Poets.  New York, 1899.

Hedgcock, David Garrick et ses amis français.  Paris, 1911.

Helvetius, Le vrai sens du
Système de la Nature
.  Paris, 1774.

Herzog, Real-Encyklopedie.

Hibbert, A Short Sketch of the Life and the Writings
of Baron d'Holbach.  London, 1834.

Holland, Réflexions philosophiques sur la

Système de la Nature
.  Paris, 1822.

Hume, Private Correspondence, etc.  London, 1820.

L'Impie démasqué, etc.  London, 1773.

Independent Whig.  London, 1720.

Jal, Dictionnaire critique de biographie et d'histoire.  Paris, 1867.

Journal de lecture, Vol. I, 1775.

Journal de Paris, 1789.

Laharpe, Cours de littérature.  Paris, 1821.
Philosophie du 18me siècle.  Paris, 1818.

Lagrange, Oeuvres complètes de Senèque.  Paris, 1778.

Landry, Beccaria, Scritte e lettre inediti.  1910.

Lange, History of Materialism.  Boston, 1877.

Lanson, Manuel bibliographique de la littérature
française moderne 1500-1900.  Paris, 1911.

Lenel, Un homme de lettres au 18me siècle, Marmontel.  Paris, 1902.

Lerminier, De l'influence de la philosophie au 18 siècle.  Paris, 1833.

Lévy-Bruhle, History of Modern Philosophy in France.  Chicago, 1899.

Lowell, The Eve of the French Revolution.  Boston, 1892.

Magasin encyclopédique.  Mai, 1805.

Mangold, von, Unumstossliche Widerlegung des Materialismus
gegen den Verfasser des Systèms der Natur.  Augsburg, 1803.

Maréchal, Dictionnaire des athées (Paris). An. VIII (1800).

Marmontel, Mémoires, ed. Tourneur.  Paris, 1891.

Martin, Histoire de France, 1748-1789.  4th Ed.

Michaud, Biographie universelle.

Morellet, Mémoires.  Paris, 1821.
Lettres à Lord Shelburne.  Paris, 1898.

Mornet, Les sciences de la nature au 18me siècle.  Paris, 1911.

Myers, Konversations-Lexikon.

Naigeon, Mémoires historiques et philosophiques sur la
vie et les ouvrages de Denis Diderot.  Paris, 1821.

Nouvelle Revue, June, July, 1912.

Paulian, La religion prouvée aux incrédules, etc. Paris, 1780.

Paulian, Le véritable système de la nature.  Paris, 1788.

Payrard, De la nature et de ses lois.  Paris, 1773.

Perey et Maugras, Dernières années de Mme. d'Epinay.  Paris, 1883.

Picavet, Les Idéologues.  Paris, 1891.

Plechanow, Beiträge zur Geschichte des Materialismus.  Stuttgart, 1896.

Quérard, La France littéraire.  Paris, 1833.
Superchéries littéraires dévoilées.  Paris, 1870.
Littérature française contemporaine (Continuation).

Rabbe, Biographie.

Répertoire de la Gazette de France.

Revue Bleue, June, 1912.

Revue de l'histoire littéraire de la France, Jan.-June, 1912.

Revue de synthèse historique, 1903, Vol. I.

Revue des Cours et Conférences, 1908-1910.

Revue des deux mondes, Apr., 1886; June, 1912.

Revue encyclopédique, Vol. XVI.

Rey, Rousseau.  Paris, 1909.

Rietstap, Armorial général.  Gonda, 1884.

Robinet, Le personnel municipale de Paris pendant la Révolution.
Paris, 1890.

Rochfort, L'Esprit révolutionnaire avant la Révolution.  Paris, 1878.

Romilly, Sir S., Memoirs.  London, 1840.

Rosenkrantz, Diderot's Leben und Werke.  Leipzig, 1864.

Rousseau, Oeuvres complètes.  Paris, 1793.

Roustan, Les philosophes et la société française au 18me siècle.
Paris, 1906.

St.-Beuve, Portraits littéraires.  Paris, 1878.
Causeries de lundi.  Paris, 1882.

St.-Martin, Des erreurs et de la vérité.  Edinburgh, 1775.

Soury, Bréviaire de l'histoire de matérialisme.  Paris, 1881.

Stupuy, Chez Diderot, comédie en deux actes, en vers.  Paris, 1868.

Tallentyre, The Friends of Voltaire.  London, 1906.

Villemain, Cours de littérature française.  Paris, 1859.

Voltaire, Oeuvres complètes, ed. Beuchot.  Paris, 1829-40.
Oeuvres complètes, ed. Garnier.  Paris, 1880.

Walpole, H., Letters, ed, Toynbee.  London, 1912.

Weiland, Oberon, tr. Holbach fils.  Paris, 1825.

Wetzer & Welte, Kirchen-lexikon.

Wilkes, Correspondence with his Friends.  London, 1805.
Letters from the year 1774 to 1796, addressed to his daughter.
London, 1805.

Wright, A History of French Literature.  London, 1912.

VITA

Max Pearson Cushing, born in Bangor, Maine, October 27, 1886; Bangor High
School, 1905; A.B. Bowdown College, 1909. Instructor in English, Robert
College, Constantinople, 1909-1911; Graduate Student in History, Columbia
University, 1911-1913; A.M. Columbia, 1912, Instructor in History, Reed
College, Portland, Oregon, 1913.

End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Baron d'Holbach, by Max Pearson Cushing

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BARON D'HOLBACH ***

***** This file should be named 5621-h.htm or 5621-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/6/2/5621/

Produced by David Ross and Richard Farris

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.

*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).

Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License.  You must require such a user to return or
destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.

Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.

Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate

Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.