The Project Gutenberg eBook, Madame de Staël, by Bella Duffy

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States
and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org
.  If you are not
located in the United States, you'll have to check the laws of the
country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Madame de Staël

Famous Women Series

Author: Bella Duffy

Release Date: February 19, 2018  [eBook #56605]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MADAME DE STAëL***

E-text prepared by Clarity

and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team

(
http://www.pgdp.net
)

from page images generously made available by

Internet Archive

(
https://archive.org
)

Note:

Images of the original pages are available through
Internet Archive. See

https://archive.org/details/madamedestal00duff

Famous Women.

MADAME DE STAËL.

Already published
:

George Eliot.
By Miss Blind.

Emily Brontë.
By Miss Robinson.

George Sand.
By Miss Thomas.

Mary Lamb.
By Mrs. Gilchrist.

Margaret Fuller.
By Julia Ward Howe.

Maria Edgeworth.
By Miss Zimmern.

Elizabeth Fry.
By Mrs. E. R. Pitman.

The Countess of Albany.
By Vernon Lee.

Mary Wollstonecraft.
By Mrs. E. R. Pennell.

Harriet Martineau.
By Mrs. F. Fenwick Miller.

Rachel.
By Mrs. Nina H. Kennard.

Madame Roland.
By Mathilde Blind.

Susanna Wesley.
By Eliza Clarke.

Margaret of Angoulême.
By Miss Robinson.

Mrs. Siddons.
By Mrs. Nina H. Kennard.

Madame de Staël.
By Bella Duffy.

MADAME DE STAËL.

BY

BELLA DUFFY.

BOSTON:

ROBERTS BROTHERS.

1887.

Copyright, 1887
,

By Roberts Brothers
.

University Press:

John Wilson and Son, Cambridge.

PREFACE.

Unpublished correspondence—that delight of the
eager biographer—is not to be had in the case of
Madame de Staël, for, as is well known, the De
Broglie family either destroyed or successfully hid
all the papers which might have revealed any facts
not already in possession of the world.

The writer of the present brief memoir has, consequently,
had to fall back upon the following well-known
works:

The
Correspondance
of the Abbé Galiani, of Mme.
Du Deffand, of Rahel Varnhagen, and of Schiller;
the
Memoirs
of Marmontel, of Mme. D’Arblay, of
Mme. de Rémusat, of Mme. d’Abrantè, of Bourrienne,
and of the Comte de Montlosier; Ticknor’s

Letters
; Châteaubriand’s
Mémoires d’Outre Tombe
;
De Goncourt’s
Histoire de la Société Française pendant
la Révolution
, and
Histoire de la Société Française
pendant le Directoire
; Lacretelle’s
Dix Années d’Épreuve
;
Michelet’s
Le Directoire
,
Le Dix-huit Brumaire
,
and
Jusqu’à Waterloo
;
Le Salon de Madame
Necker
, by Vicomte d’Haussonville;
Studies of the
Eighteenth Century in Italy
, by Vernon Lee; Byron’s

Letters
; Benjamin Constant’s
Letters to Mme.
Récamier
;
Coppet and Weimar
;
Les Correspondants
de Joubert
, by Paul Raynal;
Les Causeries du Lundi
,
and other studies by Ste. Beuve; Droz’
Histoire du
Règne de Louis XVI.
; Villemain’s
Cours de Littérature
Française
; the fragments from Constant’s
Journals
,
recently published in the
Revue Internationale
;
Sismondi’s
Journals
and
letters
; and sundry old
articles in the
Revue des Deux Mondes
; besides
various other volumes, of which the list would be
long and wearisome to detail.

BELLA DUFFY.

CONTENTS.

Chap.

Page.

I.—

THE MOTHER

1

II.—

GERMAINE

9

III.—

GIRLHOOD AND MARRIAGE

20

IV.—

NECKER’S SHORT-LIVED TRIUMPH

34

V.—

MADAME DE STAËL IS COURAGEOUS FOR HER FRIENDS

51

VI.—

RETURNS TO COPPET

69

VII.—

THE TRANSFORMED CAPITAL

78

VIII.—

MADAME DE STAËL MEETS NAPOLEON

93

IX.—

NEW FACES AT COPPET

108

X.—

MADAME DE STAËL VISITS GERMANY

127

XI.—

MADAME DE STAËL AND AUGUSTE SCHLEGEL AT ROME

141

XII.—

MADAME DE STAËL’S SECOND MARRIAGE

162

XIII.—

ENGLAND AGAIN

180

XIV.—

CLOSING SCENES

196

XV.—

HER WORKS

207

[1]

MADAME DE STAËL.

CHAPTER I.

THE MOTHER.

“My dear friend having the same tastes as
myself, would certainly wish always for my chair,
and, like his little daughter, would beat me to
make me give it up to him. To keep peace between
our hearts, I send a chair for him also.
The two are of suitable height and their lightness
renders them easy to carry. They are made
of the most simple material, and were bought at
the sale of Philemon and Baucis.”

Thus wrote Madame Geoffrin to Madame
Necker when the intimacy between them had
reached such a pitch as to warrant the introduction
into the Necker salons of the only sort of
chair in which the little old lady cared to sit.

The “dear friend” was M. Necker, and the
“little daughter” of the house must then have
been about four or five years old, for it was in
the very year of her birth (1766) that Madame
[2]

Geoffrin took her celebrated journey to Poland,
and it was some little time after her return that
she became intimate with Germaine Necker’s
parents.

They were still in the Rue de Cléry. M. Necker’s
elevation to the Contrôle Général was in the
future and had probably not been foreseen; it is
possible that even the
Éloge de Colbert
, which betrayed
his desire for power, had not yet appeared;
nevertheless, he was already a great man. His
controversy with the Abbé Morellet, on the subject
of the East India Company, had brought
him very much into notice; and, although his
arguments in favor of that monopoly had not
saved it from extinction, they had caused his
name to be in everybody’s mouth.

His position as Minister for the Republic of
Geneva gave him the entry to the Court of Versailles,
and brought him into contact with illustrious
personages, who otherwise might have
disdained a mere wealthy foreigner, neither a
noble nor a Catholic. His well-filled purse completed
his popularity, for it was not seldom at the
service of abject place-hunters and needy literati.
Moreover, he had been fortunate in his choice of
a wife.

By the time that the King of Poland’s
bonne
maman
wrote that little note to Madame Necker,
the wife of the Genevese banker had founded a
[3]

salon as brilliant and crowded as Madame Geoffrin’s
own. She had achieved this in a few years,
whereas Madame Geoffrin for the same task, and
in spite of her wealth and generosity, had required
a quarter of a century.

But Madame Necker, besides being young,
rich and handsome, was bitten with the prevailing
craze for literature, could listen unweariedly
for hours to the most labored
portraits
and
éloges
,
and, although herself the purest and most austere
of women, would open her salon to any reprobate,
provided only he were witty.

Madame Necker, first known to us as Suzanne
Curchod, was the daughter of a Swiss pastor, and
saw the light in the Presbytery of Crassier in the
Pays de Vaud. The simple white house, with its
green shutters, is still to be seen, separated from
the road by a little garden planted with fruit
trees. The Curchods were an ancient and
respectable family whom Madame Necker (it was
one of her weaknesses) would fain have proved
entitled to patents of nobility. Some Curchods
or Curchodis are found mentioned in old chronicles
as fighting beneath the banners of Savoy,
and it was from these that Madame Necker
sought vainly to trace her descent. She held a
secret consultation for this cherished object with
the Sieur Chérin, genealogist to the King; but
his decision disappointed her. Chagrined, but
[4]

not convinced—for her opinions were not easily
shaken—she carried home the precious papers
and locked them up without erasing the endorsement,

Titres de noblesse de la famille Curchod
,
which she had written with her own hand.

M. Curchod took pains to give his only daughter
an unusually thorough and liberal education.
She knew Latin and a little Greek, “swept with
extreme flounce the circle of the sciences,” and
was accomplished enough in every way to attract
the admiration, very often even the love, of sundry
grave and learned personages.

Mixed with her severe charm there must have
been some coquetry, for at a very early age she
began making conquests among the young ministers
who arrived on Sundays at Crassier, ostensibly
to assist M. Curchod in his duties; and
a voluminous correspondence, somewhat high-flown,
as was the fashion of the day, is extant, to
prove that Suzanne possessed the art of keeping
her numerous admirers simultaneously well in
hand. Verses, occasionally slightly Voltairian
in tone, were also addressed to her; and later in
life Madame Necker reproached herself for her
placid acceptance of the homage thus expressed,
and owned that had she understood it better she
would have liked it less.

Suzanne’s parents, proud, no doubt, of their
daughter’s talents and accomplishments, took her
[5]

after a while to Lausanne. That pleasant city,
since giving up its own political ideals and falling
under the sway of Berne, had lapsed into easy-going,
intellectual ways, and even professed a discreet
and modified form of Voltairianism. Ever
since the author of the “Henriade” had dazzled
it with his presence, it had been on the look-out
for illustrious personalities, and welcomed all foreigners
who showed any promise of literary distinction.

What with her pretensions to be a
bel-esprit
,
her youth and beauty, Mademoiselle Curchod
captivated the town at once, and very soon had the
proud joy of founding an
Académie de la Poudrière
,
and being elected to preside over it under
the fantastic name of Thémire. The members
of this intellectual society were of both sexes
and all young. Their duties consisted in writing

portraits
of one another, and essays or odes on
subjects in general. Combined with these profound
pursuits there seems to have been a good
deal of flirtation, and, doubtless, both the scholasticism
and the sentiment were equally to Suzanne
Curchod’s taste.

During her stay in Lausanne she fascinated
Gibbon, and, for the first time in her career of
conquest, fell in love herself. So profound was
her passion—or so profound, in her self-tormenting
way, did she imagine it to be—that she
[6]

remained constant to her engagement during the
four years of Gibbon’s absence in England, and
wrote him agitated, abject letters of reproach,
when he, alleging his father’s invincible objections,
broke off the engagement. Her devoted
friend, Moulton, who appears to have loved her
all his life, was so touched by her despair, that,
with Suzanne’s own consent, he sought the mediation
of Rousseau in order to bring the recreant
lover back to his allegiance. But the attempt
was vain. Gibbon showed himself as heartless as
Mademoiselle Curchod had proved indulgent, and
when the lady, as a last resource, proposed that
they should at least remain friends, he declined
the amiable offer as being “dangerous for both.”
Nevertheless, when they met again in Paris, some
years later, Mademoiselle Curchod, then married,
welcomed Gibbon with kindness, and even wrote
him notes containing, here and there, allusions
to the past. For the age was evidently sentimental,
and to cherish memories of vanished joys,
and make passing, pathetic reference to them,
was a luxury of which Madame Necker would
have been the last to deprive herself.

On the death of her parents, Suzanne found
herself obliged to seek for a situation as governess,
or companion. All her life, fortunate in
making and keeping the most devoted friends,
she found plenty anxious to help her in carrying
[7]

out her plans. Among her sincerest admirers
was the charming Duchess d’Enville, whose
sweetness, grace, and naïf enthusiasm for Switzerland
(as a kind of romantic republic, all shepherds
and shepherdesses, toy-châlets, natural
sentiments and stage liberty) were so characteristic
of the age, and so admiringly celebrated in
Bonstetten’s letters. It was, in all probability,
through her introduction at Geneva that Suzanne
became acquainted with Madame de Vermenoux,
a rich Parisian widow, who fell immediately under
the young orphan’s charm, and, engaging her as
a companion, took her back to Paris. In that
intellectual centre—the promised land of all her
thoughts—Suzanne speedily came into contact
with several interesting people, among others the
delightful Bonstetten, then still young in years,
destined to be always young in heart, and whom,
in the course of this work, we shall often see
among the band of fervent admirers surrounding
Madame de Staël.

Another frequent visitor at Madame de Vermenoux’s
house was M. Necker, at that time a
partner in Thellusson’s bank, and already possessed
of ample means. He was a rejected suitor
of the hostess, but continued on very good terms
with her, and perhaps was expected to propose
a second time. If such were the widow’s ideas,
they were doomed to disappointment; for very
[8]

soon after Necker’s introduction to Suzanne he
made a transfer of his affections to her. He left,
however, for Geneva, without declaring his sentiments;
and Mademoiselle Curchod, once again
in love, and once again in despair, poured out
her feelings in a long letter to Moulton. That
ever faithful friend did his best to bring things
to a happy termination, by taking care that M.
Necker, during his sojourn in Geneva, should
hear nothing but praise of Suzanne. The device,
if needed, was most successful; for the banker
returned to Paris with his mind made up. He
proposed without loss of time, and it is, perhaps,
not too much to say, that Mademoiselle Curchod
jumped into his arms.

All the friends of the bride elect were delighted,
and even Madame de Vermenoux proclaimed
her pleasure at the turn which affairs had taken.
Some little subsequent coolness, however, she
must have manifested, for the date fixed for the
wedding was kept a secret from her. When the
day dawned, Suzanne stole out quietly and met
M. Necker at the church door.

In what form the news was broken to the widow
is not known; but any annoyance she may have
felt was not of long duration, for in after years
we find Madame de Vermenoux a frequent guest
of the Neckers, and the little daughter, born on
the 22nd April, 1766, was named Germaine after
her.

[9]

CHAPTER II.

GERMAINE.

When Germaine was about six years old, M.
Necker retired from the bank, and devoted himself
to the study of administrative questions.
This was in preparation for the career to which
he felt himself called. For years past his wealth
had come frequently to the aid of a spendthrift
Government and an exhausted exchequer; and it
was natural that he should seek his reward in
power. In his
Éloge de Colbert
, published in
1773, he was at no pains to conceal that he was
thinking of himself when drawing the portrait of
an ideal Minister of Finance; and some annoyance
at Turgot’s appointment is thought to have
added force to his attacks on the latter’s theories
concerning free trade in corn.

Madame Necker, profiting by her husband’s
growing importance, quickly attained the summit
of her ambition in becoming the presiding
genius of a salon thronged with intellectual celebrities.
Buffon and Thomas were her most trusted
friends, but, austere though she was, she did
[10]

not disdain to admit to a certain intimacy men
like Marmontel, the Abbé Galiani, St. Lambert,
and Diderot. They all flattered her outrageously
to her face, while some of them, Marmontel especially,
sneered at her behind her back. All made
love to her, and, misled by the studied warmth
of pompous eloquence with which she proclaimed
her delight in their society, they not rarely persuaded
themselves that they had added her to
the list of their conquests, and were chagrined
and not a little disgusted later to discover that
the only man she cared for was her husband.
Indeed, she bored everybody with praise of M.
Necker, composing and reading aloud in her own
salon a preposterous
portrait
of him, in which she
compared him to most things in heaven and
earth and the waters under the earth, from an
angel to a polypus. Her rigidity, her self-consciousness,
her want of charm, and absence of
humor, were a fruitful theme of ridicule to the
witty and heartless parasites who crowded her
drawing-rooms and made raids on her husband’s
purse. And yet such was the native force of
goodness in her that, sooner or later, in every
instance, detraction turned to praise. The bitter
Madame de Genlis, who detested the Neckers,
and ridiculed them unsparingly, admits that
the wife was a model of virtue; and Diderot paid
her the greatest compliment which she, perhaps,
[11]

ever received, when declaring that had he known
her sooner, much that he had written would never
have seen the light.

Grimm was another frequenter of the Necker
salons; and the mistress of the house being no
less prodigal of gracious encouragement towards
him than towards everybody else, he also eventually
declared his sentiments of friendship and
admiration, with as much warmth as his manners
allowed of. Like Voltaire, he called her “Hypatie”;
and testified the genuineness of his regard
by scolding her about her religious opinions.
Needless to say these were not infidel, but they
were, in Grimm’s opinion, disastrously illogical;
and, his fine taste in such matters being offended,
he expressed his displeasure on one occasion in
no measured terms. Madame Necker retorted,
for she loved a discussion too fervently ever to
be meek; but apparently Grimm was too much
for her. Either his arguments were irrefragable,
or his manner was irritating; the result was that
Madame Necker—to the polite consternation of
her numerous guests—dissolved into tears.

Humiliated, on reflection, at having made such
a scene, with characteristic ardor, she seized the
opportunity to write Grimm a high-flown apology;
and an interchange of letters followed in
which the philosopher compared the lady to
Venus completed by Minerva, and Madame
[12]

Necker ransacked the universe for metaphors
wherewith to express her admiration of the gentleman’s
sensibility.

As the Neckers spent their summer at St.
Ouen—not the historic Château associated with
Louis XVIII., but another in the neighborhood,
and of the same name—the proximity to Paris
enabled them to continue unbroken their series
of dinners, suppers and receptions, twice a week.

Many of the guests were notable personages,
and most of them types which vanished forever
a few years later—engulphed by the storm-wave
of the Revolution. There was the Abbé Morellet,
clear-headed, gravely ironical, with as much
tact in concealing as in displaying the range of
his knowledge and the depth of his insight; St.
Lambert, a little cold, but full of exquisite politeness,
supremely elegant in expression, and, without
being lively himself, possessed of the delicate
art of never quenching liveliness in others;
D’Alembert, charming, if frigid, and destined
soon to be an object of sentimental interest, because
of his inconsolable grief for Mlle. L’Espinasse;
the Abbé Raynal, doubtless enchanted to
pour into Madame Necker’s respectful ears the
floods of eloquence for which Frederick the Great
laughed at him; these, with Marmontel and
Thomas, were almost always present.

A few years earlier the Abbé Galiani, delightful
[13]

and incorrigible, would also have been seen.
This extraordinary little man, political economist,
archæologist, mineralogist, diplomatist and
pulcinello, was one of Madame Necker’s professed
adorers. Everybody liked and admired
him; Diderot described him as “a treasure on a
rainy day”; Marmontel as “the prettiest little
harlequin,” with “the head of Macchiavelli”;
while, for Madame Geoffrin, he was her
petite
chose
. After so much praise, and from such people,
Madame Necker must certainly have accepted
him unconditionally; but it would be interesting
to know exactly with what air she listened to his
impassioned declarations. When eventually restored
to his native land—or, as he expressed it,
exiled from Paris—he wrote her impudent and
characteristic epistles, in which reproaches at
her virtue, intimate interrogations regarding her
health, and envy of M. Necker’s happiness, mingled
with inquiries after everybody in the beloved
capital, and wails of inconsolable grief at his own
departure. “
Quel désert que cinquante mille Napolitains!
”
he exclaims.

Madame Du Deffand was also for a time an
intimate guest at the Neckers’. The friendship
did not last long. The marquise, by this time
infinitely weary of men and things, appears soon
to have tired of Madame Necker’s declamations
and M. Necker’s superiority. Her final judgment
[14]

on the wife was very severe, rather ill-tempered,
and therefore unjust. Madame Necker was, she
says, “stiff and frigid, full of self-consciousness,
but an upright woman.” Her liking for the husband
held out longer, but finally succumbed to
the discovery that, while very intelligent, he
failed to elicit wit from others. “One felt oneself
more stupid in his company than when with
other people or alone.”

There is no trace of any variation in the
friendship between Madame Necker and Madame
Geoffrin. Perhaps the latter, with her habitual
gentle “
Voilà, qui est bien
,” called her
young friend to order, and early repressed the
emphatic praises which could not but have wearied
her.

We are told that she hated exaggeration in
everything; and how could Madame Necker’s
heavy flattery have found favor in her eyes?
Her delicate
savoir-vivre
, too, that preternaturally
subtle sense which supplied the place in
her of brilliancy and learning and early education,
must have been vexed at Madame Necker’s
innocent but everlasting pedantry. We can
fancy, however, that she managed, in her imperceptible,
noiseless way, to elude all these disturbing
manifestations; and then she was doubtless
pleased at Madame Necker’s good-humored
patience with her scoldings. All Madame Geoffrin’s
[15]

friends, as we know, had to submit to be
scolded; but probably few showed under the
infliction the magnanimity of Madame Necker,
who must have possessed all the power of submission
peculiar to self-questioning souls. The
calm old lady, ensconced in her own peculiar
chair, whether in Paris or at St. Ouen, in the
midst of the sparkling society to which she had
perseveringly fought her way, was disturbed in
her serenity by no presage of misfortune.

In point of reputation the most illustrious, and
in point of romantic ardor the most fervent, of
all Madame Necker’s friends, was Buffon. He
wrote her some eighty letters full of fervid flatter
and genuine, almost passionate affection, to
which she responded in the terms of adulation
that the old man still held dear. Such incense
had once been offered to him in nauseating abundance;
now that he was old and lonely it had
diminished, and this fact, joined to his unquestionable
admiration for Madame Necker, made
him all the more easily intoxicated by her praise.
Mixed with her high esteem for his genius was a
womanly compassion for his bodily sufferings
that rendered the tie uniting their two minds a
very sweet and charming one. On hearing that
his end was near, she hastened to Montbard,
where he was residing, and established herself by
his bedside, remaining there five days, and courageously
[16]

soothing the paroxysms of pain that it
tortured her own sensitive nature to see.

Perhaps her strong and unconcealed desire that
the philosopher should make a Christian end, lent
her fortitude to continue the self-imposed task.
There is no proof that she directly influenced
him in that final declaration of faith by which he
scandalised a free-thinking community; but she
had often discussed religious questions with him,
and deplored his want of a definite creed; consequently,
it is possible that her mere presence
may have had some effect upon him at the last.

On the brink of the irrevocable, even the pride
of controversy may come to be a little thing; and
Buffon’s wearied spirit perhaps recoiled from further
speculation on the eternal problem of futurity.
And to be at one, in that supreme moment,
with the pitying woman who had come to solace
his final agony, may have weighed with him above
the praise and blame over which the grave was
to triumph forever.

Madame Necker delighted in making herself
miserable, and the melancholia natural to him
probably caused Thomas to be the most thoroughly
congenial to her of all her friends. The
author of the
Petréide
and the foe of the Encyclopædists,
he enjoyed during his life a celebrity
which posterity has not confirmed. He was the
originator of the unhappy style of writing in
[17]

which Madame Necker so delighted that she
modelled her own upon it. For the rest, he was
a man of extremely austere and simple life, as
well as of very honest character. Passion was
unknown to him, unless, indeed, the profound
and sentimental esteem which he felt for Madame
Necker was of a nature under more favorable
treatment to have developed into love. If so,
she found the way in his case, as in all, to restrain
his feelings within platonic bounds, and indulged
him chiefly with affecting promises not to forget
him when she should be translated to heaven.

Madame Necker may be said to have touched
the zenith of social distinction the day on which
the Maréchale de Luxembourg entered her salon.
This charming old lady and exquisite
grande
dame
, the arbiter of politeness and fine manners,
was felicitously and untranslatably described by
Madame du Deffand, in one delightful phrase, as
“
Chatte Rose!
” Upon all those who met her
at this period (when she was already nearly
seventy), she seems to have produced the same
impression of softness and elegance, of fine malice
and caressing, irresistible ways.

Madame de Souza—that sweet little woman
round whose name the perfume of her own roses
still seems to cling—drew a portrait of the Maréchale
in her novel
Eugénie de Rothelin
, under
the name of the Maréchale de’Estouteville; nor
[18]

did she, as Ste. Beuve tells us, forget to introduce,
by way of contrast, in the person of Madame
de Rieny, the pretty and winning Duchess
de Lauzun, grand-niece of the Maréchale, and
another flower of Madame Necker’s salon.

This little Duchess, “
joli petit oiseau à l’air
effarouché
” (to quote Madame du Deffand once
again), was so devoted an admirer of M. Necker,
that, hearing somebody in the Tuileries Gardens
blame him, she slapped the speaker’s face.
Apart from this one outburst, which saves her
from seeming too meek, she flits shadowy, sweet
and pathetic, across the pages of her contemporaries.
The record of her life, as we know it, is
brief and touching. She kept herself unspotted
from a most depraved world; loved a very unworthy
husband and died, during the Terror, on
the scaffold.

Another friend, and apparently a very sincere
one, of Madame Necker, was Madame d’Houdetôt.
Madame Necker seems to have accepted
that interesting woman just as she was, including
her relations with St. Lambert, whom the letters
exchanged between the two ladies mention quite
naturally. The affection which she felt for the
mother was extended by Madame D’Houdetôt to
the little daughter, and there are letters of hers
extant describing visits which she had paid to
[19]

Germaine, while Madame Necker was at Spa or
Mont Doré for her health.

They were written to relieve the natural pain
of absence on the parents’ part, and are full of
praises of the child, of her engaging ways, her
air of health, and her magnificent eyes.

[20]

CHAPTER III.

GIRLHOOD AND MARRIAGE.

In the brilliant world in which she awoke, Germaine
very soon found her place. It is a very
familiar little picture that which we have of her,
seated on a low stool beside her mother at the
receptions, and fixing on one speaker after another
her great, astonished eyes.

Soon, very soon, she began to join in the conversation
herself, and by the time she was ten or
eleven years old she had grown into a person
whose opinion was quite seriously consulted.
Some of the friends of the house, Marmontel,
Raynal and others, enchanted to have a new
shrine in the same temple at which to worship,
talked to her, wrote verses to her, and laid at her
young feet some of the homage up to then exclusively
devoted to Madame Necker.

That lady began by being enchanted at Germaine’s
amazing powers, and set to work to educate
her with characteristic thoroughness and
pedantry. Everything that was strongest in her,
family pride, the sense of maternal authority, the
[21]

love of personal influence, the passion for training,
seemed to find their opportunity in the surprising
daughter whom Heaven had given her.
She drove the child to study with unrelenting
ardor, teaching her things beyond her age, and
encouraging her at the same time further to exercise
her intelligence by listening to conversations
on all sorts of subjects. The consequence was
that at eleven Germaine’s conversational powers
were already stupendous. On being introduced
to a child of her own age, a little Mademoiselle
Hüber, who was her cousin, she amazed her new
acquaintance by the questions she put to her.
She asked what were her favorite lessons; if she
knew any foreign languages; if she often went
to the theatre. The little cousin confessing to
having profited but rarely by such an amusement,
Germaine was horror-stricken, but promised that
henceforward the deficiency should be remedied,
adding that on their return from the theatre they
should both proceed to write down the subject
of the pieces performed, with suitable reflections;
that being, she said, her own habit. In the evening
of this first day’s acquaintance, Mademoiselle
Hüber, already sufficiently awe-struck, one must
think, was further a witness to the attention paid
to Germaine by her mother’s most distinguished
guests.

“Everybody addressed her with a compliment
[22]

or a pleasantry. She answered everything with
ease and grace.… The cleverest men were
those who took most pleasure in making her talk.
They asked what she was reading, recommended
new books to her and … talked to her of what
she knew, or of what she had yet to learn.”

From her tenderest years Germaine wrote
portraits

and
éloges
. At fifteen she made extracts
from the
Esprit de Lois
, with annotations, and
about the same time the Abbé Raynal was very
anxious that she should contribute to his great
work an article on the Revolution of the Edict
of Nantes.

But before this, when she was only twelve, the
effects of such premature training had made
themselves visible. Her feelings had been as
unnaturally developed as her mind. Already
that rich, abundant nature, so impetuous, generous,
and fervid, which was at once the highest
gift and deepest curse, had begun to reveal itself
in an exaggerated sensibility. Praise of her parents
moved her to tears; for the little cousin she
had an affection amounting to passion; and the
mere sight of celebrated people gave her palpitation
of the heart. She did not care to be amused.
What pleased her best was what pained her most,
and her imagination was fed upon the “Clarissa
Harlowe” school of novels.

By degrees her health began to fail, and at
[23]

fourteen the collapse was so complete as to cause
the most serious alarm. Tronchin was consulted,
and prescribed absolute rest from study.
This was a cruel blow to Madame Necker. A
nature allowed to develop spontaneously, a mind
virgin of the pruning-hook, were objects of as
much horror to her as if they had been forbidden
by Heaven. That her daughter, just at the
final moment, when what was doubtless the mere
preliminary course of study had been traversed,
should be released from bondage and abandoned
to her own impetuosity, was well-nigh insupportable.
She had no alternative but to resign herself,
and therefore, silently and coldly, as was her
wont, she accepted the situation. Nevertheless,
she was neither reconciled to it, nor felt the same
interest in Germaine again. Years afterwards,
the bitterness that she had hoarded in her soul
betrayed itself in one little phrase. Madame
Necker de Sausanne was congratulating her
on her daughter’s astonishing powers. “She is
nothing,” said Madame Necker, coldly, “nothing
to that which I would have made her.”

Despatched from Paris to the pure air of St.
Ouen, and ordered to do nothing but enjoy herself,
the young girl quickly recovered her vivacity,
and developed a charming joyousness. This
new mood of hers, while gradually estranging her
from her mother, drew her closer to her father.
[24]

M. Necker, who detested literary women, had
looked with but scanty favor on his daughter’s
passion for writing, and it is probable that, as
long as she was exclusively under Madame Necker’s
rule, he did not feel for her more than the
commonplace sort of affection which a busy and
serious-minded father bestows on a little girl.

During her childhood Germaine herself lavished
all her warmest affection on her mother,
being apparently drawn to her by the subtle
attraction which a very deep and reserved nature
exercises on an excitable one. Madame Necker,
pale, subdued in manner, restrained in gesture,
surrounded with respectful adorers, revered by
her husband, and flattered by her friends, seems
to have filled her observant, imaginative little
daughter with a feeling bordering on awe. Very
sensitive, yet very submissive, and quite incapable
of resentment, Germaine threw herself with
characteristic passionate ardor into the task of
winning her mother’s praise. How complacently
Madame Necker must have accepted the
homage implied in these efforts, it is easy to
imagine. A little contempt for the child’s impetuosity
helped to give her the firmness necessary
for moulding, according to her own notions,
the nature so plastic, yet so vital, thus placed
within her grasp. A good, nay, a noble woman,
yet essentially a self-righteous one, she could
[25]

comprehend perfection in nothing that did not,
to a certain degree, resemble herself.
Her
ideas,

her
principles,
her
will, were, she conceived, to
shape and fashion, restrain and re-create, this
thing of fire and intellect, this creature all spirit,
instinct and insight, that she named her child.
Germaine, predestined all her life to struggle,
to consume herself to ashes—like the Arabian
princess who fought with the
djinn
—succumbed
for the time to her mother’s will, by the annihilation
of everything that was inalienably
herself
.
The spell lasted as long as the tyranny which had
created it; but once freed from the thraldom,
wandering with her young cousin through the
avenues of St. Ouen, drinking in the freshness
of the shadowy glades, and acting innocent little
dramas, Germaine became more natural and, in
her mother’s eyes, more commonplace. Madame
Necker lost interest in her, drew frigidly away
from her, and even began to feel some jealousy
of the new-born affection between the father and
child.

When Germaine was fifteen, M. Necker fell
from power. A few months previously he had
published his
Compte Rendu
, and roused the
enthusiasm of France. He had been the idol of
the hour, and his name was in everybody’s mouth.
From all sides, from nobles and bourgeois alike,
letters of praise and congratulation poured in
[26]

upon him. Among these was an anonymous
epistle, written by Germaine, and immediately
recognized by her father, who knew the author’s
style.

She was transported with joy and triumph, and
probably understood her father’s achievements
better than two-thirds of the people who applauded
them. For she was endowed with a marvellous
quickness and completeness of comprehension,
and, where she loved, her sympathy was flawless.
She was always willing to welcome and adopt the
thought of another, and never seemed to guess
how much of force and brilliancy it owed to the
illuminating power of her own vivid intellect.

On M. Necker’s retirement from the Ministry
of Finance he came to St. Ouen, followed in his
retreat by the pity and praise of the best and
brightest minds of France. His daughter, seeing
more of him than ever, now, in the greater leisure
which he enjoyed, and regarding him as the
heroic victim of an infamous political cabal, soon
conceived for him an affection that amounted to
idolatry. On his side he was enchanted with her
humorous gayety, and lent himself to her playfulness
in the not rare moments when Germaine’s
small sum of years got the better of her large
amount of intelligence.

One day Madame Necker had been called from
the dining-room, during meal time, on some
[27]

domestic or other business. Returning unexpectedly,
she heard a good deal of noise, and,
opening the door, stood transfixed with amazement
on seeing her husband and daughter capering
about, with their table-napkins twisted round
their heads like turbans. Both culprits looked
rather ashamed of themselves when detected, and
their spirits fell to zero beneath the lady’s frozen
glance.

The Neckers, in spite of the ex-minister’s so-called
“disgrace,” continued surrounded with
friends, so that from fifteen to twenty, at which
latter age she married, Germaine’s days were one
long intellectual triumph.

Her
portraits
read aloud to the guests, were
eagerly received and enthusiastically applauded.
She wrote one of her father, in competition with
her mother; but when Monsieur Necker was
appealed to on the respective merits of the two
compositions, he wisely declined to pronounce
any opinion. His daughter, however, divined his
thoughts: “He admires Mamma’s portrait,” she
said, “but mine flatters him more.”

Her own merits inspired the wits surrounding
her in their turn. A
portrait
by Guibert described
her as a priestess of Apollo, with dark
eyes illumined by genius, black, floating curls,
and marked features, expressive of a destiny superior
to that of most women. This was an ornamental
[28]

way of saying that Germaine was not
beautiful. She was, in fact, very plain, strangely
so, considering that she had magnificent eyes,
fine shoulders and arms, and abundant hair.
What spoilt her was the total want of grace.
When talking, she was much too prodigal of
grimace and gesture, and, if eloquent and convincing,
was also overpowering.

She felt too much on every subject, and carried
other people’s small stream of platitudes
along in the rushing tide of her own emotions,
till her hearers were left exhausted and admiring,
but also a little resentful. She disconcerted the
very persons whom she most revered by only
pausing long enough in her talk to grasp their
meaning, and feed her own thought with it till
that glowed more consumingly than ever, while
all the time what
she
felt, what
they
felt, and what

she
imagined that
they
meant to say was proclaimed
in loud, harsh accents, most trying to
sensitive nerves.

All this time she was busily writing, and her
father, who nicknamed her Mademoiselle de Ste.
Ecritoire, could not correct the tendency, even
by his unceasing raillery. In a comedy entitled

Sophie, ou les Sentiments Secrets
, she scandalized
Madame Necker, by selecting for a subject the
struggles of a young orphan against the passion
inspired in her by her guardian, a married man.
[29]

To this period belong also
Jane Grey
and
Montmorency
,
both tragedies, and various novelettes.

When Germaine was nearing twenty, the question
of her marriage came under discussion;
and serious consideration was then, for the first
time, accorded to a suitor whom her large fortune
had long attracted.

This was the Baron de Staël Holstein, Secretary
to the Swedish Embassy. He seems to
have been one of the elegant and amiable diplomatists
whom the Courts of Europe in those days
turned out by the score. He had wit and good
manners, as he had also the golden key of the
Court Chamberlain; otherwise, his personality
was insignificant in the extreme.

He was fortunate, however, in serving under a
very popular ambassador, the Count de Creutz;
and in representing a king who, both for political
and personal reasons, was anxious to keep on
good terms with France. Gustavus III. of Sweden
adored Paris, and was in continual correspondence
with Madame de la Mark, Madame
d’Egmont, Madame de Boufflers, and anybody
who would keep him conversant with the gossip
of the Tuileries and Versailles. The Count de
Creutz having the intention of shortly retiring, it
was understood that the Baron de Staël Holstein
was to be his successor. That gentleman, who
comprehended his own interests, and was head-over-ears
[30]

in debt, lost no opportunity of persuading
the Swedish King’s trio of witty correspondents,
who in their turn were careful to impress
on Gustavus, as well as on Louis XVI. and his
Queen, that the next Swedish ambassador must
be endowed with a splendid fortune.

A grand marriage was, of course, to be the
means of achieving this; and Mademoiselle Germaine
Necker, an heiress and a Protestant, was
fixed upon for the bride.

The delicate negotiations lasted for some considerable
time, during which period the prize the
Baron sought was disputed by two formidable
rivals—William Pitt and Prince George Augustus
of Mecklenburg, brother of the reigning
Duke. Madame Necker warmly supported Pitt’s
suit, and showed great displeasure at being unable
to overcome her daughter’s obstinate aversion
to it. Seeing how distinguished the Englishman
already was, and how brilliant his future career
promised to be, one wonders a little at Germaine’s
rejection of him. Probably the secret of her determination
lay in the passionate adoration which
she had now begun to feel for her father, on
whom—as all his friends and partisans assured
her—the eyes of misery-stricken France were
fixed as on a savior.

The idea of quitting France in such a crisis,
at the dawn, so to speak, of her father’s apotheosis,
[31]

would naturally be intensely repugnant to
her; and possibly for that very reason Madame
Necker, always a little jealous of the sympathy
between her husband and her daughter, warmly
advocated Pitt’s claims. A painful coldness ensued
between mother and daughter, and lasted
until the former happened to fall dangerously ill.
Then Germaine’s feelings underwent a revulsion
of passionate tenderness; and in the touching
reconciliation which ensued between parent and
child, Mr. Pitt and his suit were forgotten.

Prince George Augustus of Mecklenburg was
even less fortunate, being refused by both Monsieur
and Madame Necker, with a promptitude
which he fully deserved. For he had nothing to
recommend him but his conspicuous position,
and had very impudently avowed that he sought
Mademoiselle Necker’s hand only for the sake of
her enormous dower.

The ground being thus cleared for Madame de
Bouffler’s protégé, that energetic lady set to work
to obtain from Gustavus a promise not to remove
the Baron, now ambassador, from France for a
specified long term of years.

This assurance that they would not be parted
from their daughter having been given to the
Neckers, and formally embodied in a clause of
the marriage settlement, the document was
signed by the King and Queen of France, and
[32]

several other illustrious personages, and the wedding
celebrated on the 14th January, 1776.

The first few days after her marriage, Madame
de Staël, according to the custom of the time,
passed under her father’s roof; and among her
letters is a sweet and affectionate one, which she
addressed to her mother on the last day of her
sojourn with her parents.

“Perhaps I have not always acted rightly
towards you, Mamma,” she writes. “At this
moment, as in that of death, all my deeds are
present to my mind, and I fear that I may not
leave in you the regret that I desire. But deign
to believe that the phantoms of imagination have
often fascinated my eyes, and often come between
you and me so as to render me unrecognizable.
But the very depth of my tenderness makes me
feel at this moment that it has always been the
same. It is part of my life, and I am entirely
shaken and unhinged in this hour of separation
from you. To-night … I shall not have in
my house the angel that guaranteed it from thunder
and fire. I shall not have her who would
protect me if I were dying, and would enfold me,
before God, with the rays of her sublime soul. I
shall not have at every moment news of your
health. I foresee regrets at every instant.…
I pray that I may be worthy of you. Happiness
may come later, at intervals or never. The end
[33]

of life terminates everything, and you are so sure
that there is another life as to leave no doubt
in my heart.… Accept, Mamma, my dear
Mamma, my profound respect and boundless tenderness.”

Perhaps when Madame Necker read this letter
she felt in part consoled for the real or fancied
pain which her brilliant and unaccountable daughter
had given her.

And in spite of passing dissensions with her
mother, Germaine’s twenty years of girlhood had
been essentially happy, for they had been tenderly
and watchfully sheltered from blight or
harm.

[34]

CHAPTER IV.

NECKER’S SHORT-LIVED TRIUMPH.

Some spiteful ridicule awaited the young ambassadress
on her first entrance into official life,
and, strangely enough, among these detractors
was Madame de Boufflers herself, who wrote to
Gustavus III.: “She has been virtuously brought
up, but has no knowledge of the world or its
usages … and has a degree of assurance that
I never saw equalled at her age, or in any position.
If she were less spoilt by the incense
offered up to her, I should have tried to give her
a little advice.” Another courtier’s soul was
vexed because Madame de Staël, when presented
on her marriage, tore her flounce, and thus spoilt
her third curtsey. As much scandal was caused
by this
gaucherie
as if it had been some newly-invented
sin; but the delinquent herself, when
the heinousness of her conduct was communicated
to her, simply laughed. She could, indeed,
afford to despise all such censure, for, if too
obstreperously intellectual and ardent for artificial
circles, she soon attained to immense influence
[35]

among all the thinking and quasi-thinking
minds of France.

Politics were now beginning to be the one
absorbing subject whose paramount importance
dwarfed every other; and Madame de Staël,
always in the vanguard of ideas, threw herself
with characteristic enthusiasm into the questions
of the day. To talk about the glorious future of
humanity was the fashionable cant of the hour,
but Madame de Staël really believed in the regeneration
about which others affectedly maundered;
and at all social gatherings in the Rue
Bergère, or at St. Ouen (where her presence was
as frequent as of yore), she held forth on this
subject to the crowd of dazzled listeners, whom
she partially convinced and wholly overpowered.

She had been married but little more than a
year when the first shadow of coming events
dimmed the lustre of her new existence. In a
speech pronounced at the Assembly of Notables
in April 1787, M. de Calonne impugned the accuracy
of the famous
Compte Rendu
. M. Necker
indignantly demanded from the King the permission
to hold a public debate on the subject, in
the presence of the Assembly before which he
had been accused. Louis XVI. refused; and M.
Necker then immediately published a memoir of
self-justification. The result was a
lettre de cachet

which exiled him to within forty leagues of
[36]

Paris. The order, conveyed by Le Noir, the Minister
of Police, reached M. Necker in the evening,
when he was sitting in his wife’s salon, surrounded
by his daughter and some friends. The liveliness
of Madame de Staël’s indignation may be
imagined. She has described it herself in her

Considérations sur la Révolution Française
, and
declared that the King’s decision appeared to her
an unexampled act of despotism. Its parallel
would not have been far to seek, and acts a thousand
times worse disgrace every page of the annals
of France. But Madame de Staël, always incapable
of judging where the “pure and noble”
interests of her father were concerned, can be
pardoned for her exaggeration in this instance,
as she had half France to share it. “All Paris,”
she says, “came to visit M. Necker in the twenty-four
hours that preceded his departure. Even
the Archbishop of Toulouse, already practically
designated for M. de Calonne’s successor, was not
afraid to make his bow.”

Offers of shelter poured in upon M. Necker,
and the best châteaux in France were placed at
his disposal. He finally elected the Châteaux de
Marolles, near Fontainebleau, although not, as he
naïvely confesses in a letter to his daughter,
without some secret misgivings as to “the decided
taste in all things good and bad of dear mamma.”

Thither Madame de Staël hastened to join him,
[37]

and to console by her unfailing sympathy, her
constant applause, and inexhaustible admiration,
a misfortune which, after all, had been singularly
mitigated. M. Necker accepted all this homage
as his due, and his magnanimous wish, that the
Archbishop of Toulouse might serve the State
and King better than he would have done, is
recorded by his daughter with the unction of a
true devotee. There is something adorably simple
and genuine in all her utterances about this
time. In a letter to her husband (who apparently
never objected to play second fiddle to M. and
Madame Necker) she directs him exactly how to
behave at Court, so as to bring home with dignity,
yet force, to their Majesties the wickedness
of their conduct towards so great and good a man;
and she adds that but for her position as Ambassadress
she would never again set foot within
the precincts of Versailles. This she wrote even
after the
lettre de cachet
was cancelled. A few
months later a reparation was offered to her father
with which even his own sense of his worth and
the idolatry of his family should have been satisfied;
for he was recalled to power—unwillingly
recalled, it is true. The King’s hand was forced.
His present sentiments to M. Necker, if not hostile,
were cold; while those of the Queen had
changed to aversion. But the Marquis de Mirabeau
had defined the position of France as “a
[38]

game of blind-man’s buff which must lead to a
general upset”; consternation had invaded even
the densest intelligences; and the voice of the
public clamored for its savior. This time, again,
the title given to M. Necker was Director-General
of Finance; but, on the other hand, the coveted
entry into the Royal Council was accorded
him. It was the first instance, since the days of
Sully, of such an honor being granted to a Protestant;
it was given at a moment when the suggestion
to restore civil rights to those of alien
faith had been bitterly resented by the French
clergy; and it was one of the many signs (for
those who had eyes to see) that the last hour of
the old régime had struck.

The nomination was hailed with a burst of applause
from one end of France to the other.
Madame de Staël hurried to St. Ouen with the
news, but she found her father the reverse of
elated. Fifteen months previously—the fifteen
months wasted by the ineptitude of Brienne—he
said he might have done something; now it was
too late.

Madame de Staël was far from sharing these
feelings. When anything had to be accomplished
by her father, she was of the opinion of
Calonne, in his celebrated answer to Marie Antoinette—“
Si
c’est possible, c’est fait; si c’est
impossible, cela se fera.
” And undoubtedly M.
[39]

Necker did his best on returning to power; but,
in spite of his honesty, good faith, and unquestionable
abilities, he was not the man for the
hour.

Very likely, as his friends, and especially his
daughter, asserted, no Minister, however gifted,
could have succeeded entirely in such a crisis;
and doubtless he was as far as any merely pure-minded
man could be from deserving the storm
of execration with which the Court party eventually
overwhelmed him. We have said that he
did his best; his mistake was that he did his best
for everybody. In a moment, when an unhesitating
choice had become imperative, he was
divided between sympathy with the people and
pity for the King.

He returned to power without any plan of his
own; but finding Louis XVI. was pledged to
assemble the States-General, he insisted that the
representation of the Tiers Etat should be doubled,
so as to balance the influence of the other
two parties. Royalists affirm that this was a fatal
error, since from that hour the Revolution became
inevitable. Madame de Staël, jealous of
her father’s reputation, maintains that reasonable
concessions on the part of the Court faction and
the higher clergy would have nullified the danger
of the double representation. But the point was
that such an aristocracy and such a clergy were
[40]

by nature unteachable; and every moment wasted
in attempting to persuade them was an hour added
to the long torture of oppressed and starving
France.

The kind heart, liberal instincts, and administrative
ability of Necker taught him that without
the double representation the voice of the people
might be lifted in vain. But the weakness of his
character, and the awe of his bourgeois soul for
the time-honored fetich of monarchy, prevented
his understanding that the power he invoked
could never again be laid by any spell of his
choosing. By seeking to arrange this or that,
to pare off something here and add something
there—in a word, by trying to be just all round,
when nobody cared for mutual justice but himself,
he rendered a divided allegiance to his country
and his King. If there were no conscious
duplicity in his character, there was abundance
of it in his opinions; and to say that nobody
could have succeeded better is to beg the question.
In the face of the savage, inflexible arrogance
of the aristocrats and clergy, there was but
one course open to a really high-minded man,
and that was to leave the Court to its own devices,
and, throwing himself with all of earnestness
and wisdom that he possessed into the
popular cause, to be guided by it, and yet govern
it by force of sympathy and will.

[41]

He might have failed; in the light of later
events, it can even be said that he would have
failed. But such a failure would have been
grander, more vital for good and sterile for harm,
than the opprobrium which eventually visited the
honest Necker and pursued him to his grave.

Needless to say that opinions such as these
never found their way into Madame de Staël’s
mind. On occasions—perhaps too frequently renewed—the
portals of that enchanted palace
were guarded by her heart. In her view, everything
might yet be saved, were Necker only listened
to and obeyed. “Every day he will do
something good and prevent something bad,” she
wrote to the reactionary and angry Gustavus,
and thus betrayed that preoccupation with the
individual, his virtues or his crimes, which, for
all her intellect, blinded her not rarely to the
essential significance of things.

With breathless interest and varied feelings of
sympathy and indignation she watched the great
events which now followed in rapid succession.
Her father was monarchical, and believed that a
representative monarchy on the English model
was the true remedy for France. Madame de
Staël—incapable of differing with so great a man—endorsed
this opinion at the time, although
eventually she became republican.

But nobody was republican then—that is in
[42]

name; people had not yet realized to what logical
conclusions their opinions would carry them.
Madame de Staël, hating oppression, blamed the
sightless obstinacy of the nobles, but, on the
other hand, was but little moved by the famous

Serment du Jeu de Paume
. She deplored the
rejection of Necker’s plan—that happy medium
which was to settle everything, and stigmatized
as it deserved the imbecility of the Court party,
as illustrated by confidence in foreign regiments
and the Declaration of the 23d June. Always
optimist, and confident of the inevitable triumph
of Right over Might, she clung to the belief that
a thoroughly pure character, in such a crisis, was
the one indispensable element of success.

The mysterious nature of Sièyes repelled her;
she preferred the virtuous Malouet to the titanic
Mirabeau, and was almost as blind as her father
to the enormous electric force of the tribune’s
undisciplined genius. For if often prejudiced,
she rarely was morbid, and false ideas did not
dazzle her. No splendor of achievement unaccompanied
by loftiness of principle could win her
applause. But she failed to grasp the fact that
perfection of moral character, by its very scruples
and hesitations, is necessarily handicapped in any
race with the velocity of public events. No man
can bring his entire self—very rarely can he even
bring all that is best of himself—into a struggle
[43]

with warring forces and contradictory individualities.
In such a contest, swiftness of insight,
power of expression, and force of organic impulse
are the only factors of value. In supreme
moments of action, men are greater than themselves—made
so by the sudden, unconscious contraction
of their complex personality into one
flame-point of consuming will.

All this Madame de Staël seems never to have
felt. If she loved unworthy people (and how
many she did love!), it was because she deceived
herself regarding them, as all her life she deceived
herself about her father. She was intolerant
of any triumph but that of virtue, and was
thus rendered unjust to the great deeds of men
who, imperfect and erring themselves, can sympathize
with the aspirations of the human heart
because its baseness is not unknown to them.

On the 11th of July, at 3 o’clock in the afternoon,
M. Necker, who had become a sort of Cassandra
to the Court party and was detested in
proportion, received a letter from the King ordering
him to quit Paris and France, and to accomplish
the departure with the utmost secrecy and
despatch. He was at table with some guests
when this order was handed to him; he read it,
put it into his pocket, and continued his conversation
as though nothing had happened.

Dinner over, he took Madame Necker aside,
[44]

and informed her what had occurred. Nothing
was communicated to Madame de Staël; probably
her father thought she would be too much
excited. M. and Madame Necker hastily ordered
their carriage and, without bidding anybody farewell,
without even delaying to change their
clothes, they had themselves conveyed to the
nearest station for post-horses. Thence they
continued their journey uninterruptedly, fleeing
like culprits from the people whose indignation
was feared by the King.

Madame de Staël is lost in admiration of this
single-minded conduct of her father, and lays
especial stress on the fact that, even during the
journey, he made no effort to win for himself the
suffrages of the multitude. “Where is another
man,” she naïvely asks, “who would not have
had himself brought back in his own despite?”

Certainly an ambitious man might have adopted
this theatrical plan; but it is much more likely,
under the actual circumstances, that an ambitious
man would never have left at all. M. Necker
had only to announce his disgrace to the people
of Paris, and go over once for all to the popular
side, to have received an intoxicating ovation.
As it was, the news of his dismissal cast the capital
into consternation. All the theatres were
closed, medals were struck in the fallen Minister’s
honor, and the first cockade worn was
[45]

green—the color of his liveries. What a career
might then have been his if, instead of being an
obedient subject, he had chosen to be a leader!

Madame de Staël thought that it was to the
last degree noble and disinterested of him to vanish
from the sight of an adoring multitude rather
than bring fresh difficulties on the master who
had deserted him. But the destinies of a nation
are of higher value than the comfort of a monarch,
and there are certain responsibilities which
no man who does not feel himself incapable (and
that was not Necker’s case) is justified in declining.
To throw back the love and influence
offered him then for the last time by France, to
sympathize with the popular cause and yet to
abandon it, and to do all this out of obedience to
the senseless caprice of a faction and the arbitrary
command of a king, was to behave like a
Court chamberlain, but in no sense like a statesman.

The taking of the Bastille, and the King’s declaration
at the Hôtel de Ville, followed immediately
on Necker’s retirement. Madame de Staël
records these events in a very few words, and
shows herself, at the moment and henceforward
through all the opening scenes of the Revolution,
more alive to the humiliation and dismay of the
Royal Family than to the apocalyptic grandeur
of the catastrophe.

[46]

The acts committed, as one reads of them quietly
now, are revolting in their mingled grotesqueness
and terror. To those who witnessed
them, they sickened where they did not deprave.
The livid head of Foulon on the pike; the greasy,
filthy, partly drunken populace, who rose as from
the depths of the earth to invade the splendid
privacy of royal Versailles; the degraded women
dragged from shameful obscurity and paraded in
the lurid glare of an indecent triumph; Madame
de Lamballe’s monstrous and dishonored death;
Marat’s hellish accusations, and Robespierre’s
diseased suspicions, were things that must have
destroyed in those who lived through them all
capacity for admiration.

The fact that Madame de Staël did not lose
heart altogether remains an abiding witness to
her faith and courage. She was wounded in her
tenderest part by the Court’s ingratitude and
the Assembly’s indifference towards her father.
Every natural and cultivated sentiment in her
was wounded by what she saw. Unlike Madame
Roland, she had no traditions and no past of her
own to attach her, in spite of everything, to the
people. She was insensible to the merely physical
infection of enthusiasm, and never even for a moment
possessed by the vertigo of the revolutionary
demon-dance. She remained, from first to
last, an absolute stranger to every act and every
[47]

consideration that was not either manifest to her
intellect or strong in appeal to her heart; and
yet such was her force of mind and rectitude of
insight that, under the Directory, we shall find
her no less interested in public events than under
the Monarchy.

The grief that Madame de Staël undoubtedly
experienced at her father’s banishment was not
destined to be of long duration. He had hardly
reached the Hôtel des Trois Rois at Bâle, when,
to his great astonishment, Madame de Polignac
asked to speak to him. She was the last person
that he expected to see there; but surprise at her
presence was soon swallowed up in the far greater
amazement excited by all she had to tell. The
taking of the Bastille; the massacre of Foulon
and Berthier and DeLaunay; the critical position
of De Besenval, and the stampede of the
aristocrats—what a catalogue of events! He
had never, his daughter says, admitted the possibility
of proscriptions, and he was a long while
before he could understand the motives which
had induced Madame de Polignac to depart. He
had not much time to reflect on all he had heard
before letters from the King and from the Assembly
arrived urging him to return. He did so
most unwillingly, according to Madame de Staël,
for the murders committed on the 14th July,
although few in number, affrighted him, and “he
[48]

believed no longer in the success of a cause now
blood-stained.” He seems to have abandoned all
sympathy with the people from this moment, and
to have returned avowedly with no intention than
that of using his popularity as a buckler with
which to defend the royal authority.

Madame de Staël, informed by letters from her
father of his departure from France and ultimate
destination (which was Germany), had hastened
after him with her husband and overtook him first
at Brussels. There the party had separated momentarily,
M. Necker hurrying forward with the
Baron de Staël, and Madame Necker, who was
suffering in health, following by slower stages
with her daughter. The consequence was that
Madame de Staël arrived at Bâle after her father’s
interview with Madame de Polignac, and almost
at the same time as he received the order to
return.

In this way she had the profound joy of witnessing
the enthusiasm which greeted him on
every step of his way. No such ovation, she truly
says, had ever before been bestowed upon an
uncrowned head. Women fell on their knees as
the carriage passed; the leading citizens of the
towns where it stopped took the places of the
postilions, and the populace finally substituted
themselves for the horses. They met numbers
of aristocratic fugitives on the journey, and M.
[49]

Necker, at their request, showered on them autograph
letters to serve as passports and enable
them to cross the frontiers in safety.

Whenever the carriage stopped, the popular idol
harangued the crowd and impressed on them the
necessity of respecting persons and property; he
entreated of them, as they professed so much love
for him, to give him the most striking proof that
they could of it, by always doing their duty.
Madame de Staël says that her father was fully
aware of the fleeting nature of popularity; and,
under these circumstances, one wonders that he
took the trouble, in such a crisis, to make so
many speeches. But it is probable that the intoxication
of praise was a little too much for him;
and he had at all times the sacerdotal tendency
to preach.

At ten leagues from Paris, news was brought
to the travellers that De Besenval had been
arrested by order of the Commune, and was to be
taken to the capital, where he would, said the
pessimists, be infallibly torn to pieces by the
populace. M. Necker, entreated to intervene,
took upon himself to rescind the order of the
Commune, and promised to obtain the sanction
of the authorities to his act.

On arriving in Paris, consequently, his first
care was to proceed, in company with his family,
to the Hôtel de Ville. The streets, the roofs, the
[50]

windows of every house were densely thronged.
Cries of “Vive Necker!” rent the air, as the redeemer
of the country appeared on a balcony and
began his discourse.

He demanded the amnesty of De Besenval and
of all those who shared De Besenval’s opinion.
This extensive programme committed all those
who accepted it to a reactionary policy, since to
pardon the people’s enemies unconditionally was
to condone, and in a measure to sanction their
crimes.

But no such considerations presented themselves
at that moment to impair Necker’s triumph.
The popular enthusiasm accorded him
what he asked; fresh thunders of applause broke
forth, and Madame de Staël, overcome with emotion,
fainted.

[51]

CHAPTER V.

MADAME DE STAËL IS COURAGEOUS FOR HER
FRIENDS.

Necker’s victory over the rage of the populace
was a fleeting one. He had, indeed, overstepped
the prerogatives of a Minister in asking for the
amnesty. Misled by the elation of his gratified
vanity and the impulse of his benevolent heart,
he, an ardent defender of order, forgot that in
placing himself between the Assembly and King
on the one hand and the people on the other, he
practically recognized the right of a faction to act
without the consent of the Government. It was
for the latter to reverse the decree of the Commune
and not for the electors of Paris.

His dream of smiling peace installed by his
hand on the ruins of the Revolution was rudely
and rapidly dispelled. Madame de Staël sorrowfully
records that on the very evening of that glorious
day the amnesty was retracted, and ascribes
this result in great part to the influence of Mirabeau.
But, in truth, a very little reflection must
have sufficed to convince anybody that the utopian
demands of Necker were singularly misplaced.
[52]

The very electors who had acceded to
them asserted that all they had ever intended
was to shield the arrested royalists from the fury
of the populace, but in no sense from the action
of justice. The Assembly confirmed this view,
and from that moment Necker’s influence was
practically gone. It was proved to be a bubble;
and his triumph, respectable as were some of the
motives which had urged him to invoke it, became
ludicrous when contrasted with the stern
and tragic realities of the moment. This Madame
de Staël did not, could not see. She was
fain to console herself with the compassionate
reflection that, after all, De Besenval—an old
man—was saved.

She narrates with dolorous pride the efforts
honestly, courageously, and to a certain degree
successfully, made by her father, during fifteen
months, to avert the disaster of famine; and innocently
appeals to them against the failure as a
statesman, to which she resolutely shuts her eyes.

One measure after another opposed by Necker
was voted—the confiscation of the property of
the clergy, the suppression of titles of nobility,
and the emission of assignats. No popularity
could have resisted such successive blows; and
Necker was popular no longer. Still, Madame
de Staël touchingly begs the world, in her writings,
not to allow itself to be turned from the
[53]

paths of virtue by the spectacle of a good man so
persecuted by fate. She claims our admiration
for a series of quixotic acts, and is perpetually
insisting on the amazing magnanimity which
would not allow her father to become base because
he had ceased to be useful.

Thoroughly discouraged at last (perhaps partly
convinced that to preach kindness to savages,
and self-abnegation to the vile, was a task to be
resumed in better times) Necker tendered his
resignation, and had the mortification of seeing
it accepted with perfect indifference both by the
Assembly and the King.

Before leaving Paris forever, he deposited in
the royal treasury two millions of his own property.
The exact object of this munificence is not
clear; even Madame de Staël failed to explain it
on any practical grounds. But she admired it
extremely, and so may we.

The journey with the terrified and suffering
Madame Necker to Switzerland was a great contrast
to the return in the previous year to Paris.
Then it had been “roses, roses all the way”;
now it was nothing but insults. At Arcis-sur-Aube
the carriage was stopped by an infuriated
crowd, who accused M. Necker of having betrayed
the cause of the people in the interests of
the emigrant nobles. The accusation was an
absurd one, since he had only endeavored to
[54]

be superhumanly kind to everybody. He had
wished to preserve the people from crimes and
starvation, the clergy from ruin, and the emigrant
nobles from detection, and this was the result.
It was hard, but inevitable, and as there were
many worse fates than M. Necker’s in those days
one cannot quite free oneself from a feeling of
impatience at Madame de Staël’s perpetual lamentations
over the inconceivable hardships of her parent’s lot.

We now approach an episode in Madame de
Staël’s life which it is necessary to touch on with
discretion. This is her connection with the
Count Louis de Narbonne. The stories circulated
in regard to them are familiar to all readers
of Madame d’Arblay’s memoirs. Dr. Burney
thought himself in duty bound to warn his little
Fanny against her growing adoration for Necker’s
great, but, according to him, not blameless daughter,
who, during her stay at Mickleham, exerted
herself to win the friendship of the author of

Cecilia
. Fanny, as we know, was at first greatly
shocked, and completely incredulous. She described
Madame de Staël as loving M. de Narbonne
tenderly, but so openly, and in a manner
so devoid of coquetry, that friendship between
two men, in her opinion, could hardly be differently
manifested. But the seed of suspicion
once cast in the little prude’s mind, quickly
[55]

germinated, and led eventually to a total cessation
of her acquaintance with the woman whose
brilliancy and goodness had so fascinated her.
This is not the place in which to discuss Fanny’s
conduct; but was the information on which she
based it correct? Who shall say? Madame de
Staël was extremely imprudent, and she seems
to have been dangerously near to loving a number
of men.

Miss Berry, in her memoirs, accuses her of a
“passion” for Talleyrand, and spoke as though
concluding it to be a theme of common gossip.
She certainly liked to absorb a great deal of her
friends’ affection, and was avowedly displeased
when they married. Her sentiments towards
Baron de Staël, full of a sweet and fresh cordiality
at first, seems rapidly to have changed to aversion.
As far as it is possible to judge, she unhesitatingly
sacrificed him on all occasions to her
filial love or her intellectual aims. When he was
in Paris she left him in order to console M.
Necker in his mournful retirement at Coppet.
When he was at Coppet she remained in Paris,
there to form and electrify a constitutional salon.
Various anecdotes attest to the scandal uttered
about her, and the truth of some of these stories
admits of little doubt. But, on the other hand,
it must be remembered that detraction is ever
busiest with the greatest names; that Madame
[56]

de Staël, always preoccupied with her subject
and never with herself, irritated the nerves and
stirred the bile of inferior people who were proportionately
gratified to hear her attacked; and
that she lived in the midst of a society where
conjugal fidelity was rare enough to be hardly
believed in. Countless passages in her writings
prove how exalted was her ideal of family life;
and if they also prove her constant, restless
yearning after some unattained, unattainable
good, there is at least no sign of the satiety of
exhausted emotion in them. Let us be content,
then, that in many instances a veil should hide
from us the deeper recesses of Madame de Staël’s
heart. Grant that there were two Germaines—one
her father’s daughter, lofty-minded, pure,
catching the infection of exalted feelings, and
incapable of error; the other her husband’s wife,
thrust into the fiery circle of human passion,
thence to emerge a little scorched and harmed.
The hidden centre of that dual self cannot be
revealed to us; but what we do know is sometimes
so grand and always so great that we can
afford to be indulgent when reduced to conjecture.

In 1791, after having paid a visit of condolence
to her father at Coppet, Madame de Staël had
returned to Paris, and made her salon the rallying-point
for the most distinguished Constitutionels.
[57]

Conspicuous among these, in principles
although not in name, was De Narbonne, described
by Madame de Staël herself as “
Grand
seigneur, homme d’esprit, courtisan et philosophe
.”
He was a brilliant, an enlightened, a generous
and charming man. His sympathies were liberal;
it would have been too much to expect from
him that they should be subversive. He had
been brought up in the enervating atmosphere of
the Court, yet had adopted many of the new
ideas. After having accomplished the difficult
and perilous enterprise of escorting the King’s
aunts to Rome, and establishing them under the
roof of the Cardinal de Bernis, he returned to
Paris and ranged himself on the side of the Constitution.
His soldier-soul (he was an extremely
gallant officer) would not allow of his going any
farther along the facile descent of change. The
King’s abortive attempt at escape and subsequent
imprisonment in the Tuileries restored to Narbonne
all the fervor which his allegiance as a
courtier might originally have lacked. But he
was a very intelligent man, so much so, that
Napoleon himself years later rendered justice to
his sagacity. He had serious tastes and a great
love of knowledge, and was almost as witty as
Talleyrand himself. He was made Minister of
War in December, 1791, and the general impression
prevailed that Madame de Staël’s influence
[58]

had contributed to his appointment. He was
young and full of hope, and proposed to himself
the impossible task of encouraging the action of
the Assembly at the same time as he sought to
reconstruct the popularity of the King. He also
exerted himself to prepare France for resistance
to the armies of foreign invaders; visited the
frontier; reported the state of things there to the
Assembly; provisioned the forts; re-established
garrisons, and organized three armies. But what
he could not do was to inspire anybody with confidence
in himself. “Too black for heaven, too
white for hell,” he could neither rise to the sublime
ineptitude of deluded royalism nor sink to
the brutal logic of facts. Curtly dismissed by the
King, at the end of three months, on resigning
the portfolio he resumed the sword.

To defend his ungrateful sovereign was his
religion, since, in spite of his talents, he did not
reach the point of perceiving that there is a moment
in the history of every nation when individuals
must be sacrificed to principles. Perhaps
this preoccupation of minds, naturally enlightened,
with merely personal issues is the real key
to all that was tragically mysterious in the Revolution.
Madame de Staël herself deplored the
fate of the King and Queen with precisely the
same wealth of compassion that she would have
expressed on the occasion of some catastrophe
[59]

involving hundreds of obscure lives. It seemed
as though only such sanguinary monomaniacs as
Robespierre or St. Just, only such corrupt and
colossal natures as Mirabeau or Danton, could
look below the accidental circumstances of an
event to its enduring elements. All that was
morally and vitally, as distinguished from mentally
and potentially, best in France threw itself
into passionate defence of persons; while all
that was strong, original, consistent, was drawn
into the fatal policy of blood.

A few months after Narbonne’s fall, Madame
de Staël endeavored to associate him in a plan
which her pity had suggested to her for the
escape of the Royal Family. She wished to buy
a property that was for sale near Dieppe. Thus
furnished with a pretext for visiting the coast,
she proposed to make three journeys thither.
On the first two occasions she was to be accompanied
by her eldest son, who was the age of the
Dauphin, by a man resembling the King in
height and general appearance, and by two
women sufficiently like the Queen and Madame
Elisabeth. In her third journey she would have
left the original party behind and taken with her
the whole of the Royal Family. But the King
and Queen refused to co-operate in this romantic
and courageous plan. Their motives were not
unselfish. Louis XVI. objected to Narbonne’s
[60]

share in the scheme; and Marie Antoinette, who
regarded the double representation of the Tiers
Etat as the cause of all her woes, detested Necker’s
daughter.

When the Tuileries was invaded by the mob,
M. Necker, who was already at Coppet, and knew
that the Baron de Staël had been recalled to
Sweden, wrote urging his daughter to join him.
But she was chained to Paris, fascinated by the
very scenes that revolted her, and anxious to
intervene if only to save. She assisted, with
slender sympathy for the revolutionaries, at the
celebration of the 14th July in the Champs de
Mars, and was wrung with pity for the tear-stained
countenance of the Queen, whose magnificent
toilet and dignified bearing contrasted
with the squalor of her cortège. Madame de
Staël’s eyes were fixed with longing compassion
on the figure of the King as he ascended the
steps of the altar, there to swear for the second
time to preserve the Constitution. His powdered
head, so lately desecrated by the
bonnet
rouge
, and gold-embroidered coat struck her
imagination painfully as the vain symbols of
vanished ease and splendor.

Then came the terrible night of the 9th August,
during which, from midnight to morning,
the tocsins never ceased sounding. “I was at
my window with some of my friends” (wrote
[61]

Madame de Staël), “and every fifteen minutes
the volunteer patrol of the Constitutionels
brought us news. We were told that the faubourgs
were advancing headed by Santerre the
brewer and Westermann.… Nobody could
foresee what would happen the next day, and
nobody expected to survive it.… All at
once (at 7 o’clock) came the terrible sound of
cannon. In this first combat the Swiss Guards
were victors.”

The tidings—partly false, as afterwards proved—were
brought her of the massacre of Lally Tollendal,
Narbonne, Montmorency, and others of
her friends; and at once, regardless of peril, she
went out in her carriage to hear if the news were
true. After two hours of fruitless efforts to pass,
she learnt that all those in whom she was most
interested were still alive, but in hiding; and, as
soon as the evening came, she sallied forth once
more to visit them in the obscure houses where
they had taken refuge. Later, she came to have
but one thought, which was to save as many as
she could of her friends. They were unwilling
at first to take shelter in her house as being too
conspicuous; but she would listen to no such
objections. Two yielded to her persuasions, and
one of these was Narbonne. He was shut up
with his companion in the safest room, while the
intrepid hostess established herself in the front
[62]

apartments, and there, in great anxiety, awaited
a domiciliary visit from the authorities. They
were not long in coming and in demanding M.
de Narbonne. To permit a search was practically
to deliver up the victim. Madame de Staël’s
whole mind was consequently bent on averting
investigation.

The police agents were exceptionally ignorant,
and of this fact she was quick to take advantage.
She began by instilling alarm into them as to the
violation of rights which they committed in
invading the house of an ambassador, and she
followed this up by informing them that Sweden,
being on the frontier of France, would descend
upon that offending land immediately. She next
passed to pleasantries, and succeeded so well in
cajoling her visitors that they finally allowed
themselves to be gracefully bowed out. Four
days later a false passport supplied by a friend
of Madame de Staël allowed Narbonne to escape
to England.

The Swedish ambassadress herself could easily
have left France at any moment, but she lingered
on from day to day, unwilling to quit the country
while so many of her friends were in danger;
and she was rewarded at last by the opportunity
of interfering to save Jaucourt, who had been
conveyed to the Abbaye—now aptly named “the
Ante-chamber of Death.” Madame de Staël
[63]

knew none of the members of the Commune, but,
with her unfailing presence of mind, she remembered
that one of them, Manuel, the
procureur
,
had some pretensions to be literary. These pretensions
being greater than his talent, Madame
de Staël rightly concluded that he possessed sufficient
vanity to be moved by solicitation. She
wrote to ask for an interview, which was accorded
her for the next morning at 7 o’clock in the
official’s own house.

“The hour was democratic,” she remarks, but
she was careful to be punctual. Her eloquence
achieved an easy victory over Manuel, who, unlike
so many of his colleagues, was no fanatic;
and on the 1st of September he made Madame
de Staël happy by writing to inform her that,
thanks to his good offices, Jaucourt had been set
at liberty.

She now, at last, determined to quit France
the next day, but not alone. Resolute to the end
in risking her life for that of others, she consented
to take the Abbé de Montesquion with her in
the disguise of a domestic, and convey him safely
into Switzerland. A passport obtained for one
of her servants was given to one of his, and a
place on the high road indicated as a rendezvous
where the Abbé was to join her suite.

When the next morning dawned a fresh element
of terror had invaded the public mind.
[64]

The news of the fall of Longwy and Verdun had
arrived and Paris was in effervescence. Again
in all the sections the tocsin was sounding; and
everybody whose own life was his chief preoccupation
kept as quiet as possible. But Madame
de Staël could not keep quiet—that was impossible
for her at all times—and at this moment the
image paramount in her mind was that of the
poor Abbé waiting anxiously at his rendezvous—perhaps
only to be discovered if his generous
deliverer delayed.

Turning a deaf ear to all remonstrance, she
started in a travelling-carriage drawn by six
horses, and accompanied by her servants in gala
livery. This was an unfortunate inspiration.
Instead of filling the minds of the vulgar with
awe, as she had vainly hoped, it aroused their
vigilant suspicions. The carriage had hardly
passed under the portals of the hotel before it
was surrounded by a furious crowd of old women,
“risen from hell,” as Madame de Staël energetically
expressed it, who shrieked out that she was
carrying away the gold of the nation. This intelligent
outcry brought a new contingent of
exasperated patriots of both sexes, who ordered
the fugitive Ambassadress to be conveyed to the
Assembly of the Section nearest at hand.

She did not lose her presence of mind, but on
descending from the carriage found an opportunity
[65]

of bidding the Abbé’s servant rejoin his master
and tell him of what had happened. This
step proved to be a very dangerous one. The
President of the Section informed Madame de
Staël that she was accused of seeking to take
away proscribed royalists, and that he must proceed
to a roll-call of her servants. One of them
was missing, naturally, having been despatched
to save his own master; and the consequence
was a peremptory order to Madame de Staël to
proceed to the Hôtel de Ville under charge of a
gendarme. Such a command was not calculated
to inspire her with any sentiment but fear. Several
people had already been massacred on the
steps of the Hôtel de Ville; and although no
woman had yet been sacrificed to popular fury,
there was no guarantee for such immunity lasting;
and, as a point of fact, the Princess de Lamballe
fell the very next day.

Madame de Staël’s passage from the Faubourg
Saint Germain to the Hôtel de Ville lasted
three hours. Her carriage was led at a foot-pace
through an immense crowd, which greeted
her with reiterated cries of “Death!” It was
not herself they detested, she says, but the evidences
of her luxury; for the news of the morning
had brought more opprobrium than ever on
the execrated name of aristocrat. Fortunately,
the gendarme who was inside the carriage was
[66]

touched by his prisoner’s situation and her delicate
condition of health, and her prayers, and
promised to do what he could to defend her. By
degrees her courage rose. She knew that the
worse moment must be that in which she would
reach the Place de Grève; but by the time she
arrived there aversion for the mob had almost
overcome in her every feeling but disdain.

She mounted the steps of the Hôtel de Ville
between a double row of pikes, and one man
made a movement to strike her. Thanks to the
prompt interposition of the friendly gendarme,
she was able, however, to reach the presence of
Robespierre in safety. The room in which she
found him was full of an excited crowd of men,
women and children, all emulously shrieking,
“
Vive la Nation!
”

The Swedish Ambassadress was just beginning
to protest officially against the treatment she had
met with, when Manuel arrived on the scene.
Never was any apparition more opportune.
Greatly astonished to see his late illustrious visitor
in such a position, he promptly undertook to
answer for her until the Commune had made up
its mind what to do with her; and conveying her
and her maid to his own house, shut them up in
the same cabinet where Madame de Staël had
pleaded for Jaucourt.

There they remained for six hours, “dying of
[67]

hunger, thirst, and fear.” The windows of the
room looked out upon the Place de Grève, and
consequently offered the spectacle of bands of
yelling murderers returning from the prisons
“with bare and bleeding arms.”

Madame de Staël’s travelling carriage had
remained in the middle of the square. She expected
to see it pillaged; but a man in the uniform
of the National Guard came to the rescue
and passed two hours in successfully defending
the luggage.

This individual turned out to be the redoubtable
Santerre. He introduced himself later in the
day to Madame de Staël, and took credit for his
conduct on the ground of the respect with which
M. Necker had inspired him when distributing
corn to the starving population of Paris.

In the evening Manuel, pallid with horror at
the events of that awful day, took Madame de
Staël back to her own house, through streets of
which the obscurity was only relieved at moments
by the lurid glare of torches. He told her
that he had procured a new passport for herself
and her maid alone; and that she was to be
escorted to the frontier by a gendarme.

The next day Tallien arrived, appointed by the
Commune to accompany her to the barriers.
Several suspected aristocrats were present when
he was announced. Most people under such circumstances
[68]

would have taken care to be found
alone; but Madame de Staël remained undaunted
to the end. She simply begged Tallien to be
discreet, and he fortunately proved so. A few
more difficulties had to be encountered before
she was fairly in safety; but at last she reached
the pure air and peaceful scenes of the Jura.

[69]

CHAPTER VI.

MADAME DE STAËL RETIRES TO COPPET.

Madame de Staël arrived at Coppet about the
beginning of September, 1792. The life there,
after her recent experiences in Paris, so far from
seeming to her one of welcome rest, fretted her
ardent spirit almost beyond endurance. She
longed to be back in France, even under the
shadow of the guillotine, anywhere but in front
of the lake, with its inexorable beauty and maddening
calm.

“The whole of Switzerland inspires me with
magnificent horror,” she wrote to her husband,
who was still in Sweden. “Sometimes I think
that if I were in Paris with a title which they
would be forced to respect, I might be of use to
a number of individuals, and with that hope I
would brave everything. I perceive, with some
pain, that the thing which least suits me in the
world is this peaceful and rustic life. I have put
down my horses for economy’s sake, and because
I feel my solitude less when I do not see anybody.”

[70]

By “anybody” it is to be presumed that she
meant the good Swiss, whose expressions of horror,
doubtless as monotonous as reiterated, must
have been irritating to one whose single desire
night and day, was to cast herself into the arena,
there to combat and to save. One outlet she
found for her activity in perpetual plans for enabling
her friends, and often her enemies, to escape
from Paris.

The scheme which she projected was to find
some man or woman, as the case might be, who
would enter France with Swiss passports, certificates,
etc., and after getting these properly

visés
, would hand them over to the person who
was to be saved.

Nothing could be simpler, Madame de Staël
averred; and as she provided money, time,
thought, energy, and presumably infected her
agents with a little of her own enthusiasm, her
efforts were often successful. Among those who
engaged her attention were Mathieu de Montmorency,
François de Jaucourt, the Princess de
Poix and Madame de Simiane.

Among the people whom she saved, and whose
rescue she records with the most complacency,
is that of young Achille du Chayla. He was a
nephew of De Jaucourt’s, and was residing at
Coppet under a Swedish name—(M. de Staël had
lent himself to many friendly devices of that
[71]

kind). The news came that Du Chayla, when
trying to escape across the frontier under cover
of a Swiss passport, had been arrested at a frontier
town on suspicion of being what he truly
was—a refugee Frenchman. Nevertheless, the
authorities declared themselves willing to release
him if the Lieutenant Baillival of Nyon would
attest that he was Swiss. What was to be done?
To bring M. Reverdil, the functionary aforesaid,
to such a declaration seemed well-nigh hopeless,
and Jaucourt was in despair. His nephew, if
once his identity were discovered, had no chance
of escape from death; for not only was his name
on the list of the suspected ones, but his father
actually held a command under Condé’s banner.
This was one of the opportunities in which Madame
de Staël delighted. Her spirits rose at once
in the face of such difficulties. Fortunately, M.
Reverdil was an old friend of her family; she
believed that she would be able to melt him, and
she hurried away to try.

The task was more arduous than she had anticipated.
M. Reverdil (by her own confession one
of the most enlightened of Swiss magistrates)
turned out to have a sturdy conscience and an
uncomfortable amount of common sense. He
represented to his ardent visitor, first, that he
would be wrong in uttering a falsehood for any
motive; next, that in his official position he
[72]

might compromise his country by making a false
attestation. “If the truth be discovered,” he
urged, “we shall no longer have the right of
claiming our own compatriots when arrested in
France; and thus I should jeopardize the interest
of those who are confided to me for the sake of
saving a man towards whom I have no duties.”
M. Reverdil’s arguments had “a very plausible
side,” Madame de Staël allowed thus much herself;
but the good man little knew with whom
he had to deal if he thought that such cold justice
would have the least effect on his petitioner.
She swept all paltry considerations as to the
remote danger of unknown, unromantic Swiss
burghers to the winds. Her object was to bring
back to Jaucourt the assurance of his young
nephew’s safety; and from this no abstract principles
could turn her.

She remained two hours with M. Reverdil,
arguing, entreating, imploring. The task she
proposed to herself was, in her own words, “to
vanquish his conscience by his humanity.” He
remained inflexible for a long while, but his visitor
reiterating to him, “If you say No, an only
son, a man without reproach, will be assassinated
within twenty-four hours, and your simple word
will have killed him,” he ultimately succumbed.
Madame de Staël says it was his emotion that triumphed;
it is just possible that it was sheer
[73]

physical exhaustion. Madame de Staël was at
no time a quiet person to deal with; when excited,
as in the present instance, she must have been
overpowering.

It was shortly after these events that Madame
de Staël visited England, and while there went
to Mickleham, there to be introduced to, and for
a time to captivate, Fanny Burney. Except Talleyrand,
she was the most illustrious of the brilliant
band of exiles gathered together at Juniper
Hall, and familiar to all readers of the memoirs
of Madame d’Arblay and the journal of Mrs.
Phillips. It is well known how Fanny withdrew
from her intimacy with the future author of

Corinne
on learning the stories which connected
the latter’s name with Narbonne. Mrs. Phillips
herself was much more indulgent, and Madame
de Staël appears to have felt a grateful liking for
her; but it is evident that she was deeply hurt at
Fanny’s coldness. The approbation of a nature
so narrow could hardly have affected her much,
one would think, and yet it is plain that she
longed for it—she longed indeed, all her life for
such things as she possessed not. She could
sacrifice her wishes at all times generously and
unregretfully, but she never knew how to bear
being denied one of them.

In all the glimpses one obtains of Madame de
Staël, in different countries and from different
[74]

people, she never seems quite so womanly, so
imperfect and yet so pathetic, as in these journals
of Mrs. Phillips. Perhaps the reason of it is that
one divines in her at this time a sentiment which,
if erring, was simple and
true
, while many of her
later sorrows gained a kind of factitious grandeur
from the train of political circumstances attendant
on them. Mrs. Phillips was present when
Madame de Staël received the letter which summoned
her to rejoin her husband at Coppet, and
relates the effect produced upon her. She was
most frankly inconsolable, spoke again and again
of her sorrow at going, and made endless entreaties
to Mrs. Phillips to attend to the wants, spirits
and affairs of the friends whom she was leaving.
She even charged her with a message of forgiveness
for the ungrateful Fanny, and fairly sobbed
when parting with Mrs. Folk.

Madame de Staël did not leave Coppet again
until after the Revolution. Her life seems to
have passed with a monotony that the long drama
of horror slowly culminating in Paris rendered
tragically sombre. She continued her efforts—every
day more difficult of accomplishment and
sterile of results—to save her friends and foes;
and when the Queen was arraigned, she wrote,
in a few days, that eloquent and well-known
defence of her which called down upon the writer
the applause of every generous heart in Europe.

[75]

The Neckers during this period seem to have
seen very little society. Gibbon was almost their
only friend; and in 1794 he went to England,
and a few months later died. The next to go was
Madame Necker herself. She had long been ill,
and her last few months of life were embittered
by cruel pain. She had prepared for her end
with the minute and morbid care that might have
been expected from her. The tomb at Coppet in
which she rests, together with her husband and
daughter, was built in conformity with her wishes,
and in great part under her eyes. She died on
6th May, 1794. M. Necker felt her death
acutely, and for months not even his daughter’s
sympathy could console him. Madame Necker
had one of those self-tormenting natures which
poison the existence of others in embittering their
own. Too noble to be slighted, and too exacting
to be appeased, they work out the doom of unachieved
desires; and when they go to be wrapt
in eternal mystery, their parting gift to their
loved ones is a vague remorse and doubting.
Silent themselves when they might have spoken,
they leave an unanswered question in the hearts
of their survivors. Monsieur Necker, with his
exaggerated consciousness, must have asked himself
repeatedly if he had cared for his strange and
loving wife enough. Madame de Staël mourned
her mother sincerely, but it is clear that the keenest
[76]

edge of her grief came from contemplation of
her father’s.

Three months had not elapsed after Madame
Necker’s death when the 9th Thermidor dawned,
and at its close, all sanguinary as that appalling
termination was, France drew one long sigh of
inconceivable relief, for Robespierre had fallen.
The Directory followed, and Baron de Staël having
been re-nominated to his post, his wife lost
no time in hurrying back to Paris. There, true
to her indefatigable self, she immediately set
about obtaining the eradication of her friends’
names from the list of the proscribed
émigrés
.
From this moment her opinions, and with them
her character, underwent a certain change. She
had been a moderate royalist; she became
avowedly a republican. But her republicanism
was of a strangely abstract and eclectic sort, and
it was dashed with so many personal leanings
towards monarchists that it resulted in nothing
better than a spirit of intrigue.

She could not understand that the law, whatever
it may be, which governs circumstances,
makes no account of individuals. She believed
that, by causing Mathieu de Montmorency and
Talleyrand to be recalled from exile, and inspiring
Benjamin Constant with the loftiest ideals,
she could obliterate the blood-stained past and
reverse the logic of events. When everybody
[77]

(everybody, that is, whom she cared about) should
have been restored to peace, prosperity, and the
air of France, she conceived that the study of
metaphysical systems and the cultivation of the
affections would alone be needed to re-model and
perfect humanity.

With this in view she toiled and plotted unceasingly,
clasping the hands of regicides like
Barras, rubbing skirts with such women as Tallien,
and sacrificing her own pet ideal of womanly
duty, which consisted, as she repeatedly proclaimed,
in loving and being loved, and leaving
the jarring strife of politics to men.

Had she remained in France, she must inevitably
have been betrayed into greater inconsistencies
still. But, fortunately for her fame, her
intellect, and her character, the period was approaching
in which Bonaparte’s aversion was to
condemn her to a decade of illustrious exile.

[78]

CHAPTER VII.

THE TRANSFORMED CAPITAL.

In all its varied story, the world probably never
offered a stranger spectacle than that presented
by Paris when Madame de Staël returned to
it in 1795. The mixture of classes was only
equalled by the confusion of opinions, and these,
in their turn, were proclaimed by the oddest contrasts
in costumes.
Muscadins
in gray coats and
green cravats twirled their canes insolently in the
faces of wearers of greasy
carmagnoles
; while
the powdered pigtails of reactionaries announced
the aristocratic contempt of their wearers for the
close-cropped heads of the Jacobins.

To the squalid orgies in the streets, illuminated
by stinking oil-lamps, and varied by the rumble
of the tumbrils, had succeeded the salons where
Josephine Beauharnais displayed her Creole
grace, and
Notre Dame de Thermidor
sought to
wield the social sceptre of decapitated princesses.
Already royalism had revived, although furtively,
and fans on which the name of the coming King
could be read but by initiated eyes, were passed
[79]

from hand to hand in the cafés of “Coblentz.”
A strange light-hearted nervous gayety—intoxicating
as champagne—had dissipated the lurid
gloom of the Terror; the dumbness of horror had
given way to a reckless contempt for tyranny.
A sordid, demented mania for speculation had
invaded all classes, and refined and delicate
women trafficked in pounds of sugar or yards of
cloth.

An enormous sensation was produced by Ducancel’s

Nouveaux Aristides, ou l’Intérieur des
Comités Révolutionnaires
, a comedy in which its
author distilled into every line the hoarded bitterness
of his soul against the Jacobins.

Barras flaunted his cynical sensuality and
shameless waste in the face of a bankrupt society;
and austere revolutionaries, beguiled into the
enervating atmosphere of the gilded salons, sold
their principles with a stroke of the same pen
that restored some illustrious proscribed one to
his family. “Every one of us was soliciting the
return of some
émigré
among his friends,” writes
Madame de Staël. “I obtained several recalls
at this period; and in consequence the deputy
Legendre, almost a man of the people, denounced
me from the tribune of the Convention. The
influence of women and the power of good society
seemed very dangerous to those who were
excluded, but whose colleagues were invited to
[80]

be seduced. One saw on
decadis
, for Sundays
existed no longer, all the elements of the old and
new
régime
united, but not reconciled.”

Into this seething world Madame de Staël
threw herself with characteristic activity. Legendre’s
attack upon her, foiled by Barras, could
not deter her from interference. Her mind being
fixed upon some ideal Republic, she was anxious
to blot out all record of past intolerance. The
prospect of restoring an aristocrat to his home,
or of shielding him from fresh dangers, invariably
proved irresistible to her. Nevertheless she was
quick to perceive and to signalize the folly of the
reactionaries; and she felt but scant sympathy
with the mad attempt at a monarchical restoration
known in history as the 13th Vendémiaire.
She uttered no word of palliation for the massacres
committed by the Royalists in Lyons and
Marseilles, and she was more than willing to admit
the benefits conferred on France by the first six
months of the Government of the Directory.

But she could not be happy at the continued
exclusion of the nobles and clericals, and any
appeal from one of them touched her with all the
force of old association. Talleyrand had not
returned from America when her eloquence
induced Chénier to address the Convention in
favor of his recall. Montesquion next claimed
her attention, and in consequence of all this she
[81]

became an object of suspicion and was accused
of exciting revolt. The Government, indeed,
thought her so dangerous that, at one moment,
when she was at Coppet, they ordered her to be
arrested and brought to Paris, there to be imprisoned.
Barras, however, defended her, as she
relates, “with warmth and generosity,” and,
thanks to him, she was enabled to return, a free
agent, to France.

Throughout the events preceding the
coup
d’État
of the 18th Fructidor, Madame de Staël
was keenly alive to the danger which threatened
and eventually overtook her friends among the
Moderates. To act, in these circumstances, was
with her a second nature. Her relations with
Barras had naturally become very friendly; and
she used her influence to obtain the nomination
of Talleyrand to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
“His nomination was the only part that I took
in the crisis preceding the 18th Fructidor, and
which I hoped by such means to avert,” she
wrote. “One was justified in hoping that the
intelligence of M. de Talleyrand would bring
about a reconciliation between the two parties.
Since then I have not had the least share in the
different phases of his political career.”

There is a ring of disappointment in these
words; but how could Madame de Staël, with
[82]

her supposed infallible insight, ever have believed
in such a nature?

“It is necessary to serve someone,” was the
answer of a noble when reproached for accepting
the office of chamberlain to one of Napoleon’s
sisters. Madame de Staël records the reply with
scorn; but she should, one thinks, have recognized
the fibre of just such a man in the Bishop
of Autun. The proscription extending on all
sides after the 18th Fructidor, Madame de Staël’s
intervention became unceasing. She learnt the
danger incurred by Dupont de Nemours, according
to her “the most chivalrous champion of liberty”
France possessed, and straightway she
betook herself to Chénier, who, two years previously,
had made the speech to which Talleyrand
owed his recall. Her eloquence soon fired
the nervous, violent-natured, but imaginative
author, and, hurrying to the tribune, he succeeded
in saving Dupont de Nemours, by representing
him as a man of eighty, whereas he was barely
sixty. This device displeased the very person in
whose favor it was adopted; but Madame de
Staël saved her friends in spite of themselves.

So much energy could not be displayed with
impunity, and the Committee of Public Safety
caused a hint to be conveyed to the Baron de
Staël, which induced his wife to retire for a short
time to the country. According to Thibaudeau,
[83]

indeed, the hint was in the first instance a distinct
order to quit France, and M. de Staël cut a
somewhat sorry figure when appearing before the
Committee to protest against it. In spite of his
“embarrassed air” and “want of dignity,” he
managed to convey to his hearers that to expel
the wife of an ambassador would be a violation
of rights; and after some discussion the decree
was withdrawn. Nevertheless, probably yielding
to the prudent representations of her husband,
Madame de Staël did retire for a while, and took
refuge with a friend. We may suppose that she
felt greatly aggrieved and ill-used, and yet it cannot
be denied that her qualities—rare and noble
though they might be—were not of a nature to
recommend her to a Revolutionary Government.
One can even affirm that they were not of a sort
to recommend her to any Government. Her talents,
her wealth and her position gave her immense
social power. When she used this, as she
repeatedly did, to inspire officials with disobedience
to orders, and to save the lives of reactionary
prisoners at the risk of ruining radical
functionaries, it is not to be wondered at if the
selfish majority regarded her interference as exceedingly
pernicious.

It may even be questioned whether her influence
at this time was intrinsically valuable. Her
state of excited feeling kept her floating between
[84]

sympathy with principles and sympathy with
individuals. The result was an eclecticism of
feeling, which reflected itself in the composition
of her salon. Had she been able to declare herself
frankly either Monarchical or Republican she
might have left some lasting impress on the destinies
of her land. As it was, she was kept in a
condition of restless activity which, while sterile
of intellectual results, brought her into disrepute
as a conspirator.

The time was now rapidly approaching when
Bonaparte was to cross her path, and, as she
chose to conceive it, to spoil her existence. The
instrument of destiny in this instance was Benjamin
Constant. Immediately after the fall of
Robespierre he arrived—a young old man, world-weary,
full of unsteady force, and warmed by an
inner flame of passion that sometimes smouldered
but never died down.

A Bernese noble, he had been reared in aristocratic
prejudices, but his life was early embittered
by domestic circumstances and the political
conditions of his country. After being educated
at Oxford, Edinburgh, and in Germany, he was
forced by his father to accept the post of Chamberlain
at the Court of Brunswick. Ariel in the
cloven pine was not more heart-sick, with the difference
that Constant’s “delicate” spirit was
dashed by a vein of mephistophelian mockery.
[85]

Some malignant fairy seemed to have linked to
his flashing and unerring insight a disposition the
most cynical of which man ever carried the burden
through sixty-three years of life. Being
utterly unwarped by illusion, he could place himself
on the side of opposition with telling effect,
for he could neither deceive himself nor be
deceived by others; and if not rigidly conscientious,
he was inexorably logical.

At war with the authorities of his native land,
too familiarized with order to be further charmed
by it, and tired of the solemn absurdities of Court
functions, he turned his thoughts towards revolutionary
Paris as being, perhaps, the one city in
the world which could still afford him a fresh sensation.
Moreover, every element of originality
and audacity in his brilliant mind was attracted
by the amazing spectacle then presented by the
Convention. A government which, deprived of
organized armies, money, or traditions, confronted
with a European coalition, and weighted with
the responsibility of crime, had conquered its enemies
in the field, and made its will respected from
the Pyrenees to the Rhine, was exactly of a kind
to fascinate a born combatant like Constant. He
arrived, eager to be initiated into that strange
world; longing to find himself in the salons of
Madame Tallien, Josephine Beauharnais and
Madame de Staël.

[86]

Hitherto his Egeria had been Madame de
Charrière, a charming middle-aged monitress,
Dutch by birth, but French by right of intellect
and choice of language. Her delicate penetration
and subtle sympathy with minor moods had
doubtless for years responded precisely to his
ideal; for if she might not excite neither could
she bore him; and she must have understood his
fastidious notions even before he could express
them. She was, in fact, perfection, as long as he
was still too young to mind feeling old; but there
necessarily came a moment when that unconscious
comedy was played out. The fitful energy
of his nature had gradually vanquished his early
lassitude, and he needed to renew his utterances
at the founts of some Sybilline inspiration.

Madame de Staël appears simply to have overwhelmed
him; and the effect which he produced
on her was not less startling. Her salon was the
rallying-ground of contradictory individualities.
She believed in those days that she could reconcile
Irreconcilables, and she welcomed Conventionnels
like Chénier and Roederer, stranded
“survivals” of a vanished epoch like Suard,
Morellet and Laharpe; and aristocrats, some of
them altogether soured and worn out, like Castellane,
Choiseul and Narbonne. Into this political
menagerie Constant fell like a spirit from another
world. Applauding the Revolution, yet having
[87]

played no part in it, he was its virgin knight.
There was something strange and attractive also
in his appearance; a certain awkwardness in figure
and gesture joined to a handsome, clever,
young face and long, fair hair. Just at that moment
(1795) the predominant tendency in Madame
de Staël’s salon was hostile to the Government.
She professed herself already to be
converted to Republicanism, and probably was
so in theory, but she had not yet overcome her
aversion to the real revolutionaries. Either
directly through her influence or with her tacit
consent, Constant was induced to publish three
letters protesting against the admission of two
thirds of the old Convention into the new body
of Representatives. The success which followed
was prodigious. All the women of the Royalist
party flattered and caressed him, and all the journalists
extolled him to the skies. Constant, however,
was not the man to bear that kind of petting
long, he required excitement with some keener
edge to it, and was, moreover, too logical, too
naturally enlightened and liberal to endorse reactionary
platitudes. He hastened to disavow the
letters, and although he did not find it easy to
disabuse the public mind of its first impression,
he was careful not to deepen this by any further
mistakes. During the following four years his
intimacy with Madame de Staël flourished and
[88]

grew apace. They acted and reacted upon one
another by the law of their opposing natures.
His ardor was as uncertain as hers was steady;
but whenever he caught fresh fire, it came from
her. On the other hand, the tormenting kind of
cruelty which belonged to his cynical caprice
seems to have cast a spell over Madame de Staël’s
own warm and frank simplicity which she found
it difficult to break.

To Constant, at this time, belongs the merit of
having appreciated her thoroughly and defended
her warmly—if not invariably, at any rate in his
truer moments. On his very first meeting with
her, which was in Switzerland, she enthralled him
instantaneously; perhaps all the more so that,
like most people, he had been prejudiced against
her by hearsay. He wrote to Madame de Charrière,
who seems to have felt and expressed some
bitterness regarding his new acquaintance, that
she should get rid of the idea that Madame de
Staël was nothing more than a “talking machine.”

He praised her lively interest in everyone who
suffered, and her courage in scheming for the
escape of her friends and enemies. He admitted
that she might be active partly because she could
not help it; but silenced further carping by the
remark that her activity was well employed. In
about a month more his admiration had risen to
[89]

enthusiasm, and he could hardly find words in
which to praise the brilliancy and accuracy of
mind, the exquisite goodness, the generosity and
social politeness, the simplicity and charm of his
latest friend. He declared that she knew just as
well how to listen as to talk (a point on which
many both before and after Madame de Charrière
differed from him), and that she enjoyed the talents
of other people quite as much as her own.
This was perfectly true. No woman ever breathed
who was less envious than Madame de Staël; but,
on the other hand, what woman’s intellect was
ever so unapproachable? At the time, however,
of her first acquaintance with Constant, her literary
reputation was still to make, and it is not to
be wondered at, consequently, if Madame de
Charrière felt more inclined to question than
agree when informed that this restless female
politician was a being of so superior a sort that
her like could not be met with once in a century.

About 1796 Madame de Staël took a new departure.
Perhaps thanks to Constant’s enlightened
views, perhaps thanks merely to her own
common sense, she felt the full futility of reactionary
effort, and ranged herself frankly on the
side of the Directory. The royalist Club de
Clichy was by this time an accomplished fact;
and to neutralize its mischievous influence the
Cercle Constitutionnel had been formed at the
[90]

Hôtel de Salm. For some time Madame de Staël
was the soul of these meetings, and Constant was
their orator. Finally, when a fresh division in
the Convention declared itself, and a large number
of deputies deserted the Directory, Madame
de Staël and Constant exerted themselves to
prove that such dissensions could profit only the
two extremes of Royalists or Terrorists, but never
the Moderates. Naturally, the latter were deaf
(when have Moderates eyes to see or ears to
hear in moments of vital significance?), and
Madame de Staël’s worst previsions were justified
by the events of the 18th Fructidor. The
establishment, two years later, of the Consulate,
while filling Madame de Staël’s noble soul with
dismay, offered Constant the opportunity assigned
to him by his talents. He entered then
upon the course of opposition from which he did
not again deviate until sixteen years later, when
he yielded either to Napoleon’s personal charm,
the fascination of his deeds, and the hope of his
repentance, or to the profound disgust of a world-worn
man with the imbecility of the Restoration.

This is how Constant, in 1800, described the
state of the public mind in France:—

“The predominating idea was: Liberty has
done us harm, and we wish for it no longer; and
those who modestly pointed out to these candidates
for slavery that the evils of the Revolution
[91]

came precisely from the fact that the Revolution
had suspended liberty, were hounded through the
salons under the names of Jacobins and Anarchists.
A nation which begged for slavery from a
military chieftain of thirty, who had covered himself
with glory, might count upon its wishes being
gratified; and they were.”

These few lines are a good example of Constant’s
incisive intellect and biting style. Another
man with such gifts would have retired
disgusted from all opposition; but Constant loved
fighting for its own sake. Perhaps he loved the
combat better than the cause; but that is one of
the secrets which it is given to no one to fathom.
Whatever the central motive, the final fact of his
complex and interesting nature, he proved himself
the ideal leader of a forlorn hope.

By the contemporaries of Constant and Madame
de Staël the connection between these two
brilliant minds was, as might be expected, variously
judged. Later critics have asserted that
he was completely under her influence, but it is
more likely that his native cynicism and spurious
passion alternately irritated and dominated her.
She may have inspired, but she could not mould,
a nature so original and perverse.

Chênedollé said of Madame de Staël about this
time that she had more intelligence than she
could manage, and in this there was probably
[92]

some truth. She had hardly begun to write as
yet, having published (besides some pamphlets)
only the
Letters on Rousseau
, and her work on
the
Passions
. Her turbulence of ideas, scarcely
then reduced to any system, must necessarily
have been crystallized at moments by contact
with a more definite mind.

[93]

CHAPTER VIII.

MADAME DE STAËL MEETS NAPOLEON.

The hostility between Madame de Staël and
Napoleon was inevitable, since not a single point
of sympathy existed between them. Her moral
superiority, unselfishness, romantic ardor and sincerity,
were precisely the qualities for which he
would feel contempt, as being incompatible with
the singleness of individual purpose, serene indifference
to suffering, and calm acceptance of
means which are necessary to material success.
Madame de Staël was intimately convinced that
not only honesty, but every other virtue constituted
the best policy. Napoleon treated all such
amiable theories as mere sentimentalism. If
occasionally sensual from love of excitement, he
was essentially passionless, and looked upon
women as toys, not as sentient beings. He hated
them to have ideas of their own; he liked them
to be elegant, graceful and pretty. He was
brought into contact with Madame de Staël—a
woman overflowing with passion, energy and
intellect, large of person, loud of voice, careless
[94]

in attire. She had generally found her eloquence
invincible, and he meant nothing to be invincible
but his system. She had every reason to
believe in her talent, and proclaimed that belief
somewhat obstreperously; while he was disgusted
at not being able to differ from her, and at
finding that there was still one light which could
shine unquenched beside his star. He usually
succeeded in repressing people so entirely as to
leave alive in them no possibility of protest; but
she was, by her nature, irrepressible. It is true
that she records having felt suffocated in his
presence, but such a feeling could not have
endured in her long. A very little familiarity
would have transformed it into impatient rebellion.
For Napoleon society, with a few exceptions,
was composed of dummies, some of them
a little more tangible and resisting than others,
consequently more difficult to thrust out of the
way. The individual had no intrinsic value for
him, but was simply a factor in the sum of success.
Madame de Staël admired everybody who
was clever, loved everybody who was good, pitied
everybody who was sorrowful. She detested
oppression, and fought against it and conquered,
if not materially, at least morally, although sometimes
she hardly foresaw when engaging in it
how much the fight would cost her. In the
beginning of her acquaintance with him Madame
[95]

de Staël evidently entertained an admiration for
Napoleon greater than that which she eventually
cared to avow. Bourrienne goes so far as to
assert that she was in love with him, and that
she wrote him perfervid letters, which he disdainfully
threw into the fire. It is not necessary
to accept the whole of this story. Bourrienne
as a returned
émigré
can have felt but a meagre
sympathy for Madame de Staël, and he probably
yielded to the temptation of making his account
of her as piquant as possible. But as she never
did anything by halves, and always wrote with
the most unconventional ardor, it is certain that
her first sentiments towards the conqueror of
Italy were expressed in a form to weary rather
than gratify him. She presumably praised him
for views which he did not hold, and for a disinterestedness
that he was far from feeling. He
must have understood that to an intellect such
as hers, the first shock of disappointment would
bring enlightenment, and then his schemes would
be penetrated before they were ripe for execution.
Add to all these elements of antipathy the
fact that every intelligent man in Paris would find
his way to Madame de Staël’s salon, with the
further fact that she herself was not to be
silenced, and it becomes easy to understand how
Bonaparte could condescend from his greatness
to hate her.

[96]

His aversion, owing to his Italian blood, had a
strain of Pulcinello-like malignity, and every fresh
outbreak of clamor from his victim only roused
him to strike harder. That he should exile her
in the first instance was not only comprehensible
but justifiable. He had undertaken a gigantic
task, that of accomplishing by the single force of
his own will, and in the brief space of his own
life-time, what, in the natural course of events,
would have required the slow action of generations.
That is, he sought to weld into his own
system the mobile, alert, and impressionable
mind of France.

To crush a thing so impalpable, to extinguish
a thing so fiery, was an impossible undertaking,
and to anybody but Napoleon it must have
seemed so. He, at least, so far understood its
magnitude as to appreciate the full danger of
even a momentary reaction. And what, in that
sombre but electric atmosphere, charged with
suppressed fire, was so likely to provoke a reaction
as the influence of Madame de Staël—a
woman of amazing talent, of high position and
great wealth; notoriously disinterested, and,
although ever true to her principles, yet strongly
swayed by personal influences.

Moreover, she represented the Opposition.
Let anybody consider what public opinion is,
even in well-ordered England, how it reverses in
[97]

a moment the best laid plans of Ministers, and it
becomes easy to understand how in revolutionary
France, a new thought emanating from Madame
de Staël’s salon could prove gravely dangerous to
Napoleon. In exiling her he only treated her
as she had been treated already. If he found
her in France on coming to power, it was because
she had been reconciled to the Directory; but
there never was the least chance of her becoming
reconciled to him.

There are several very womanly touches in
Madame de Staël’s own account of her relations
with Napoleon. Here is one of them, relating
apparently to a time when the aversion between
the First Consul and his illustrious foe had
become an accomplished but not an acknowledged
fact. Madame de Staël was invited to
General Berthier’s one evening when it was
known that Napoleon would be present.

“As I knew,” she says, “that he spoke very
ill of me, it struck me that he would address me
with some of the rude things which he often liked
to say to women, even to those who flattered him;
and I wrote down on chance, before going to the
party, the different stinging and spirited replies
which I could make to his speeches. I did not
wish to be taken by surprise if he insulted me,
for that would have been a greater want of character
even than of wit; and as nobody could be
[98]

sure of remaining at ease with such a man, I had
prepared myself beforehand to defy him. Fortunately,
it was unnecessary; he only put the
most insignificant question in the world to me,
for … he never attacks except where he feels
himself to be the stronger.”

The whole of this passage is enchantingly
simple-minded. One may be allowed to think,
in spite of Madame de Staël’s assertion to the
contrary, that she was really disappointed at not
being able to make some of her defiant retorts to
the conqueror; but it was child-like of her to
have arranged them in advance!

Napoleon was preparing to invade Switzerland.
Madame de Staël flattered herself for a moment
that she might deter him from the project, and
sought an interview with him for that purpose.
The
tête-à-tête
lasted an hour, and Napoleon listened
with the utmost patience, but he did not
give himself any trouble to discuss Madame de
Staël’s arguments, and quickly diverted the conversation
to his own love of solitude, country life
and fine arts—three things for which, by the way,
his visitor cared almost as little as himself. She
came away convinced that the eloquence of
Cicero and Demosthenes combined would not
move him, but captivated, she admits, by the
charm of his manner; in other words, by the
false
bonhomie
which he possessed the art of
[99]

introducing into his Italian garrulity. While
Madame de Staël pleaded and Bonaparte chattered
they were both learning to understand one
another, but it is most probable that the first to
be enlightened was the man.

Switzerland being threatened with an invasion,
Madame de Staël left Paris in 1798 to join her
father at Coppet; for he was still on the list of

émigrés
, and therefore came under a law which
forbade him on pain of death to remain on any
soil occupied by French troops. His daughter,
always as much alarmed by remote danger as
courageous when in imminent peril, trembled for
his safety, and supplicated him to leave, but in
vain. He probably supposed that her fears were
groundless; and so they turned out to be.

When Madame de Staël was returning to
France, Necker, anxious to have his name erased
from the list of the proscribed, drew up a memorial
to that effect, which was presented by his
daughter to the Government. His request having
been unanimously granted, his next step was
to endeavor to recover the two millions which he
had quixotically left in the public treasury when
quitting France on the outbreak of the Revolution.
The Government recognized the debt, and
offered to pay it out of the confiscated church
lands. But to this M. Necker would not consent.
He no longer disapproved of the sale of ecclesiastical
[100]

property, but he did not wish to throw
doubt on his perfect impartiality by confounding
his interests with his opinions.

About this time Madame de Staël’s separation
from her husband took place. Her ostensible object
was to ensure the safety of her children’s fortune,
which was jeopardized by Baron de Staël’s
extravagance. Any other reason which may
have existed is not of great importance, inasmuch
as the Baron, always a shadowy personage, had
finally been quite eclipsed by his brilliant wife.
He was said to be indifferent to her, but he seems
to have been always fairly amiable and very obedient.
As it will not be necessary to speak of
him again, it may be mentioned here that he died
in 1802, and that his last moments were soothed
by the ministrations of his wife, who, hearing
that he was ill, travelled from Switzerland to
France to attend on him, and tried to bring him
back with her to Coppet; but he expired on the
road at a place called Poligny.

Madame de Staël happened to be returning
from Coppet to Paris on the 18th Brumaire, when
she learnt that her carriage had passed that of
her former ally Barras, who was returning to his
estate at Grosbois accompanied by gendarmes.
The name of “Bonaparte” was on everybody’s
lips—the first time, as she remarks, that such a
thing had happened since the Revolution. The
[101]

state of things which she found on entering the
capital was of a kind to excite her imagination.
Five weeks of intrigue had ripened Napoleon’s
opportunity, and the 19th Brumaire dawned on a
France exhausted and enslaved.

From that moment Madame de Staël’s
rôle

was marked out for her irrevocably as one of perpetual
opposition. At no time inclined to silence,
she was, we may be sure, both loud and intrepid
in her denunciation of the new tyranny. At first
Napoleon appeared disposed to win her over.
Joseph Bonaparte, who was her friend and frequented
her salon, came to her once with something
that sounded like a message. Napoleon
had asked why Madame de Staël would not give
in her adhesion to his Government. Did she
want the two millions to be paid to her father, or
residence in Paris accorded him? There should
be no difficulty about either. She had only to
say what it was she wanted. Madame de Staël’s
answer is celebrated: “The question is not what
I want, but what I think.”

Some protests against the growing despotism
proceeded from the Tribunat, and notably from
Constant. It is superfluous to say that Madame
de Staël applauded these with fervor. It is well
known how, the evening previous to a celebrated
speech which he was about to make, Constant
consulted her on the subject. She encouraged
[102]

him warmly, although already perceiving that the
path which she had elected to tread would, in all
likelihood, lead to exile. The salon was full of
her friends at the time, but Constant warned her
that, if he spoke the next day, everybody would
desert her. “You must obey your conscience,”
she replied; but adds that, had she known what
she would have to suffer from that day, and
throughout the next ten years, her answer might
have been different. But here we think that
Madame de Staël’s literary instinct carried her
away. She was very sincere, but very imaginative,
and, when writing for the public, it must
often have been difficult for her to distinguish
between what she felt
before
and
after
the fact.
Considering what her disposition was, and the
opportunities for eloquence afforded both to herself
and Constant by an attitude of hostility to
Napoleon, it is impossible to resist the conclusion
that she enjoyed her opposition with one-half
of her nature, if she regretted its results with
the other.

For some weeks after Constant’s speech Madame
de Staël’s salon, usually so animated, was
silent and deserted. Joseph Bonaparte was
forbidden by his brother to attend it; but most
people needed no prohibition, they absented
themselves of their own accord under various
pretexts. Fouché, the Minister of Police, called
[103]

on her, and insinuated that a brief retirement
into the country would be advisable, as giving
the storm time to blow over. She took the hint,
and retired for a short time to St. Ouen. On her
return to Paris she avers that she did not find
Napoleon’s wrath at all appeased. Apparently
she expected it to die a spontaneous death, for
she did not adopt the only means by which she
could have pacified him, but continued to applaud,
if not instigate, an active hostility to his measures.
It would have been grand and magnanimous
of Napoleon to have despised the enmity of
a woman, but he was neither grand nor magnanimous.
Moreover, the last thing which Madame
de Staël probably desired was to be despised.
Nobody can deny her the meed of admiration
which she deserved for her love of liberty, and
the indomitable spirit with which, when in exile,
she refused to conciliate her oppressor by one
word of praise. But, inasmuch as she knew with
whom she had to deal, and what would be the
consequence of her actions, one must admit that
the amount of pity which she claimed for herself,
and has generally received, is excessive. She
was in direct contradiction to her own theories
of a woman’s true duty, when interfering in politics;
and in being treated by Napoleon as a man
might have been, she paid the penalty of the
splendid intellect which emancipated her from
[104]

the habits and the views, if not from the weaknesses,
of her sex. She was neither helpless nor
harmless, since she could stir up enemies to the
tyrant by her eloquence, and revenge herself,
when punished, by the power of her pen. She
was exiled not because she was a woman and
defenceless, but because she was a genius and
formidable. She deliberately engaged in a contest
of which the object was to prove who was
the stronger—herself or Napoleon.

She came out of it scarred, but dauntless.
What right had she to complain because the
weapons that wounded her were keen?

Besides, paltry as Napoleon showed himself in
many respects, he was a phenomenon of so exceptional
a nature that to judge him by ordinary
standards was absurd. It was the weakness of
France which made his opportunity; and if the
epoch had not been abnormal, he never could
have dominated it. The people whom he governed
had two courses open to them: to submit
or to protest. The first brought profit, the second
glory; and the glory which is purchased by
no sacrifice is unworthy of the name.

In 1801 Madame de Staël published her work
on
Literature
, in which, as she says, there was
not a word concerning Napoleon, although “the
most liberal sentiments were expressed in it with
force.” The book produced an immense sensation;
[105]

and Parisian society, in its admiration for
the writer, forgot the First Consul’s displeasure,
and again crowded round her. She admits that
the winter of 1801 was a pleasant one. Napoleon,
passing through Switzerland the previous
summer, had seen and spoken with M. Necker.
It is characteristic of both interlocutors that the
ex-statesman was far more impressed with the
warrior than the latter with him. Necker divined
in the young hero a strength of will to which his
own hesitating nature was a stranger; while
Napoleon, on his side, penetrating but prejudiced,
contemptuously described the once august
financier in two words, “A banker and an Idealist.”
With his usual cynicism, he attributed
Necker’s visit to the desire of employment;
whereas Madame de Staël affirmed that her
father’s chief object was to plead her cause. In
this he was so far successful that residence in
France was for some time at least assured to her.
“It was,” she writes, “the last time that my
father’s protecting hand was extended over my
life.” For the moment, either this beneficent
influence, or, as is more likely, a passing fit of
good humor on the part of Napoleon, enabled her
to enjoy existence. Fouché consented to recall
several
émigrés
for whom she interceded, and even
Joseph Bonaparte once again treated her with
[106]

cordiality, and entertained her for a little time at
his estate at Morfontaine.

A variety of circumstances arose to put an end
to this state of things and to revive Napoleon’s
dislike to Madame de Staël. Her father published
his work,
Dernières Vues de Politique et de
Finance
, with the avowed intention of protesting
against Napoleon’s growing tyranny. His
daughter had encouraged him in this feeling, herself
unable, as she declares, to silence this “Song
of the Swan.” Then Bernadotte had inaugurated
a certain sullen opposition to the First Consul,
and Madame de Staël immediately became
his friend. Finally, her salon was more crowded
than ever, and by great personages, such as the
Prince of Orange and other embryo potentates,
besides foreigners of celebrity in letters and science.

Napoleon detested salons. It was his conviction
that a woman who disposed of social influence
might do anything in France, inasmuch as
he held that the best brains in the country were
female. Madame de Staël, moreover, possessed
the art of keeping herself well before the public.
Even now she had just published
Delphine
, and
all the papers were full of it. To please Napoleon,
they condemned it as immoral—a strange
criticism in that age, and an excellent advertisement
in any.

[107]

Napoleon, on Madame de Staël’s again visiting
Switzerland, hinted to Lebrun that she would do
well not to return to Paris. His obsequious colleague
hastened to intimate this by letter; and
although the communication was not official, the
First Consul’s lightest intimations by this time
carried so much weight that Madame de Staël
was compelled to obey. She did so very reluctantly;
and perhaps if her father’s prudence had
not been greater than her own, her longing to be
back in the capital would have overpowered every
other consideration. As it was, she made the
best that she could of a year’s uninterrupted
sojourn at Coppet. The Tribunat meanwhile
had shown itself again rebellious. Bonaparte,
irritated, declared that he would shake twelve or
fifteen of its members “from his clothes like vermin,”
and Constant had no choice but to rejoin
his friend in Switzerland.

[108]

CHAPTER IX.

NEW FACES AT COPPET.

Some remarkable people had already begun to
cluster round the Châtelaine of Coppet. De
Gérando, Sismondi, Camille Jordan, Madame de
Krüdener, Madame Récamier—all are interesting
names. Camille Jordan, who was introduced
by De Gérando, appears to have been taken up
at once with characteristic ardor by Madame de
Staël. His
Vrai Sens du Vôte National sur le
Consulat à Vie
, published in 1802, was just the
kind of trumpet-call to which she always responded.
Straightway her letters to him became frequent,
and full of the excessive fervor and flattery
which distinguished all her protestations of affection.
Oddly enough, Madame de Krüdener,
not yet a priestess, but a most decided coquette,
appears to have exercised a rather perturbing
influence upon these new relations. Madame de
Staël writes that she would have liked to send
Jordan a ring containing a lock of her hair, and
formerly the property of her husband, but she is
restrained by the recollection of Madame de Krüdener’s
[109]

fair tresses, for which, as she learns,
Camille entertains a lively admiration. Another
letter contains an invitation to him to join her
and one or two other friends in a journey to Italy,
coupled with a playful hint that in such scenes
he might find her society more agreeable than
the lovely blonde’s. Camille not responding in
the way desired, Madame de Staël betrays some
wounded feeling. She had thought that when
once she had admired Jordan’s writings so much,
everything must be in harmony between them.
She had been mistaken. She would take refuge
in silence. Nevertheless she is not silent; and
Madame de Krüdener’s name reappears. Madame
de Staël is willing to admit that she is a
remarkable person, but objects that she is always
talking of persons who have killed themselves for
love of her. Then Jordan is summoned to say
if it be true that he is in love, not with Madame,
but with Mademoiselle de Krüdener? She has
nothing but a Greuze-like face to recommend her,
and if
she
has enthralled him then why has he
not fallen a victim to every young girl of fifteen?
Nevertheless, if he really be in love, and will confess
it, Madame de Staël will set herself to study
Mademoiselle de Krüdener better, with a view to
loving her herself if she prove indeed worthy of
Jordan’s affection.

In reading all this, one is forced to the conclusion
[110]

that a more emotional woman than Madame
de Staël never trod the earth. Every human
creature, perhaps, has one unsolved, it may be
insoluble, riddle in his life—one mystery of feeling
which nobody fathoms. More especially is
this true of women who live so much in sentiment;
and supremely true of a woman like Madame de
Staël. That ineffable something in her which
nobody seems to have guessed while she was living,
of which Byron felt the presence in her without
divining the cause, was the passionate and
unappeasable desire to be loved. All men who
had dealings with her appear to have misunderstood
her in so far that they believed her to be
more dominated by her head than her heart—instead
of understanding that, in her, head and
heart were the systole and diastole of a temperament
surprisingly forcible but not essentially
strong. Or, if they did learn to comprehend her
better at last, it was when she was no longer
young, and feeling of a certain sort had become,
alas! ridiculous. As long as she was entitled to
feel and to suffer they made almost a reproach to
her of the intellectual superiority which they
could not deny, and cast her back upon her own
thoughts for happiness.

Madame de Krüdener, on one occasion, arrived
at the complacent conclusion that Madame de
Staël was jealous of her. Not jealous of her
[111]

beauty and golden locks, which was conceivable,
and might have been true, but jealous of her literary
fame!
Corinne
jealous of
Valerie
! It is
true that
Corinne
had not yet seen the light,
while
Valerie
had not only appeared, but had
met with great success. So great an authority
as St. Beuve pronounces Madame de Krüdener’s
novel to be a thing of joy, a work to be read
thrice, “in youth, in middle life, and in old age.”
But it is possible to have many intellectual qualities,
and yet remain at such an immeasurable
distance beneath Madame de Staël that nothing
but vanity could scale the height.

Moreover, Madame de Krüdener’s meaner self
had not been a stranger to the immediate and
surprising triumph of her work. She was always
intriguing, and intrigued to some purpose when
her novel was on the eve of publication. She ran
about to all the
fournisseurs
in Paris, asking them
for bows
à la Valerie
, caps and gowns
à la Valerie
.

They heard the name for the first time, but
naturally proceeded to call a variety of articles
by an appellation presumably so fashionable, and
the success of the novel was assured. Madame
de Krüdener, promptly and conveniently oblivious
of the sources of this sudden triumph, allowed
herself to become somewhat intoxicated
by it, and wrote to a friend that the “dear
[112]

woman” (meaning Madame de Staël) was jealous
of her. The person at whom this accusation
was levelled probably never heard of it. She certainly
would never have divined it; and, the little
difficulty about Jordan once overcome, she appears
to have found Madame de Krüdener’s society
more than tolerable. Indeed they ended by
becoming affectionate friends; but that was after
the authoress of
Valerie
had undergone the mystic
change which transformed her from a flirt into
a priestess.

She had always been immensely admired, and
had not preserved a spotless reputation. But
she had one of those emotional natures in which
a restless vanity, love of novelty, a morbid sensibility
and an excess of imagination, combine to
produce religious fervors.

Standing at a window in Riga one day, she
saw an old admirer drop dead at the very moment
that he was lifting his hat to salute her. This
event made on her one of those terrifying and
ineffaceable impressions which in regenerate circles
is known as “a call.” She plunged into
mysticism; became the exponent of a new dogma,
and finally claimed for herself the gift of
prophecy. People were, of course, not wanting
to declare that her predictions had in several
instances been verified; and, her personal fascination
remaining always great, she now acquired
[113]

an enormous influence. Her extreme self-abnegation
and boundless charities increased her reputation
for sanctity, and she even succeeded in
bringing down on herself a satisfactory amount of
persecution. In Paris superstition was, as always,
rife. The days were not yet so remote when Philip
Egalité had gone to question the devil in the
quarries of Montrouge; and men were barely
more than middle-aged who in their first youth
had looked on the brazen brow of Cagliostro, and
felt their blood agreeably frozen by the Comte
de St. Germain’s casual mention of personal
experiences three hundred years old. But little
more than thirty years previous to Madame de
Krüdener’s “revival” Mesmer had seen numbers
of the fairest and many not of the stupidest heads
in Paris gathered round his famous
baquet
. A
little later the
illuminati
had been credited unveraciously
and to their scant honor, with a share in
the sanguinary priesthood of Robespierre, and
finally Mademoiselle Lenormand had shuffled the
cards of prophecy at the instance of Napoleon
himself. Into this strange world, so exhausted
and cynical, yet excited, impulsive, and thirsting
for novel emotions, the Northern Sybil, with her
strange, pale face and shining eyes, came like a
wandering star.

But all this was subsequent to our first meeting
with her at Coppet, when she was still fairly
[114]

young and singularly pretty, and the gold in her
tresses owed as yet no fancied splendor to the
aureole of inspiration.

Madame Récamier, the charming Juliette, was
a far more normal, but a not less attractive person.
Châteaubriand’s memoirs have made her
famous, but he was among the latest of her many
swains. Her path through life was strewn with
conquests, and she had offers of marriage by the
score. They continued up to the age of fifty-one,
when the author of
Réné
laid a heart which was
hardly worthy of her at her feet.

Three generations of Montmorencys adored
her; a German prince of royal blood urged her
to divorce her husband in order to marry him;
and Lucian Bonaparte was among the most ardent
of her slaves. Ampère the younger, at
twenty, fell in love with her, she being then forty-three;
and Châteaubriand addressed her as “
très
belle et très charmante
” when she was seventy
and blind. The little Savoyards turned round in
the streets to look at her, and when they did so
no longer she knew that her marvellous beauty
was on the wane. But the fascination of her
grace, her goodness, her unfailing tact and delicate
intelligence survived her loveliness; and the
men who knew her still worshipped her for years
after fresher charms had attracted the eyes of the
multitude. She was not a politician, but her
[115]

friendship with Madame de Staël gave her decided
opinions, and she incurred the anger of
Napoleon by declining to be
Dame du Palais
to
one of his sisters. It was said, however, that
what specially raised his ire was that a throng
which on one occasion had been assembled to do
homage to him, so far forgot his presence, when
Madame Récamier appeared, as to have eyes only
for her.

Finally Constant, the inexplicable, unhappy,
brilliant Constant, sought the peace which he
had never found in anyone in a tardy passion for
her. He sought in vain, for she treated him as
she treated all men, with a kind and gracious
indifference which her unique fascination robbed
of all its sting. She influenced his political conduct—not
altogether for good, as it turned out
in 1814, when Napoleon returned from Elba.
Vague hints at a rivalry before this date between
her and Madame de Staël are to be found in
some of the correspondence of the time, but they
are contradicted by the tone of Madame de
Staël’s letters to her
belle Juliette
, and by Madame
Récamier’s own rare discretion.

Moreover, although Constant first saw Madame
Récamier at Coppet in 1806, and confided
to her those grievances of his against Madame
de Staël, which just then were rising to exasperation
point, it was only in 1813, when she called
[116]

upon him to defend the interests of Murat at the
Congress of Vienna, that he fell in love with her.
The correspondence which ensued between them
does more honor to her than to him. Leaving
aside the questionable nature of his passion, he
allowed himself to speak of Madame de Staël
with a fractious mistrust which, even if transitory,
could have come from nobody with a more
deplorable grace. The basis of the sentiment
appears to have been jealousy of Madame de
Staël’s influence over her devoted friend. Such
a jealousy was as futile as paltry; for it would
have needed a more witching tongue even than
Constant’s to have shaken the loyalty of the loving
Juliette. To gratify a request of hers he
wrote some fragments of memoirs and sketched
a portrait of Madame de Staël which, besides
much praise, contains some furtive sarcasm at
her inexpugnable belief in herself—that large
quality, too grand to be called conceit, which,
according to Constant, amounted to a cultus and
inspired a “religious respect.”

It is interesting to record that the first time
Châteaubriand ever saw Madame Récamier was at
Madame de Staël’s. He had gone to thank the
latter for having occupied herself about his recall
to France. He found her at her toilette, talking
eagerly, and twirling in her fingers, as usual, a
little green twig. Madame Récamier suddenly
[117]

entered, dressed in white. From that moment
Châteaubriand was so absorbed in her that he had
no longer any attention to bestow on her eloquent
friend. This was in 1800. He did not see her
again for twelve years. Benjamin Constant, in
the “portrait” already mentioned, has left an
account of Madame Récamier and Madame de
Staël, which gives a very good idea of both of
them, and is specially interesting as coming from
such a source. He relates that, at the first interview
between them, Madame Récamier felt very
shy. He says:—

Madame de Staël’s appearance has been much discussed,
but a magnificent glance, a sweet smile, and
an habitual expression of kindness, the absence of
all minute affectation and of all embarrassing reserve,
flattering words, praise a little direct but apparently
dictated by enthusiasm, an inexhaustible variety in
conversation, astonish, attract, and reconcile almost
everybody who approaches her. I know no woman,
and even no man, who is more convinced of her
immense superiority over the whole world, and who
renders this conviction less oppressive to others.
Nothing could be more charming than the conversations
between Madame de Staël and Madame Récamier.
The rapidity of the one in expressing a
thousand new thoughts, the rapidity of the second in
seizing and judging them; on the one side a strong
and masculine intelligence which unmasked everything,
on the other a delicate and penetrating mind
which understood everything. All this formed a
whole impossible to render for those who did not
enjoy the privilege of witnessing it.

[118]

Madame de Staël scattered golden rain of the
frankest and sincerest praise over Madame Récamier
every time that she addressed her. “You
are exquisite,” “you are beautiful,” “you reign
as a queen over sentiment,” are among the sentences
that stud every other line of her letters.
Another of her female friends was she whom she
named the “sweet Annette de Gérando,” the wife
of the author of
The Signs and Art of Thinking
in their Mutual Relations
, the
Origin of Human
Intelligence
, the
Comparative History of Philosophic
Systems
, etc. He was a philanthropist as
well as a philosopher, and Madame de Staël in
later years once made rather a bitter allusion to
this fact. As time went on, and Napoleon’s star
blazed brighter, De Gérando was unable to resist
the general infection of idolatry; moreover, he
had accepted a post under the new Government,
and the withering blight of officialism fell to a
certain extent on his spirit. “There is too much
philanthropy in his friendship,” wrote Madame
de Staël to Jordan. “One is afraid of being
treated by him like a pauper.”

But in the summer of 1801 all this was still in
the future, and harmony and wit reigned at Coppet.
Sismondi about this time appears on the
scene; discreet, observant, serene, reasonable,
he conceived for Madame de Staël a friendship
which remained moderate in expression and sincere
[119]

in feeling to the last. He was not as much
dazzled by her as many, and saw her failings
clearly. Occasionally she even wounded his
quiet self-love, and once or twice, when very restless
and excited, she offended him. But he was
invariably drawn back to her by the spell of her
goodness. He appears as a rock of strength amid
all the sparkling, moving, changing tide of ideas
and feelings that rippled, dashed, recoiled, and
returned unceasingly in every hour of the sojourn
at Coppet. His steady sense and calm judgment
bring out into sharper contrast the unrest of Constant;
the flashing splendor of Madame de Staël;
the dreamy refinement of Mathieu de Montmorency;
the fantastic charm of Madame de Krüdener,
and the unfailing grace of the lovely “Juliette.”

Bonstetten was yet another visitor at the château.
He was called the Swiss Voltaire, was
eternally young, and even grew younger and
more plastic in mind as the unnoticed years crept
over him. He had seen Madame Necker in Paris
when she was still unmarried, and reappeared in
her daughter’s home at Coppet as gay, as smiling,
as vivacious and witty as he had shown himself
in the long-vanished salon of Madame de Vermenoux.
He laid himself at Madame de Staël’s feet
at once, was received by her with her usual gracious
warmth, and profited by her keen but generous
[120]

criticism of his works. Everybody began
by gently laughing at Bonstetten’s incurable
youthfulness, and ended by adoring him for it.
He wanted steadiness of intellectual purpose—a
“belfry,” as St. Beuve expresses it; in other
words, some central fact of mind round which all
his ideas could rally—but he had plenty of insight,
and, amid the universal eulogium of Madame de
Staël’s powers, seems to have been the first to
point out a defect in her which Schiller commented
on later. For when writing of her to
Frederica Brun, he says: “Her goodness is extreme,
and nobody has more intellect; but that
which is best in you, in her does not exist. She
lacks feeling for art, and sees no beauty except
in eloquence and intelligence. She has more
practical wisdom than anybody, but uses it more
for her friends than herself.”

Frederica Brun herself came to Geneva about
this time, and has left enthusiastic descriptions
of Madame de Staël, of Necker, Madame Necker
de Saussure and Madame Rilliet-Hüber. She
also bore testimony to Madame de Staël’s devotion
to her children. Her eldest son, Auguste,
and her only daughter, Albertine, were destined
all her life to solace her by their love for much
that she suffered. She directed the education
of both her boys, but occupied herself especially
with that of the girl. She was accused by some
[121]

of her friends, even by Sismondi, of not caring
very much for her children; but no word of theirs
ever betrayed any sense of such a deficiency in
her. On the contrary, both Auguste and Albertine
always spoke and wrote of her with the
utmost enthusiasm.

After spending two summers and one winter
uninterruptedly at Coppet, during which period
she wrote and published
Delphine
, the desire to
return to France grew into an overpowering force.
Napoleon had now been declared Consul for
life, and was preparing to invade England. She
hoped, she said, that amid such multifarious occupations
he would not have leisure to conceive any
objection against her establishing herself within
a few miles of Paris, near enough, in fact, to enjoy
the society of such friends as would not be too
much in awe of the potentate to pay her occasional
visits. She further deluded herself with
the notion that Napoleon would shrink from the
odium of exiling a woman so well known as herself.
Such a hope shows how simple Madame de
Staël could still be at times. Napoleon was no
longer in a position in which blame for mere details
of conduct could touch him, and his career
from this moment was to be one long outrage on
public opinion.

Madame de Staël established herself in a country
house about ten miles from Paris. Then there
[122]

happened a circumstance which she had not foreseen.
In the eighteen months of her sojourn at
Coppet, the society which she knew formerly had
grown baser. A whole race of parasites had
arisen, whose real or fancied interest it was to
obtain the favor of Napoleon by denouncing the
people whom he detested. A woman, whose
name is suppressed, lost no time in informing
Napoleon that the road leading to Madame de
Staël’s dwelling was crowded with her visitors.
Immediately one of her friends warned her that
a gendarme would probably be sent to her without
loss of time. She instantly became a prey
to anxiety, an excessive anxiety it is certain, for
she was excessive in most things.

She wrote to De Gérando to plead her cause
with Talleyrand; she solicited the good offices of
Lucian and Joseph Bonaparte; and finally she
wrote a passionate but dignified letter to Napoleon
himself. Then she waited, in the midst of
strangers, and consuming herself with a fiery
impatience that made every hour of fresh suspense
a torture. She spent the nights sitting up
with her maid, listening for the tramp of the
horse which was to bring the gendarme and his
message. But the gendarme did not arrive; and,
worn out with her terrors, Madame de Staël bethought
herself of her “beautiful Juliette.” That
loving and devoted person assured her of a kind
[123]

welcome at St. Brice, a place about two leagues
from Paris. Thither Madame de Staël went, and
finding there a varied and agreeable society, was
for the time being cured of her fears. Hearing
nothing more about her exile, she persuaded herself
that Napoleon had changed his mind, and
she returned with some friends to her own lodgings
at Maffliers. It is probable enough that
some officious courtier again drew her enemy’s
attention to her; or perhaps Madame de Staël’s
own letter, in which she spoke of her children’s
education and her father’s advanced age, and betrayed
in every line her haunting fear of exile,
enlightened Napoleon as to the tenderest spot in
which to wound her. Disliking her as he did,
and irritated by the mere thought of her as he
seems to have been, it would have been highly
characteristic of his southern malice to be decided
in his course by the very prayers that should
have deterred him.

However that may be, she was sitting at table
with her friends one late September afternoon
when she perceived a rider, dressed in grey, pull
up at her gate and ring the bell. This prosaic-looking
individual was the messenger of destiny.
She felt it at once, although he did not wear the
dreaded uniform. He was the bearer of a letter
signed by Napoleon, and ordering her to depart
within twenty-four hours for any place not nearer
than forty leagues to Paris.

[124]

Needless to say, Madame de Staël did not submit
without protest, and represented so energetically
to the gendarme that a woman and three
children could not be hurried off with no more
preparation than a recruit’s, as to induce him to
allow her three days at Paris in which to get
ready.

On their way they stopped for a few moments
at Madame Récamier’s, and there found General
Junot, who, like everybody else, was one of Juliette’s
admirers. Perhaps to please the latter, he
promised to intercede with the despot for her
illustrious friend; and he was, as it appears, so
far successful that Napoleon accorded permission
for Madame de Staël to reside at Dijon. As soon
as Madame Récamier received this news she communicated
it in a letter to the care of Camille
Jordan. But Madame de Staël never received it,
having been driven, as she says, by daily admonitions
from her gendarme—but as Madame Récamier
appeared to think, by her own impatient
agitation—away from Paris to Morfontaine. This
was the home of Joseph Bonaparte. Probably
pitying her state of excitement and misery, he
invited her thither to spend a few days. He was
just then animated, as far as he dared be, by a
spirit of opposition to his mighty brother; and
perhaps—who knows?—was kind to Madame de
Staël as much for that reason as for any other.
[125]

In any case, nobody in those days appears to have
been profoundly in earnest except Madame de
Staël herself. She could not recover either patience
or peace. She was wretched at Morfontaine
in spite of the kindness of her host and
hostess, because surrounded with officers of the
Government who had accepted the servitude
against which she rebelled. She knew that her
father would receive her, but the thought of taking
refuge at Coppet again was distasteful to her.

She had but just left that place, and to return
thither was to resume habits of which she had
tired, and to acknowledge herself beaten. Probably
she longed for a change; and probably
enough, also, she was in that morbid condition of
mind in which to do the simplest and most obvious
thing is to rob grief of all its luxury. Finally,
she decided to crave permission through Joseph
to betake herself to Germany, with the distinct
assurance that the French Minister there would
consider her a foreigner and leave her in peace.
Joseph hastened to St. Cloud for the purpose, and
Madame de Staël retired to an inn within two
leagues of Paris, there to await his reply.

At the end of one day, receiving no answer,
and fearing (but why?) to attract attention to
herself by remaining any longer in one inn, she
sought the shelter of another; and is extremely—one
cannot really help thinking needlessly—eloquent
[126]

in describing her anguish during these
self-imposed peregrinations. At last Joseph’s
letter came. He not only forwarded her the
permission to go to Berlin, but added several
valuable letters of introduction, and took leave
of her in the kindest terms.

Accompanied by her children and Benjamin
Constant, she started, hating the postillions for
their boasted speed, and feeling that every step
taken by the horses was a fresh link in the ever-lengthening
and indestructible chain of which
one end was Paris and the other her heart.

What Constant’s feelings were she does not
say, and speaks of his accompanying her as a
spontaneous act of friendship. But he had been
exiled as well as herself; and although his desire
to go to Germany had partly determined hers,
and neither wished to separate from the other,
there are indications that Constant quitted
France as reluctantly as his companion.

Their relations were already varied by alternate
periods of shine and storm; and although
her influence over him was still immense, it had
begun, as was inevitable with such a man, to fret
him. And probably some doubts that were not
political, and some sufferings that had their root
in another cause than exile, played their part in
the extreme agitation of Madame de Staël’s mind
at this period.

[127]

CHAPTER X.

MADAME DE STAËL VISITS GERMANY.

At Metz Madame de Staël was received in triumph.
The Prefect of the Moselle entertained
her, parties were given in her honor, and all the
literary big-wigs of the place hastened to do her
homage. She there, for the first time, came into
personal contact with Charles de Villers, with
whom she had previously corresponded on the
subject of Kant. Of course she was charmed
with him, her first impulse invariably being to
find every clever or distinguished person delightful.
Her friendship with him resembled all her
friendships. She began by expecting to have inspired
as much enthusiasm as she felt, possibly
a little more, seeing that she was a woman, and
such a woman, and exiled to boot. Villers, a
cross-grained kind of Teuton, had no idea of
allowing his theories, which were extremely
sturdy on all subjects, to be spirited away by any
of Madame de Staël’s conversational conjuring
tricks. They discussed philosophy, and he railed
sourly at French taste; and, perhaps by way of
[128]

proving his final emancipation from all such fetters,
he had obtained the companionship of a certain
Madame de Rodde, whom Madame de Staël
described, with some asperity, as a “fat German.”

But she separated from the philosopher still
quite charmed with his appreciation of the good
and true, and not in the least repulsed by his
ways. On the contrary, she wrote to him shortly
afterwards, reproaching him passionately with his
silence. One can imagine how absurd such exactions
must have seemed to the good Villers, with
his head full of Kant and Madame de Rodde to
attend to his comforts; but the truth was that
Madame de Staël’s mood just then caused her to
make herself needlessly miserable about everything.
To Mathieu de Montmorency she wrote
that she was filled with terror, and fancied that
death must shortly overtake her father, children,
friends, everybody dear to her.

She seemed to forget entirely that it was her
own choice which had taken her to Germany;
Napoleon had banished her merely from Paris;
and there was nothing to prevent her returning
to Coppet to soothe the last years and enjoy the
conversation of her venerated father. But this
did not suit her; she required a wider intellectual
horizon and more varied society.

For many reasons, some of them dependent
on the political bias of monarchical writers, it has
[129]

been the fashion to proclaim Madame de Staël’s
opposition to Napoleon as inspired by pure hatred
of despotism. To us this does not seem quite a
correct version. If it were, Madame de Staël
would have been a totally different person; colder,
less impulsively benevolent, less thoroughly
womanly. All through her life her conduct was
determined by her feeling towards individuals.
While professing republicanism she counted, as
we have seen, hosts of reactionary friends; the
claims to consideration of noble names and social
distinctions weighed powerfully with her; and
all her love of liberty could not save her from
being torn by sympathy for every Royalist head
that fell during the Revolution. Such a catholicity
of feeling constitutes a charming woman,
but not a great politician; and Madame de Staël’s
liberal instincts and penetrating insight only lent
force to her hatred of Napoleon, they did not originate
it. There was a natural antagonism between
their natures—circumstances increased
this, and obstinacy on both sides confirmed it—and
Madame de Staël made the most of a persecution
which, while condemning her to inaction,
added enormously to her fame.

That Napoleon in his most transcendent moments
was great simply by stupendous intellect
and amazing will; that in his baser moments he
was inconceivably callous, cynical, arrogant and
[130]

mean, perhaps few persons in these days will be
found to deny. But it is overstating the case to
assert, as has been done, that he persecuted
Madame de Staël from unmitigated envy of her
superiority. Much as he resented intellectual
power in a woman, it is nevertheless most likely
that what really inspired his action against Madame
de Staël was her turbulent disposition and
the restless mind which made her the centre of
Parisian opposition. As to this opposition itself,
without any wish to detract from its sublimity,
it may fairly be asked whether—at the time Constant
began his denunciations, and Madame de
Staël encouraged them—it was altogether well-timed.
To declaim against Napoleon’s growing
despotism was perhaps irresistible to independent
spirits; but such declamation necessarily
remained sterile of results in the state in which
France then was. What would these orators
have substituted for the strong will of a Dictator?
The greed for place of a Talleyrand? The mystic
fervor of a Montmorency? The dissolute ambition
of a Barras? Between the sanguinary excesses
of the
Terreur Rouge
, the lust for revenge
of the
Terreur Blanche
, the incorrigible short-sightedness
and criminal frivolity of the “Coblentz”
faction, the diseased logic of the Jacobins,
and the frightful collapse of intelligence, morality,
decency, and humanity that extended from end
[131]

to end of France, it is difficult to understand
what ruler could have governed it for other ends
than personal ones. Napoleon sprang armed
from the ruin of France, as a kind of fatal embodiment
of all the evil under which she groaned
and all the crime that stained her. And yet who
shall say that his career of conquest, desolating
as it was, could have been spared from European
history? It enters as a factor into almost all
that this closing century has brought us—the
unity of Italy, the power of Germany, France’s
own awakening to the limitations of her destiny.
It was not given to any mortal, eighty years ago,
to foresee all this; and Madame de Staël, who was
in most things of a preternatural acuteness, only
foresaw the coming despotism and its immediate,
not its ultimate, results. Nevertheless, had her
bias against Napoleon not been a personal one,
she might have submitted more quietly to his
first acts of tyranny, and only protested when his
insatiable ambition had prostrated France at the
feet of the nations. She might have done this,
because she was constantly led away by her feelings,
and could be blind on occasion. That she
was not more dazzled by Napoleon must be considered
a lucky accident.

In Germany the feeling in regard to her was
not generally favorable. The mightiest minds,
indeed, admired her great intellect; and Goethe’s
[132]

unwilling homage is the brightest jewel in her
crown. But it was as a woman that she excited
a somewhat sour antipathy. Her plaintive little
friend Madame de Beaumont had called her a

tourbillon
, and Heine has only added a doubtful
picturesqueness to this description when designating
her a “whirlwind in petticoats.” But as
a most disturbing element she certainly did introduce
herself into German society. Rahel Varnhagen
acidly—it is difficult to help thinking
ungenerously—echoes the usual complaint of her
obstreperousness, saying, with striking lack of
originality, by the way, “She is nothing to me
but an inconvenient hurricane.”

Schiller, as is well known, was infinitely more
magnanimous. He had made up his mind as to
her kind of intellect before she came. In 1798
he had already pronounced her to be of an “exalted,
reasoning, entirely unpoetical nature”; and,
although he clung, after seeing her, to his conviction
that “of poetry she had no conception,”
he was obviously surprised and enchanted at her
native goodness, her healthy simplicity of mind,
and unaffectedness. To her penetration, brilliancy
and vivacity, he does full justice. And if,
as her book on Germany afterwards showed, his
statement that “nothing existed for her unless her
torch could illuminate it,” was as misleading as
are most metaphors, still its descriptiveness enables
[133]

one exactly to understand the particular sort
of splendor with which Madame de Staël flashed
through the windings of the German mind.

Schiller—poor man!—was quite pathetic over
her amazing volubility, which left him, with his
halting French, a hopeless distance behind her.
It is rather comic to trace the dismay at her
exhausting personality which pierces through all
his admiration for, and interest in, her mind.
To Goethe, who was coquetting at Jena, and
wished the brilliant stranger to come there to
him, Schiller later writes: “I saw the De Staël
yesterday, in my house, and again to-day at the
Dowager Duchess’s. One would be reminded
of the sieve of the Danaïdes, if Oknos with his
donkey did not then occur to one.” He fears
she will have to discover that the Germans in
Weimar can be fickle, as well as the French,
unless it strikes her soon that it is time she went.
To Körner he complained that the devil had
brought the French female philosopher to torment
him just in the middle of his new play.

He found her, of all mortals within his experience,
“the most gesticulative, combative, and talkative,”
even while admitting that she was almost
the most cultivated and intellectual of women.
But he declared that she destroyed all poetry
in him, and waxed plaintive once again over
his ineffectual struggles with French. He proclaimed
[134]

that not to admire her for her fine mind
and liberality of sentiment was impossible; and
he breathed a sigh of the most unfeigned relief
when she departed. All the Court personages
felt that they had been having a severe time of
it; although the bright and petulant Duchess
Amelia was enchanted in the first instance, and
wrote to Goethe imploring him to come and study
the phenomenon. He resisted for a long while,
but finally arrived—not without a previous sneer
or two. Madame de Staël was charmed to know
him—in fact, her days in Weimar passed in a perfect
effervescence of delight. While the Germans
were coldly, sometimes rather snarlingly,
criticizing her, she was admiring them. Schiller
she speaks of with the liveliest enthusiasm.
Their acquaintance began with an animated discussion
on the respective merits of French and
foreign dramas. Madame de Staël maintained
that Corneille and Racine were unsurpassable.
Schiller, of course, differed; and managed to
make her heed his reasons, in spite of his difficulty
in speaking French. His quiet simplicity
and earnestness, as well as his originality of mind,
became instantly manifest to the illustrious stranger.
With her, admiration meant always the
most ungrudging friendship; and this was the
sentiment with which Schiller inspired her for
the rest of his days. Goethe she found cold, and
[135]

she was characteristically disappointed at his no
longer displaying the passionate ardor of Werther
“Time has rendered him a spectator,” she
says; yet she admits the universality of his mind
and his prodigious information when once prevailed
on to talk. It is provoking to think that
she never saw the best of Goethe, and that this
disappointing result was—although she was far,
indeed, from guessing it—her own fault chiefly;
for she informed the poet that she intended to
print his conversation, and of this Goethe had a
horror. He states as much in a letter to Schiller,
and gives as his reason the sorry figure
which Rousseau had cut in his correspondence—just
then published—with Madame de la Tour
Franqueville and her friend.

The Dowager Duchess Amelia was a vivacious,
pleasure-loving, singularly intelligent, and liberal-minded
woman, who had governed the duchy during
her son’s minority admirably, and made allies
for herself among the best German intellects.
Thanks to her, her son Karl August had been so
trained, that, in the midst of a court circle to
which the light of the eighteenth century had
barely penetrated, he showed a most manly contempt
for the ideals of mistresses of the robes and
silver sticks in waiting, and swept all such fripperies
away to become the dearest friend of
Goethe. His duchess (whose courage both extorted
[136]

Napoleon’s admiration and saved her husband
from further proofs of his ire) was a woman
of grand character, and as great a contrast, except
in what was really best in both of them, to her
lively mother-in-law as could well be imagined.
She insisted on the most uncompromising observance
of etiquette, and wore to the last day of her
life the costume which had prevailed in the years
when she was young.

Of this remarkable trio of exalted personages
it was the reigning duchess whom Madame de
Staël selected for her friend. Indeed, she never
mentions the Dowager Duchess in corresponding
with the daughter-in-law, and in her
Allemagne

dismisses the Grand Duke with a few lines, in
which she alludes to his military talents and
speaks of his conversation as
piquante
and
thoughtful.

From Weimar, Madame de Staël went to Berlin,
with letters from their highnesses of the little
court to the lovely and charming Queen Louise.

In a well-known letter to the Grand Duchess
(the first of their long correspondence), she records
a
fête
which took place immediately after
her arrival. It was a masquerade representing
Alexander’s return to Babylon; and the beautiful
queen, of whom Madame de Staël is lost in
admiration, danced in it herself. To this pageant
succeeded various costume quadrilles, in which
[137]

Kotzebue appeared as a priest of Mercury, poppy
crowned, caduceus in hand, and so ugly and awkward,
that Madame de Staël wonders why her
imagination was not irretrievably ruined by the
sight of him.

One likes to think of her at this court in the
midst of such famous and distinguished people;
the personages so outwardly brilliant, so inwardly
dull, who surrounded her having vanished down
the gulfs of Time, her own unique personality
stands out vividly against the picturesque but
confused background reconstructed by our fancy.

At Berlin she first saw and liked August Wilhelm
Schlegel, destined later to be so unwelcome
to Sismondi, Bonstetten, and her other friends at
Coppet. She succumbed at once to the varied
attractions of his colossal learning, his surprising
linguistic accomplishments, and his great conversational
powers. She felt that here was a foeman
worthy of her steel, and she magnanimously overlooked
his acerbity, his pedantry and vanity. She
had indeed a royal indifference to the defects of
great minds. It was only the greatness she cared
for.

Berlin was destined to be associated with the
greatest, perhaps the most genuine, grief of her
life. She left it pleased with her reception, enriched
with new friends, new experiences, and
new ideas. She had been happier there than six
[138]

months previously she would have admitted she
could ever be again; far happier than at Coppet,
which for years past had only been a place where
she tarried and amused herself as she could until
the moment came for returning to Paris. She
had treasured up a wealth of conversation for her
father—all kinds of novel and delightful impressions
which she felt would be listened to by nobody
so appreciatively as by him; and she started
for Vienna, there to glean a little more. But she
had hardly set foot in Austria when a courier
brought her the news that her father was dangerously
ill. He was, in truth, dead, and the messenger
knew it; but the fact was withheld, to be
broken to her later on. She instantly quitted
Vienna, where, as she expresses it, “her happiness
had ended,” and started homewards. On
the road her father’s death was communicated to
her. Her grief was overpowering and demonstrative
to the last degree. It was not only sorrow
that she felt, but an overmastering terror,
for it seemed to her that with her father her last
moral support had vanished. Henceforward she
would bend to the storms of life like a reed.

On arriving at Coppet, she sank into a condition
that temporarily resembled dementia. The
idea that in losing her father her whole existence
was irretrievably wrecked from its moorings, and
would drift aimlessly in the future, again filled her
[139]

mind, and this time with greater force. To every
remonstrance she only answered, “I have lost
my father.” She soon recovered—strangely soon
as it seemed to many—her old elasticity and fire,
but a curious secret change was wrought in her
from the hour of her loss. She showed mystic
yearnings, and became even a little superstitious.
She invoked her father in her prayers, and nothing
deeply agreeable to her ever happened without
her saying, “My father has obtained this for
me.”

One of Necker’s latest acts was to write a letter
to Napoleon begging him to rescind the order for
Madame de Staël’s exile. Needless to say that
the pathetic request had no effect upon the person
to whom it was addressed. Domestic sentiment
at no time appealed strongly to Napoleon,
and at this period he had almost reached his final
pitch of unreasoning and arrogant egoism. The
murder of the Duc d’Enghien had hardened all
his nature, and in preparing to have himself proclaimed
Emperor he had kicked away any useless
rubbish in the shape of scruples that might still
encumber him.

Now, when the first germ of decay had begun
to consume the core of his splendor, his attitude
towards Madame de Staël itself altered. His
persecution of her ceased to be a capricious thing
compounded of spasmodic spite on his side and
[140]

sporadic fears on hers, and became an organized
system of repression which placed its originator
in a light all the meaner that the woman against
whom it was directed rose from this time to a
new and grander moral altitude.

[141]

CHAPTER XI.

MADAME DE STAËL AND AUGUSTE SCHLEGEL AT
ROME.

Madame de Staël sought to solace her grief
for her father’s death by writing “The Private
Life of Necker,” a short sketch intended to serve
as preface to a volume of his fragmentary writings.
Constant spoke very feelingly of this
sketch, and pronounced it to be a revelation of all
that was best in the writer’s head and heart. He
said that all her gifts of mind and feeling were
here devoted to express and adorn a single sentiment,
one for which she claimed the sympathy
of the world.

This is all quite true, but it is natural that the
sketch should affect us less than it did Madame
de Staël’s contemporaries. Necker was a good
and intelligent man. He had varied talents of
no common order, and an incorruptibility of character
which would be rare—given the circumstances—in
any age, and, by his admirers, was
supposed to be especially so in his. But joined
to all these qualities in him were just the foibles
which spoil an image for posterity. He had a
[142]

profound compassion for what he considered the
hardships of his lot. It is touching to read the
way—so simple, loving, and yet ingenuous—in
which Madame de Staël records such facts as the
following:—“It was painful to him to be old.
His figure, which had grown very stout and made
movement irksome to him, gave him a feeling of
shyness that prevented his going into society.
He hardly ever got into a carriage when anybody
was looking at him, and he did not walk where
he could be seen. In a word, his imagination
loved grace and youth, and he would say to me
sometimes, ‘I do not know why I am humiliated
by the infirmities of age, but I feel that it is so.’
And it was thanks to this sentiment that he was
loved like a young man.”

For the rest, the sketch is one long impassioned
elegy in prose. One is astonished at the sudden
creative force of expression in it. It is graphic
by mere power of words without any help from
metaphor.

It was not in Madame de Staël’s nature to
mourn in solitude, and we have Bonstetten’s
authority for the fact that the summer of 1804
was one of the most delightful which he had ever
passed at the Château. Schlegel, Constant, Sismondi,
were all there, as well as Bonstetten, himself,
and Madame Necker de Saussure, now more
than ever devoted to her cousin. Madame de
[143]

Staël had also a new visitor, Müller, the historian,
whose learning was stupendous, and who
wrangled from morning till night on subjects of
amazing erudition with Schlegel. The mistress
of the house, although far from being the equal
of the two combatants in learning, sometimes
rushed between them with her fiery eloquence,
like an angel with a flaming sword; but most of
the society were reduced to silence. Sismondi
felt a perfect ignoramus, and talked plaintively to
Bonstetten of going to Germany, there to drink
in facts and theories at the source of the new
intellect. In short, the German “Revival” was
beginning, and Madame de Staël in bringing
Auguste Schlegel to Switzerland had broken a
large piece off the mountain of learning, like
somebody in the fairy tale who carried away a
slice from the Island of Jewels.

In October, 1804, Madame de Staël started
with Schlegel and her three children for Italy,
and it is to this journey that the world owes

Corinne
. It is said that Schlegel first taught
Madame de Staël to appreciate art—that is,
painting, sculpture, and architecture. For music
she had always had a passion, and both sang and
played agreeably. But plastic beauty had as yet
been a sealed book to her, and she had not even
any great appreciation of scenery. A spontaneous
feeling for all these she perhaps never
[144]

acquired. Ste. Beuve, indeed, complains that the
spot on Misenum where she places Corinne on
one occasion, was the least picturesque of many
beautiful points of view. Nevertheless, Italy
revived her. She found hope and thought and
voice anew beneath that magic sky. There was
nothing but the still-abiding sense of loss to mar
the pleasure of her visit. The diplomatic agents
of Napoleon abstained from interference with her,
and Joseph had given her letters introducing her
to all the best society in Rome. Unlike her own
Corinne, however, she found it very uninteresting,
and wrote complainingly to Bonstetten that
Humboldt was her most congenial companion.
The Roman princes she found extremely dull,
and preferred the cardinals, as being more cultivated,
or more probably more men of the world.
For the rest, she was received with the liveliest
respect, and even enthusiasm; was made a member
of the Arcadian Academy, and had endless
sonnets written upon her. Unfortunately, her

Dix Années d’Exil
does not speak of this Italian
journey, and so, for the impression she received,
one has to turn to
Corinne
, where, of course,
everything reappears more or less transfigured.
One would have liked to know the genesis of that
work, on what occasion it took root, and how it
grew, in Madame de Staël’s mind. How much
did she really know of that poor, lampooned,
[145]

insulted, and squint-eyed Corilla who was the
origin of her enchanting Sibyl? How far below
the surface did she really see of that strange
Roman world, so cosmopolitan, so chaotic after
the French invasion, so thrilled with fugitive
novel ideas, so steeped in time-worn apathy? It
would be delightful to know what was the impression
which Madame de Staël herself produced in
the few salons where a little culture prevailed,
and what was the true notion concerning her in
that motley and decaying society of belated Arcadians,
exhausted
cicisbei
and
abatini
lapsed forever
from the genial circles where their youth
had passed in gossiping and sonneteering.

Hers must have seemed a curious and forcible
figure among all those frivolous “survivals”; and
great and strange, mad and merry as were the
many foreigners who found their way at various
times to Rome, probably no more striking couple
ever appeared there than Madame de Staël and
Auguste Schlegel.

As soon as she returned to Switzerland she
began
Corinne
. At Coppet some of her old circle
immediately gathered round her again: Madame
Necker de Saussure, of course, and Madame
Rilliet-Hüber, Schlegel, Constant, and Sismondi,
assembled to enjoy her society once more. The
private theatricals in which she delighted were
again resumed, and such tragedies as
Zaire
and
[146]

Phèdre
performed, as well as slight comedies
composed by the châtelaine herself. Madame de
Staël was fond of acting; and although she had
no special talent, her imposing presence, and the
earnestness with which she played, made her
performance a pleasing one—at any rate, to her
admirers.

When
Corinne
was drawing to an end, its
authoress could no longer resist her old and recurring
temptation to return to France. She
went first to Auxerre; then, profiting by the
indulgence of Fouché, who, when it was possible
(and politic), always shut one eye, she accepted
an invitation to Acosta, a property near Meulon
belonging to Madame de Castellane. Some of
her old friends ventured there to visit her, and in
peace and reviving hope she completed
Corinne
.
It was no sooner published than it was hailed
with universal applause.

All this success annoyed Napoleon, possibly
because it revealed in his enemy greater powers
than he had hitherto suspected, hence a greater
influence with all enlightened minds. According
to some, an article which appeared in the
Moniteur

attacking
Corinne
was written by the Imperial
hand. And this first sign of ire was followed
by a new decree of banishment, which sent Madame
de Staël back to Coppet. There a few new
figures came to join the usual set, among them
[147]

Prince Auguste of Prussia, who straightway fell
a victim to Madame Récamier. For a few weeks
this love affair introduced a new element of
romantic, yet very human, interest into the intensely
intellectual life of Coppet. The Prince
wished Madame Récamier to marry him; and for
a short time, either dazzled by the prospect of
such splendor, or really attracted by her royal
wooer, she hesitated. But such a step would
have involved a divorce from M. Récamier. He
was old; he had lately lost his fortune; he had
always been good to her; and Juliette made up
her mind that it would be too unkind to leave
him.

Some other scenes not altogether literary were
passing just then in the Château. The relations
between Madame de Staël and Constant, of late
much strained, had now become constantly
stormy. Sismondi, some years later, in writing
to the Countess of Albany, referred to them as
really distressing, and apparently Madame Récamier
was in the flattering but uncomfortable
position of having to listen to and, as well as she
could, soothe both parties.

Constant would have married Madame de Staël,
but she desired a secret marriage, and he would
only hear of an open one. It was only in 1808
he finally put an end to his perplexities by marrying
Charlotte von Hardenberg. He carefully
[148]

avoided telling Madame de Staël of his intention
beforehand, being still too much under her influence
to bear her criticisms and possible reproaches
with equanimity.

About November, 1807, Madame de Staël had
returned again to Germany, accompanied by
two of her children, by Constant, Sismondi, and
Schlegel. From Munich she wrote one of her
characteristic letters to Madame Récamier:—

“I have spent five days here, and I leave for
Vienna in an hour. There I shall be thirty
leagues farther from you and from all who are
dear to me. All society here has received me in
a charming manner, and has spoken of my beautiful
friend with admiration. You have an aerial
reputation which nothing common can touch.
The bracelet you gave me [this bracelet contained
Madame Récamier’s portrait] has caused my hand
to be kissed rather oftener, and I send you all the
homage which I receive.”

In another she significantly remarks:—

“The Prince de Ligne is really amiable and
good above all things. He has the manners of
M. de Narbonne, and a heart. It is a pity he is
old, but all that generation fill me with an invincible
tenderness.”

This is one of her touching allusions to her
father, of whom all “good gray heads” reminded
her. But the Prince de Ligne and Necker were
[149]

two very different people. The former was the
ideal of a
grand seigneur
, clever, brave, handsome,
all in a supreme degree; the descendant of a
chivalrous race, and as gallant and noble himself
as any of them. He was extremely witty, and
quickly achieved the conquest of the Empress
Catherine when he was sent on a mission to Russia
in 1782. He followed in her suite through
the Crimea on the occasion of her famous journey
there with Joseph II., and his amusing
account of this expedition is one of his claims to
literary reputation. The last years of his brilliant
life were embittered by the loss of his property,
consequent on the French invasion of
Belgium, and by the death in battle of his eldest
and best-beloved son.

Madame de Staël probably enjoyed his society
all the more that the Viennese gentlemen
appeared to her singularly uninteresting. She
complained of them in her letters to the Grand
Duchess of Weimar, and also to Madame Récamier,
and declared that she felt the need of a summer
at Coppet to indemnify her for the frivolous
monotony of the Austrian capital. She seems
to have been in an unusually depressed state of
mind, and recurred perpetually to the hardships
of exile.

In April, 1808, shortly before starting again
for Weimar, she addressed a letter to her former
[150]

friend, the ungrateful Talleyrand, begging him to
interest himself for the payment of the two millions
left by her father in the French Treasury.
She alluded sadly, and at some length, to all her
sufferings again in this letter, and reminded him
that he wrote thirteen years previously to her
from America, “If I must remain even one year
longer here I shall die.”

One is not much surprised to divine from subsequent
circumstances that this appeal produced
no effect. Amiable, and even pathetic as it was,
Talleyrand was not the man to be moved by it.
Like Napoleon, to whom he perhaps showed it,
he would be likely to think that Madame de
Staël’s “exile” was singularly mitigated. It is
one thing to be proscribed and banished, not
only from one’s own country but from friends
and fortune; to wander, as so many illustrious
refugees have done, a lonely stranger in a foreign
land, not daring to invoke the protection of any
authority, and constantly eking out a miserable
existence by teaching or worse. It is another
thing to be wealthy, influential, admired; to be
the guest of sovereigns, and the honored friend
of the greatest minds in Europe; to be surrounded
with sympathy, and followed at every
step by the homage of a brilliant and cultured
crowd. Such was the existence of Madame de
Staël. Her sorrows were great because her fiery
[151]

temperament rebelled against her grief, at the
same time that her great intellect fed it with lofty
and lyric thoughts. But her sorrows were of the
affections exclusively. She never felt the sting
of the world’s scorn, nor knew the bitter days and
sleepless nights of poverty. If she ever “ate her
bread with tears,” they were not those saltest
tears of all which are wrung from burning eyes
by unachieved hopes and frustrated endeavor.
Every field of social and intellectual activity was
open to her except the salons of Paris, and those
were very different under the blight of Napoleonic
bureaucracy from what they had been even
during the mingled vulgarity and ferment of the
Directory.

She returned to Weimar, and had a touching
meeting with the Grand Duchess, whose recent
troubles, and the courage she displayed under
them, had not only endeared her to her subjects
and her friends, but had won the applause of the
world. On her way thither she presumably delayed
a short while in Berlin, and it must have
been to that period that Ticknor refers when
relating a very amusing anecdote in his
Life and
Letters
. She asked Fichte to give her in a quarter
of an hour a summarized idea of his famous

Ego
, professing to be, as she doubtless was, entirely
in the dark about it. Fichte’s consternation
may be imagined, for he had been all his life
[152]

developing his system, and intended it to comprehend
the universe. Moreover he spoke very
bad French, and even if Madame de Staël were
momentarily silent in speech, we may fancy how
voluble she
looked
, and how nervous the prescience
of her imminent rapid speech must have
made the philosopher. However, he made up his
mind to the attempt, and began. In a very few
moments Madame de Staël burst out:

“Ah! that is enough. I understand perfectly.
Your system is illustrated by a story in Munchausen’s
travels.” Fichte’s expression at this
announcement was a study; but the lady went
on: “He arrived once on the banks of a wide
river, where there was neither bridge nor ferry,
neither boat nor raft; and at first he was in despair.
But an idea struck him, and taking hold of
his own sleeve, he jumped himself over to the
other side. Now, Monsieur Fichte, is not this
exactly what you have done with your
Ego
?”

This speech charmed everybody except Fichte
himself, who never forgave Madame de Staël, or
at least so Ticknor’s informant said, and it is
easy to believe him.

During the remainder of 1808, and the whole
of 1809 and 1810, Madame de Staël remained
alternately at Coppet and Geneva, working steadily
at the
Allemagne
. It was only about this
time that she acquired habits of sustained occupation.
[153]

Her father had entertained so strong
and singular an objection to seeing her engaged
in writing, that, rather than pain him, she used
to scribble at odd hours and in casual positions—sometimes,
for instance, standing by the chimney-piece.
In this way she was able to hide her
work as soon as he appeared, and thus spare him
the annoyance of supposing that he had interrupted
her. She talked so continually that it
was a marvel how she ever wrote at all; and her
friends used often to wonder where and how she
planned her works. But the truth seems to have
been that they sprang full grown from her brain,
after having been unconsciously developed there
by perpetual discussion.

During the years above mentioned society at
Coppet, although normally composed as of old by
Schlegel, Sismondi, Constant (for a time), Madame
Récamier, and Bonstetten, was varied once
more by new and interesting visitors. Among
these was Madame Le Brun, who not only painted
a portrait of Madame de Staël, but noted many
things which now afford pleasant glimpses of the
life at the Château. Of course, like everybody
else who sojourned as a guest at Coppet, she fell
under the spell of the hostess. Byron himself
some years later recorded how much more charming
Madame de Staël was in her own house than
out of it; and she seems to have possessed the
[154]

art of dispensing her hospitality, which was royal,
with as much grace as cordiality.

Among the new figures in these years at Coppet
were Werner and Oehlenschläger. Both
were poets and cursed with the irritability of the
genus, so that their mutual exasperation was
great, and Madame de Staël had some trouble to
keep the peace between them. Sismondi in one
of his letters described Werner as a man of many
intellectual gifts, who considered himself the
apostle of Love and bound to preach it in his
wanderings through the world. Occasionally his
utterances were a little puzzling to sober-minded
people, who were too much taken aback by his
mystical mixtures of passion, sentiment, and
piety to be always ready with an answer.

Werner had had a
Sturm und Drang
period of
extreme dissipation, had taken to Freemasonry,
and imbibed, apparently, some of the ideas of the
Illuminati; and, besides his mysticism in religion,
inclined to socialism in politics. After all this
vagueness of thought, joined to a highly impressionable
and very vivid temperament, it is not
surprising to learn that he eventually became a
Roman Catholic priest and rose to great renown
as a preacher.

Oehlenschläger has left a spiteful picture of
Werner, with his nose full of snuff, discussing his
esoteric doctrines in an execrable patois which
[155]

was intended for French. Both poets, however,
united in admiring and praising, almost worshipping,
Madame de Staël, and she on her side seems
to have cared little for any peculiarity in their
habits as long as there was originality in their
characters.

It was during this visit of the two poets at
Coppet that Karl Ritter appeared for a short
time on the scene. He enjoyed a great reputation
in Germany, being considered as the inventor
of the Science of Comparative Geography.
He was also a gentle, earnest man, and
became extremely religious in his old age. He
records an animated, indeed perfervid and amazingly
eloquent, speech pronounced before him by
Madame de Staël in favor of the metaphysical
origin of religion, and in answer to Sismondi
who maintained that its basis should be reasoned
morality. Madame de Staël declared that religion
was the condition of virtue; and that without it
there could be no higher life, by which she meant
no communion with God. In support of this
thesis she displayed the most surprising power
both of analysis and illustration, while her logic
appearing to Ritter unanswerable, caused the
discussion, as he avers, to be an epoch in his
intellectual life. This new interest of Madame
de Staël in such questions was largely due to the
ever-growing influence of Madame de Krüdener,
[156]

now irrevocably “regenerate” and rapidly rising
to fame as a priestess and prophetess, while leading
a life of the utmost asceticism. She had been
in Coppet again, and had left there the trail of
her sacerdotal tendencies. Poor Bonstetten, daily
growing younger in mind and heart, was comically
disgusted at the change which was coming
over the intellectual life at the Château. The
confusion of dogmas prevailing could not console
him for the fact of there being any dogmas at all.
Between Catholics, Boehmists, Martinists and
Mystics, he appeared at times to be quite worn
out, and attributed the whole revolution to the
influence of his pet aversion Schlegel. How he
made this out is not very clear, for the theological
spirit was as cosmopolitan in its representatives
as varied in its forms. Mathieu de
Montmorency was a Catholic, somebody else a
Quietist, a third an Illuminist, while Rationalism
was left to the doubtful prowess of Baron Voght,
who was reported by Bonstetten to be as gyratory
in his opinions as a weathercock.

We now approach an event in Madame de
Staël’s life so well known and so often recounted,
that it will not be necessary to relate it again in
detail. This was the suppression of her
Allemagne
,
Napoleon’s crowning act of meanness,
and a deed which obtained for Madame de Staël
[157]

the entire and unquestioning sympathy of every
enlightened mind and generous heart.

Madame de Staël determined, after some hesitation,
to publish the work in Paris, after submitting
it in the first instance to the approval of
the Imperial Censors. Why she took this unfortunate
resolution it is difficult to conceive; for
she had been plentifully illuminated with regard
to Napoleon’s spite, and even if all her penetration
did not enable her to foresee the full lengths
to which this would carry him, she might, one
would think, have guessed that the censors in
Paris would judge her work with the utmost
severity.

However this may be, she took up her abode
near Blois for the sake of correcting the proofs
as they issued from the press. She had, before
leaving Coppet, caused her passports to be made
out for America, in which country she had property,
and whither, for the sake of her children
she said, she was gradually making up her mind
to go. One cannot imagine Madame de Staël in
the New World such as it was in those days;
and as she entertained the project for a long
while, put it off from month to month, and finally
abandoned it altogether, it is more than probable
that she never liked it sufficiently to have resolved
upon it seriously.

At Blois she established herself first in the
[158]

famous Château of Chaumont-sur-Loire, haunted
by such various memories as the Cardinal d’Amboise,
Diane de Poitiers, Catherine de Medici,
and Nostradamus. But the owner of the house
shortly returning, she removed to another mansion
at Fossé, the home of a M. de Salaberry.
She had addressed a letter to Napoleon in which
she presented her work to his notice, craved an
interview in very respectful terms, and urged on
his notice the advantage which it would be for
her sons’ career and her daughter’s eventual marriage
(Albertine was then thirteen) if she were
allowed to reside again in the neighborhood of
Paris.

While awaiting the answer to this, she gathered
round her a group of her usual friends,
among them Madame Récamier, Adrien and
Mathieu de Montmorency, Prosper de Barante,
and Benjamin Constant. This society amused
itself with music (an Italian musician, Albertine’s
master, who played the guitar, being of the company),
and with a quaint invention named
La
petite poste
. This consisted in abolishing conversation
and substituting for it little notes, which
were passed from one to the other. A very innocent
amusement; but either it, or the guitar-playing,
or “Corinne’s” famous name made some
noise in the neighborhood.

Finally, one evening Madame de Staël went to
[159]

the theatre at Blois, and, on leaving it, was surrounded
by a curious crowd. Some officious
person communicated this fact, probably with
various others, some true, some false, to the Minister
of Police, who wrote to the Prefect of the
department to complain that his master’s celebrated
foe was the centre of a little court. In a
short time the blow fell. No answer came from
Napoleon, but, instead of it, the announcement
that her book had been seized, that all copies of
it were destroyed, and that the authoress was to
leave France within three days either for America
or Coppet. At the same time, the Prefect of
Loir and Cher demanded the surrender of the
MS. of the work. Fortunately Madame de Staël
possessed a rough copy, which she gave him,
while her son saved the real one.

She wrote to Savary, Duke of Rovigo (“permitted,”
she says bitingly “to hide his name
under a title”), and represented to him that the
interval allowed her for her departure was insufficient.
She received a reply which has become
classic for its baseness, its insolence, and its ludicrous
arrogance. All the littleness and none of
the force of Napoleon was reflected from the
mind of his underling. He told her that she
need not seek for the cause of her exile in the
silence regarding the Emperor which she had
observed in her work, for that no place in it could
[160]

have been found worthy of him! For the rest,
the air of France did not suit her, and as for its
inhabitants, they were not yet reduced to taking
as models the nations whom she admired. Her
last work was not French, and it was he (this
worthy official) who had forbidden it to be printed.

Savary thus claimed for himself, and not for
his master, the glory of this precious proceeding;
but as nobody suspected him of acting except
under orders, he blew this trumpet to the desert
air.

The blow to Madame de Staël was a terrible
one. Her first impulse was to go to America;
but fearing the long sea-voyage for her daughter
at that season of the year (it was October), she
once again set her face most reluctantly towards
Coppet. This place, which she henceforward describes
as a “prison,” was shortly afterwards
made further distasteful to her by a change of
Prefect. Monsieur de Barante, who was a friend
of hers, was removed, and the successor appointed
to him, M. Capelle, was one of the functionaries
now turned out by the gross from the Imperial
mould. He regarded Napoleon as a deity and
himself as a prophet, and conceived the brilliant
idea of distinguishing himself by persuading
Madame de Staël to write something flattering
of the Emperor. Naturally he failed; the mind
of a bureaucrat prostrate before the fetich of his
[161]

own alarmed idolatry alone could have conceived
the possibility of success. And naturally, again,
his failure rankled, and caused him to visit his
disappointment on the creator of it by numerous
small vexations.

[162]

CHAPTER XII.

MADAME DE STAËL’S SECOND MARRIAGE.

Madame de Staël arrived at Coppet in a condition
of despair, which she partially solaced by
writing to Madame Récamier and thanking her
again and again for the constancy of her friendship.
Evidently many of her friends had already
dropped away, or she fancied they had. Perhaps
she wearied them a little with her lamentations,
for one knows that silence was never her forte.
But all at once a happy change came over her.
Sismondi, writing to the Countess of Albany,
mentioned the transformation, and spoke of their
friend with admiration for her new-born but to
him inexplicable courage. She had given up
literary work, and no longer alluded to her afflictions;
and yet, in spite of that, her gaiety was
great and her conversation as charming and
sparkling as ever. Sismondi doubtless considered
that Reason—his beloved Reason was at
last asserting its sway over “Corinne’s” excitable
imagination. He must have been greatly
surprised a long time afterwards when he learnt
[163]

that the magician was Love. Years previously,
when Sismondi had himself been in love in his
decorous fashion, and had reproached Madame
de Staël for a want of sympathy in his trouble—a
want which he had not expected in the author
of
Delphine
—she said to him: “I have never
loved that I have not felt in myself two persons—one
who laughed at the other.” But when she
made that answer she was young and restless,
and, like all great and burning minds, claimed
from life a destiny too radiant to be ever realized.
Now she was middle-aged; she had drunk of the
waters of bitterness and known some of the tragic
awakenings of passion; she had experienced an
immeasurable sorrow in the loss of her father;
she had become familiar to satiety with the triumphs
of the world; and was, as she wrote to
Madame Récamier, “wearied of suffering.” In
short the moment had come when the one imperious
cry of her soul was for peace. In such a
state of mind what seems ridiculous becomes
possible, and the spirit of mocking youth in Madame
de Staël, which once could laugh at the
passionate half of her nature, was buried with
most of her hopes and almost all of her illusions.

It was shortly after her return to Switzerland
that, going to Geneva to spend some little while,
she first met Rocca. He was twenty-three, she
was forty-five; but that disparity of years did
[164]

not prevent his conceiving for her a most romantic
passion. He was extremely handsome—a fact
to which Frederica Brun and Byron alike bear
witness, and was further interesting through having
been wounded in the war in Spain, and so
badly that his health was never restored. He
was the son of a Councillor of State in Geneva,
and descended from a noble Piedmontese family
which had emigrated to Switzerland during the
persecution of the Protestants. He had some
culture and considerable intelligence; was even
something of an author; and, finally, was a splendid
horseman. He was wont to ride a magnificent
black Andalusian steed, and performed
unheard-of feats of jumping and galloping under
the windows of the house in Geneva where Madame
de Staël was staying. These varied attractions
finally proved irresistible to the object of
his homage, and before the year 1811 a secret
marriage took place. Why it was a secret is one
of those mysteries which has never been satisfactorily
cleared up. One explanation is that Bonaparte,
out of hatred of Madame de Staël, would
order Rocca, who, of course, was in the French
army, away on service. But if this had been the
real reason, it was sufficiently strong to have rendered
any further explanation unnecessary. Nevertheless,
a very good authority, the authoress of

Coppet et Weimar
, gives two other reasons: one
[165]

that Madame de Staël would “never have consented
to give up the aristocratic name which
she had made so illustrious”; the other, that the
world would have turned such a marriage into
ridicule. In this connection it is worth while to
state that Constant has given Madame de Staël’s
unwillingness to change her name as a reason
why she would not consent to an open marriage
with him.

The union with Rocca seems to have been a
very happy one; but inasmuch as it passed for
years in the eyes of everybody for a connection
of another nature, there is no doubt that it brought
Madame de Staël into some discredit. Many of
the guests at Coppet admired Rocca, but Sismondi,
for one, disliked him extremely. Sismondi,
however, was not unfrequently disposed
to be rather severe on Madame de Staël and her
guests; he even carped a little at the lovely Juliette.
“She (Madame Récamier) has put in a
fleeting appearance here,” he wrote in August,
1811. “She is full of kindness and graciousness
towards Madame de Staël, and is not less pretty
than two years ago, and yet I am glad that she is
going; for whenever she is present, all true conversation
is destroyed. She always beguiles her
neighbor into low-toned
tête-à-tête
talk. Her
small airs and graces weary me, and her
[166]

intelligence—for she is intelligent—in no way profits
the public.”

Sismondi sometimes visited Madame de Staël
herself with criticism not less captious, although
he was generally vanquished in the end by her
heroism and her charm. During the summer of
1811 she was in a very restless and unhappy
mood, which often drew forth his censure.

The conviction of the extreme disfavor with
which Napoleon regarded her was now widely
spread, and one of its results was a real or fancied
falling-off of friends, which wounded her exceedingly.
To nothing was she so sensitive as to any
failure of affection, and the ardor with which she
sought to defend herself from blame was caused
not so much by offended self-love as by slighted
feeling of a more amiable kind. Just about this
time she wrote to Camille Jordan a very characteristic
letter. Its tone was indignant, for Jordan,
always rather cold and repellent, had evidently
stung her by some censure of her conduct.
Apparently also, he had sought to justify himself
for not coming to see her, for she assured him
that she had never dreamed of blaming him, nor
entertained a thought against his loyalty. She
quivered under a shaft which had struck more
deeply home, and in one sentence made an allusion
applying apparently to Rocca. She owned
that being placed, as it appeared to her, on the
[167]

highest pinnacle of moral dignity, she had felt
some wonder at the fact that Jordan, “indulgent
towards the inconceivable conduct of Girando,”
should have reserved all his wrath for an unhappy
woman who, “while resisting all attacks and defending
her children and her talent at the risk of
happiness, security, and life,” had allowed herself
to be momentarily touched by the self-sacrificing
chivalry of a young man. Her anger was
but fleeting, and a few months later she wrote
as affectionately as ever to Camille, who, perhaps,
for once had been shaken from his prudent calm
by her fiery words, and had calmed her by protesting
unaltered regard.

This year of 1811 was fruitful of sorrow.
Mathieu de Montmorency and Madame de Récamier
were both exiled immediately after a visit
paid by them to their illustrious friend. According
to Madame Lenormant, the writer of
Coppet
et Weimar
, as well as to Madame de Staël herself,
the letter from the Minister of Police which
conveyed the order of exile to Mathieu de Montmorency
distinctly signified that friendship with
the mistress of Coppet was the cause of his disgrace.
Sismondi, however, who showed himself
incredulous, and to a certain extent unsympathizing
throughout all these circumstances, when
writing to the Countess of Albany, was concerned
to correct such an impression, and declared that
[168]

not only had the Prefect of Geneva and the Minister
of the French Police disclaimed the idea as
unfounded, but he himself had never seen that
anybody was in the least compromised by going
to Coppet. Nevertheless, in a very short time
Schlegel was ordered to quit the Château on the
preposterous plea that he had pronounced the

Phædra
of Euripides to be superior to that of
Racine! Madame de Staël went to Aix for the
sake of her youngest son’s health, but at the end
of ten days was recalled by a letter from the Prefect,
who advised her not to venture more than
two leagues from Coppet. Very naturally she
was irritated to the last degree and often deeply
distressed at all these incidents. The exile imposed
on Mathieu de Montmorency and Madame
Récamier caused her the greatest grief, more
especially as she never doubted but that unwittingly
she was the cause. She had other causes
of suffering also in her health at the time, and
doubtless was far from being as brilliant as of
yore.

Circumstances (she had a son by Rocca in
1812) condemned her to an isolation which fretted
her almost beyond endurance; and Sismondi,
not possessing the key to the situation, was
aggrieved at her sombre mood and nervous irritability.
He wrote that he sometimes “bores
himself” at Coppet (O Ichabod!); and he was
[169]

induced to take refuge with sundry amiable persons
at Geneva who soothed his wounded self love.

At last Madame de Staël—inconsolable for the
loss of Schlegel’s society, panting to escape beyond
the narrow limits of Coppet, where her sons
had no career before them, and her daughter no
chance of marrying, and she herself was harassed
by hints and admonitions from the Prefect at
every turn—resolved upon escape. She was
informed through Schlegel, who was in Berne at
the time, that if she would even now write something
in praise of Napoleon her fate would be
considerably mitigated. It is no slight credit to
her that, agitated and ill as she was, she firmly
declined. Nothing, indeed, at such a moment
could have been more courageous than her refusal,
for she was torn with a thousand fears at
her impending journey. The passport would
have been an insuperable difficulty, as the permission
to go to America, once accorded, had
now been withdrawn from her; entrance into
Italy was also denied, and the Government was
determined that she should not take refuge in
England.

Yet to England she was resolved to go. The
only route open to her was through Russia and
Sweden. Through her friend the Grand Duchess
of Weimar she obtained a passport, which was
[170]

to be handed to her in Vienna. All this took
months to settle, and it was only on the 23rd of
May, 1812, that she was at last able to start.
It was necessary to leave in such a way as not
to excite the attention of the lynx-eyed Prefect
of Geneva.

The eve of her departure she wandered about
the park of Coppet a prey to the utmost grief.
She had been unwilling to return there at one
time, but now she was heart-broken at having to
bid a long, perhaps a last, farewell to the tomb
of her father and the scenes associated with his
memory. To her, both by nature and system,
such a parting was particularly poignant.

At 2 o’clock on the afternoon of the 23rd, she
got into her carriage, announcing that she would
return for dinner. Only two of her servants were
in the secret. Albertine, Auguste and Rocca
were with her; her second son was to follow in
a few days, and join her at Vienna with her baggage.
For the present, all the necessaries which
the travellers absolutely needed were stowed away
in the pockets of Auguste and Rocca; Madame
de Staël and Albertine only carried fans.

The escape thus ingeniously planned was carried
out with a success that it is quite pleasant to
read of, even to this moment. The police never
awoke at all to the fact of the flight until the luggage
followed the fugitives, and then Madame de
[171]

Staël was beyond their reach. History draws a
veil over the feelings of the Prefect.

At Berne, Schlegel joined the party, and Auguste
de Staël separated from it, in order to return
to Coppet to see after things there. The travellers
pushed on, but, because of Madame de Staël’s
health, in no great haste, through Switzerland
and the Tyrol. Her one haunting fear all this
time was that in Bavaria an agent of the French
Government might have preceded her with an
order for her arrest. The abject subservience
of the German Governments at that time to
Napoleon made it very likely that in such a case
passports would be so much waste-paper.

Vienna was reached in safety, and there Madame
de Staël at first determined to remain three
weeks, while a courier was despatched to Wilna
to obtain the Russian passport from the Emperor
Alexander. The first ten days of her sojourn
were marked by cloudless pleasure. Security
had returned to her; and, after her late repression,
varied chiefly by the Prefect of Geneva’s
solemn exhortations, it was a real delight to find
herself in the midst of a society where Napoleon
was frankly abused. But the Emperor and Empress
of Austria were at Dresden, and the official
mind, left to itself, soon became frightened at
the idea of sheltering the dangerous authoress.
Spies were stationed at her door, and cropped up,
[172]

like poisonous fungi, with silent rapidity along
her path. Moreover, an order had arrived for the
arrest and return of Rocca as a French officer—the
fact of his wounds and inability to serve being
waived in the interests of persecution. At this
point one pauses to ask
why
, after all, Madame
de Staël herself was not arrested. There seems
but little doubt that the obsequiousness of the
Austrian police would have been equal to the
task. Perhaps Napoleon shrank from the odium
of such a proceeding; perhaps he was, in reality,
rather glad to be rid of Madame de Staël. This
would agree with a well-known conversation
which he had held four years previously with
Auguste de Staël, who, going to him to plead for
his mother’s recall, was told, with insolent, good-humored
contempt, that the whole of Europe,
except France, was open to her; that she would
not be imprisoned, as then she might have some
cause to complain, but that she alone could be
unhappy when allowed to wander at will through
every capital of Europe except Paris.

But if this explanation be accepted, it becomes
difficult to account for the later persecutions of
Madame de Staël at the hands of the French and
Swiss police. Could it be that Savary and his
underlings, through excess of zeal, interpreted
their instructions with liberal severity and that
Napoleon was not responsible for every individual
[173]

act, but only for the angry hatred which
promised approval of each and all of them?

However this may be, Madame de Staël’s fears
were not long in reasserting themselves. Too
impatient to wait for the passport, she started
with her son and daughter for Galicia, having
extracted from a friend the promise of hurrying
after her as soon as the expected paper arrived.
In her
Memoirs
she admits that this was a mistake;
for at Vienna she had friends to intercede
in her favor, while in Galicia there was no shield
between herself and the servility towards France
of inferior officials. As a consequence she was
driven along her route by the unceasing admonitions
to “move on” of the police. Her immediate
goal was Lanzut—the home of her friends
Prince and Princess Lubomirski. Here she was
to meet Rocca, who had also proceeded on his
way, but disguised. At some point of the road
her passport reached her. This was a ray of
light; and a letter from Madame Récamier, which
overtook her somewhere near Olmutz, was
another. But, as a rule, her sensations were all
gloomy. The discomforts of her journey through
such a country and under such circumstances
increased her sadness, to which the finishing
touch was put by the aspect of the desolated
countries, and of the overtaxed, starving populations
withering beneath the Napoleonic blight,
[174]

and mingling curses on the oppressor with
prayers to heaven for relief.

These tragic pictures were ludicrously, but by
no means reassuringly relieved by the sight of
placards, in the various towns where the passports
had to be examined, which ordained that
Madame de Staël was to be submitted, wherever
she appeared, to the surveillance of the police!

At Lanzut she had been informed that she was
not to stay more than twenty-four hours. This,
however, was previous to her receiving the Russian
passport. With that to show, she hoped for
more indulgence.

The hope was vain, for at Lanzut a police agent
presented himself, having received orders from
his chief, the Governor of the district, to see that
Madame de Staël did not remain more than eight
hours at the Lubomirski’s Château. And when
she left, he followed her carriage in a calèche,
thus causing her much alarm lest Rocca, on joining
them, should be recognized.

Fifty leagues of Austrian territory had still to
be traversed. The police agent, who is described
as carrying out his instructions with a most vexatious
pertinacity, quitted the travellers at the
limit of his “circle”; but Madame de Staël says
that grenadiers were still found posted along the
route to observe her, and she did not breathe
freely until she found herself on Russian territory.
[175]

Even there she could not allow herself to
feel quite secure, for Napoleon’s huge army—destined
by its apparent power and its oncoming
doom to typify the falling might of France—was
hastening by forced marches to Moscow; and
Madame de Staël, to avoid meeting it, had to
reach St. Petersburg by a circuitous route. Her
terror of being arrested and imprisoned still abode
with her; she was evidently convinced that the
Emperor was furious with her for having escaped
his clutches; and she began seriously to consider
what she would do if any portion of the army
threatened to overtake her. Her plan was to
hasten on to Odessa, and thence proceed to
Greece and Constantinople.

Fortunately, her companions succeeded in persuading
her that she could travel by post much
faster than an army; and partially calmed, she
at last gave herself up to some enjoyment of the
scenes and people around her. Her
Dix Années
d’Exil
, always vivid, becomes from this point a
charming book. She is a little too optimistic,
and indulges, as usual, too much in generalization,
but seizes on salient points with swiftness,
and describes them with remarkable force.

She was delighted with her reception by the
nobles and the Imperial family. Of the Czar she
speaks with a fervent admiration that later generations
have not shared. He had the facile
[176]

amiability and conventional philanthropy of a
sovereign who finds his benevolent theories so
constantly crossed by circumstances as to release
him, in most instances, from the responsibility of
applying them. But any promise of political
reform and any appeal to general principles of
excellence found so ready a response in Madame
de Staël’s own heart that, especially where a monarch
spoke, she ceased to be severely critical.

According to Galiffe, she met in Russia with
immense social success, and enchanted everybody.
He, personally, found her much improved
since the days of her brilliant, but too self-asserting
youth.

Stein was struck with her air of simplicity and
goodness, and sought to convey her great unaffectedness
of manner by saying that “she gave
herself no trouble to please”—quite a man’s
judgment on a woman, and curiously inaccurate
as a necessary consequence. Madame de Staël
was so intensely interested in every new person
who appeared to her at all distinguished, that she
must always have cared supremely to please.
But what Stein probably meant was that she had
none of the airs and graces of worldly coquettes;
and very often, when launched in conversation,
she must have been more bent on convincing than
seducing.

Madame de Staël passes over in her
Memoirs
[177]

a scene at the theatre, during her visit to St.
Petersburg, which wounded her deeply, and is
related by Arndt. She went with her son and
somebody else to the “Théatre Français,” to see
Racine’s
Phèdre
. Scarcely was she seated, when
somebody in the pit denounced her and her companions
as French. Instantly the people rose
and clamored for them to be turned out. The
performance was stopped, the actors decamped,
and poor Madame de Staël, sobbing with indignation
and grief, was led away. Even then she
felt the insult chiefly as levelled at Racine, and
repeated incessantly, “
Oh! les barbares, les barbares!
Oh, mon Racine!
” Arndt was rather
astonished at her taking such a scene so much to
heart; but, on reflection, arrived at the conclusion
that German women might be the better for
a little of the same passionate patriotism.

But unpleasant incidents during her stay in the
Russian capital seem to have been few. She visited
several institutions, was received everywhere
with politeness and cordiality, and revelled again,
as she had done in Vienna, in listening to the
free expression of sentiments that agreed with
her own. Events, however, were progressing
rapidly, and, in spite of the engagement never
to sign a peace entered into by the Czar with
Bernadotte at Abo, the battle of Borodino and
the taking of Moscow filled most people with dismay.
[178]

Madame de Staël, always easily alarmed,
thought that the moment had arrived when she
could no longer remain in Russia with safety,
and she set her face towards Sweden,
en route
for
England; thus quitting St. Petersburg a few days
too soon to receive in all its force the electric
shock of learning that Moscow was fired. At
Abo, where she was to embark for Stockholm,
she met Bernadotte, now Prince Royal of Sweden,
whom she had formerly known in Paris as
an
habitué
of her own and Madame Récamier’s
salon. Of course he admired the lovely Juliette,
and hastened to inquire after her with an interest
which Madame de Staël straightway conveyed in
a letter to her friend—a letter worded, however,
with a caution that reveals the inconceivable difficulty
even of private correspondence in those
stormy days.

At Stockholm she was welcomed, according
to her son, with “perfect kindness”; and as she
was notoriously enthusiastic about Bernadotte,
whom she unhesitatingly pronounced to be “the
hero of the age,” it is probable that he honored
her with a great deal of his confidence. Galiffe
(author of
D’un siècle à l’autre
), who had access
to her correspondence from Sweden with J. A.
Galiffe in St. Petersburg, was of opinion that her
influence had a large share in determining Bernadotte
to declare himself against Bonaparte.

[179]

She dedicated her
Réflexions sur le Suicide
to
the Prince in a very complimentary preface, in
which she compared herself and her children as
seeking his protection in the same way as Arabian
Shepherds take shelter from a storm “under
a laurel”; and went on to assure him that his
public life had been signalized by all the virtues
which claim the admiration of thinkers, and she
encouraged him to persevere and remind the
world of that which it had entirely forgotten,
namely, that the highest reason teaches virtue.
In contrast to all this praise, it is piquant to learn
that Bernadotte—like so many other practically-minded
people—had his little grumble at his illustrious
guest, and talked of the “inconceivable
preoccupation with self,” which by this time had
led Madame de Staël to see in every political
move of Napoleon the beginning of some new
measure against herself.

Her oft-professed anxiety about her sons’
future was allayed by the Prince Royal’s offer to
interest himself in Auguste’s diplomatic career,
while Albert was to enter the Swedish army.

One might wonder why this obvious solution
of her difficulties had not presented itself sooner
to Madame de Staël, were it not evident that she
had consciously or unconsciously made the most
of every circumstance which could heighten the
apparent hardship of her lot.

[180]

CHAPTER XIII.

ENGLAND AGAIN.

After quitting Sweden Madame de Staël went
to England. Some eighteen years or so had
passed since she had wept in the lanes at Mickleham
at the thought of separating from the charming
colony at Juniper Hall. Her heart was still
almost as young as in those days; the vivid flame
of enthusiasm for all that was good still burnt as
brightly in her soul. If her spiritual horizon had
widened, and a fervent if rather vague religious
sentiment had succeeded to her unquestioning
faith in men—that was almost all the change in
her. For her nature was a singularly homogeneous
one, and growth, while widening and deepening
it, did not render it more complex.

Her reception in English society was marked
by all the enthusiasm which we are accustomed
to lavish on illustrious foreigners. She was
mobbed at routs and assemblies, and ladies
mounted on chairs and tables to stare at her.

She took up her abode at 30, Argyll Place, Regent
Street, a house now a bathing establishment.
[181]

It was here that she received the mixed but brilliant
society which Byron declared reminded him
of the grave, inasmuch as all distinctions were
levelled in it!

These social meetings formed her protest
against the enormous and overcrowded gatherings
which were dignified then, as now, with the
name of “society” in London, and where Madame
de Staël found that all intellectual enjoyment
was smothered by sheer force of numbers.
She was willing enough to admit that clever men
and women in England were transcendentally
interesting when caught in sufficiently small
groups to make rational conversation possible;
but declared that all qualities of mind were annihilated
in the crowds, where the only superiority
necessary was physical force to enable one to
elbow one’s way along.

Byron and Madame de Staël became very good
friends, although she rated him about his conduct
in love; and he laughed, with quiet malice, at
many of her peculiarities. One of his favorite
diversions—or, at least, so he said—was to plague
her by declaring that he did not believe in Napoleon’s
“persecutions.” Nothing made her
more angry, he declared, inasmuch as she was
proud of the danger, which, as she believed,
threatened Napoleon’s Government from her eloquence
and her fame. Byron, in his
Conversations
[182]

with Lady Blessington
, told one or two
stories of “Corinne,” more diverting probably
than veracious, and complained of her overwhelming
declamation (as distinguished from
talk), her tendency to metaphysical subtleties,
her extraordinary self-complacency, and the
strange simplicity which caused her to be perpetually
mystified. But he admitted that she
was “a fine creature with great talent and many
noble qualities”; and he loudly proclaimed her
immeasurable superiority to every woman with
pretensions to literary fame in England. He
even found several things to admire in her
appearance, which in a man of his taste was a
very precious testimony, and might have consoled
Madame de Staël, had she only known of it, for
those personal defects which were said to afflict
her.

The person who in all England appears to have
been the best match, conversationally, for Madame
de Staël was Sir James Mackintosh, who,
perhaps, gave the best of all descriptions of her
when he said, “She is one of the few persons
who surpass expectation. She has every sort of
talent, and would be universally popular if, in
society, she were to confine herself to her inferior
talents—pleasantry, anecdote, and literature,
which are so much more suited to conversation
than her eloquence and genius.” At another
[183]

time he remarked: “Her penetration was certainly
extraordinary, with an air of apparent occupation
in things immediately around her.” He
recorded, not always approvingly, some of her
sweeping judgments, as for instance, that “Political
Economy was prosaic and uninteresting,”
and that “Miss Austen’s novels were commonplace.”

Her stay in England was saddened, although
apparently not very deeply so, by the violent
death of her younger son. Byron’s flippant allusion
to this tragic event has brought him into
much disrepute. “Madame de Staël,” he wrote,
“has lost one of her young Barons, who has been
carbonaded by a vile Teutonic adjutant.…
‘Corinne’ is, of course, what all mothers must
be, but will, I venture to prophesy, do what few
mothers could—write an essay upon it. She cannot
exist without a grievance and somebody to
see or read how much grief becomes her.” All
these epigrammatic previsions turned out to be
apparently unfounded; for there is no proof that
Madame de Staël mourned her son with anything
approaching to the passion with which she had
grieved for her father. Sismondi, indeed, always
censorious, is rather severe on what he is pleased
to consider her want of maternal feeling; and, as
she was never known to hide her sentiments, it is
only fair to conclude that comparative silence
[184]

meant comparative insensibility. Albert de Staël
was very high-spirited and impetuous, and rather
wild. Judging from a severe and somewhat self-righteous
epistle addressed to him on one occasion
by his mother, he had many of the faults that
irritated, and none of the qualities that pleased
her. Auguste and Albertine, inspired by their
adoring veneration, presumably tried to mould
their tastes and pursuits by hers; but Albert
appears to have been different—for his mother
reproaches him with remaining unmoved by her
own intellect, the dignity of his brother, the charm
of his sister, and the talents of M. Schlegel!
She assures him that he is unfit to appreciate
the mother whom he possesses, and very characteristically
requests to be told of what service it
has been to him to be “the grandson of Necker.”
Neither the invocation of this august memory,
nor the general drift of the arguments, strike one
as happily chosen for moving a thoughtless lad
in his teens, who was probably drawn towards his
brother and sister by other reasons than their
respective dignity and charm, and was more than
likely to be secretly bored by the disquisitions of
the learned Schlegel. However this may be, the
letter gives the full measure of the contempt
which Madame de Staël could feel for folly and
frivolity; and, if those were the distinguishing
characteristics of Albert, it is very comprehensible
[185]

that, the first pangs of natural grief overcome,
his loss would not leave a great void in her active
existence.

In the autumn of 1813
L’Allemagne
was published.
It appeared in London, and straightway
caused the greatest ferment known for a long
while in the literary world. The circumstances
under which it saw the light—the social position,
sex, and history of its author—and its own intrinsic
merits, combined to make it an event. It is
notorious how much Sir James Mackintosh and
Byron admired it; and articles concerning it, critical
and laudatory, poured from the European
press. Goethe admitted that no previous writer
had so largely revealed the riches of German literature
to the intelligence of an unappreciative
generation; and although the great Teutonic
race was not fully satisfied with the work at the
time, and has since become somewhat captious
regarding it, the talent which it displayed has
never been called in question. By a sufficiently
striking coincidence the publication of
L’Allemagne

took place in the same month as the battle
of Leipzic. Only a brief period then elapsed before
Napoleon abdicated, and Madame de Staël,
her splendid and triumphant exile terminated,
was enabled once more to re-enter the gates of
beloved but, alas! humiliated Paris. She was
far too patriotic not to entertain saddened feelings
[186]

on seeing the streets of the capital filled
with soldiers in German, Russian and Cossack
uniforms; for while rejoicing in the overthrow
of Napoleon, she mourned the tarnished glory of
the French arms.

She was received with the utmost cordiality by
Louis XVIII., and her salon quickly became the
rallying-ground for all the brightest intellects of
France. It is interesting to read that Talleyrand—the
supple, silent, time-serving Talleyrand—was
among her guests. She forgave him, of
course, for his long oblivion of her old claims on
his friendship; but not more thoroughly, in all
probability, than he forgave himself. To Paris
had returned the Abbé de Montesquion, Lally,
Tollendal, Lafayette. How changed were the
times since the latter had hurried thither to plead,
and plead in vain, for his imprisoned King;
since the Abbé had waited in disguise on the
high road for Madame de Staël to arrive in her
carriage and convey him out of France; since
Lally, “the fattest of susceptible men,” had
brought his eloquence and sensibility to help in
enlivening the sylvan glades of Mickleham.

Madame Récamier had returned and Constant,
at the ripe age of forty-eight and married for the
second time, was so in love with her as to resent
any allusion to the past which could divert him,
even momentarily, from his all-absorbing passion.

[187]

Madame de Krüdener, worn and wasted with
sybilline fervor, had commenced her religious
gatherings, and the Czar was drawn daily within
the circle of her spells, while Madame Récamier
was banished from it because her beauty could
still claim glances that were vowed to heaven.
Constant, going once, never went again; perhaps
because Juliette was wanting; perhaps because
such mystic utterances as fell from the inspired
priestess’s lips were too vague to find an echo in
his passion-tossed soul. To Paris also had come
Bonstetten, younger than ever in spirit, and hopeful,
for all his burden of years.

The dawn of the new era—so quickly clouded
for more serious and prescient souls than his—filled
him with delight. He was brighter and
more contented now than he had been in youth;
the world seemed a better place to him, and he
almost wondered how anybody could be sad in a
universe so full of new ideas and dazzling intellectual
possibilities.

Besides all these interesting figures, other and
more splendid, if not more illustrious, personages
crowded Madame de Staël’s salon. Thither came
the Czar, so chivalrous and sympathetic in these
days; thither came her old friend the Duke of
Saxe Weimar; and Wellington presented himself
to be received with the utmost cordiality, and
[188]

to inscribe himself on the long list of Madame
Récamier’s admirers.

At first Madame de Staël’s heart beat high
with patriotic hopes. She had become monarchical
in her feelings again, and expected great
things for France from the liberal disposition of
the King. She exerted herself quite in her old
way to talk over dissidents and reconcile malcontents;
for her one longing was that the new constitution
of France might be made on the pattern
and informed with the spirit of England. But
she was not slow to discover how ill-founded were
such aspirations. Egotism stalked through the
exhausted land—egotism under various forms and
professing various creeds; now wearing the super-annuated
uniform of the Maison Rouge; now
decorated with the medals conferred by Napoleon;
now prating of old services before the emigration;
now professing a servile repentance for
base obedience to Bonaparte. They were but
differences in the mask after all; yet over these
differences men wrangled, and meanwhile the
poison of a deadly indifference crept through the
veins of France. Madame de Staël saw all this
and felt it with a passionate regret. In the last
volume of her
Considerations
she shows how
everything was accorded in the letter, only to be
constantly violated in the spirit. She deplored
the irreconcilable folly of the
émigrés
; the abject
[189]

cringing of converted Bonapartists, who only
cared for power; and the disastrous reactionary
influences which hampered the action of the
Court.

She returned for the summer to Coppet—a
very welcome refuge to her now that she went
thither of her own free will. Her health was
beginning to fail about this time, while that of
M. Rocca gave her constant anxiety. Originally
she had been blest, if not with a splendid constitution,
at least with a royal disdain of physical
influences. She had felt neither heat nor cold,
and spoke even with a certain impatience of
invalid considerations. But she had lived at
such high pressure intellectually from her very
earliest years; had thought, felt, talked, and done
so much, that her existence could not be counted,
like most people’s, by years. In the sense of
accumulated efforts and results it had been a very
long life, and the expenditure of nervous energy
so constantly kept up was beginning to tell at
last. Even Bonstetten, the optimist, saw a
change in her when in July, 1814, he visited her
at Coppet. She was, indeed, very depressed in
spirits; but he appeared to allude only to a physical
alteration, for he declared her to be as brilliant
and good as ever. He might have added as
indefatigable. She found somebody to translate
Wilberforce’s work on the Slave Trade, and wrote
[190]

a preface to the French edition. Also she published,
in pamphlet form, an appeal for Abolition
addressed to the Sovereigns met together at that
time in Paris; and she was busy with her work,

Considerations
, of which the first two parts alone
were eventually revised by herself.

In July, from Coppet, she wrote a characteristic
letter to Madame Récamier, telling what difficulty
she experienced in keeping up the fine love
of solitude, which had beguiled her momentarily
into seeking that picturesque and sacred but
monotonous retreat. “My soul is not sufficiently
rural,” she writes. “I regret your little apartment
and our quarrels and conversations, and all
that life which is yours.” In this sturdy love of
streets Madame de Staël resembled Dr. Johnson
and, perhaps, if the truth were known, she resembled
all good talkers.

She returned to Paris in the winter of 1814-15,
and, conscious that her strength was failing,
she became extremely anxious to marry her darling
daughter to some man who would be worthy
of her. Her circumstances had been recently
much improved by the repayment from the Treasury
of the two millions which Necker had left
there. Such wealth, joined to her own brilliant
social position, entitled her to look out for a good

parti
for Albertine; but she was resolute that the
match should be a happy one. Her ideal of felicity
[191]

was conjugal love. She preached, indeed, a
code of wifely submission that would seem very
insipid to some emancipated damsels in our days,
and was perhaps a little too perfect to be possible.
But she put into it all her own rare faith in
good, and often laughingly declared that “she
would
force
her daughter to make a marriage of
the heart.”

In the midst of these amiable preoccupations,
and while enjoying once again the delight of social
intercourse, unhampered by foreign modes of
speech and thought, and untroubled by the irritation
of exile, Madame de Staël was still haunted
by a foreboding of evil. Such presentiments
were very common with her. She had the quick,
indefinable instinct of imaginative minds, and felt
that subtle vibration of events which precedes,
or perhaps causes, change in them. Probably
she hardly knew what she anticipated; and yet,
when the news of Napoleon’s escape from Elba
arrived, it seemed as if the expected disaster
could only be that. An hour after she met M.
de la Valette, and said to him: “If Bonaparte
triumph, liberty is lost; and if he be beaten, our
national independence is over.”

A few days of utter consternation followed—a
pause of bewildered, incapable silence, through
which, as Châteaubriand so graphically says,
“the sound of Bonaparte’s advancing footsteps
[192]

echoed.” Then came the news of one town and
province after another rallying round the standard
of the resurgent conqueror. Ney departed,
vowing to bring back his former master in an
iron cage; and the vain boast, so quickly yet not
ludicrously disproved, inspired as little confidence
as it deserved.

The Court prepared for ignominious flight,
and Madame de Staël had no choice but to follow
its example. But a few months previously she
had by chance become aware of a conspiracy
against Napoleon’s life, and, for all her hatred of
him, had been so moved by the menace of peril
to her ancient and implacable foe, that she had
found means to despatch a warning to him. Yet
now, when she heard of his return, all her terror
of him revived in its pristine force, bringing back
with it the flood of agitated imagination which
had so long poisoned her life.

Villemain has left a record of the evening of
the 18th March 1815, which he passed in the
salon of the Countess Rumford, and where he
met Madame de Staël. Several famous, and to
us now familiar, personages were present—Lafayette,
Constant, Jaucourt, Cuvier, Sismondi,
and Lemercier among others. Every moment
somebody arrived with news of the advancing
hero. Madame de Staël came late, and instantly
attracted the general attention to herself. She
[193]

was overwhelmed with sadness, but more for
France even than for herself. She had been at
the Tuileries, and found that there all hope of
resistance was abandoned. Her own mind was
made up for flight, yet she urged Madame de
Rumford to remain, showing that she considered
Napoleon’s hatred of herself to be inextinguishable
and as active as ever. In point of fact, Napoleon’s
earliest care, on reaching the capital,
was to express his regret at her departure. It is
very unlikely that he would have molested her in
any way had she remained; but it was ordained
that, to the last, he should make her suffer even
more in imagination than in reality. She urged
Madame Récamier to escape with her, for, Juliette’s
prescription never having been formally
revoked, Madame de Staël considered her danger
as great as her own. But Madame Récamier,
more calm, refused. With her remained also
Benjamin Constant, although he also was admonished
by Madame de Staël to seek safety in
another land. His career during the Hundred
Days is well known. He began by attacking
Napoleon violently, then had an interview with
him, was fascinated, converted, appointed a councillor
of state, and helped to edit the
Acte Additionnel
.
Another convert was the sober-minded
Sismondi, and several people have asserted, on
the authority first of an English editor, and then
[194]

of M. Thiers, that the great, the irreconcilable
“Corinne” herself, gave in a tardy but complete
adhesion. Ste. Beuve endorsed the error, and
based his belief upon the style of an unsigned
note in French found among Lord Castlereagh’s
posthumous papers, and attributed by Lord Londonderry’s
secretary to Madame de Staël. This
letter was supposed to have been written at Coppet
and forwarded to Mr. Crawford, the American
Minister in Paris, in order that he might take
it to London. Its object was to inspire English
statesmen with the writer’s own belief in Napoleon’s
new-found sincerity, and to recommend his
government to their support.

A comparison of dates shows, however, that
such a letter, if despatched from Coppet, could
only have reached Paris twenty-four hours after
Mr. Crawford’s departure, and Thiers’ assumption
that Madame de Staël remained in Paris
during the Hundred Days is disproved by her
correspondence from Switzerland with Madame
Récamier. Finally, and again according to
Thiers, Sismondi’s conversion was a result of
Madame de Staël’s own change of views. But
this also appears quite untenable, inasmuch as
Sismondi himself bears testimony to her resentment
against Napoleon, strengthened, as he says,
“to a blind and violent hatred.” This is the natural
language of a person who
has
veered about
[195]

of another person who has
not
, and the expression
occurs in a letter of Sismondi’s written from
Coppet a short time after Waterloo, and when he
had gone to the château in some doubt as to the
nature of the reception there awaiting him. He
had been much relieved to find his hostess as
cordial as ever. Madame de Staël, indeed, never
seems to have willingly or spontaneously given
up any friend whom she had once admitted to the
title. Politics are apt to envenom the most intimate
relations, but they left no bitterness in
her

great and gentle soul. Alas! the happy days at
Coppet were numbered now for most of those
whom we have seen congregating there through
so many exciting summers.

Madame de Staël delighted in the exercise of
a generous hospitality. Nobody ever seems to
have managed her business affairs better than
she did, and among the few apparent contradictions
of her transparent nature was the spirit of
order in which she dealt with life, as soon as the
things presented to her consideration were hard
facts and not sentiments. In all administrative
matters she had the capacity of a true Frenchwoman,
and, while systematic and careful, was
the least avaricious of women.

[196]

CHAPTER XIV.

CLOSING SCENES.

After Waterloo, Madame de Staël did not
return to France. The thought of the second
occupation by foreign troops was odious to her,
and, besides this, she feared the outbreak of reactionary
feelings, and foresaw a political condition
in which her pure and ideal liberalism would be
equally unwelcome to all parties.

Rocca’s state of health finally induced her to
go to Italy. From Milan she sent a letter to
Madame Récamier, which is interesting as showing
how little her fine mind and noble heart were
in harmony just then with the condition of affairs
in France.

“You are kind enough to say to me,” she
wrote, “that I should do better to be in Paris.
But no, indeed, I should not care to see some
forms of liberty (
franchises
) ‘accorded’ to the
people, for it is my creed that nations are born
free. I should say unfashionable things and
make enemies unnecessarily. When all is
arranged for Albertine’s marriage, I shall lead a
[197]

solitary life in Paris; but at present I do well,
believe me, to have myself represented by Auguste.
Like you, I think well, and better than
ever, of Victor de Broglie, and I shall be very
glad of the marriage if nothing goes against it.
I am also of your way of thinking in regard to
Madame de Krüdener. She is the herald of a
great oncoming religious epoch. Speak of me to
her, I beg, as of a person quite devoted to her.…
M. Rocca’s health still gives me anxiety.
I have never recovered any happiness since Bonaparte
disembarked.”

Madame de Staël had been very happy in her
marriage with Rocca, and the tenderness with
which she regarded him was manifest to all her
acquaintances. Under such circumstances, it
does seem strange that she should to the last
have kept her marriage with him a secret.

The most plausible reason for such a course,
fear of Napoleon’s spite, existed no longer after
Waterloo. Why, then, have gratuitously incurred
the reproach of an illicit connection? Why,
above all, separate herself for five years from her
own and Rocca’s child? Such conduct does not
on the face of it seem quite consistent with the
lofty ideal of duty which Madame de Staël professed.

Albertine’s wedding took place in civil form
at Leghorn on February 15th, 1815; and five
[198]

days later in Pisa a double religious ceremony,
one Catholic, the other Protestant, was performed.

All Madame de Staël’s friends gave a charming
picture of Albertine. Guizot, Lamartine,
and Bonstetten were most enthusiastic about her.
Their praises were also echoed by Byron, who,
needless to say, was no mean judge; and Ticknor
seeing her in Paris about a year after her
marriage, never mentioned her except in terms
of admiration. She was both beautiful and clever,
and, after her mother’s death, became, in her turn,
the queen of a cosmopolitan salon.

Accompanied by the bride and bridegroom, by
Rocca, by Schlegel and Sismondi, Madame de
Staël presently betook herself to Florence, and
while there renewed her acquaintance with the
Countess of Albany. Alfieri was dead now, and
Fabre reigned in his stead. Madame de Staël
appears to have adopted him with the mingled
enthusiasm and indulgence which she exhibited
towards all the tastes of her friends.

The summer of 1816 was spent in Coppet.
The newest and most interesting figure there on
this occasion was Byron. He had shaken the
dust of England from his feet, and was nursing
his lyrical cynicism at Cologny near Geneva.
Unfortunately, his reputation was so bad that the
virtuous society of the place would not know him.
Madame de Staël alone not only received but
[199]

welcomed him. He was grateful; and so far
yielded to the influence which this gratitude enabled
her to exercise over him as actually to
make an imperfect attempt at reconciliation with
his wife, in order to please his eloquent and magnanimous
hostess.

It is amusing to note the different impressions
which Byron—the charming, reprehensible Byron—made
upon the various guests at the Château.
Bonstetten, as might be expected, was
quite fascinated by him, and wrote to Malthasson
of his musical voice and beautiful head; and of
the “half-honest little demon” that darted in a
lambent way through the sarcasm of his speech.
Sismondi—the correct and censorious—dwells
more especially on Byron’s cynical contempt for
appearances, and the conduct and companionship
which had brought him into disrepute with
the worthy Genevese.

Coppet had never been quite as brilliant, probably,
as in this last summer that Madame de
Staël was to reign there. The society was more
varied in nationality than in the days when a
brilliant but small band of intellects had gathered
round to console her in her exile. Brougham,
Bell, Lady Hamilton, Lord Breadalbane, Romilly,
Stendahl, Schlegel, passed in rapid succession
over the scene—talked, sparkled—and disappeared.
They flashed like meteors, but Madame de
[200]

Staël shone among them with a steady splendor.
Wherever and with whomsoever she was, her
powers remained always unquenchable. Nevertheless
a great sadness possessed her. This
was partly due to her anxiety concerning Rocca—partly
to the disappointment inevitable in a
spirit which broke impatiently against the limitations
of life, the pettiness of human nature.
“Ah happiness!” she exclaimed yearningly.
Then added, “But at my age no trust is possible
but in the goodness of God.”

Bonstetten, parting with her, was struck with
the profound melancholy of the glance which
she gave him. He had been gay and content,
as usual, yet the memory of her look dwelt with
him; and unable to explain it, he at last, the
dear, genial old man, arrived at the touching conclusion
that she had been thinking how old
he

was, and that she would never see him again.
The adieu was, indeed, a lasting one; but it was
over Madame de Staël’s radiant path that the
shadows of death were to gather first.

Nevertheless, during the winter of 1816-17,
and when she returned to Paris, her spirit showed
no sign of failing. In her salon gathered Châteaubriand,
Talleyrand, Wellington, Humboldt,
Blucher, Lafayette, Schlegel and his brother,
Canova, and crowds of English. Bonstetten
averred that to her influence over Wellington
[201]

alone was due the fact that the Army of Occupation
was about this time diminished by 30,000
men.

Just before her death she removed from the
Rue Royale to the Rue Neuve des Mathurins;
and it was here that Châteaubriand again, after
so many years, saw Madame Récamier, and commenced
the romantic friendship which was to
end only with his death. He had been invited
to dine at Madame de Staël’s; but, when he arrived
there, found that she was too ill to entertain
the guests. The dinner took place all the
same—for Madame de Staël invariably insisted
on this, and made her daughter do the honors.
They must have been melancholy banquets; the
little Duchess de Broglie presiding with a heavy
heart, and all the guests being vividly conscious
of the noble life slowly and painfully ebbing
away in another room. It is with a certain relief,
therefore, in the midst of so much sadness
that one reads Châteaubriand’s record of his
meeting with Juliette. He was selfish and self-conscious
and weak no doubt—his fretful uneasy
vanity, indeed, pierces through the affected melancholy
of the
Mémoires d’Outre Tombe
. They
are sickly with a kind of faded perfume; and
yet in the great void which is coming, one is glad
to think that the blind Madame Récamier, the
aged and feeble Châteaubriand, must often have
[202]

remembered, perchance often talked of, that dinner
where they met in the house of their dying
friend.

Her interest in life remained undiminished to
the last. Not only Châteaubriand, but Constant,
Mathieu de Montmorency, Sismondi, all her old
friends, were daily with her. She was even glad
to welcome strangers, although frequently so ill
that her physicians forbade such visits for several
days at a time. It was after one of these intervals
that Ticknor saw her. She received him in
bed, and her weakness was already so great that
she could hardly stretch out her hand to touch
his. She alluded to her approaching end with a
calmness infinitely pathetic and admirable in one
who suffered none of that slow extinction of the
faculties which blunts the anguish of the end for
so many departing souls. Seeing that her words
pained her daughter, she changed the subject to
America, and spoke of the great future of that
country with characteristic enthusiasm of belief.
Of Europe, Ticknor said, “she despaired.” She
might well do so, for the era then beginning was
one with which she could not have sympathised.
Whatever its virtues, its force, its promise, the
oracles by which it was inspired must have
sounded strange in her ears. Herself, she had
been a kind of priestess; through her some unknown
God had spoken, and amid the thunder of
[203]

great events her faith, for all its ideal grandeur,
had hardly seemed too mighty. But that age
had passed, and it was fit she should pass with it.

All witnesses except the captious Sismondi
bear testimony to the devotion with which Rocca
nursed his wife in her last illness. Silent, pallid,
sad as a phantom itself, he sat day by day beside
her bed. According to Madame d’Abrantes, she
never looked long at him without feeling that she
might still live. The sense that her existence
was necessary to him seemed to inspire her for
a moment with the courage to take up anew the
increasing burden of her days. But at other
times her thoughts turned with a grateful sense
of coming rest to the great change, and to the
thought of her father “waiting for her,” as she
said, “on the other shore.” Constant passed the
last night of her life by her bedside. She had
seemed so much better that at eleven o’clock
Mathieu de Montmorency left, convinced that in
the morning he would find her revived. She
suffered no pain during the concluding hours, and
the brightness of her intellect was not even momentarily
dimmed. Sleep visited her as usual;
then at 5 o’clock she opened her eyes again, for
the last time on the world. A few moments
later she passed away, so quietly that her watchers
did not note the precise moment in which her
[204]

great soul was exhaled. The date of her death
was 14th July, 1817.

The news of it was the signal for, perhaps, the
most widely-spread and most genuine outburst
of grief ever known. Joubert, indeed, asserts
the contrary, and not only declares that she was
not regretted, but adds that Constant, meeting
him casually the very day after the event, did not
even allude to it. It never seems to have occurred
to Joubert that Constant might have had
some other and deeper cause for silence than
indifference. From such a nature reserve was
perhaps the only tribute that could be more eloquently
expressive than the loud lamentations of
other friends. These abounded, and even Châteaubriand,
who, after all, had not been bound to
the dead woman by such ties of constant friendship
as attached Schlegel, Sismondi, and others—even
he records with a sort of jealous care
that in the last letter she ever wrote to Madame
de Duras, a letter penned in “large, irregular
characters like a child’s,” there was an affectionate
allusion to “Francis.”

Bonstetten and Sismondi have both left records
of their grief at her funeral. The latter, writing
immediately after it to his mother, said: “My
life is painfully changed. I owe more to her
than to any other person.” Bonstetten’s sorrow
finds a more energetic expression: “I miss her
[205]

as though she were a part of myself. I am
maimed henceforward in thought.”

She was buried at Coppet, and they laid her
coffin at the foot of her father’s. A crowd of
friends, of humble mourners, and of official
functionaries, assembled to do her homage; but
Rocca was too ill to be present. He died, indeed,
only seven months later, and the son whom
Madame de Staël had borne him hardly reached
early manhood before he also passed away.
Auguste de Staël had preceded him along the
road to eternity, and the Duchess de Broglie did
not live to be old.

Twenty years had hardly elapsed before, with
the sole exception of her faithful friend and
cousin, Madame Necker de Saussure, no near
relative of Madame de Staël was still alive; but
those who had known her did not need to be
reminded of her. She was constantly present
to them, a radiant, imperishable vision. “I wish
I could see you asleep,” Bonstetten had said one
day to her. “I would like to feel sure that you
sometimes close your eyes, and are not always
thinking.” She had remained so bright and full
of life to the last, that even Death’s inexorable
hand could not for many long years efface the
recollection of her vivid personality.

In a page of the
Mémoires d’Outre Tombe
,
Châteaubriand has left a description of a visit
[206]

paid by himself and Madame Récamier to the
grave at Coppet. It was fifteen years after
Madame de Staël’s death. The Château was
closed, the apartments deserted. Juliette, wandering
through them, recognised one after another
the spots where Madame de Staël had played
the piano, had talked to those gathered round
her, or had written.

The two friends went into the park where the
autumn leaves already were reddening and falling.
The wind subsided by degrees, and the
sound of a millstream alone broke the stillness.
Madame Récamier entered the wood into whose
depths the grave is hidden, while Châteaubriand
remained looking at the snowy line of the Alps,
and at the glittering lake. Above the sombre
heights of Jura the sky was covered with golden
clouds “like a glory spreading above a bier.”
Suddenly Madame Récamier, pale and tearful,
phantom-like among phantoms, emerged from
the wood. And on her companion’s melancholy
spirit fell a sense of all the emptiness of glory,
of all the sad reality of life. “
Qu’est-ce que la
gloire?
” asked Madame de Staël. “
Ce n’est
qu’un deuil éclatant du bonheur.
” We could
wish that the most famous of women might have
held a less hopeless creed.

[207]

CHAPTER XV.

HER WORKS.

Any notice of Madame de Staël would be imperfect
without a review of her works. She did
not begin, like so many famous authors, to write
at an abnormally early age—it is true, she composed

Portraits
, which were read aloud in her
mother’s salon, but everybody did as much in
those days, and her attempts were not sufficiently
remarkable to stamp her at once as a literary
genius. It has been said how much her father
discouraged her writing. This may account in
part for the tardy development of the taste, although
more was doubtless due to the peerless
conversations in which, before the Revolution,
her young intellect found all that it could need
of ideas. However this may be, she was twenty
before she wrote
Sophie, ou les Sentiments Secrets
,
that elegiac “comedy” which drew down on its
authoress’s youthful head the animadversions of
her austere mother. Madame Necker was
shocked at the subject, which represented a
young girl of seventeen struggling against a
[208]

secret passion for her guardian, a married man,
who is in love with her. Sophie (who, by the
bye, is English) behaves in the noblest manner
as soon as she discovers that her feelings are
reciprocated, and leaves the home of which she
has unwittingly destroyed the peace. Her guardian
and his wife are no less equal to the occasion,
and Milord Henri Bedford, Sophie’s slighted
swain, is inspired by their example. Everybody
expresses his or her sentiments in polished and
prolix verse, and the curtain finally falls on four
loftily eloquent and magnanimously miserable
people. The style is not inflated, but the piece
is very dull, and, while betraying little of the
writer’s future talent, reveals two of her defects,
exaggeration of sentiment and a want of humor.

To the same date as
Sophie
belong
Jane Grey
,
a tragedy in five acts, also in verse, of no real
merit; another tragedy,
Montmorency
, and three
tales—all romantic and tiresome.

Finally, in 1788, when she was nearly twenty-two,
Madame de Staël published her
Letters on
Rousseau
, and thus established her position as an
aspirant to literary fame. The book, coming
from a woman, made a great sensation. Indeed,
this fact of her sex must never be lost sight of
in judging the reception accorded to Madame de
Staël’s works. She attempted subjects of historical
[209]

and philosophical interest which no woman
in her country or age had approached before her.

As might be expected, she was an ardent admirer
of Rousseau. Her sympathy with the
philosophy of Helvetius was naturally slight.
She required something declamatory, earnest,
and didactic. In a glorification of natural sentiments
to result in some future apotheosis of
humanity lay the key to her creed. “Virtue”
and still “virtue” and more “virtue” was her
cry, as though “virtue” were a tangible and
definitely constituted thing to be extracted
en bloc

out of the materials composing humanity. To
such a mind it was inevitable that
Emile
and the

Contrat Social
should appeal more strongly than
any number of witty epigrams at the expense of
penitents and priests.

She sympathised with the philosophy of the
eighteenth century in so far as it tended, by uprooting
abuses, to promote the progress of culture
and the emancipation of the oppressed, but
she required some system that would reconstruct
as well as destroy; and being a fervid believer
in theories, disliked nothing so much as the idea
of leaving the human race to take care of itself.
Rousseau, as embodying a protest against the
spirit of frivolous negation, appeared to her in
the light of a prophet of perfection; and she
saw in the approaching meeting of the States
[210]

General a first step towards the realization of his
views. These radiant ideals were destined to
be suddenly and painfully obscured by the
events of the Terror. Her only contribution to
literature during that time was her celebrated
and impassioned defence of the unhappy Queen.
Public events so fascinated her attention that she
had no leisure for any other thought. Two sentences
in her
Réflexions sur la Paix
, published in
1794, reveal this preoccupation.

“During the reign of Robespierre,” she says,
“when each day brought a list of devoted victims,
I could only desire death, and long for the
end of the world and of the human race which
was witness to, or accomplice in, such horrors.
I should have made a reproach to myself even
of thought, because it was separate from sorrow.”
In another passage she exclaims: “Oh
appalling time, of which centuries will barely
dim the trace; time which will never belong to
the past!”

Nevertheless, Robespierre had hardly fallen,
before her ever vivid faith in humanity revived
in full force. She looked for safety to the faction
which divided extreme revolutionaries from
extreme reactionaries, and refused to believe
that it could only act as a buffer. Its moderation
was partly caused by exhaustion; yet
Madame de Staël, always optimistic, maintained
[211]

that having no passions it must have convictions,
and that the trumpet-call of liberty would summon
it to the front. In this she was mistaken;
but in the course of her observations on public
events she uttered one remarkable prophecy.
“France,” she wrote, “may remain a republic;
but to become a monarchy it must first submit
to a military government.”

In 1790 she published her work on
The Influence
of the Passions upon Human Happiness
.
This was originally to have been divided into
two parts. The first portion was to be devoted
to reflections on man’s peculiar destiny; the
second, to the constitutional fate of nations. We
have to concern ourselves with the first alone, as
the second, which would have required an immense
and minute knowledge of ancient and
modern governments, was never even begun.

In Madame de Staël’s view the true obstacle
to individual and political happiness lay in the
force of passion. Neutralize this, and the problem
of government would be solved. Happiness,
as she conceived it, was to consist in having
hope without fear, activity without anxiety,
glory without calumny, love without inconstancy—in
a word, ideal good with no admixture
of evil. The happiness of nations would consist
in the combination of Republican liberty with
monarchical calm, of emulation among talents
[212]

unaccompanied by factious clamor, of military
spirit in foreign affairs, and a law-abiding tendency
in domestic matters. She concluded by
saying that such an ideal is impossible of attainment,
and the only achievable happiness is to
be acquired by studying the true means of
avoiding moral pain. To the discovery of this
spiritual Nirvana her work was directed. The
subject, as is evident, was a sterile one, since it
dealt with abstractions that have no corresponding
realities. To say that men and nations
would be prosperous and contented without
some particular institution or defect, is the
same as to say that a human face would be
beautiful without features. A blank surface is
conceivable as a blank surface, but not as a
physiognomy; and to speculate concerning ideal
humanity divorced from social systems, imposes
on thought the most futile exercise that ever
occurred to an enlightened mind. Such being
the case, it is not surprising that Madame de
Staël should eventually have abandoned her
self-imposed task. Even as much of it as she
accomplished landed her on a moving morass of
conclusions of which the essential nullity must
have been evident to herself before anybody.
For the rest, her analysis of the various passions
is admirable. One wonders as one reads how a
young woman could have reached so perfect a
[213]

comprehension of the springs of human action.
The penetration displayed is unerring, and only
equalled by the masculine vigor of touch. A
good example is the following: “Truly great
men are such as have rendered a greatness like
their own less necessary to successive generations.”
And here is another striking passage:
“A revolution suspends every action but that of
force. Social order establishes the ascendancy
of esteem and virtue, but a revolution limits
men’s choice to their physical capacities. The
only sort of moral influence that it does not exclude
is the fanaticism of such ideas as, not
being susceptible of any restraint, are weapons
of war and not exercises of the mind. To aspire
to distinction in times of revolution one must
always outstrip the actual momentum of events,
and the consequence of this is a rapid descent
which one has no power of staying. In vain
one perceives the abyss in front. To throw
oneself from the chariot is to be killed by the
fall, so that to avoid the danger is more perilous
than to face it. One must of one’s own accord
tread the path that leads to ruin, since the least
step backwards overturns the individual but does
not hinder the event.”

This is a very good example both of the clearness
of Madame de Staël’s thought and the careless
confusion of her style. She introduced
[214]

metaphors just as they occurred to her, without
any preparatory gradations of thought.

The second section of the work is devoted to
the examination of natural affections such as
family love, friendship, and pity. Here, again,
the analysis is delicate and true, but the mind,
fatigued by the futility of the theme, recoils
from such minute dissection of emotion. Passion,
being comparatively rare, is always interesting,
but sentiment does not bear prolonged
contemplation.

Finally come the remedies to be applied to the
evils worked by passion. They consist in philosophy,
in study, and the practice of benevolence,
joined, if possible, to a child-like faculty
of extracting from each hour just the amount of
happiness that it contains. With this lame and
impotent conclusion the book practically ends,
for all the remaining reflections do not avail to
place in any clearer light the uncertain and
colorless thought of the writer.

Her next work was that on
Literature Considered
in Relation to Social Institutions
. Its
object was to establish the continuous progress
and ultimate perfectibility of the human mind,
and the happy influence exercised by liberty
upon literature.

The theory of the authoress was that the progress
[215]

of philosophy,
i. e.
thought, had been gradual,
while that of poetry had been spasmodic.

Art, indeed, offering, by its early maturity, an
awkward contradiction to her system, she proceeded
to get rid of it by describing it as the
product of imagination rather than of thought,
and by adding that its plastic and sensuous
qualities rendered it capable of flourishing under
systems of government which necessarily crush
every other form of intellectual activity. To
prove the perfectibility of the human mind, she
then had but poetry and philosophy. To the
latter she assigned the really glorious future,
while the former she regarded as finished. She
was the first of the Romanticists, in the sense
that she preferred the poetry of the north to
that of the south; and her predilections in this
line carried her so far, that she placed Ossian
above Homer. She considered that the early
forms of poetry—in other words, mere transcripts
of material impressions—were superior
to those later creations in which sentiment
enters as an element. And this idea, which
seems at first a contradiction to her theory of
perfectibility, was really intended to confirm it.
For, in her view, the value of literature consisting
exclusively in the amount of thought that it
contained, introspective poetry became a mere
[216]

bridge which the mind traversed on its way to
wider horizons.

Madame de Staël was not only not a poet
herself, but she was incapable of appreciating
the higher forms of poetry. In her excursions
through the regions of literature, she was always
in pursuit of some theory which would reconcile
the contradictions of human destiny. Man, regarded
as socially perfectible, being her ideal, she
was in haste to classify and relegate to some
convenient limbo the portions of a subject which
did not directly contribute to her hypotheses.
Having disposed, therefore, of poetry and art,
she undertook to consider literature from the
point of view of psychology. She was only
pleased with it when self-conscious and analytical.
Dante probably perplexed her, and she
evoked to condemn him the perruqued shade of
“Le Goût.” Shakespeare she applauded, as
might be expected, chiefly in consideration of

Hamlet
; while Petrarch pleased her principally
because he was harmonious; and Ariosto because
he was fanciful. The true significance of
the Renaissance escaped her. She sought for
the origin of each literature in the political and
religious institutions of the country where it
arose, instead of regarding both literature and
social conditions as simultaneous products of
the national mind. Her erudition was inadequate
[217]

to her task, and the purpose of her works,
by warping her judgments, contributed to make
them superficial. While pronouncing the English
and French drama to be essentially superior
to the Greek, she characteristically preferred
Euripides to his two mighty predecessors. The
grandeur of the dominant idea of Greek tragedy—that
of an inevitable destiny, against which
man struggles in vain—appears to have escaped
her altogether. This is not surprising, since
such a conception was entirely opposed to her
own order of mind and to the age in which she
lived. The root of all the social theories then
prevailing was the value of the individual. Man
was not a puppet of the gods, but the architect
of his own fate. To lose hold of ideal virtue
was to become incapable of governing or being
governed; and ideal virtue was a definite entity
which anybody might possess who chose. This—rather
crudely stated—was Madame de Staël’s
point of view. Her enthusiasm rejected all
idea of limited responsibilities. The ethical
value of the Æschylean trilogy—the awful sense
of overhanging doom which pervades it—did
not appeal to her, because it tended to the annihilation
of the struggling soul. In other
words, she liked
self-conscious
drama, and was
attracted to Euripides by his creation of artificial
[218]

situations, in which interesting personages
had room and leisure to explain themselves.

With Aristophanes she was frankly disgusted;
from her didactic standpoint, because of his pronounced
indecency; and on artistic grounds,
because he attacked living individuals instead of
creating characters like Tartufe and Falstaff.
To his beauties she remained entirely blind, and
this, perhaps, is to be explained by her deficiency
in the æsthetic faculty. It is said that Châteaubriand
first taught her to appreciate nature, and
Schlegel to perceive the loveliness of art. Chênedollé
complained that she had lived for years
opposite Lake Leman “without finding an image”
in regard to it; and she herself once
frankly admitted that of her own accord she
would hardly open her window to gaze on the bay
of Naples, while she would go a hundred miles
to converse with a new mind.

Its defects admitted, we may own that Madame
de Staël’s work contains many charming chapters.
If, true to her theory, she provokes her
reader by preferring the Latin poets to the Greek
ones, and Quintilian to Cicero, simply because
of their later date; if she persists, rather than
modify her views, that the sterile scholasticism
of the Middle Ages was not a real retrogression,
and strangely overlooks, in her admiration for
Christianity, the intellectual benefits which man
[219]

owes to the Arabs; on the other hand, she has
flashes of admirable insight. The chapter on
the invasion of Italy by the barbarians, and the
part played by Christianity in fusing the two
races, is very suggestive. But, unfortunately, it
is suggestive
only
, and sins by a sketchiness
which, more or less, mars the whole book. This
was one of Madame de Staël’s defects. She
abounded in ideas, but failed either in the power
or the patience to work them out.

Two other interesting chapters are those on
the “Grace, Gaiety, and Taste of the French
Nation,” and on “Literature in the Reign of
Louis XIV.” The peculiar social influences
which, among successive generations of courtiers,
produced the best writers of France, are
very happily described; but here again the conclusions
are indicated rather than developed.
Madame de Staël stated her conviction that the
palmy days of French wit were over, and that
the literature of the future, if it wished to flourish,
must invest itself with greater gravity.

Convinced that the moment had come for the
dramatist to pack up his puppet-show and despatch
it to a museum of antiquities, she laid
down rules for an ideal republican literature, and
prescribed strong emotions, careful analysis of
character, and a high moral tone as indispensable
ingredients. She was in fact one of the first
[220]

to admire and write that appalling product, the
novel with a purpose.

Anything duller than
Delphine
it would be
difficult to imagine. From the first page to the
last there is hardly one line of genuine inspiration.
All is forced, exaggerated, overstrained.
The misfortunes of the heroine are so needlessly
multiplied, that they end by exasperating the
reader; and the
motif
of the book—the contrast
between conventional and moral ideals—fails in
true dramatic interest. The plot is as follows:
Madame de Vernon has a daughter, Mathilde,
beautiful and sanctimonious, whom she desires
to marry to Léonce de Mondoville, a young
Spaniard of noble birth and aristocratic prejudices.
Madame de Vernon has in the whole
world one friend, Delphine d’Albémar, a miracle
of grace, wit, and beauty, who does acts of unheard-of
generosity, and generally by some evil
chance accomplishes them at the moment when
they lead to unlucky results for herself. She is
a young widow, and has been left by her elderly
and devoted husband a fortune, of which she
proceeds to divest herself as rapidly as possible.
One of her favorite objects of charity is Madame
de Vernon, who does not deserve her pity, since
the pecuniary embarrassments under which she
suffers arise from her love of card-playing, and
general mismanagement. But Delphine adores
[221]

her friend, who is represented as extremely
charming, and is in some respects a well-drawn
character. Her life is one long act of dissimulation.
She masks her cynicism cleverly, under
an appearance of indolence, which dispenses her
from ever taking inconvenient resolutions, or appearing
agitated by events which should—but do
not—move her. She has some faint affection
for her generous dupe—Delphine; but not
enough to be prevented from taking every mean
advantage of her. There is some difficulty in
arranging Mathilde’s marriage, on account of the
want of a dowry. Delphine hastens to supply
this, and then the bridegroom elect, Léonce,
appears on the scene. He is described as divinely
handsome. The cold and pietistic
Mathilde falls in love with him immediately (as
was her duty, since he was to be her husband),
but so, unfortunately, does Delphine. What is
still worse, he is by no means attracted by his

fiancée
, but reciprocates the young widow’s passion.
Then the drama begins. Madame de
Vernon, while seeming to see nothing, sees
everything. Mathilde is really blind. Delphine
is agitated, but resolved, if possible, to be happy.
This, by the way, is the only gleam of common
sense that she has throughout the book. Unfortunately,
she manages to compromise herself (of
course quite innocently) by espousing the cause
[222]

of a pair of guilty but repentant lovers; and
Madame de Vernon cleverly uses the awkward
positions in which she places herself, in order to
detach Léonce from her. He marries Mathilde
and is madly unhappy. Delphine pours out her
feelings in long letters to her sister-in-law and
confidant, Mademoiselle d’Albémar, letters which
she writes, by the way, on recovering from fainting
fits, or when lying in bed, or when on the
verge of distraction. The whole of the novel
is told in letters, and is proportionately long-winded
and unnatural.

Not long after the marriage Madame de Vernon
dies, and on her death-bed confesses her perfidy
to her victim. Then the mutual passion of Delphine
and Léonce enters upon a new and harrowing
phase. They determine to remain
technically virtuous, but to see one another constantly—of
course unknown to Mathilde. This
unnatural situation—unnaturally prolonged, becomes
unbearable through its monotonous
misery.

Finally Mathilde discovers the state of the
case and conjures Delphine to separate herself
from Léonce. Madame d’Albémar consents, and
disappears. Léonce is then described by his
confidant as being on the point of madness. He
alternately loses consciousness, and rushes about
with dishevelled hair and distraught looks. Delphine
[223]

goes to Switzerland, and there proceeds
to compromise herself anew, this time beyond
recall, for the sake of a rejected lover who had
behaved disgracefully to her.

She had taken refuge in a convent of which
the superioress, Madame de Ternan, turns out
to be the aunt of Léonce. This lady is something
of the same sort as Madame de Vernon—except
that her egotism, although quite as systematic,
is not so base. But it can become so on
occasion, and, as she is rather fond of Delphine
and anxious to keep her with her to solace her
old age, she plays into the hands of Madame de
Mondoville (the mother of Léonce) and cleverly
contrives to make Delphine take the veil. Barely
has this been done when Léonce appears and
claims her as his own, Mathilde having in the
meanwhile died. Then is the exhausted reader
harassed anew by a fresh spectacle of poignant
anguish. A Monsieur de Sebersci suggests that
Delphine should break her vows, quit her convent,
and join Léonce, pointing out that, thanks
to the Revolution, they can be quite respectably
married in France. Delphine is horrified at first,
but Léonce having announced the firm intention
of putting an end to his existence if she remains
a nun, she finally escapes and joins him. One
begins to hope that they are going to be happy
at last, when the “purpose” of the book presents
[224]

itself. Madame de Staël was anxious to
prove that social conventions may not be braved
with impunity, but overtake and crush the nature
which defies them. Delphine throughout had
listened to no voice but that of her conscience
and her heart; she is consequently the victim of
calumny. Léonce is principally swayed by passion.
He defies society in the end to possess
Delphine, but has no sooner induced her to
break her vows for him than he begins to feel
the stigma of the act. He leaves her, and seeks
death on the battle-field. Death spares him, but
he is arrested as an aristocrat and condemned to
be shot. Delphine follows him, and by her eloquence
wrings a pardon from the judge. Léonce,
enlightened by the approach of death as to the
nothingness of the world’s opinion, is prepared
to live happily at last with the woman whom he
still professes to adore. But all at once the
order for his release is rescinded and he is taken
out to die. Delphine accompanies him, and
talks all along the road. Indeed, she is superfluously
eloquent, from the first page of her
history to the last. When Léonce has been
strung up by her to the highest pitch of exalted
feeling, she takes poison and dies at his feet.
He is then shot; and the lovers are interred in
one grave by Monsieur de Serbellane, who has
appeared again in the last chapter, after having
[225]

been the primary though unwitting cause of his
unhappy friends’ woes.

It is difficult to understand why critics like
Sainte Beuve should so warmly have praised
this novel. No doubt it shows talent, especially
in the analysis of mental struggle; but it is false
from beginning to end. All the characters want
vitality, although some of the qualities attributed
to them are described with penetration and force.
Delphine and Léonce talk too much, and faint
too much, and are simply insupportable. Finally,
the book is drearily monotonous and unrelieved
by one gleam of poetry or humor.

Corinne
is a classic of which everybody is
bound to speak with respect. The enormous
admiration which it excited at the time of
its appearance may seem somewhat strange in
this year of grace; but then it must be remembered
that Italy was not the over-written country
it has since become. Besides this, Madame de
Staël was the most celebrated woman, and, after
Napoleon, the most conspicuous personage of
her day. Except Châteaubriand, she had nobody
to dispute with her the palm of literary glory in
France. Her exile, her literary circle, her courageous
opinions, had kept the eyes of Europe
fixed on her for years, so that any work from her
pen was sure to excite the liveliest curiosity.

Corinne
is a kind of glorified guide-book, with
[226]

some of the qualities of a good novel. It is very
long-winded, but the appetite of the age was
robust in that respect, and the highly-strung
emotions of the hero and heroine could not
shock a taste which had been formed by the

Sorrows of Werther
. It is extremely moral,
deeply sentimental, and of a deadly earnestness—three
characteristics which could not fail to
recommend it to a dreary and ponderous generation,
the most deficient in taste that ever trod
the earth.

But it is artistic in the sense that the interest
is concentrated from first to last on the central
figure, and the drama, such as it is, unfolds
itself naturally from its starting-point, which is
the contrast between the characters of Oswald
and Corinne.

Oswald Lord Nelvil is a young man of exquisite
sensibility and profound melancholy. He
comes to Rome (after distinguishing himself heroically
during a fire at Ancona) accompanied by
a young Frenchman, the Count D’Erfeuil, whom
he has casually met. One of the first sights
which greets them on their arrival in the Eternal
City is the triumphal procession of “Corinne”
on her way to be crowned in the Capitol. She
is a musician, an improvisatrice, a Muse or Sibyl,
with all the poetry and passion of Italy stamped
upon her radiant brow. In the midst of her
[227]

improvisation she exchanges glances with Lord
Nelvil, and the fate of both is sealed. He is intended
to be a typical Englishman imbued with
a horror of eccentricity in women. His ideal of
the sex is a domestic angel, and he feels bound
to disapprove of Corinne, who lives alone, though
young and beautiful, and offers the spectacle of
her various talents to the profane view of the
crowd. The Count D’Erfeuil mocks at everything,
and is the most amusing character in the
book; feels no scruples about knowing Corinne,
and, having quickly discovered that his reserved
English friend pleases her, he persuades that
gentleman to call on her also. Corinne speaks
English wonderfully, and allows Lord Nelvil to
divine that there is a mystery about her past.
Once she betrays great agitation on hearing the
name of Edgermond, which is the patronymic of
a certain Lucile, whom Lord Nelvil’s father had
destined him to marry. Grief at the death of
this father is, by the way, the ostensible cause of
his persistent melancholy, but he also vaguely
hints at remorse. He promises that he will one
day confide his history to Corinne, who on her
side prepares herself to tell him hers. But as
she greatly fears the effect of it on him, and is
deeply in love, she puts off the evil hour, and, in
order to keep him with her, offers to be his
cicerone in Rome. Together they wander among
[228]

the ruins, visit the galleries, and drive on the
Appian Way. Corinne explains everything, discourses
on everything, and Oswald interrupts
her with exclamations of rapture at her wit and
learning. This novel form of courtship lasts
for some weeks, and finally the lovers proceed to
Naples. Corinne persuades Oswald that there
is nothing at all extraordinary in such conduct
in Italy, where everyone, according to her, may
do as he likes. But the Count L’Erfeuil makes
remarks which, although intended to be merely
flippant, are sensible enough to convince Lord
Nelvil that he must either marry Corinne or
leave her. He is very much in love, or fancies
himself so. Nevertheless he hesitates because
of the mystery surrounding his
inamorata
. Who
is she? What is her name? Whence comes
her fortune? If she is not quite blameless, he
thinks he can never marry her, for that would be
derogating from the traditions of his order and
outraging the shade of his father. The mental
struggle which he undergoes is visible to Corinne
and fills her with anguish and alarm. At last,
during an expedition to Vesuvius, Oswald speaks.
He had been at one time in love with an unworthy
Frenchwoman; had lingered in France
when his father required his presence in England,
and had finally returned, only to find him dead.
From that hour he had known no peace; remorse
[229]

had pursued him; his filial love, which
was morbidly excessive, caused him to look upon
himself as almost a parricide, and he considered
that he was thenceforward morally bound to do
nothing which his father might disapprove.
This absurd conclusion afflicts Corinne visibly,
and the sight of her agitation reawakens all
Oswald’s doubts. He conjures her to tell him
her history. She consents; but begs for a few
days’ grace, and employs the interval in planning
and carrying out a fête on Cape Misenum. In
front of the azure, tideless sea she takes her lyre
and pours out an improvisation on the past
glories of that classic shore. This, although
Oswald does not know it, is an adieu to her past
life, for she foresees that what she has to tell
him of herself will entirely change her destiny.
Either he will refuse to marry her, and then she
will never know happiness again, but wingless,
voiceless, will go down to her tomb, or else he
will make her his wife, and the Sibyl will be lost
in the peeress.

The next day she leaves with him the narrative
of her youth. She is the daughter of Lord Edgermond
by an Italian wife, consequently the
half-sister of Lucile. At the age of fifteen she
had gone to England, and fallen under the rule
of her stepmother, Lady Edgermond, a cold and
rigid Englishwoman, who cared for nothing outside
[230]

her small provincial town, and regarded
genius as a dangerous eccentricity. In the
narrow monotony of the life imposed upon her
Corinne nearly died. At the age of twenty-one
she finally escaped and returned to Italy, having
dropped her family name out of respect for Lady
Edgermond’s feelings. Until her meeting with
Oswald she had led the life of a muse, singing,
dancing, playing, improvising for the whole of
Roman society to admire, and had conceived no
idea of greater felicity until learning to love.
This love had been a source of peculiar torment
to her from the fact of her divining how much
the unconventionality of her conduct, when fully
known to him, must shock Oswald’s English
notions of propriety. In the first moment, however,
his love triumphs over these considerations,
and he resolves to marry Corinne. Only he
wishes first—in order that no reproach may
attach to her—to force Lady Edgermond once
again to acknowledge her as her husband’s
daughter. He goes to England, partly for this
purpose, partly because his regiment has been
ordered on active service.

In England he again meets Lucile, a cold-mannered,
correct, pure-minded, but secretly
ardent English girl, with an odd resemblance in
many ways to a French
jeune fille
. He mentions
the subject of her step-daughter to the
[231]

upright but selfish Lady Edgermond, who has
set her heart on seeing Oswald the husband of
Lucile. She is too honorable to try and detach
him from Corinne by any underhand means, but
does what she knows will be far more effectual;
that is, she makes him acquainted with the
fact that his father had seen Corinne in her
early girlhood, had admired her, but had strongly
pronounced against the marriage proposed by
Lord Edgermond between her and Oswald. In
the view of the late Lord Nelvil, she was too
brilliant and distinguished for domestic life.
This is a terrible blow to Oswald. He begins to
think he must give up Corinne, and is strengthened
in the idea by perceiving that the beautiful
and virtuous Lucile is in love with him. Finally
he marries her, decided at the last by Corinne’s
inexplicable silence. She has not answered his
letters for a month, and he concludes that she
has forgotten him. But her silence is owing to
her having left Venice and come to England.
She loses a whole month in London, for very insufficient
reasons—necessary, however, to the
story—and at last follows Oswald to Scotland
just in time to learn that he is married, to fall
senseless on the road-side, and to be picked up by
the Count D’Erfeuil. She returns heart-broken
to Italy, and dies slowly through four long years
of unbroken misery.

[232]

When she is near her end Oswald comes to
Florence, accompanied by his wife and child.
He had begun to regret Corinne as soon as he
had married Lucile, who, on her side, being
naturally resentful, takes refuge in coldness and
reserve. As soon as Lord Nelvil learns that
his old love is in Florence and dying he wishes
ardently to see her, but she refuses to receive
him. He sends the child to her, and she teaches
it some of her accomplishments. Lucile visits
her secretly, and is converted by her eloquence
to the necessity of rendering herself more attractive
to her husband by displaying some graces
of mind.

At last Corinne consents to see Oswald once
again, but it shall be, she determines, in public.
This is one of the most unnatural scenes in the
book. Corinne invites all her friends to assemble
in a lecture hall. Thither she has herself
transported and placed in an arm-chair. A
young girl clad in white and crowned with flowers
recites the Song of the Swan, or adieu to
life, which Corinne has composed, while Oswald,
listening to it and gazing on the dying poetess
from his place in the crowd, is suffocated with
emotion and finally faints. A few days later
Corinne dies, her last act being to point with her
diaphanous hand to the moon, which is partially
[233]

obscured by a band of cloud such as she and
Lord Nelvil had once seen when in Naples.

Even as a picture of Italy,
Corinne
leaves
much to be desired. Madame de Staël’s ideas
of art were acquired. She had no spontaneous
admiration even for the things she most warmly
praised, and her judgments were conventional
and essentially cold. Some of the descriptions
are good in the sense of being accurate and
forcibly expressed. But even in the best of
them—that of Vesuvius—one feels the effort.
Madame de Staël is wide-eyed and conscientious,
but has no flashes of inspired vision. She can
catalogue but not paint. A certain difficulty in
saying enough on æsthetic subjects is rendered
evident by her vice of moralizing. Instead of
admiring a marble column as a column, or a picture
as a picture, she finds in it food for reflection
on the nature of man and the destiny of the
world. Some of her remarks on Italian character
are extremely clever, and show her usual surprising
power of observation; but they are generally
superficial.

This was due, in part, to her system of explaining
everything by race and political institutions,
in part to her passion for generalization.
Because Italians had produced the finest art and
some of the finest music; because they had no
salons and wrote sonnets; because they had developed
[234]

a curiously systematic form of conjugal
infidelity; finally, because they had no political
liberty, Madame de Staël constructed a theory
which represented them as simply passionate, romantic,
imaginative and indulgent. This theory
has cropped up now and again in literature from
her days to our own, and if partially correct,
overlooks the subtler shades and complex contradictions
of the Italian mind.

Roman society in the beginning of this century
was far from being the transfigured and exotic
thing represented in
Corinne
. The modern
Sibyl’s prototype, poor Maddalena Maria Morelli,
was mercilessly pasquinaded, and on her
road to the Capitol pelted with rotten eggs.
This gives a very good idea of the sort of impression
that would have been produced on a
real

Prince of Castel-Forte and his fellows by the
presence in their midst of a young and beautiful
woman, unmarried, nameless, and rich. Corinne’s
lavish exhibition of her accomplishments
is another “false note,” as singing and dancing
were but rarely, if ever, performed by amateurs
in Italy. What redeems the book are the detached
sentences of thought that gem almost
every page of it. Madame de Staël had gradually
shaken off the vices of style which her
warmest admirers deplore in her, and in her

Allemagne
she was presently to reveal herself as
[235]

singularly lucid, brilliant, and acute. This work
of hers on Germany is, perhaps, the most satisfactory
of her many productions. As a review
of society, art, literature, and philosophy, it naturally
lends itself to the form best suited to her
essentially analytical mind.

Madame de Staël was always obliged to generalize,
that being a law of her intelligence, and
this disposition is accentuated in the
Allemagne
,
through her desire to establish such contrasts
between Germany and France, as would inspire
the latter with a sense of its defects. She saw
Germany on the eve of a great awakening, and
was not perhaps as fully conscious of this as she
might have been. As Saint Beuve happily says,
she was not a poet, and it is only poets who,
like birds of passage, feel a coming change of
season. Germany appealed to her, however,
through everything in herself that was least
French; her earnestness, her vague but ardent
religious tendencies, her spiritualism, her excessive
admiration of intellectual pursuits. She
was, therefore, exceptionally well-qualified to
reveal to her own countrymen the hitherto unknown
or unappreciated beauties of the German
mind.

She was, on the other hand, extremely alive to
the dullness of German, and especially of Viennese,
society, and portrays it in a series of
[236]

delightfully witty phrases. The
Allemagne
is
indeed the wittiest of all her works, and abounds
in the happiest touches.

The opinions expressed on German literature
are favorable towards it, and on the whole correct.
If she betrays that Schiller was personally
more sympathetic to her than Goethe, she nevertheless
was quick to perceive in the latter the
strain of southern passion, the light, warmth and
color, which made his intellect less national than
universal.

Her chapters on Kant and German philosophy
generally, are luminous if not exhaustive. She
takes the moral sentiment as her standpoint,
and pronounces from that on the different systems.
Needless to say, she admires metaphysical
speculations, and considers them as valuable
in developing intellect and strengthening character.

Les Dix Années d’Exil
is a charming book.
Apart from its interest as a transcript of the
writer’s impressions during her exile at Coppet
and subsequent flight across Europe, it contains
brilliant pictures of different lands, and especially
Russia. One is really amazed to note how much
she grasped of the national characteristics during
her brief sojourn in that country. The worst reproach
that can be addressed to her description
is that, as usual, it is rather too favorable. Her
[237]

anxiety to prove that no country could flourish,
during a reign such as Napoleon’s, made her
disposed to see through rose-colored spectacles
the Governments which found force to resist him.

The
Considerations on the French Revolution

were published posthumously. According to
Sainte Beuve, this is the finest of Madame de
Staël’s works. “Her star,” he says, “rose in
its full splendor only above her tomb.” It
is difficult to pronounce any summary judgment
on this book, which is partly biographical and
partly historical. The first volume is principally
devoted to a vindication of Necker; the second
to an attack on Napoleon; the third to a study
of the English Constitution and the applicability
of its principles to France. The first two volumes
alone were revised by the authoress before
her death. We find in this work all Madame de
Staël’s natural and surprising power of comprehension.
She handles difficult political problems
with an ease that would be more astonishing
still, had the book more unity. As it is, each
separate circumstance is related and explained
admirably, but one is not made to reach the
core of the stupendous event of which Europe
still feels the vibration. Her portrait of Napoleon
is unsurpassable for force and irony, for
sarcasm and truth. All she possessed of epigrammatic
power seems to have come unsought
[238]

to enable her to avenge herself on the mean,
great man who had feared her enough to exile
and persecute her.

In closing this rapid review of her works, one
asks why was Madame de Staël not a greater
writer? The answer is easy; she lacked high
creative power and the sense of form. Her
mind was strong of grasp and wide in range,
but continuous effort fatigued it. She could
strike out isolated sentences alternately brilliant,
exhaustive and profound, but she could not
link them to other sentences so as to form an
organic page. Her thought was definite singly,
but vague as a whole. She always saw things
separately, and tried to unite them arbitrarily,
and it is generally difficult to follow out any idea
of hers from its origin to its end. Her thoughts
are like pearls of price profusely scattered, or
carelessly strung together, but not set in any
design. On closing one of her books, the reader
is left with no continuous impression. He has
been dazzled and delighted, enlightened also by
flashes; but the horizons disclosed have vanished
again, and the outlook is enriched by no
new vistas.

Then she was deficient in the higher qualities
of imagination. She could analyze but not
characterize; construct but not create. She
could take one defect like selfishness, or one
[239]

passion like love, and display its workings; or
she could describe a whole character, like Napoleon’s,
with marvellous penetration; but she
could not make her personages talk or act like
human beings. She lacked pathos, and had no
sense of humor. In short, hers was a mind endowed
with enormous powers of comprehension,
and an amazing richness of ideas, but deficient
in perception of beauty, in poetry, and true
originality. She was a great social personage,
but her influence on literature was not destined
to be lasting, because, in spite of foreseeing
much, she had not the true prophetic sense of
proportion, and confused the things of the present
with those of the future—the accidental
with the enduring.

THE END.

Messrs. Roberts Brothers’ Publications.

FAMOUS WOMEN SERIES.

GEORGE SAND.

By BERTHA THOMAS.

One volume. 16mo. Cloth. Price, $1.00.

“Miss Thomas has accomplished a difficult task with as much good sense as
good feeling. She presents the main facts of George Sand’s life, extenuating
nothing, and setting naught down in malice, but wisely leaving her readers to
form their own conclusions. Everybody knows that it was not such a life as the
women of England and America are accustomed to live, and as the worst of men
are glad to have them live.… Whatever may be said against it, its result on
George Sand was not what it would have been upon an English or American
woman of genius.”—
New York Mail and Express.

“This is a volume of the ‘Famous Women Series,’ which was begun so well
with George Eliot and Emily Brontë. The book is a review and critical analysis
of George Sand’s life and work, by no means a detailed biography. Amantine
Lucile Aurore Dupin, the maiden, or Mme. Dudevant, the married woman, is
forgotten in the renown of the pseudonym George Sand.

“Altogether, George Sand, with all her excesses and defects, is a representative
woman, one of the names of the nineteenth century. She was great among the
greatest, the friend and compeer of the finest intellects, and Miss Thomas’s essay
will be a useful and agreeable introduction to a more extended study of her life
and works.”—
Knickerbocker.

“The biography of this famous woman, by Miss Thomas, is the only one in
existence. Those who have awaited it with pleasurable anticipation, but with
some trepidation as to the treatment of the erratic side of her character, cannot
fail to be pleased with the skill by which it is done. It is the best production on
George Sand that has yet been published. The author modestly refers to it as a
sketch, which it undoubtedly is, but a sketch that gives a just and discriminating
analysis of George Sand’s life, tastes, occupations, and of the motives and impulses
which prompted her unconventional actions, that were misunderstood by a narrow
public. The difficulties encountered by the writer in describing this remarkable
character are shown in the first line of the opening chapter, which says, ‘In naming
George Sand we name something more exceptional than even a great genius.’
That tells the whole story. Misconstruction, condemnation, and isolation are the
penalties enforced upon the great leaders in the realm of advanced thought, by
the bigoted people of their time. The thinkers soar beyond the common herd,
whose soul-wings are not strong enough to fly aloft to clearer atmospheres, and
consequently they censure or ridicule what they are powerless to reach. George
Sand, even to a greater extent than her contemporary, George Eliot, was a victim
to ignorant social prejudices, but even the conservative world was forced to recognize
the matchless genius of these two extraordinary women, each widely different
in her character and method of thought and writing.… She has told much that
is good which has been untold, and just what will interest the reader, and no more,
in the same easy, entertaining style that characterizes all of these unpretentious
biographies.”—
Hartford Times.

Sold everywhere. Mailed, post-paid, on receipt of price, by the publishers
,

ROBERTS BROTHERS, Boston.

Messrs. Roberts Brothers’ Publications.

FAMOUS WOMEN SERIES.

MARY LAMB.

By ANNE GILCHRIST.

One volume. 16mo. Cloth. Price, $1.00.

“The story of Mary Lamb has long been familiar to the readers of Elia, but
never in its entirety as in the monograph which Mrs. Anne Gilchrist has just
contributed to the Famous Women Series. Darkly hinted at by Talfourd in his
Final Memorials of Charles Lamb, it became better known as the years went on
and that imperfect work was followed by fuller and franker biographies,—became
so well known, in fact, that no one could recall the memory of Lamb without
recalling at the same time the memory of his sister.”—
New York Mail and Express.

“A biography of Mary Lamb must inevitably be also, almost more, a biography
of Charles Lamb, so completely was the life of the sister encompassed by
that of her brother; and it must be allowed that Mrs. Anne Gilchrist has performed
a difficult biographical task with taste and ability.… The reader is at
least likely to lay down the book with the feeling that if Mary Lamb is not famous
she certainly deserves to be, and that a debt of gratitude is due Mrs. Gilchrist for
this well-considered record of her life.”—
Boston Courier.

“Mary Lamb, who was the embodiment of everything that is tenderest in
woman, combined with this a heroism which bore her on for a while through the
terrors of insanity. Think of a highly intellectual woman struggling year after
year with madness, triumphant over it for a season, and then at last succumbing to
it. The saddest lines that ever were written are those descriptive of this brother and
sister just before Mary, on some return of insanity, was to leave Charles Lamb.
‘On one occasion Mr. Charles Lloyd met them slowly pacing together a little
foot-path in Hoxton Fields, both weeping bitterly, and found, on joining them,
that they were taking their solemn way to the accustomed asylum.’ What pathos
is there not here?”—
New York Times.

“This life was worth writing, for all records of weakness conquered, of pain
patiently borne, of success won from difficulty, of cheerfulness in sorrow and
affliction, make the world better. Mrs. Gilchrist’s biography is unaffected and
simple. She has told the sweet and melancholy story with judicious sympathy,
showing always the light shining through darkness.”—
Philadelphia Press.

Sold by all Booksellers. Mailed, post-paid, on receipt of
the price, by the Publishers,

ROBERTS BROTHERS,
Boston
.

Messrs. Roberts Brothers’ Publications.

Famous Women Series.

RACHEL.

By Mrs. NINA H. KENNARD.

One Volume. 16mo. Cloth. Price, $1.00.

“
Rachel
, by Nina H. Kennard, is an interesting sketch of the famous
woman whose passion and genius won for her an almost unrivalled fame as
an actress. The story of Rachel’s career is of the most brilliant success in
art and of the most pathetic failure in character. Her faults, many and
grievous, are overlooked in this volume, and the better aspects of her nature
and history are recorded.”—
Hartford Courant.

“The book is well planned, has been carefully constructed, and is
pleasantly written.”—
The Critic.

“The life of Mlle. Élisa Rachel Félix has never been adequately told,
and the appearance of her biography in the ‘Famous Women Series’ of
Messrs. Roberts Brothers will be welcomed.… Yet we must be glad the
book is written, and welcome it to a place among the minor biographies;
and because there is nothing else so good, the volume is indispensable to
library and study.”—
Boston Evening Traveller.

“Another life of the great actress Rachel has been written. It forms
part of the ‘Famous Women Series,’ which that firm is now bringing out,
and which already includes eleven volumes. Mrs. Kennard deals with her
subject much more amiably than one or two of the other biographers have
done. She has none of those vindictive feelings which are so obvious in
Madame B.’s narrative of the great tragedienne. On the contrary, she
wants to be fair, and she probably is as fair as the materials which came into
her possession enabled her to be. The endeavor has been made to show us
Rachel as she really was, by relying to a great extent upon her letters.…
A good many stories that we are familiar with are repeated, and some are
contradicted. From first to last, however, the sympathy of the author is
ardent, whether she recounts the misery of Rachel’s childhood, or the splendid
altitude to which she climbed when her name echoed through the world
and the great ones of the earth vied in doing her homage. On this account
Mrs. Kennard’s book is a welcome addition to the pre-existing biographies
of one of the greatest actresses the world ever saw.”—
N.Y. Evening
Telegram.

Sold everywhere. Mailed postpaid, by the Publishers
,

ROBERTS BROTHERS,
Boston
.

Messrs. Roberts Brothers’ Publications.

FAMOUS WOMEN SERIES.

THE COUNTESS OF ALBANY.

BY VERNON LEE.

One volume. 16mo. Cloth. Price $1.00.

“It is no disparagement to the many excellent previous sketches to say that
‘The Countess of Albany,’ by Vernon Lee, is decidedly the cleverest of the series
of biographies of ‘Famous Women,’ published in this country by Roberts Brothers,
Boston. In the present instance there is a freer subject, a little farther removed
from contemporary events, and sufficiently out of the way of prejudice to admit of
a lucid handling. Moreover, there is a trained hand at the work, and a mind
not only familiar with and in sympathy with the character under discussion, but
also at home with the ruling forces of the eighteenth century, which were the forces
that made the Countess of Albany what she was. The biography is really dual, tracing
the life of Alfieri, for twenty-five years the heart and soul companion of the
Countess, quite as carefully as it traces that of the fixed subject of the sketch.”—
Philadelphia
Times.

“To be unable altogether to acquiesce in Vernon Lee’s portrait of Louise of
Stolberg does not militate against our sense of the excellence of her work. Her
pictures of eighteenth-century Italy are definite and brilliant. They are instinct
with a quality that is akin to magic.”—
London Academy.

“In the records of famous women preserved in the interesting series which
has been devoted to such noble characters as Margaret Fuller, Elizabeth Fry, and
George Eliot, the life of the Countess of Albany holds a unique place. Louise of
Albany, or Louise R., as she liked to sign herself, possessed a character famed,
not for domestic virtues, nor even for peculiar wisdom and creative power, but
rather notorious for an easy-going indifference to conventionality and a worldly
wisdom and cynicism. Her life, which is a singular exponent of the false ideas
prevalent upon the subject of love and marriage in the eighteenth century, is told
by Vernon Lee in a vivid and discriminating manner. The biography is one of
the most fascinating, if the most sorrowful, of the series.”—
Boston Journal.

“She is the first really historical character who has appeared on the literary
horizon of this particular series, her predecessors having been limited to purely
literary women. This brilliant little biography is strongly written. Unlike preceding
writers—German, French, and English—on the same subject, the author
does not hastily pass over the details of the Platonic relations that existed between
the Countess and the celebrated Italian poet ‘Alfieri.’ In this biography the
details of that passionate friendship are given with a fidelity to truth, and a knowledge
of its nature, that is based upon the strictest and most conscientious investigation,
and access to means heretofore unattainable to other biographers. The
history of this friendship is not only exceedingly interesting, but it presents a
fascinating psychological study to those who are interested in the metaphysical
aspect of human nature. The book is almost as much of a biography of ‘Alfieri’
as it is of the wife of the Pretender, who expected to become the Queen of England.”—
Hartford
Times.

Sold by all booksellers. Mailed, postpaid, on receipt of
the price, by the publishers
,

ROBERTS BROTHERS,
Boston
.

MESSRS. ROBERTS BROTHERS’ PUBLICATIONS.

Famous Women Series.

GEORGE ELIOT.

By MATHILDE BLIND.

One vol. 16mo. Cloth. Price, $1.00.

“Messrs. Roberts Brothers begin a series of Biographies of Famous
Women with a life of George Eliot, by Mathilde Blind. The idea of the
series is an excellent one, and the reputation of its publishers is a guarantee
for its adequate execution. This book contains about three hundred pages in
open type, and not only collects and condenses the main facts that are known
in regard to the history of George Eliot, but supplies other material from
personal research. It is agreeably written, and with a good idea of proportion
in a memoir of its size. The critical study of its subject’s works, which
is made in the order of their appearance, is particularly well done. In fact,
good taste and good judgment pervade the memoir throughout.”—
Saturday
Evening Gazette.

“Miss Blind’s little book is written with admirable good taste and judgment,
and with notable self-restraint. It does not weary the reader with
critical discursiveness, nor with attempts to search out high-flown meanings
and recondite oracles in the plain ‘yea’ and ‘nay’ of life. It is a graceful
and unpretentious little biography, and tells all that need be told concerning
one of the greatest writers of the time. It is a deeply interesting if not
fascinating woman whom Miss Blind presents,” says the New York

Tribune
.

“Miss Blind’s little biographical study of George Eliot is written with
sympathy and good taste, and is very welcome. It gives us a graphic if not
elaborate sketch of the personality and development of the great novelist, is
particularly full and authentic concerning her earlier years, tells enough of
the leading motives in her work to give the general reader a lucid idea of the
true drift and purpose of her art, and analyzes carefully her various writings,
with no attempt at profound criticism or fine writing, but with appreciation,
insight, and a clear grasp of those underlying psychological principles which
are so closely interwoven in every production that came from her pen.”—
Traveller.

“The lives of few great writers have attracted more curiosity and speculation
than that of George Eliot. Had she only lived earlier in the century
she might easily have become the centre of a mythos. As it is, many of the
anecdotes commonly repeated about her are made up largely of fable. It is,
therefore, well, before it is too late, to reduce the true story of her career to
the lowest terms, and this service has been well done by the author of the
present volume.”—
Philadelphia Press.

Sold by all booksellers, or mailed, post-paid, on receipt of
price, by the publishers,

ROBERTS BROTHERS,
Boston
.

Messrs. Roberts Brothers’ Publications.

FAMOUS WOMEN SERIES.

EMILY BRONTË.

By A. MARY F. ROBINSON.

One vol. 16mo. Cloth. Price, $1.00.

“Miss Robinson has written a fascinating biography.… Emily Brontë is
interesting, not because she wrote ‘Wuthering Heights,’ but because of her
brave, baffled, human life, so lonely, so full of pain, but with a great hope shining
beyond all the darkness, and a passionate defiance in bearing more than the
burdens that were laid upon her. The story of the three sisters is infinitely sad,
but it is the ennobling sadness that belongs to large natures cramped and striving
for freedom to heroic, almost desperate, work, with little or no result. The author
of this intensely interesting, sympathetic, and eloquent biography, is a young lady
and a poet, to whom a place is given in a recent anthology of living English poets,
which is supposed to contain only the best poems of the best writers.”—
Boston
Daily Advertiser.

“Miss Robinson had many excellent qualifications for the task she has performed
in this little volume, among which may be named, an enthusiastic interest
in her subject and a real sympathy with Emily Brontë’s sad and heroic life. ‘To
represent her as she was,’ says Miss Robinson, ‘would be her noblest and most
fitting monument.’ … Emily Brontë here becomes well known to us and, in one
sense, this should be praise enough for any biography.”—
New York Times.

“The biographer who finds such material before him as the lives and characters
of the Brontë family need have no anxiety as to the interest of his work. Characters
not only strong but so uniquely strong, genius so supreme, misfortunes so
overwhelming, set in its scenery so forlornly picturesque, could not fail to attract
all readers, if told even in the most prosaic language. When we add to this, that
Miss Robinson has told their story
not
in prosaic language, but with a literary
style exhibiting all the qualities essential to good biography, our readers will
understand that this life of Emily Brontë is not only as interesting as a novel, but
a great deal more interesting than most novels. As it presents most vividly a
general picture of the family, there seems hardly a reason for giving it Emily’s name
alone, except perhaps for the masterly chapters on ‘Wuthering Heights,’ which
the reader will find a grateful condensation of the best in that powerful but somewhat
forbidding story. We know of no point in the Brontë history—their genius,
their surroundings, their faults, their happiness, their misery, their love and friendships,
their peculiarities, their power, their gentleness, their patience, their pride,—which
Miss Robinson has not touched upon with conscientiousness and sympathy.”—
The
Critic.

“‘Emily Brontë’ is the second of the ‘Famous Women Series,’ which Roberts
Brothers, Boston, propose to publish, and of which ‘George Eliot’ was the initial
volume. Not the least remarkable of a very remarkable family, the personage
whose life is here written, possesses a peculiar interest to all who are at all familiar
with the sad and singular history of herself and her sister Charlotte. That the
author, Miss A. Mary F. Robinson, has done her work with minute fidelity to
facts as well as affectionate devotion to the subject of her sketch, is plainly to be
seen all through the book.”—
Washington Post.

Sold by all Booksellers, or mailed, post-paid, on receipt of
price, by the Publishers,

ROBERTS BROTHERS, Boston.

Messrs. Roberts Brothers’ Publications.

Famous Women Series.

MARGARET FULLER.

By JULIA WARD HOWE.

One volume. 16mo. Cloth. Price $1.00.

“A memoir of the woman who first in New England took a position of moral
and intellectual leadership, by the woman who wrote the Battle Hymn of the
Republic, is a literary event of no common or transient interest. The Famous
Women Series will have no worthier subject and no more illustrious biographer.
Nor will the reader be disappointed,—for the narrative is deeply interesting and
full of inspiration.”—
Woman’s Journal.

“Mrs. Julia Ward Howe’s biography of
Margaret Fuller
, in the Famous
Women Series of Messrs. Roberts Brothers, is a work which has been looked for
with curiosity. It will not disappoint expectation. She has made a brilliant and
an interesting book. Her study of Margaret Fuller’s character is thoroughly
sympathetic; her relation of her life is done in a graphic and at times a fascinating
manner. It is the case of one woman of strong individuality depicting the points
which made another one of the most marked characters of her day. It is always
agreeable to follow Mrs. Howe in this; for while we see marks of her own mind
constantly, there is no inartistic protrusion of her personality. The book is always
readable, and the relation of the death-scene is thrillingly impressive.”—
Saturday
Gazette.

“Mrs. Julia Ward Howe has retold the story of Margaret Fuller’s life and
career in a very interesting manner. This remarkable woman was happy in
having James Freeman Clarke, Ralph Waldo Emerson, and William Henry
Channing, all of whom had been intimate with her and had felt the spell of her
extraordinary personal influence, for her biographers. It is needless to say, of
course, that nothing could be better than these reminiscences in their way.”—
New
York World.

“The selection of Mrs. Howe as the writer of this biography was a happy
thought on the part of the editor of the series; for, aside from the natural appreciation
she would have for Margaret Fuller, comes her knowledge of all the
influences that had their effect on Margaret Fuller’s life. She tells the story of
Margaret Fuller’s interesting life from all sources and from her own knowledge,
not hesitating to use plenty of quotations when she felt that others, or even
Margaret Fuller herself, had done the work better.”—
Miss Gilder, in Philadelphia
Press.

Sold by all booksellers. Mailed, post-paid, on receipt of
the price, by the publishers
,

ROBERTS BROTHERS,

Boston, Mass.

Messrs. Roberts Brothers’ Publications.

Famous Women Series.

MARIA EDGEWORTH.

By HELEN ZIMMERN.

One volume. 16mo. Cloth. Price $1.00.

“This little volume shows good literary workmanship. It does not weary the
reader with vague theories; nor does it give over much expression to the enthusiasm—not
to say baseless encomium—for which too many female biographers
have accustomed us to look. It is a simple and discriminative sketch of one of
the most clever and lovable of the class at whom Carlyle sneered as ‘scribbling
women.’ … Of Maria Edgeworth, the woman, one cannot easily say too
much in praise. That home life, so loving, so wise, and so helpful, was beautiful
to its end. Miss Zimmern has treated it with delicate appreciation. Her book
is refined in conception and tasteful in execution,—all, in short, the cynic might
say, that we expect a woman’s book to be.”—
New York Tribune.

“It was high time that we should possess an adequate biography of this ornament
and general benefactor of her time. And so we hail with uncommon pleasure
the volume just published in the Roberts Brothers’ series of Famous Women,
of which it is the sixth. We have only words of praise for the manner in which
Miss Zimmern has written her life of Maria Edgeworth. It exhibits sound
judgment, critical analysis, and clear characterization.… The style of the
volume is pure, limpid, and strong, as we might expect from a well-trained English
writer.”—
Margaret J. Preston, in the Home Journal.

“We can heartily recommend this life of Maria Edgeworth, not only because it
is singularly readable in itself, but because it makes familiar to readers of the
present age a notable figure in English literary history, with whose lineaments
we suspect most readers, especially of the present generation, are less familiar
than they ought to be.”—
Eclectic.

“This biography contains several letters and papers by Miss Edgeworth that
have not before been made public, notably some charming letters written during
the latter part of her life to Dr. Holland and Mr. and Mrs. Ticknor. The author
had access to a life of Miss Edgeworth written by her step-mother, as well as to a
large collection of her private letters, and has therefore been able to bring forward
many facts in her life which have not been noted by other writers. The book is
written in a pleasant vein, and is altogether a delightful one to read.”—
Utica
Herald.

Sold by all booksellers. Mailed, post-paid, by the publishers
,

ROBERTS BROTHERS,

Boston, Mass.

Messrs. Roberts Brothers’ Publications.

Famous Women Series.

ELIZABETH FRY.

By Mrs. E. R. PITMAN.

One vol. 16mo. Cloth. Price $1.00.

“In the records of famous women there are few more noble examples of
Christian womanhood and philanthropic enthusiasm than the life of Elizabeth
Fry presents. Her character was beautifully rounded and complete, and if she
had not won fame through her public benefactions, she would have been no less
esteemed and remembered by all who knew her because of her domestic virtues,
her sweet womanly charms, and the wisdom, purity, and love which marked her
conduct as wife, mother, and friend. She came of that sound old Quaker stock
which has bred so many eminent men and women. The time came when her
home functions could no longer satisfy the yearnings of a heart filled with the
tenderest pity for all who suffered; and her work was not far to seek. The prisons
of England, nay, of all Europe, were in a deplorable condition. In Newgate,
dirt, disease, starvation, depravity, drunkenness, &c., prevailed. All who surveyed
the situation regarded it as hopeless; all but Mrs. Fry. She saw here the
opening she had been awaiting. Into this seething mass she bravely entered,
Bible in hand, and love and pity in her eyes and upon her lips. If any one
should ask which of all the famous women recorded in this series did the most
practical good in her day and generation, the answer must be, Elizabeth Fry.”—
New
York Tribune.

“Mrs. Pitman has written a very interesting and appreciative sketch of the
life, character, and eminent services in the causes of humanity of one of England’s
most famous philanthropists. She was known as the prison philanthropist,
and probably no laborer in the cause of prison reform ever won a larger share of
success, and certainly none ever received a larger meed of reverential love. No
one can read this volume without feelings of admiration for the noble woman who
devoted her life to befriend sinful and suffering humanity.”—
Chicago Evening
Journal.

“The story of her splendid and successful philanthropy is admirably told by
her biographer, and every reader should find in the tale a breath of inspiration.
Not every woman can become an Elizabeth Fry, but no one can fail to be impressed
with the thought that no woman, however great her talent and ambition,
can fail to find opportunity to do a noble work in life without neglecting her own
feminine duties, without ceasing to dignify all the distinctive virtues of her sex,
without fretting and crying aloud over the restrictions placed on woman’s field of
work.”—
Eclectic Monthly.

Our publications are for sale by all booksellers, or will be
sent post-paid on receipt of advertised price.

ROBERTS BROTHERS, Boston.

Messrs. Roberts Brothers’ Publications.

Famous Women Series.

MARY WOLLSTONECRAFT.

BY ELIZABETH ROBINS PENNELL.

One volume. 16mo. Cloth. Price $1.00.

“So far as it has been published, and it has now reached its ninth volume, the
Famous Women Series is rather better on the whole than the English Men of
Letters Series. One had but to recall the names and characteristics of some
of the women with whom it deals,—literary women, like Maria Edgeworth,
Margaret Fuller, Mary Lamb, Emily Brontë, George Eliot, and George Sand;
women of the world (not to mention the other parties in that well-known Scriptural
firm), like the naughty but fascinating Countess of Albany; and women of
philanthropy, of which the only example given here so far is Mrs. Elizabeth
Fry,—one has but to compare the intellectual qualities of the majority of English
men of letters to perceive that the former are the most difficult to handle, and
that a series of which they are the heroines is, if successful, a remarkable collection
of biographies. We thought so as we read Miss Blind’s study of George
Sand, and Vernon Lee’s study of the Countess of Albany, and we think so now
that we have read Mrs. Elizabeth Robins Pennell’s study of Mary Wollstonecraft,
who, with all her faults, was an honor to her sex. She was not so considered
while she lived, except by those who knew her well, nor for years after her
death; but she is so considered now, even by the granddaughters of the good
ladies who so bitterly condemned her when the century was new. She was
notable for the sacrifices that she made for her worthless father and her weak,
inefficient sisters, for her dogged persistence and untiring industry, and for her
independence and her courage. The soul of goodness was in her, though she
would be herself and go on her own way; and if she loved not wisely, according
to the world’s creed, she loved too well for her own happiness, and paid the
penalty of suffering. What she might have been if she had not met Capt.
Gilbert Imlay, who was a scoundrel, and William Godwin, who was a philosopher,
can only be conjectured. She was a force in literature and in the enfranchisement
of her sisterhood, and as such was worthy of the remembrance which she
will long retain through Mrs. Pennell’s able memoir.”—
R. H. Stoddard, in the
Mail and Express.

Sold by all booksellers. Mailed, post-paid, on receipt of
price by the publishers
,

ROBERTS BROTHERS,

Boston

Messrs. Roberts Brothers’ Publications.

Famous Women Series.

HARRIET MARTINEAU.

By Mrs. F. FENWICK MILLER.

16mo. Cloth. Price $1.00.

“The almost uniform excellence of the ‘Famous Women’ series is well sustained
in Mrs. Fenwick Miller’s life of Harriet Martineau, the latest addition to
this little library of biography. Indeed, we are disposed to rank it as the best of
the lot. The subject is an entertaining one, and Mrs. Miller has done her work
admirably. Miss Martineau was a remarkable woman, in a century that has not
been deficient in notable characters. Her native genius, and her perseverance in
developing it; her trials and afflictions, and the determination with which she rose
superior to them; her conscientious adherence to principle, and the important
place which her writings hold in the political and educational literature of her day,—all
combine to make the story of her life one of exceptional interest.… With
the exception, possibly, of George Eliot, Harriet Martineau was the greatest of
English women. She was a poet and a novelist, but not as such did she make
good her title to distinction. Much more noteworthy were her achievements in
other lines of thought, not usually essayed by women. She was eminent as a
political economist, a theologian, a journalist, and a historian.… But to attempt
a mere outline of her life and works is out of the question in our limited space.
Her biography should be read by all in search of entertainment.”—
Professor
Woods in Saturday Mirror.

“The present volume has already shared the fate of several of the recent biographies
of the distinguished dead, and has been well advertised by the public contradiction
of more or less important points in the relation by the living friends of the
dead genius. One of Mrs. Miller’s chief concerns in writing this life seems to
have been to redeem the character of Harriet Martineau from the appearance of
hardness and unamiability with which her own autobiography impresses the
reader.… Mrs. Miller, however, succeeds in this volume in showing us an altogether
different side to her character,—a home-loving, neighborly, bright-natured,
tender-hearted, witty, lovable, and altogether womanly woman, as well as the clear
thinker, the philosophical reasoner, and comprehensive writer whom we already
knew.”—
The Index.

“Already ten volumes in this library are published; namely, George Eliot,
Emily Brontë, George Sand, Mary Lamb, Margaret Fuller, Maria Edgeworth,
Elizabeth Fry, The Countess of Albany, Mary Wollstonecraft, and the present
volume. Surely a galaxy of wit and wealth of no mean order! Miss M. will
rank with any of them in womanliness or gifts or grace. At home or abroad,
in public or private. She was noble and true, and her life stands confessed a success.
True, she was literary, but she was a home lover and home builder. She
never lost the higher aims and ends of life, no matter how flattering her success.
This whole series ought to be read by the young ladies of to-day. More of such
biography would prove highly beneficial.”—
Troy Telegram.

Our publications are for sale by all booksellers, or will be
mailed, post-paid, on receipt of price.

ROBERTS BROTHERS, Boston.

Messrs. Roberts Brothers’ Publications.

Famous Women Series.

MADAME ROLAND.

By MATHILDE BLIND
,

AUTHOR OF “GEORGE ELIOT’S LIFE.”

One volume. 16mo. Cloth. Price, $1.00.

“Of all the interesting biographies published in the Famous Women Series,
Mathilde Blind’s life of Mme. Roland is by far the most fascinating.… But
no one can read Mme. Roland’s thrilling story, and no one can study the character
of this noble, heroic woman without feeling certain that it is good for the world to
have every incident of her life brought again before the public eye. Among the
famous women who have been enjoying a new birth through this set of short
biographies, no single one has been worthy of the adjective
great
until we come
to Mme. Roland.…

“We see a brilliant intellectual woman in Mme. Roland; we see a dutiful
daughter and devoted wife; we see a woman going forth bravely to place her neck
under the guillotine,—a woman who had been known as the ‘Soul of the Girondins;’
and we see a woman struggling with and not being overcome by an intense
and passionate love. Has history a more heroic picture to present us with? Is
there any woman more deserving of the adjective ‘great’?

“Mathilde Blind has had rich materials from which to draw for Mme. Roland’s
biography. She writes graphically, and describes some of the terrible scenes
in the French Revolution with great picturesqueness. The writer’s sympathy
with Mme. Roland and her enthusiasm is very contagious; and we follow her
record almost breathlessly, and with intense feeling turn over the last few pages
of this little volume. No one can doubt that this life was worth the writing,
and even earnest students of the French Revolution will be glad to refresh their
memories of Lamartine’s ‘History of the Girondins,’ and again have brought
vividly before them the terrible tragedy of Mme. Roland’s life and death.”—
Boston
Evening Transcript.

“The thrilling story of Madame Roland’s genius, nobility, self-sacrifice, and
death loses nothing in its retelling here. The material has been collected and
arranged in an unbroken and skilfully narrated sketch, each picturesque or exciting
incident being brought out into a strong light. The book is one of the best in an
excellent series.”—
Christian Union.

For sale by all booksellers. Mailed, post-paid, on receipt
of price by the publishers
,

ROBERTS BROTHERS, Boston.

[1]

NEW BOOKS AND NEW EDITIONS

(
Not included in General Catalogue
)

LATELY PUBLISHED BY

MESSRS. ROBERTS BROTHERS,

3 Somerset Street, Boston.

JULY, 1887.

A NEW “NO NAME” NOVEL.

A QUESTION OF IDENTITY.

Being the tenth volume in the third “No Name Series.” 16mo.
Cloth. $1.00.

“A Question of Identity” takes its title from the resemblance of girl twins
to each other,—a resemblance so strong that a lover of Rachel offered himself to
Leah, calling her his beautiful Rachel. It is a story of New England life, with
strong characterization and intense dramatic incidents which give coloring to the
impression that it is very real. The locality might be a half-hour’s ride from
Boston by rail.

A YEAR IN EDEN.

Part I. Spring; Part II. Summer; Part III. Autumn; Part IV.
Winter. By
Harriet Waters Preston
. 12mo. Cloth, $1.00;
paper covers, 50 cents.

“There is a great charm in the style, and there are some exquisite scenes
unsurpassed by any writer on New-England life. The book will interest a very
large number of readers by its subject, its thought, and its wit.”—
London
Academy.

A LAD’S LOVE.

A Campobello Romance. By
Arlo Bates
, author of “The
Pagans,” “A Wheel of Fire,” etc. 16mo. Cloth. Price, $1.00.

OURSELVES AND OUR NEIGHBORS:

Short Chats on Social Topics. By
Louise Chandler Moulton
,
author of “Bed-Time Stories,” “Some Women’s Hearts,”
“Random Rambles,” etc. 16mo. Cloth. Price, $1.00.

[2]

AGATHA AND THE SHADOW.

The second volume in the “Old Colony Series” of novels.
Uniform in size and style with “Constance of Acadia.” 12mo.
Cloth. $1.50.

“This is the second in the ‘Old Colony Series.’ Agatha is represented as
the daughter of Elder Brewster, and the wife of Bernard Anselm. The story is
a series of pictures of the early life of this country, always with Puritans as the
central figures. Indians have a large place in this record of Pilgrim life, and
the book is crowded with romantic and dramatic material, with intense feeling,
with brilliant descriptions.”—
Worcester Spy.

CARVING AND SERVING.

By Mrs.
D. A. Lincoln
, author of “The Boston Cook Book.”
Square 12mo. Illuminated board covers. 60 cents.

“Carving and Serving,” by Mrs. D. A. Lincoln, author of the “Boston
Cook Book,” is a little manual by the aid of which any gentleman or lady can
become an expert carver. What an advantage it must be to be able to place with
the left hand a fork in the breast of a turkey, and, without once removing it, with
the right hand to carve and dissect, or disjoint, the entire fowl ready to be helped
to admiring guests! This is done by skilful carvers. The book also contains
directions for serving, with a list of utensils for carving and serving.

MABEL STANHOPE.

A Story. By
Kathleen O’Meara
, author of “Madame
Mohl,” etc. 16mo. Cloth. $1.25.

This is a French story, with both English and French characters. The author,
Miss O’Meara, by a long residence in Paris, has become familiar with French
life; and her delightful book, “Madame Mohl, her Salon and her Friends,” is
a foretaste of what “Mabel Stanhope” will be found to be.

THE COMMON SENSE OF RIDING.

RIDING FOR LADIES.

With Hints on the Stable. By Mrs.
Power O’Donoghue
,
author of “Ladies on Horseback” and “A Beggar on Horseback.”
Very fully illustrated by A. Chantrey Corbould. Square
12mo. Cloth. Gilt. $3.50. Special English edition.

So much interest is now being given to horseback-riding that the publication
of this book is very opportune. It is a collection of useful and practical hints on
matters that pertain to the horse and his management. The instructions given
are of the plainest and easiest description, and are the result of an experience
which has in some instances been dearly bought.

[3]

FRANKLIN IN FRANCE.

From Original Documents, most of which are now published
for the first time. By
Edward E. Hale
and
Edward E. Hale
,
Jr. With three newly engraved portraits of Franklin from copies
which are now quite rare, and numerous portrait-illustrations
throughout the text. One handsome 8vo volume of 500 pages.
Cloth. $3.00.

When Benjamin Franklin died, in 1790, he left to his grandson, Wm. Temple
Franklin, the largest collection of his papers. This collection, which had been
supposed to be irrevocably lost, was found a few years since on the top shelf of an
old tailor’s shop in St. James, became the property of Mr. Henry Stevens, and
finally of the United States. From this collection and from other original documents,
this life of “Franklin in France” has been written.

SOME CHINESE GHOSTS.

By
Lafcadio Hearn
.

“If ye desire to witness prodigies and to behold marvels,

Be not concerned as to whether the mountains are distant or the rivers far away.”—
Kin-Kou-Ki-Koan.

Contents
: The Soul of the Great Bell; The Story of Ming-Y;
The Legend of Tchi-Niu; The Return of Yen-Tchin-King; The
Tradition of the Tea-Plant; The Tale of the Porcelain-God.
16mo. Cloth. $1.00.

CATHEDRAL DAYS.

A Tour through Southern England. By
Anna Bowman
Dodd
. Illustrated from sketches and photographs by E. Eldon
Deane. 12mo. Cloth. $2.00.

“Mrs. Dodd is a most delightful travelling companion. Nothing in method
exactly like “Cathedral Days” is, so far as we know, to be found in English.
We can no more describe its flavor than we can describe the flavor of a fruit.
Nobody who once takes it up will be willing to put it down until he has absorbed
the whole of it. People who are going to England ought to take Mrs. Dodd’s
book with them. People who must stay at home ought to read it and enjoy the
trip in fancy.”—
N. Y. Commercial Advertiser.

A WEEK AWAY FROM TIME.

16mo. Uniquely bound in cloth. $1.25.

“Fair Harbor is one of the few places now left in the world which most
people know nothing about. You may count on your fingers the men and women
who have ever heard of it; and if you have the usual number of fingers, your list
will come to an end first.” And in this “singularly pretty and attractive bit of
the very tip end of the heel of Cape Cod” some happy summer idlers passed
the delightful “week away from time” which the book records. A bit of advice:
Read it.

[4]

THROUGH THE GATES OF GOLD.

A Fragment of Thought. By
Mabel Collins
. 16mo. Limp
cloth. Style of “A Little Pilgrim.” 50 cents.

“A work which is reported to be of a remarkable character will be published
by Roberts Brothers in February. It is called ‘Through the Gates of Gold;’
and though by a well-known author, it was submitted to that house under conditions
of the strictest secrecy, and nothing concerning the writer’s identity or
nationality is to be revealed. As Roberts Brothers have had much experience in
the secret-keeping business, there seems to be little prospect that the mystery
surrounding the origin of the work will be penetrated. The book deals with
problems of the future life in an unusual manner, and it is believed that it will
make as much of a sensation as did ‘The Gates Ajar.’ Its simultaneous publication
in London has been arranged for.”

MARGARET OF ANGOULÊME, QUEEN OF
NAVARRE.

By
A. Mary F. Robinson
, author of “Emily Brontë.”

MRS. SIDDONS.

By Mrs.
Nina H. Kennard
, author of “Rachel Félix.”

Two new volumes in the “Famous Women Series,” which now
comprises Lives of George Eliot, Emily Brontë, George Sand,
Margaret Fuller, Mary Lamb, Maria Edgeworth, Elizabeth Fry,
Mary Wollstonecraft, Harriet Martineau, Countess of Albany,
Rachel Félix, Madame Roland, Susanna Wesley. Uniform library
volumes. 16mo. $1.00 each.

DANTE:

A Sketch of his Life and Works. By
May Alden Ward
.
16mo. Cloth. $1.25.

A delightful study of the poet’s life and works, written with remarkable
clearness and lucidity both of style and arrangement.

THE KERNEL AND THE HUSK.

Letters on Spiritual Christianity. By the author of “Philochristus”
and “Onesimus.” 12mo. Cloth. $1.50.

The author of this book asserts that a belief in the miracles of Christ is not
essential to a belief in Christ; and in an introduction “to the reader” he says
“it is to the would-be worshippers and the doubtful worshippers of Christ that
the following letters are addressed by one who has for many years found peace
and salvation in the worship of a non-miraculous Christ.”

[5]

FOOTPRINTS OF THE SAVIOUR.

A Volume of Devotional Studies in the Life and Nature of our
Lord. By the Rev.
Julian K. Smyth
, pastor of the New-Church
in Boston Highlands. One handsome 16mo volume. Cloth. Gilt
top. Rough edges. $1.00; white and gold cover, in a neat box,
$1.25.

LAST DAYS OF MARIE ANTOINETTE.

An Historical Sketch. By Lord
Ronald Gower
, author of
“My Reminiscences.” With a steel portrait of Marie Antoinette,
and a fac-simile letter. The edition is limited to 483 copies, numbered.
Printed on hand-made Irish linen paper. Small 4to.
Beautifully bound in cloth. Gilt top. $4.00.

CALENDRIER FRANÇAIS. 1888.

Printed entirely in the French language, and mounted on a card
of appropriate design. Price, $1.00.

“A calendar with a handsome illuminated background of scarlet, blue, and
gold, containing a fine collection of bits from the best French literature of modern
and olden times, all in the French language. It is a good idea, well carried out.”—
Hartford
Times.

IMAGINATION IN LANDSCAPE PAINTING.

By
Philip Gilbert Hamerton
. An elegant folio volume,
fully illustrated, and bound in cloth. Gilt. $6.50. (Limited
edition.)

“A richly illustrated folio, of especial interest to students of art, and, it
might be added, to students of mental philosophy; for the imaginative faculty
is here investigated quite as much as are its bearings on the painter’s art. Mr.
Hamerton even goes into the distinctions between fancy and imagination,—a
labyrinth in which Ruskin once confessed himself as good as lost.”—
Commercial
Gazette, Cincinnati.

REYNARD THE FOX.

After the German Version of Goethe. By
Thomas James
Arnold
, Esq. With 60 woodcut illustrations from the original
designs of William Von Kaulbach, and 12 full-page etchings by
Fox, from designs by Joseph Wolf. One handsome super-royal
8vo volume. Bound in half seal morocco. Cloth sides. Gilt top.
$9.00.

“The illustrations are wonderful studies in animal expression, and convey a
meaning no less sharp than that of the poem itself. Their humor is of the grotesque
variety, but it is nevertheless a rich humor.… The volume is sumptuously
printed, and is a standard edition of one of the world’s most celebrated
books.”—
N. Y. Tribune.

[6]

TWO PILGRIMS’ PROGRESS

From Fair Florence to the Eternal City of Rome. Delivered
Under the Similitude of a Ride, Wherein is Discovered, The
Manner of Their Setting Out, Their Dangerous Journey, and Safe
Arrival at the Desired City.

“And behold, they wrought a work on the wheels.”—
Jer.
xviii. 3.

By
Joseph
and
Elizabeth Robins Pennell
. With illustrations
by Joseph Pennell. 12mo. $2.00. Paper covers, 50 cents.

“The whole work is pervaded with a sense of the glory of movement, the
buoyancy of open air, the joy of rapid passage through exquisite scenery. The
gayety of spirits is infectious; and the reader shares, while he envies, the pleasure
of the pilgrims.”—
London Academy.

FAMILIAR TALKS ON SOME OF SHAKSPEARE’S
COMEDIES.

By Mrs.
E. W. Latimer
. 12mo. $2.00.

The Comedies are “The Winter’s Tale,” “The Tempest,”
“Midsummer Night’s Dream,” “Taming of the Shrew,” “Much
Ado about Nothing,” “As You Like It,” “Twelfth Night; or,
What You Will,” “The Merchant of Venice,” “Cymbeline.”

“A series of easy-going essays in æsthetic criticism which were delivered
before a women’s reading-class in Baltimore. For similar clubs, and for students,
Mrs. Latimer’s book will be found entertaining, sometimes original, occasionally
naïve, and often suggestive.”—
Shakesperiana.

A PHANTOM LOVER.

A Fantastic Story. By
Vernon Lee
, author of “Baldwin,”
“Euphorion,” “The Countess of Albany” (Famous Women
Series), etc. 16mo. 50 cents.

“‘A Phantom Lover’ is probably the best shilling story since ‘Dr. Jekyll.’
It is short; it is startling.… One is fascinated, and offended, and finally appalled.”—
St.
James’s Gazette.

JOHN JEROME: HIS THOUGHTS AND WAYS.

A Book without Beginning. By
Jean Ingelow
, author of
“Off the Skelligs,” “Fated to be Free,” “Sarah de Berenger,”
and “Don John.” 16mo. $1.25.

“Every page is fresh and original, and touched with a charm all its own. The
talented author has never produced anything better.”—
Springfield Union.

[7]

BERRIES OF THE BRIER.

Poems. By
Arlo Bates
, author of “A Wheel of Fire,” etc.
16mo. Cloth. $1.00.

“Those who like choice and true work will possess this volume, and find in
it the echo of much that passes within the reserve of their own lives.”—
Boston
Herald.

BALDWIN:

Being Dialogues on Views and Aspirations. By
Vernon Lee
,
author of “Euphorion: Studies of the Antique and the Mediæval
in the Renaissance,” “The Countess of Albany” (Famous Women
Series). 12mo. $2.00.

“Vernon Lee’s writing would stand alone in any hall of philosophy. Her
reasoning is keen and subtle, her divination wonderful; her tolerance, being a
woman, most wonderful of all. Her scholarship is deep and broad and serviceable.
She takes rather too much pains with her ideas, but the result is that there
is no doubt about her meaning. And her thought, while it has the defects of
modernness, has also its virtues. It is vital in every part, and full of a vivid
individuality. We would not dispossess her of even her æsthetic weather-phases;
she seems, oddly enough, to draw such inspiration from them.”—
The Week,
Toronto.

GEORGE MEREDITH’S NOVELS.

A NEW AND UNIFORM EDITION.

THE ORDEAL OF RICHARD FEVEREL.

EVAN HARRINGTON.

HARRY RICHMOND.

SANDRA BELLONI.

VITTORIA.

RHODA FLEMING.

BEAUCHAMP’S CAREER.

THE EGOIST.

DIANA OF THE CROSSWAYS.

THE SHAVING OF SHAGPAT, AND FARINA.

10 vols. 12mo. English cloth. Uncut leaves. $2.00 per volume.
10 vols. 12mo. Half calf. Extra. $25.00 the set.

“That Mr. Meredith is a master of his art, and a master of the highest
qualities, is unquestionable. That his popularity will ever be as great as is that
of many less gifted artists may be doubted; but among the refined and thoughtful,
among those who recognize and appreciate what is most artistic in art, among
those who have studied and know men and women, and who feel the charm of
brilliant literary style as exercised by an original thinker and a man of uncommon
genius, George Meredith will always hold an unassailable position.”—
Saturday
Evening Gazette, Boston.

[8]

GOLDEN MEDIOCRITY.

A Novel. By Mrs.
Eugenie Hamerton
. 16mo. $1.00;
paper covers, 50 cents.

Mrs. Hamerton is the “Eugenie” to whom her husband dedicated
his book, “The Intellectual Life.”

“She paints a scene in which modesty, simplicity, frugality, and fine culture
combine to make a home free from ostentation, and full of those domestic virtues
which we are so slow to associate with French family life.”—
Christian Register.

“It must be said of Mrs. Hamerton’s characters that they are far beyond the
golden mediocrity of clearness and naturalness. The reader accepts them unfalteringly;
they are real and living beings, human but alive.”—
N. Y. Graphic.

AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL MEMOIRS

Of Giovanni Duprè. Translated from the Italian by
E. M.
Peruzzi
(a daughter of William W. Story). With an introduction
by William W. Story and a fine portrait of Duprè. 12mo.
Cloth. $2.00.

“A book published by Blackwood, of Edinburgh, has been attracting great
attention in Rome. If it were republished in America it would have a great run.
‘The Autobiography of Giovanni Duprè,’ the distinguished Florentine sculptor,—a
clever, original, and spirited work,—as characteristic of the middle decade
of our century as Benvenuto Cellini’s was of his period. The book is translated
from the Italian by Edith Marion Story (Mme. Peruzzi), daughter of our brilliant
sculptor, poet, writer, and talker, Story.”—
Miss Brewster’s Correspondence
from Rome.

THE SERVICES OF WASHINGTON.

An Address before the School Children of Boston, in the Old
South Meeting House, Feb. 22, 1886. By
William Everett
.
16mo. Paper covers. 15 cents.

“William Everett’s ‘Address on the Services of Washington’ is a production
of marked originality; and while not lacking in eloquence, its beauty and
value consist not so much in rhetorical flourishes and glittering generalities,—common
enough on such occasions,—as in the impressive manner in which the
true secret of Washington’s greatness is set forth, and his excellence of character
commended as an example to youth.”—
Alton Telegraph.

SUSANNA WESLEY.

By
Eliza Clarke
. Being the thirteenth volume in the
“Famous Women Series.” 16mo. $1.00.

“This new life of Mrs. Wesley will find many readers; for the strong, true,
fearless character can never lose its charm. The indomitable courage she showed
through her many and great trials wins our warmest admiration.”—
Churchman.

[9]

SANTA BARBARA AND AROUND THERE.

By
Edwards Roberts
. With 16 illustrations. 16mo. 75 cts.

“A choice little volume, conveying just the information which a traveller or
invalid wants before visiting what is now called the Nice of America.”—
Utica
Herald.

PRISONERS OF POVERTY.

Women Wage-workers, their Trades and their Lives. By

Helen Campbell
, author of “The What-to-do Club,” “Mrs.
Herndon’s Income,” “Miss Melinda’s Opportunity,” etc. 16mo.
Cloth. Price, $1.00. Paper covers. 50 cents.

These are the articles which have been appearing in the
New York Sunday
Tribune
, where they have attracted universal attention.

DANTE GABRIEL ROSSETTI’S COLLECTED
WORKS.

Edited, with Preface and Notes, by
William M. Rossetti
.
2 vols. 12mo. Cloth. Gilt. Price, $6.00.

Contents
: Vol. I. Poems, Prose Tales, and Literary Papers.
Vol. II. Translations, Prose-Notices of Fine Arts.

The original poems are rearranged, so far as was practicable and convenient,
in order of date. Eight minor poems, which appeared in print while Rossetti
was alive, but which were not included in his volumes, are added; also twenty-two
others (besides some “versicles and fragments”), of which the great majority
have never yet seen the light. All the prose writings of Rossetti are also printed.

DANTE GABRIEL ROSSETTI’S POEMS.

Including the original volume of Poems, and Ballads and Sonnets,
together with some forty new poems, making a complete edition
of Rossetti’s Poems. With portrait. 1 vol. 12mo. Cloth.
Gilt edges. Price, $2.00. Half calf, $3.50; tree calf, $5.00.

DANTE AND HIS CIRCLE.

With the Italian Poets preceding him. (1100-1200-1300.) A
Collection of Lyrics edited and translated in the Original Metres.
By
Dante Gabriel Rossetti
. A new American edition, containing
a Preface to the first English edition. 1 vol. 12mo.
Cloth. Gilt. Price, $2.00.

CRACKER JO.

A new “No Name” Novel, the eleventh in the Third Series.
16mo. Cloth. Price, $1.00.

SONNETS IN SHADOW.

By
Arlo Bates
, author of “Berries of the Brier,” “A Wheel
of Fire,” etc. 16mo. Cloth. $1.00.

[10]

ONE DAY IN A BABY’S LIFE.

From the French of
M. Arnaud
. Translated and adapted by

Susan Coolidge
. With 32 full-page illustrations by F. Bouisset,
printed in colors. 4to. Illuminated board covers. $1.50.

“No volume of baby talk and baby experience has been so naturally told to
children or so perfectly illustrated as this one. The grown-ups will be as much
charmed with its contents as the children.”—
Home Journal.

THE LAST OF THE PETERKINS,

With Others of their Kin. By
Lucretia P. Hale
. With
illustrations. Square 16mo. $1.25.

“It is such sweet sorrow to say good-by to this astonishing family that one
cannot but hope that after the ‘lastly,’ as in some sermons, there will be a ‘finally.’
The entertaining members are now sent into a sort of oblivion; but how nice it
would be if it should turn out that they had reunited and had merely gone off
into some wilderness to get ready for further campaigning!”—
Boston Advertiser.

IN THE TIME OF ROSES.

A Tale of Two Summers, told and illustrated by
Florence

and
Edith Scannell
. 12mo. $2.00.

“There are in it delightful sketches of child-life and child-character which
make it a quite suitable and a very suggestive book for girls. It has been printed
and published in artistic fashion, and it would be difficult to imagine anything
sweeter or more cunning than some of the pen drawings of children’s faces with
which it is illustrated. Altogether, author and artist have worked together with
admirable sympathy to produce a charming story.”—
Christian Union.

Gordon Browne’s Series of Old Fairy Tales
:

NO. 1. HOP O’ MY THUMB.

NO. 2. BEAUTY AND THE BEAST.

The Stories Retold by
Laura E. Richards
. The drawings by
Gordon Browne. 4to. Illuminated paper covers. 40 cents each.

“The venerable classics, ‘Hop o’ My Thumb,’ and ‘Beauty and the Beast,’
are retold by Mrs. Richards, and redecorated with pictures by Browne, in a style
that gives the youngsters fresh entertainment. The pictures are capital, and compel
even the elder readers to renew their long-neglected studies.”—
Home Journal.

[1]

STANDARD LIBRARY BOOKS

SELECTED FROM THE CATALOGUE OF

ROBERTS BROTHERS.

Louisa M. Alcott.
Little Women, Illustrated, 16mo, $1.50;
Little Men, Illustrated, 16mo, $1.50; An Old-Fashioned Girl,
Illustrated, 16mo, $1.50; Eight Cousins, Illustrated, 16mo, $1.50;
Rose in Bloom, Illustrated, 16mo, $1.50, Under the Lilacs, Illustrated,
16mo, $1.50; Jack and Jill, Illustrated, 16mo, $1.50;
Jo’s Boys, Illustrated, 16mo, $1.50. Eight volumes in box,
$12.00. Work, Illustrated, 16mo, $1.50, Moods, a Novel, 16mo,
$1.50; Hospital Sketches, Illustrated, 16mo, $1.50.

A. Bronson Alcott.
Table Talk, 16mo, $1.50; Concord Days,
16mo, $1.50; Record of a School, 16mo, $1.50; Tablets, with
Portrait, 16mo, $1.50; Sonnets and Canzonets, 16mo, $1.00; New
Connecticut, 16mo, $1.25.

William R. Alger.
A Critical History of the Doctrine of a
Future Life, 8vo, $3.50; The Genius of Solitude, 16mo, $1.50;
The Friendships of Women, 16mo, $1.50; The School of Life,
16mo, $1.00; The Poetry of the Orient, Illustrated, 16mo, $1.50.

Joseph H. Allen.
Hebrew Men and Times, 16mo, $1.50; Our
Liberal Movement, 16mo, $1.25; Christian History in its Three
Great Periods, 3 vols., 16mo, $3.75; Outlines of Christian History,
16mo, 75 cents.

Thomas G. Appleton.
A Sheaf of Papers, 16mo, $1,50; A
Nile Journey, Illustrated, 12mo, $2.25; Syrian Sunshine, 16mo,
$1.00; Windfalls, Essays, 16mo, $1.50; Chequer Work, 16mo,
$1.50.

Ernst Moritz Arndt.
Life and Adventures of Arndt, with
Portrait, 12mo, $2.25.

[2]

Edwin Arnold.
The Light of Asia, 16mo, $1.00; Pearls of the
Faith, 16mo, $1.00; Indian Idylls, 16mo, $1.00; The Secret of
Death, 16mo, $1.00; The Song Celestial, 16mo, $1.00; India Revisited,
Illustrated, 12mo, $2.00; Miscellaneous Poems, 16mo,
$1.00.

W. P. Atkinson.
On the Right Use of Books, 16mo, 50 cents;
On History and the Study of History, 16mo, 50 cents.

Henry Bacon.
A Parisian Year, Illustrated, 16mo, $1.50.

Honoré de Balzac.
Père Goriot, 12mo, half Russia, $1.50;
The Duchesse de Langeais, 12mo, half Russia, $1.50; César
Birotteau, 12mo, half Russia, $1.50; Eugénie Grandet, 12mo,
half Russia, $1.50; Cousin Pons, 12mo, half Russia, $1.50; The
Country Doctor, 12mo, half Russia, $1.50; The Two Brothers,
12mo, half Russia, $1.50; The Alkahest, 12mo, half Russia, $1.50.

Anna Letitia Barbauld.
Tales, Poems, and Essays. Biographical
Sketch by Grace A. Oliver. 16mo, $1.00.

S. Baring-Gould.
Curious Myths of the Middle Ages, new
edition, Illustrated, 16mo, $1.50.

William Barnes.
Rural Poems, Illustrated, square 18mo, $1.25.

C. A. Bartol, D.D.
Radical Problems, 16mo, $1.25; The Rising
Faith, 16mo, $1.25; Principles and Portraits, 16mo, $1.25.

William M. Baker.
Blessed Saint Certainty, 16mo, $1.50; The
Making of a Man, 16mo, $1.25; His Majesty, Myself, 16mo, $1.00.

Arlo Bates.
Berries of the Brier (Poems), 16mo, $1.00; Sonnets
in Shadow (Poems), 16mo, $1.00; A Lad’s Love, a Story,
16mo, $1.00.

Henry Walter Bates.
The Naturalist on the Amazon, Illustrated,
8vo, $2.50.

Karoline Bauer.
Memoirs, from the German, 12mo, $1.50.

Walter Besant.
The French Humorists, 12mo, $2.00; Studies
in Early French Poetry, 12mo, $2.00.

William Blake.
Poetical Works. With a Memoir by W. M.
Rossetti. Portrait, 16mo, $2.25.

Mathilde Blind.
Tarantella, a novel, 12mo, $1.50.

“Sherwood Bonner.”
Suwanee River Tales, Illustrated, 16mo.
$1.25.

[3]

Mrs. E. V. Boyle.
Days and Hours in a Garden, 16mo, white
cloth, gilt, uncut, $2.00.

Mary Bradley.
Hidden Sweetness, Illustrated, small 4to, $1.50.

Charles T. Brooks.
Poems, with Memoir, 16mo, $1.25; William
Ellery Channing, with Portrait, Illustrated, 16mo, $1.50;
The Layman’s Breviary, square 16mo, $1.50; The World-Priest,
square 16mo, $2.25; The Wisdom of the Brahmin, 16mo, $1.25.

Sir Thomas Browne.
Religio Medici, 16mo, $1.25.

Robert Buchanan.
Poems, 16mo, $1.50.

Sir Edward Bulwer-Lytton.
Dramas and Poems, with steel
Portrait, square 18mo, $1.00; Schiller’s Lay of the Bell, translated
by Bulwer, Illustrated, oblong 4to, $7.50.

John Bunyan.
The Pilgrim’s Progress, Illustrated, 16mo, $1.00.

F. C. Burnand.
Happy Thoughts, 16mo, $1.00; More Happy
Thoughts, 16mo, $1.00; My Health, 16mo, $1.00; Happy
Thought Hall, Illustrated, square 16mo, $2.00; The New History
of Sandford and Merton, Illustrated, 16mo, $1.00; paper
covers, 50 cents.

By The Tiber.
A Novel, by the author of “Signor Monaldini’s
Niece,” 16mo, $1.50.

T. Hall Caine.
Recollections of D. G. Rossetti, with Portrait,
8vo, $3.00.

Helen Campbell.
The What-to-do Club, 16mo, $1.50; Mrs.
Herndon’s Income, 16mo, $1.50; Miss Melinda’s Opportunity,
16mo, $1.00; Prisoners of Poverty, 16mo, $1.00.

John W. Chadwick.
Poems, 16mo, $1.00; In Nazareth Town,
16mo, $1.00; The Faith of Reason, 16mo, $1.00; The Man
Jesus, 16mo, $1.00.

Peleg W. Chandler.
Memoir of Governor Andrew, Illustrated,
16mo, $1.25.

George L. Chaney.
F. Grant & Co., Illustrated, 16mo, $1.00;
Tom, Illustrated, 16mo, $1.00; Aloha, Illustrated, 16mo, $1.50;
Every-day Life and Every-day Morals, 16mo, $1.00.

William Ellery Channing.
Thoreau: the Poet-Naturalist,
16mo, $1.50.

Lydia Maria Child.
Aspirations of the World, 16mo, $1.25.

P. W. Clayden.
The Life of Samuel Sharpe, 12mo, $1.50.

[4]

“Mabel Collins.”
Through the Gates of Gold, a Fragment of
Thought, 16mo, 50 cents.

Sara Coleridge.
Phantasmion, 12mo, $2.00.

R. Laird Collier, D. D.
Meditations on the Essence of Christianity,
12mo, $1.25.

“Susan Coolidge.”
The New Year’s Bargain, Illustrated,
16mo, $1.25; What Katy Did, Illustrated, 16mo, $1.25; What
Katy Did at School, Illustrated, 16mo, $1.25; What Katy Did
Next, Illustrated, 16mo, $1.25; Mischief’s Thanksgiving, Illustrated,
16mo, $1.25; Nine Little Goslings, Illustrated, 16mo,
$1.25; Eyebright, Illustrated, 16mo, $1.25; Cross Patch, Illustrated,
16mo, $1.25; A Round Dozen, Illustrated, 16mo, $1.25;
A Little Country Girl, Illustrated, 16mo, $1.25; A Guernsey
Lily, Illustrated, 4to, $2.00; For Summer Afternoons, 16mo,
$1.25; Short History of Philadelphia, 12mo, $1.25; Verses,
square 16mo, $1.00.

Caroline H. Dall.
Letters Home from Colorado, Utah, and
California, 12mo, $1.50; What we Really Know about Shakespeare,
second edition, 16mo, $1.25.

Madame D’Arblay.
Diary and Letters, with Portraits, 2 vols.,
12mo, $4.00.

J. Morrison Davidson.
New Book of Kings, 16mo, $1.00.

Sir Humphry Davy.
Consolations in Travel, Illustrated,
16mo, $1.50; Salmonia, Illustrated, $1.50.

Daniel Defoe.
Robinson Crusoe, Illustrated, 12mo, $1.50.

Mrs. Delany.
Autobiography, with Portraits, 2 vols., 12mo,
$4.00.

Paul De Musset.
Biography of Alfred De Musset, 12mo, $2.00.

Madame De Sévigné.
Letters, 12mo, $1.50.

Orville Dewey.
Autobiography, 12mo, $1.75.

George T. Dippold.
The Great Epics of Mediæval Germany,
16mo, $1.50.

Anna Bowman Dodd.
Cathedral Days, Illustrated, 12mo,
$2.00.

Giovanni Duprè’s Autobiographical Memoirs.
With an
Introduction by William W. Story. 12mo, $2.00.

Don Quixote
, Wit and Wisdom of, Illustrated, 16mo, $1.25.

[5]

Dorothy.
A Country Story in Verse, square 16mo, $1.25.

Samuel Adams Drake.
Old Landmarks of Boston, Illustrated,
12mo, $2.00; Old Landmarks of Middlesex, Illustrated, 12mo,
$2.00; New England Legends and Folk Lore, Illustrated, 8vo,
$3.50; Around the Hub, Illustrated, 16mo, $1.50.

Maria Edgeworth.
Classic Tales, 16mo, $1.00.

M. Betham Edwards.
Doctor Jacob, a Novel, 12mo, $1.00.

George Eliot
, Wit and Wisdom of, square 18mo, $1.00.

William Everett.
School Sermons, 16mo, $1.00.

Famous Women Series.
George Eliot, 16mo, $1.00; Emily
Brontë, 16mo, $1.00; George Sand, 16mo, $1.00; Margaret
Fuller, 16mo, $1.00; Mary Lamb, 16mo, $1.00; Maria Edgeworth,
16mo, $1.00; Elizabeth Fry, 16mo, $1.00; Mary Wollstonecraft,
16mo, $1.00; Harriet Martineau, 16mo, $1.00;
Countess of Albany, 16mo, $1.00; Rachel Félix, 16mo, $1.00;
Madame Roland, 16mo, $1.00; Mrs. Siddons, 16mo, $1.00;
Margaret of Angoulême, 16mo, $1.00; Madame De Staël, 16mo,
$1.00.

Festival Poems.
For Christmas, etc. Square 16mo, $1.25.

Louis Figuier.
To-morrow of Death, 16mo, $1.50.

“George Fleming.”
Kismet, 16mo, $1.00; Mirage, 16mo,
$1.00; The Head of Medusa, 16mo, $1.50; Andromeda, 16mo,
$1.50; Vestigia, 16mo, $1.25.

Mrs. Eliza Fletcher.
Autobiography, with Portraits, 16mo, $1.50.

James E. Freeman.
Gatherings from an Artist’s Portfolio in
Rome, 12mo, $1.50.

Ellen Frothingham’s Translations.
Goethe’s Hermann and
Dorothea, 16mo, $1.00; Illustrated, 8vo, $2.00; The Laocoön,
16mo, $1.50; Sappho, square 18mo, $1.00.

Margaret Fuller.
Woman in the Nineteenth Century, 12mo,
$1.50; Art, Literature, and the Drama, 12mo, $1.50; Life Without
and Life Within, 12mo, $1.50; At Home and Abroad, 12mo,
$1.50; Memoirs, 2 vols., 12mo, $3.00; Same, 1 vol., $1.50.

Theophile Gautier.
My Household of Pets. Translated by
“Susan Coolidge.” Illustrated, 16mo, $1.25.

Judith Gautier.
The Usurper, a Novel, 12mo, $1.50.

[6]

Oliver Goldsmith.
The Vicar of Wakefield, with Illustrations
by Mulready, 16mo, $1.00.

Lord Ronald Gower.
My Reminiscences, with Portrait, 12mo,
$2.00; Last Days of Marie Antoinette, with Portrait, small 4to,
$4.00.

Louise Imogen Guiney.
Goose-Quill Papers, 16mo, $1.00.

Edward Everett Hale.
In His Name, Illustrated, 12mo, $2.00;
square 18mo, $1.00; paper covers, 30 cents; The Man Without
a Country, 16mo, $1.25; His Level Best, 16mo, $1.25; What
Career? 16mo, $1.25; The Ingham Papers, 16mo, $1.25; Christmas
Eve and Christmas Day, 16mo, $1.25; Sybaris, 16mo, $1.25;
Seven Spanish Cities, 16mo, $1.25; Ten Times One is Ten, 16mo,
$1.00; Mrs. Merriam’s Scholars, 16mo, $1.00; How to Do It,
16mo, $1.00; Good Time Coming, 16mo, $1.00; Gone to Texas,
16mo, $1.00; Crusoe in New York, 16mo, $1.00; Ups and Downs,
16mo, $1.50; A Summer Vacation, paper covers, 16mo, 50 cents;
Franklin in France, with Portraits, 8vo, $3.00.

Eugenie Hamerton.
The Mirror of Truth, Illustrated, 16mo,
$2.00; Golden Mediocrity, 16mo, $1.00.

Philip G. Hamerton.
A Painter’s Camp, 12mo, $2.00; Thoughts
about Art, 12mo, $2.00; Intellectual Life, 12mo, $2.00; Chapters
on Animals, 12mo, $2,00; Round My House, 12mo, $2.00;
The Sylvan Year and The Unknown River, 12mo, $2.00; Wenderholme,
12mo, $2.00; Modern Frenchmen, 12mo, $2.00; Life
of J. M. W. Turner, 12mo, $2.00; The Graphic Arts, 12mo, $2.00;
Human Intercourse, 12mo, $2.00; Landscape, 12mo, $2.00; Paris,
Illustrated, 8vo, $3.00; Etching and Etchers, Illustrated, 8vo,
$5.00; The Unknown River, Illustrated with etchings, 8vo, $6.00;
Harry Blount, a Boy’s Book, 16mo, $1.25.

Augustus J. C. Hare.
Records of a Quiet Life, 16mo, $2.00.

The Heaven Series.
Heaven Our Home, 16mo, $1.00; Life
in Heaven, 16mo, $1.00; Meet for Heaven, 16mo, $1.00.

Lafcadio Hearn.
Some Chinese Ghosts, 16mo, $1.00.

Frederic Henry Hedge.
Primeval World of Hebrew Tradition,
16mo, $1.50; Reason in Religion, 16mo, $1.50; Ways of
the Spirit, 16mo, $1.50; Atheism in Philosophy, 12mo, $2.00;
Hours with German Classics, 8vo, $2.50.

[7]

Arthur Helps.
Companions of My Solitude, 16mo, $1.50; Essays,
16mo, $1.50; Brevia, 16mo, $1.50; Conversations on War
and General Culture, 16mo, $1.50; Ivan de Biron, 12mo, $2.25;
Thoughts Upon Government, 8vo, $2.25; Social Pressure, 8vo,
$2.25; Brassey’s Life, 8vo, $2.50; Realmah, 16mo, $2.00; Casimir
Maremma, 16mo, $2.00.

Holy Songs
, Carols, and Sacred Ballads, 16mo, $1.00.

F. L. Hosmer and W. C. Gannett.
The Thought of God
in Hymns and Poems, 16mo, $1.00; paper covers, 50 cents.

Lord Houghton.
Poetical Works, with Portrait, 2 vols., 16mo,
$5.00.

Julia Ward Howe.
Margaret Fuller, 16mo, $1.00; Modern
Society, 16mo, 50 cents.

Maud Howe.
San Rosario Ranch, 16mo, $1.25; Atalanta in
the South, 16mo, $1.25; A Newport Aquarelle, 16mo,
$1.00.

Leigh Hunt.
Book of the Sonnet, 16mo, $2.00; The Seer, 16mo,
$2.00; A Day by the Fire, 16mo, $1.50.

Jean Ingelow.
Poems, Cabinet edition, 16mo, $1.50; Diamond
edition, square 18mo, $1.00; Household edition, 16mo, 75 cents;
Red-Line Household edition, 12mo, $1.25; Illustrated edition,
8vo, $7.50; Birthday Book, Illustrated, 16mo, $1.00; Off the
Skelligs, 16mo, $1.00; Fated to be Free, 16mo, $1.00; Sarah de
Berenger, 16mo, $1.00; Don John, 16mo, $1.00, John Jerome,
16mo, $1.00; Poems of the Old Days and the New, 16mo, $1.25.

J. H. Ingraham.
The Prince of the House of David, 16mo,
$1.50; The Pillar of Fire, 16mo, $1.50; The Throne of David,
16mo, $1.50.

Helen Jackson.
Ramona, 12mo, $1.50; Century of Dishonor,
12mo, $1.50; Glimpses of Three Coasts, 12mo, $1.50; Bits of
Travel, Illustrated, 18mo, $1.25; Bits of Travel at Home, 18mo,
$1.50; Bits of Talk, 18mo, $1.00; Bits of Talk for Young Folks.
16mo, $1.00; Mercy Philbrick’s Choice, 16mo, $1.00; Hetty’s
Strange History, 16mo, $1.00; Zeph, 16mo, $1.25; Between
Whiles, 16mo, $1.25; Verses, 16mo, $1.00; Sonnets and Lyrics,
16mo, $1.00; Verses and Sonnets and Lyrics, in 1 vol., $1.50.

[8]

Richard Jefferies.
Wild Life in a Southern County, 16mo,
$1.25 Gamekeeper at Home, 12mo, $1.50; Illustrated, 8vo,
$3.75; The Amateur Poacher, 12mo, $1.50; Round About a
Great Estate, 12mo, $1.50; Story of My Heart, 16mo, 75 cents.

Francis Jacox.
Cues from All Quarters, 16mo, $1.50; Bible
Music, 12mo, $1.75.

Joyce, R. D.
Deirdré, a Poem, 16mo, $1.00; Blanid, a Poem,
16mo, $1.50.

Sylvester Judd.
Margaret, 16mo, $1.50; Richard Edney,
16mo, $1.50.

John Keats.
Poems. Memoir by Lord Houghton. 16mo, $1.50.

The Kernel and the Husk.
Letters on Spiritual Christianity,
by the author of “Philochristus” and “Onesimus,” 12mo, $1.50.

Edward Lear.
Nonsense Songs, Illustrated, 12mo, $1.25.

Walter Savage Landor.
Pericles and Aspasia, 16mo, $1.50;
Imaginary Conversations, 5 vols., 12mo, $10.00; Oxford edition,
16mo, $5.00.

Mrs. E. W. Latimer.
Familiar Talks on Some of Shakspeare’s
Comedies, 12mo, $2.00.

Vernon Lee.
Baldwin, 12mo, $2.00; Euphorion, 2 vols., demy
8vo, $4.00; Countess of Albany, 16mo, $1.00; A Phantom Lover,
16mo, 50 cents; Juvenilia, 12mo, $2.00.

Madame Lenormant.
Memoirs of Madame Récamier, with
Portrait, 16mo, $1.50; Madame Récamier and Her Friends,
16mo, $1.50.

Mrs. D. A. Lincoln.
Boston Cook Book, Illustrated, 12mo,
half bound, $2.00; Carving and Serving, square 12mo, 60 cents.

W. J. Linton.
Rare Poems of Sixteenth and Seventeenth
Centuries, 16mo, $2.00.

A Little Pilgrim
, 16mo, 60 cents.

Abiel A. Livermore.
Anti-Tobacco, 16mo, 50 cents.

Living English Poets
(MDCCCLXXXII), 12mo, $2.00.

Margaret Lonsdale.
Sister Dora, with Portrait, 16mo, $1.25.

[9]

Robert T. S. Lowell.
Antony Brade, 16mo, $1.75; A Story or
Two from an Old Dutch Town, 16mo, $1.25.

W. M. Lupton.
A Concise English History, 12mo, $1.50.

Hamilton W. Mabie.
Norse Stories, 16mo, $1.00.

Lord Macaulay.
Lays of Ancient Rome, with “Ivry” and
“Armada,” Illustrated, 16mo, $1.00.

John MacGregor.
Thousand Miles in the Rob Roy Canoe,
16mo, $1.25; Rob Roy on the Baltic, 16mo, $1.25; Voyage Alone
in the Yawl Rob Roy, 16mo, $1.25; Three vols. in one, $2.00.

George MacDonald.
The Vicar’s Daughter, Illustrated, 16mo,
$1.50.

Gerardine Macpherson.
Memoirs of Anna Jameson, with
Portrait, 8vo, $2.50.

James Martineau.
Hours of Thought on Sacred Things, 1st
series, 16mo, $1.50; 2d series, 12mo, $2.00.

George Meredith.
Ordeal of Richard Feverel, uncut, English
cloth, 12mo, $2.00; Evan Harrington, uncut, English cloth,
12mo, $2.00; Harry Richmond, uncut, English cloth, 12mo,
$2.00; Sandra Belloni, uncut, English cloth, 12mo, $2.00; Vittoria,
uncut, English cloth, 12mo, $2.00; Rhoda Fleming,
uncut, English cloth, 12mo, $2.00; Beauchamp’s Career, uncut,
English cloth, 12mo, $2.00; Diana of the Crossways, uncut, English
cloth, 12mo, $2.00; The Egoist, uncut, English cloth, 12mo,
$2.00; Shaving of Shagpat, and Farina, uncut, English cloth,
12mo, $2.00; Ballads and Poems of Tragic Life, 16mo, $1.50.

Joaquin Miller.
Songs of the Sierras, 16mo, $1.50; Songs of
the Sun Lands, 16mo, $1.50; Ship in the Desert, 16mo, $1.50;
Songs of Italy, 16mo, $1.25; Four vols. in one, $2.00; Songs of
the Mexican Seas, 16mo, $1.00.

Miss Toosey’s Mission
, and Laddie, 1 vol., 16mo, 50 cents.

J. L. Molloy.
Our Autumn Holiday on French Rivers, 16mo,
$1.00.

Lady Mary Wortley Montagu.
Letters, 12mo, $1.50.

John Morley.
Life of Richard Cobden, with Portrait, 8vo,
$1.50.

[10]

Lewis Morris.
The Epic of Hades, 16mo, $1.50; Gwen, 16mo,
$1.50; Songs Unsung, 16mo, $1.50; The Ode of Life, 16mo,
$1.00.

William Morris.
The Earthly Paradise, 3 vols., 16mo, gilt,
$6.00; Popular edition, $4.50; Sigurd the Volsung, 8vo, $2.50;
Æneids of Virgil, 8vo, $2.50; Defence of Guenevere, 12mo,
$2.00; Life and Death of Jason, 16mo, $1.50; Lovers of Gudrun,
16mo, $1.00; Love is Enough, 16mo, $1.25; Hopes and
Fears for Art, 16mo, $1.25.

Louise Chandler Moulton.
Poems, square 18mo, $1.00; Some
Women’s Hearts, 16mo, $1.50; Random Rambles, 18mo, $1.25;
Ourselves and Our Neighbors, 16mo, $1.00.

William A. Mowry.
Talks with My Boys, 16mo, $1.00.

My Marriage.
A Novel, 16mo, $1.00.

May Alcott Nieriker.
Studying Art Abroad, 16mo, 50 cents.

No Name Novels.

First Series
: Afterglow, $1.00; Deirdrè,
$1.00; Is That All? $1.00; Will Denbigh, Nobleman, $1.00;
Kismet, $1.00; Wolf at the Door, $1.00; The Great Match,
$1.00; Marmorne, $1.00; Mirage, $1.00; A Modern Mephistopheles,
$1.00; Gemini, $1.00; A Masque of Poets, $1.00.

Second Series
: Signor Monaldini’s Niece, $1.00; The Colonel’s
Opera Cloak, $1.00; His Majesty, Myself, $1.00; Mrs. Beauchamp
Brown, $1.00; Salvage, $1.00; Don John, $1.00; Tsar’s
Window, $1.00; Manuela Parédes, $1.00; Baby Rue, $1.00; My
Wife and My Wife’s Sister, $1.00; Her Picture, $1.00; Aschenbroedel,
$1.00.

Third Series
: Her Crime, $1.00; Little Sister, $1.00; Barrington’s
Fate, $1.00; Daughter of the Philistines, $1.00;
Princess Amélie, $1.00; Diane Coryval, $1.00; Almost a
Duchess, $1.00; A Superior Woman, $1.00; Justina, $1.00;
Question of Identity, $1.00; Cracker Joe, $1.00.

Mrs. Power O’Donoghue.
Riding for Ladies, 12mo, $3.50.

Old Lady Mary.
A Tale of the Seen and the Unseen, 16mo,
60 cents.

Kathleen O’Meara.
Madame Mohl, 16mo, $1.25 (crown 8vo,
$2.50); Mabel Stanhope, 16mo, $1.25.

[11]

Old Colony Series of Novels.
Constance of Acadia, 12mo,
$1.50; Agatha and the Shadow, 12mo, $1.50.

Onesimus
, Memoirs of a Disciple of Saint Paul, 16mo, $1.50.

Open Door and The Portrait
, 1 vol., 16mo, 60 cents.

Dr. H. Oort and Dr. I. Hooykaas.
The Bible for Learners,
3 vols., 12mo, $6.00.

John Boyle O’Reilly.
Moondyne, a Novel, 16mo, $1.00;
Statues in the Block, 16mo, $1.00; paper covers, 50 cents.

Our Little Ann.
By the author of “Tip Cat.” 16mo, $1.00.

Joseph Parker, D.D.
Ecce Deus, 16mo, $1.00; Ad Clerum,
16mo, $1.50.

Theodore Parker.
Prayers, 16mo, $1.00; Lessons from the
World of Matter, 12mo, $1.25.

Charles E. Pascoe.
London of To-day, 1887, Illustrated, 12mo,
$1.50.

C. Kegan Paul.
William Godwin, 2 vols., 8vo, $6.00; Mary
Wollstonecraft’s Letters to Gilbert Imlay, square 12mo, $2.00.

Paul of Tarsus
, 16mo, $1.50.

Elizabeth P. Peabody.
Reminiscences of William Ellery
Channing, 16mo, $2.00.

A. P. Peabody, D.D.
Christian Belief and Life, 16mo, $1.50.

Frances M. Peard.
The Rose Garden, 16mo, $1.50; Thorpe
Regis, 16mo, $1.50; Unawares, 16mo, $1.50.

Silvio Pellico.
My Prisons, Illustrated, 16mo, $1.25.

“Pembridge.”
Whist, or Bumblepuppy? 16mo, 50 cents.

J. and E. R. Pennell.
Two Pilgrims’ Progress, Illustrated,
12mo, $2.00; paper covers, 50 cents.

Philochristus
, Memoirs of a Disciple of Our Lord, 16mo, $1.50.

Edward L. Pierce.
Memoir and Letters of Charles Sumner,
with Portraits, 2 vols., 8vo, $6.00.

Margaret J. Preston.
Cartoons, 16mo, $1.00.

[12]

Laura Elizabeth Poor.
Sanskrit and its Kindred Literatures,
16mo, $2.00.

Harriet W. Preston.
A Year in Eden, a Novel, 12mo, $1.50;
Troubadours and Trouvères, 12mo, $2.00; Aspendale, 16mo,
$1.00; Love in Nineteenth Century, 16mo, $1.00; Translations:
Mistral’s Mirèio, 16mo, $1.25; Writings of Madame
Swetchine, 16mo, $1.25; Life and Letters of Madame Swetchine,
16mo, $1.50; Portraits of Celebrated Women, 16mo,
$1.50; Memoirs of Madame Desbordes-Valmore, 16mo, $1.50;
Biography of Alfred de Musset, 12mo, $2.00.

Bryan Waller Procter.
An Autobiographical Fragment, with
Portrait, 12mo, $2.00.

Alfred P. Putnam.
Singers and Songs of the Liberal Faith,
8vo, $3.00.

Josiah Quincy.
Figures of the Past, 16mo, $1.50.

Josiah P. Quincy.
Protection of Majorities, 16mo, $1.00.

Harriet H. Robinson.
Massachusetts in the Woman Suffrage
Movement, 16mo, $1.25.

A. Mary F. Robinson.
The New Arcadia, 16mo, $1.50; An
Italian Garden, 16mo, $1.00; Emily Brontë, 16mo, $1.00.

Phil. Robinson.
Under the Sun, 16mo, $1.50; Sinners and
Saints: Three Months Among the Mormons, 16mo, $1.50.

Edwards Roberts.
Santa Barbara, Illustrated, 16mo, 75 cents.

Christina G. Rossetti.
Poems, 16mo, $1.50; Red Line edition,
12mo, $2.00; A Pageant, 16mo, $1.25; Time Flies, 18mo, $1.00;
Annus Domini, square 18mo, $1.50; Commonplace, 16mo, $1.50.

Dante Gabriel Rossetti.
Blessed Damozel, 16mo, $1.50; Ballads
and Sonnets, 16mo, $1.50; Complete Poems, with Portrait,
12mo, $2.00; Dante and His Circle, 12mo, $2.00.

Maria Francesca Rossetti.
A Shadow of Dante, Illustrated,
12mo, $1.50.

Earl John Russell.
Recollections, 8vo, $3.00.

Bernardin de Sainte-Pierre.
Paul and Virginia, Illustrated,
16mo, $1.00.

[13]

C. A. Sainte-Beuve.
Portraits of Celebrated Women, 16mo,
$1.50; Memoirs of Madame Desbordes-Valmore, 16mo, $1.50.

Frank B. Sanborn.
Life and Letters of John Brown, with
Portraits, 8vo, $3.00.

George Sand.
Mauprat, 12mo, half Russia, $1.50; Antonia,
12mo, half Russia, $1.50; Monsieur Sylvestre, 12mo, half Russia,
$1.50; Snow Man, 12mo, half Russia, $1.50; Miller of
Angibault, 12mo, half Russia, $1.50.

Epes Sargent.
Planchette; or, The Despair of Science, 16mo,
$1.25; The Woman who Dared, 16mo, $1.50.

Sir Walter Scott.
Lay of the Last Minstrel, Lady of the Lake,
and Marmion, 1 vol., 16mo, $1.00.

Sea and Shore
, a Collection of Poems, 18mo, $1.00.

J. R. Seeley, M.A.
Ecce Homo, 16mo, $1.00; Roman Imperialism,
16mo, $1.50; Short History of Napoleon, with Portrait,
16mo, $1.50; Life and Times of Stein, 2 vols., with Portrait, 8vo,
$6.00; Natural Religion, 16mo, $1.25; Expansion of England,
crown 8vo, $1.75.

Flora L. Shaw.
Colonel Cheswick’s Campaign, a Novel, 16mo,
$1.25; Castle Blair, 16mo, $1.00; Hector, 16mo, $1.00; Phyllis
Browne, 16mo, $1.00; A Sea Change, 16mo, $1.00.

Six of One by Half-a-Dozen of the Other
, 16mo, $1.50.

Julian K. Smyth.
Footprints of the Saviour, 16mo, gilt top,
$1.00.

Mary Somerville.
Personal Recollections, Portrait, 12mo, $1.50.

Robert Southey.
Life of Nelson, Illustrated, 16mo, $1.00.

Harriet Prescott Spofford.
The Marquis of Carabas, 16mo,
$1.00; Hester Stanley at St. Marks, 12mo, $1.25.

“A Square.”
Flatland, Illustrated, 16mo, 75 cents.

[14]

Robert Louis Stevenson.
Travels with a Donkey, 16mo,
$1.00; An Inland Voyage, 16mo, $1.00; Treasure Island, 16mo,
$1.00; The Silverado Squatters, 16mo, $1.00; Prince Otto,
16mo, $1.00.

Harriet Beecher Stowe.
Pink and White Tyranny, 16mo,
$1.25.

Charles Swain.
Poems, with Portrait, 18mo, $1.00.

Andrew James Symington.
William Wordsworth, with Portrait,
2 vols., 16mo, $2.00.

Jane and Ann Taylor.
Tales, Essays, and Poems. Biographical
Sketch, by Grace A. Oliver. 16mo, $1.00.

Connop Thirlwall.
Letters to a Friend, 12mo, $1.50.

Mary W. Tileston.
Quiet Hours, 1st Series, 16mo, $1.00;
2d Series, 16mo, $1.00; 2 vols. in one, $1.50; Sursum Corda,
16mo, $1.25; The Blessed Life, 18mo, $1.00; Daily Strength for
Daily Needs, 16mo, $1.00; Heroic Ballads, Illustrated, 12mo,
$2.00; “The Wisdom Series,” comprising The Apocrypha, 18mo,
flexible covers, 50 cents; Ecclesiasticus, 18mo, flexible covers,
50 cents; Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, 18mo, flexible covers, 50
cents; The Imitation of Christ, 18mo, flexible covers, 50 cents;
Sunshine in the Soul, 1st Series, 18mo, flexible covers, 50 cents;
2d Series, 18mo, flexible covers, 50 cents (both in one, 75 cents);
Epictetus, 18mo, flexible covers, 50 cents; Life of Dr. John
Tauler, 18mo, flexible covers, 50 cents; Selections from Fénelon,
18mo, flexible covers, 50 cents; Socrates, 2 vols., 18mo, flexible
covers, 50 cents each. In sets, complete in six volumes, $4.50.

Tip Cat
, A Story. By the author of “Miss Toosey’s Mission.”
16mo, $1.00.

George M. Towle.
Certain Men of Mark, 16mo, $1.00.

W. Steuart Trench.
Realities of Irish Life, 12mo, $1.00.

R. St. John Tyrwhitt.
Our Sketching Club, Illustrated, 8vo,
$2.50.

Sarah Tytler.
The Old Masters, 16mo, $1.50; Modern Painters,
16mo, $1.50; Musical Composers, 16mo, $1.50.

[15]

May Alden Ward.
Dante, a Sketch of his Life, 16mo,
$1.25.

M. de Voltaire.
Charles XII., King of Sweden, with Portrait,
16mo, $1.00.

William B. Weeden.
Morality of Prohibitory Liquor Laws,
16mo, $1.25; The Social Law of Labor, 12mo, $1.50.

Rev. John Weiss.
American Religion, 16mo, $1.50; Wit,
Humor, and Shakspeare, 12mo, $2.00.

Oscar Wilde.
Poems, 16mo, $1.25.

A Week Away from Time
, 16mo, $1.25.

Rev. J. G. Wood.
Nature’s Teachings, Illustrated, 8vo, $2.50.

Abba Goold Woolson.
Dress Reform, Illustrated, 16mo,
$1.50; Browsing Among Books, 16mo, $1.00.

Benjamin Worcester.
Life and Mission of Emanuel Swedenborg,
with Portrait, 12mo, $2.00 (8vo, $3.00).

LATEST ADDITIONS TO ROBERTS BROTHERS’ CATALOGUE.

Albion W. Tourgee.
Button’s Inn, a Story, 16mo, $1.25.

Philip Bourke Marston.
For a Song’s Sake, and Other
Stories, 12mo, $2.00; Garden Secrets, with a Sketch of his Life
by Louise Chandler Moulton, and Portrait, 16mo, $1.00.

Esther Bernon Carpenter.
South-County Neighbors, 16mo,
$1.00.

William Shakespeare.
Complete Works, Dyce’s Edition,
7 vols., 16mo, half Russia, in a neat box, $9.00.

Laura E. Richards.
Toto’s Joyous Winter, a continuation of
“The Joyous Story of Toto,” 16mo, $1.25.

[16]

Louisa M. Alcott.
A Garland for Girls, and Other Stories,
uniform with “Spinning-Wheel Stories,” 16mo, $1.25; Lulu’s
Library, Vol. II., uniform with Lulu’s Library, Vol. I., 16mo,
$1.00.

Edward E. Hale.
In His Name, a new edition, with more than
100 Illustrations by G. P. Jacomb-Hood, R.A., 12mo, $2.00.

Philip Gilbert Hamerton.
The Saône, a Summer Voyage,
with 150 Illustrations by Joseph Pennell and the author, 4to.
(
In the press.
)

The Little Flowers of Saint Francis.
Translated by Abby
Langdon Alger. 16mo, 75 cents.

T. S. Millington.
Some of Our Fellows, a School Story, with
16 Illustrations, small 4to, $2.00.

Joaquin Miller.
Songs of the Mexican Seas, comprising The
Sea of Fire and The Rhyme of the Great River, 16mo, $1.00.

George Meredith.
Ballads and Poems of Tragic Life, 16mo,
$1.50.

Vernon Lee.
Juvenilia: being a Second Series of Essays on
Sundry Æsthetical Questions, uniform with “Baldwin” (the
First Series), 12mo, $2.00.

Madame de Staël.
A Life of this celebrated woman, the
author of “Corinne,” being the 15th Volume in the Famous
Women Series, 16mo, $1.00.

Send for Descriptive Catalogue of our Publications (free).
All of our Books are mailed, post-paid, on receipt of price.

ROBERTS BROTHERS, Publishers,

3 Somerset Street, Boston.

***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MADAME DE STAëL***

******* This file should be named 56605-h.htm or 56605-h.zip *******

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:

http://www.gutenberg.org/5/6/6/0/56605

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United
States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost
no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use
it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with
this eBook or online
at
www.gutenberg.org
. If you
are not located in the United States, you'll have to check the laws
of the country where you are located before using this
ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation."

You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
works.

You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.

You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

Dr. Gregory B. Newby

Chief Executive and Director

gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit
www.gutenberg.org/donate
.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.