Project Gutenberg's The Polly Page Yacht Club, by Izola L. Forrester

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Polly Page Yacht Club

Author: Izola L. Forrester

Release Date: March 24, 2018 [EBook #56834]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE POLLY PAGE YACHT CLUB ***

Produced by Roger Frank and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from images made available by the HathiTrust
Digital Library.)

THE POLLY PAGE YACHT CLUB

She Leaned Forward, Intent on Every Point

THE POLLY PAGE YACHT CLUB

BY

IZOLA L. FORRESTER

AUTHOR OF “ROOK’S NEST,” “US FELLERS,” ETC.

PHILADELPHIA

GEORGE W. JACOBS & CO.

PUBLISHERS

Copyright, 1910, by

George W. Jacobs & Company

Published November 1910

All rights reserved

Printed in U. S. A.

CONTENTS

I

The Launching Party

II

Glenwood

III

Polly Ships Her Crew

IV

Fitting Out

V

On Board the “Hippocampus”

VI

Three Days at Sea

VII

Landing at Lost Island

VIII

Dropping Anchor

IX

The Captain Calls

X

A Home on the Rolling Deep

XI

Smugglers’ Isle

XII

“
Girl Overboard
”

XIII

Polly’s “Current Events”

XIV

“
Mr. Smith of Smugglers’ Cove
”

XV

The Pearl Fest

XVI

The Captain’s Party

XVII

Polly Prepares

XVIII

The Regatta

XIX

The First Event

XX

The Winner of the Junior Cup

ILLUSTRATIONS

She leaned forward, intent on every point

“Girls, I’ve got it!”

A happy, dripping lot

“First batch of marshmallows ready!” called Ruth

Combing their hair and chatting, girl fashion

THE POLLY PAGE YACHT CLUB

CHAPTER I

THE LAUNCHING PARTY

“She was here just a minute ago. Wait till
I find her, girls. We can’t go ahead without
Polly.”

Ruth Brooks dropped her bouquet of white
roses on the piano stool, and hurried out into the
long corridor. It was still crowded with people,
although Crullers had played the tenderest, saddest
strains of “Träumerei,” and “Blumenlied,”
to let them know it was time to go home. Ruth
paused on the lower staircase a minute to see
if Polly’s brown head showed anywhere below.
Between the square reception hall, and the
library, stood Miss Calvert, her figure tall and
imposing in its black silk gown of state, even
among so many. If there was one day in the
entire year, when she was radiantly happy, and in
her favorite element, it was Commencement day,
so her girls said.

After the closing exercises, the members of
the H. S. Club had managed to slip away unobserved
during the reception. Polly had passed
the secret word around that a last meeting would
be held in the music room before school closed for
vacation time. Yet in spite of this Polly herself,
founder of the Hungry Six Club, and its president,
and chief cook, was now missing.

Months before, when the fall term opened, the
H. S. had been formed as a mutually protective
association. Out of thirty-four pupils, twenty-eight
at Calvert Hall were out-of-town girls.
The other six were day scholars, and all lived at
Queen’s Ferry, Virginia. Therefore the six had
banded together, and stood by one another faithfully,
against the united force of the twenty-eight
“regulars.”

“What did Polly tell us to wait up here for?”
asked Isabel Lee.

“Vacation,” came Sue’s matter-of-fact tone
from the curtained window, where she was watching
the long procession of carriages and automobiles
in front of Calvert Hall. “Polly has an
idea, and she wants us to sew buttons on it.”

“Oh, girls, who’s got the chafing-dish? Did
any one remember to get it at all?” Edwina,
which the girls cut short to Ted, looked dismayed
at the others, and nobody responded. It was a
serious moment. If the H. S. Club had possessed
a coat-of-arms, there would have been a
chafing-dish rampant on a field of fire as part
of its symbolism. It had been Polly’s Christmas
present to the club. She had smuggled it in, all
unknown to Miss Calvert or the other girls, and
had beguiled Annie May, the colored cook, to
hide it. On special occasions it made its appearance
at feasts, wonderful feasts, prepared with
the help of Annie May, when the Hungry Six
foregathered behind locked doors, with the chafing-dish
in the place of honor.

“Open the door, just a little way, girls,” Polly
would always say, just at the crucial moment,
and the tempting fumes of some chafing-dish
decoction would float away down the long
dormitory corridor, until the noses of the twenty-eight
caught it, and there was an instantaneous
bombardment.

“Hold it open till the last minute when you
see them coming,” Polly would cry, her brown
eyes dancing with fun, as she presided in one of
Annie May’s huge aprons, and waved a big
spoon. “Just let them get a good whiff of it,
so the clans will gather, and then we’ll bar the
door.”

And the clans always gathered. First from
one room, then another, in the upper dormitories,
the “regulars” would troop forth, and cluster
around the door where the day pupils ate their
luncheon. Polly always held that it was wise to
wait until twelve-thirty, as by that time the regulars
would have finished eating. Sometimes
they would catch murmurs from the corridor.

“Smells like crab meat,” some one would
whisper, and from the inner shrine Polly would
declaim,

“’Tis crab meat, with green peppers.”

Then a deep groan would rise from the “regulars,”
and the Hungry Six would smile at each
other, for revenge is sweet. They could not forget
the midnight feasts which the “regulars”
held while they were away.

Yet, at the very last minute, they had forgotten
the chafing-dish. Some of the people were
already leaving, and the imposing line of carriages
outside the stately old Hall was growing
thinner.

“Hadn’t one of us better go downstairs to the
kitchen, and find Annie May,” suggested Ted,
anxiously. “Polly’s probably talking to somebody,
and has forgotten all about us. I saw the
Admiral lift up his finger at her, and that signal
between them always calls Polly to attention.
Wasn’t it dear of him to come and talk to us!
What was it he said? Oh, I know. Look,
girls, like this.” Ted struck a dignified posture
in the center of the floor, her chin set deeply
in her lace collar, her brows drawn down in imitation
of the Admiral’s own bushy ones.

“Standing with reluctant feet,

Where the brook and river meet,

Maidenhood and—”

“Girls, I’ve got it!”

In the doorway stood Polly, her curly hair,
brown and glossy as a ripe chestnut, tied back
in a cluster of long curls that reached to her
waist, her brown eyes brimming over with mischief,
and in her hand, wrapped carefully in a
clean pillow case, was something the girls all
recognized by its outlines.

“Girls, I’ve Got It!”

“I thought of it the very last minute,” went
on Polly, quickly, “Annie May hid it the last
time we used it, you know, and I forgot to ask
her where she had put it. And she’s down in
the back hall, crying over the girls who are leaving,
so of course I couldn’t disturb her. So I
hunted around the kitchen, in the wash boiler,
and up in her room, then I guessed. You know
the linen closet in the back hall. It was in there,
way down under some gray blankets on the bottom
shelf. Wasn’t she the wise old darling to
put it under the gray ones, so it wouldn’t show if
it should happen to get a spot on them! And
then I heard Honoria calling me.”

“Whatever did you do, Polly?” whispered the
girls, tensely.

“I slipped the chafing-dish into a pillow case,
left it on the hall settee, and went to see what
she wanted. And afterwards, Mrs. Yates sent
for me to be introduced to her.”

“The Senator’s wife?” asked Isabel, eagerly.

“Yes’m. She used to be one of Miss Calvert’s
girls when she was young, and she wanted
specially to meet me for the sake of the Admiral.
It’s dreadful, all the things I have to go
through for the sake of that boy. She even said
I looked like him.”

Polly’s low, rippling laugh was smothered by
a judicious toss of a sofa pillow from Sue.

“Be quiet, goosie, or you’ll have everybody
rushing up here to see what’s the matter. Put
the pillow case over the chafing-dish so it won’t
be seen, and tell us what happened. Why did
you tell us all to come up here?”

Polly seated herself on the arm of the nearest
chair, and pushed back her hair from her forehead
with a gesture exactly like the Admiral’s.

“Ladies, and sisters, and dear colleagues,” she
began, in imitation of Miss Calvert’s Commencement
Day rhetoric.

“Don’t speechify, Polly,” ordered Ruth,
cheerfully. “Hurry up. It’s getting late.”

But Polly went serenely on her own way, which
was characteristic of her.

“We stand at the parting of the ways, don’t
we? The last year at dear, precious old Honoria’s
is over for Ruth and Kate. No more will
we six use the historic chafing-dish, no more battle
with the twenty-eight strangers who have
lingered within our gates.” She turned her
head, and smiled at Ted and Sue. “Am I on
the right thread of discourse, sisters? Does it
sound like oratory?”

“Oh, bozzer,” said Sue, helplessly. “Play
ball, Polly, please, please, play ball.”

“I’ll be good, and stop,” Polly retorted,
laughing. “Listen. All the rest of the girls,
excepting us, are going away on vacations.
Real ones, I mean. And for the next two
months, what are we going to do?”

“Nothing but rest,” Sue said, dismally.

“That’s just it. We’ll stay around home the
way we always do, have a few picnics, and a few
lawn parties, and all that sort of thing. We
shan’t have any real vacation, anything that is
different from everything else we do the whole
year round, shall we?”

Five heads shook in unison.

“But, Polly, it would take so much money,”
began Ruth, picking one of her roses abstractedly
to pieces.

“If we went any distance at all,” Kate Julian
laid down the book she had been looking over
while Polly talked. She met Polly’s eager
glance, and smiled. Kate was nearly eighteen,
but both Ruth and herself were firm, true
friends of Polly’s, and the Admiral said he approved
because Polly needed ballast now and
then to keep her steady on her course.

“Oh, it’s quite a distance,” exclaimed Polly.
“It wouldn’t be any fun to go along the shore
here.”

“Anybody’d think to hear you, Polly, that you
had a whole island to colonize, and an airship
to travel in,” Kate teased. “I think you’re just
blowing a lovely bubble.”

Even Polly had to laugh, for at Calvert Hall
her rainbow bubbles that would float so beautifully
for a whole minute, then turn into air,
were a steady source of fun among the girls.

“Well, you may laugh, but I have the island
even if I haven’t any airship,” she said.

There was the soft rustle of silk outside, and
Miss Calvert stood in the doorway. She was not
the typical principal of a school for girls, Honoria
Calvert. There were too many “laughing
wrinkles,” as Polly called them, around her gray
eyes; and the corners of her generous mouth, and
the way the girls clustered about her, told more
plainly than words, how dear she was to them all.

“The Admiral is asking for you, Polly, my
dear,” she said. “Won’t the girls excuse you,
now?”

“Tell my commanding officer, ‘Aye, aye, sir,’
please, Miss Calvert,” Polly replied, rising at attention.

“Hurry, girls,” cautioned Miss Calvert, with a
warning uplift of her finger, as she went back to
her guests. Polly hurried.

“Girls,” she whispered, “report for duty
Saturday afternoon, at Glenwood, all of you, because
if we are going to do this thing, it must
be started right away.”

“Oh, Polly,” pleaded Sue, “is it anything
where we can have the dear old chafing-dish
feasts?”

Polly turned around as she reached the doorway,
and swung the pillow-case around her head.
Inside it, the chafing dish cover rattled.

“Indeed it is,” she cried. “We’ll need it more
than ever. Will you all be sure to come Saturday?”

“Sure,” echoed all of the girls, solemnly.
“Polly’s going to hold a launching party all her
own.”

Polly laughed, and nodded mysteriously.

“There’ll be something happening besides a
big splash if I do,” she said, and hurried out to
join the Admiral.

CHAPTER II

GLENWOOD

The music-room was on the east side of the
hall at its farthest end. As Polly hurried along
the hall, she caught sight of a woe-begone figure,
and stopped short. The Admiral was waiting
for her just beyond the arched entrance to the
reception room. From where she stood, she
could just see his shoulder, and some iron gray
curls which shook a little, so she knew he must
be laughing. The Admiral’s curls were always
a weathervane of his mood. Polly hesitated,
then following her first impulse, she slipped into
the library, and put her hand on Crullers’ shoulder.
Such an unhappy, moist Crullers, though,
very different from the happy-go-lucky, easy-going
girl of the past term. She raised a tearful
face, and sobbed outright.

“I’m not going back home.”

“You’re not!” Polly checked herself. She
was not much given to expostulations. The
shortest way around any trouble was straight
through the middle, she always held. “Why
aren’t you?”

“The children are down with measles, so I’ll
have to stay here for weeks, and it spoils my
vacation.”

Polly considered. It was not a very joyous
outlook. During the long summer vacation, the
big gray house was shrouded in darkness, and
Miss Calvert usually went to the seashore for a
rest.

“Maybe Honoria would take you with her
when she goes away,” Polly suggested, but Crullers
shook her head dismally.

“No, she won’t. She says she doesn’t want
any such responsibility as I would be. I am to
be left here with Annie May and Fraulein.”

Polly frowned at such an outlook. Annie
May was not so bad. The big-hearted old colored
mammy who acted as cook at the Hall was
far preferable as a pleasant companion to Fraulein,
the teacher of German, with her neuralgia
and shaded eyeglasses. Polly had always said
that she believed those glasses were the whole
reason why Fraulein took such a dismal view of
life. Green glasses were enough to turn Harlequin
into an undertaker.

“Don’t you mind, Crullers, precious,” she said,
patting the round rosy cheek nearest her. “The
girls from our own crowd are coming over to
Glenwood on Saturday, and you ask Miss Calvert
to let you come along with them. I have a
plan ahead for the summer, and maybe you could
go with us. Who knows? Don’t cry. I never
cry except when things are all wrong, and I can’t
fix them right. We’ll find a way.”

The Admiral called in the hallway outside,

“Polly! Time’s up.”

“Aye, aye, sir,” answered Polly, promptly, and
with a final pat on poor Crullers’ head, she
caught up her cloak and the chafing-dish from
the hall settee, and joined the Admiral at the
door of the reception room.

Miss Calvert was standing beside him, and the
tears came in her eyes as she looked at Polly,
slender and sweet in her gown of softest white
mull.

“I shall miss her this summer more than any
of my girls, Admiral,” she said, half sadly.
“She has done more this year towards giving
the other girls the right point of view—”

“Now, Miss Honoria, I must insist that you
stop filling Polly’s head with such ideas,”
laughed the Admiral, his eyes twinkling proudly,
as he bent over Miss Calvert’s hand with the old-time
grace of a gentleman who could call Virginia
his home state.

“Don’t you believe him, Miss Calvert,” Polly
said severely. “He’s a great deal worse than
you are. If it wasn’t for mother’s good, sensible,
Massachusetts spirit in me, I’d be so puffed up
that I’d blow away with the first strong breeze.
But I do like to be praised, indeed, I do. I just
love to be loved and appreciated.”

Miss Calvert kissed her, and stood in the doorway,
as the two went down the broad steps from
the veranda. The Admiral’s carriage was waiting,
with old Balaam on the box, smiling till his
face looked like a piece of shirred black satin.
The Admiral handed Polly into the carriage as
if she had been a duchess, and turned to bow
once again to Miss Calvert.

“Isn’t she a dear?” said Polly, with a sigh of
genuine comfort, as the carriage turned the
corner, and the broad riverside road lay before
them. “It doesn’t seem as though I had finished
my Freshman year at school, grandfather.”

“Finished?” repeated the Admiral. “Why,
bless my heart, girlie, you’ve just begun now.
Three more years at the Hall, then four years in
college, and then after that I rather think you and
I will tramp around some rare old corners of this
old world that I know of just to freshen up.
And when you come back your aunts will make a
society bud of you, and I shall lose my little messmate.”

Polly’s eyes were grave in an instant. As she
put her head down on the broad shoulder nearest
her, and rubbed her cheek on it, very much like a
satisfied kitten.

“You’ll never lose me, grandfather. Don’t
you know what mother always said? We were
worse than twins, the way we always stood by
each other, and chummed together. Don’t you
remember?”

The Admiral stared at Balaam’s back in front
of them. And then he coughed vigorously, and
patted the hand on his knee. It was nearly four
years since Polly’s mother had passed over the
mysterious bourne, from which, we are told, no
traveler returns. Polly had been ten then, and
four aunts had offered separately to bring her
up properly. But the Admiral had stood firmly
on his rights, and Polly had remained at home
with the Admiral, and her old mammy, Aunty
Welcome, to give orders. Welcome had been
in the family since Balaam was first made coachman,
but no one could even guess her age.

“Doan’t ask me sech foolish questions, chile,”
she used to say to Polly. “I dun kept ’count till
I was ninety, den I lost track, and I ain’t had no
buffday since.”

She stood at the entrance to the drive now,
when the carriage turned into the grounds of
Glenwood, the Admiral’s spacious home on the
river bank. Nearly as tall as the Admiral she
was, and spare and strong as some fine old
weather-beaten pine. In spite of newer fashions,
she wore her bandana folded turbanwise around
her head, and beneath it a few gray wisps of hair
could be seen. Her under lip protruded greatly,
“jes’ on account of making dat chile behave herself,”
she used to say. To-day, she was smiling
grimly, and her deep-set eyes sparkled like old
jet as she looked at the slender figure in white
sitting up so sedately beside the Admiral.

“Don’t you know ’nuff to raise dat parasol, and
pertect dis chile’s complexion, Admiral?” she demanded,
haughtily. “Has I got to watch over
her when she’s out of my sight? Ain’t she got a
terrible leaning towards freckles anyway?
Wouldn’t she look fine under her snow white
bridal veil all brown freckles? I declar’ I’m
ashamed of you, Admiral, I suttainly am.”

Polly laughed as she stepped from the carriage
and, slipping one arm around the old figure, entered
the big house. But Welcome scolded
firmly all the way upstairs to the large, cool
south chamber that had been Polly’s special domain
ever since Welcome herself had carried her
into it, a wee baby.

It was a delightful room, the dearest in all the
world, Polly thought. The south windows overlooked
the garden, and below the river gleamed
like silver through the thick foliage and clambering
vines. Over the old gray stone walls,
rambled Virginia creeper, pushing its tendrils
even around the window casements, and if one
leaned far out, one might pick a cluster of sweet,
old-fashioned climbing bride’s roses, from the
vine that wound itself around the trellis just
beneath Polly’s pet window.

“Aunty, don’t I look ’most grown-up?”

Polly stopped for a moment before the long
mirror between the windows, and looked at herself
thoughtfully.

“’Deed, you don’t,” Welcome responded, resolutely.
“Ain’t nuffin’ but a baby. Getting so
self-compinionated, dere won’t be any living with
you, chile, not a bit.”

“I want long dresses pretty soon.” Polly put
the idea suggestively, her brown eyes full of
mischief.

“Long dresses! For mercy sakes. Hyar dat
chile talk. Don’t need long dresses any more’n a
toad needs a side pocket.”

Polly laughed as she slipped out of her white
dress and into a simpler one for home use; then
ran downstairs to join her grandfather. On the
right hand side of the lower hall was the Admiral’s
own private retreat, from which Polly
herself was barred admission, save by special permit.
When she reached the foot of the stairs,
she hesitated, and listened. The hallway
divided the house equally, running its full length,
with great doorways at either end, opening on
broad verandas. Every evening before dinner,
Polly and the Admiral walked in the garden, and
told each other the happenings of the day. It
was an old sweet custom, that dated back to
Polly’s toddling days, and they both looked forward
to it as the happy climax to each day’s routine.

Polly took a golf cape from the hall rack, and
threw it around her shoulders. Although it was
the end of June, the evenings were still cool along
the river, and Aunty Welcome would scold if she
went out into the night unprotected.

Stretched out at full length before the doorway
was Tan, the old setter. He lifted his head,
bent one friendly ear towards her, and beat his
long, silky tail lazily on the floor.

“Tan, you old goose,” said Polly, kneeling beside
him, “why don’t you make a fuss over me?
Don’t you know this is one of the golden days
of life for me? You might at least bark! I
suppose you’re waiting till I finish Calvert Hall
and college besides. Well, let me tell you, sir, it
is something to be through your Freshman year
at Calvert Hall. It is hard work, I’d have you
know.”

Tan dozed lazily off while she talked to him.
She rose with a little sigh, and went softly out
into the garden. On the top step she paused,
just for a minute, and lifted her face to the
evening light. Polly loved that old garden.
During babyhood and childhood it had been her
wonderland of enchantment, her play country of
mystery and make-believe. It was just sunset
now, and the mellow light turned the old gray
walls of the house into battlements of splendor.
The garden stretched primly before her, with its
beds of flowers, trimly-cut hedges and last of all,
four terraces sloping to the river. An old
cypress stood guard at the rustic steps leading
down to the boat landing. Polly hurried along
the narrow paths until she came to the spot the
Admiral loved best. In the old days she had
always called it the Wishing Seat, for if one
caught the Admiral there at the sunset hour, and
wished a really good wish, it was almost always
sure to come true. Beneath an apple tree it
stood, with banks of lilacs behind it. A rose
bush drooped over one corner, a bush of old-fashioned
musk roses that Polly’s mother had planted
there years ago, palest pink, and so fragrant that
even at twilight the humming birds fluttered
around them lovingly.

There had been a sun dial near the old Roman
seat, but only the pedestal was left, and that was
overgrown with morning-glory vines. When
Polly’s brown curls had barely reached the top
of the dial, she had loved to climb the two steps
of the stone pedestal and pick off the little
trumpet shaped buds, and “pop” them. Didn’t
you ever do it? It’s lots of fun.

The Admiral sat as usual on the old seat, his
iron gray hair upcurling from his high forehead,
as Polly had told him once, for all the
world like a surprised cockatoo. He was resting
placidly after the unaccustomed excitement of
the Commencement exercises, and Polly looked
down at him with a certain secret pride before
she made her presence known. He was so altogether
right, she had decided long ago, this
grandfather Admiral of hers. He had been retired
from active service for years, and still she
never could understand how the naval forces of
the country managed to get along without him.
He was seventy now, but as tall and straight-shouldered
as a certain naval cadet in the full-length
oil painting over the mantel in the library.
His cheek was as rosy and clear as Polly’s own,
and his eyes like hers were as brown and bright as
a robin’s. He wore a moustache and long imperial,
both silver white, and there was an air of
distinction about him that was totally indescribable.
Polly declared that even the cab horses
standing around the Capitol grounds bowed
their heads when the Admiral passed by. She
slipped her hands over his eyes now, before he
had discovered her presence.

“Guess?”

“Bless me, I couldn’t possibly.”

“Oh, please.” In Polly’s gentlest, most persuasive
tone.

“I haven’t the remotest idea who it could be.”

“Then you have to pay a forfeit.” She leaned
over and kissed his cheek, then slipped into the
seat beside him.

“Admiral grandfather darling, listen to me.”
It was Polly’s regular way of opening up a serious
discussion. “The girls are coming to-morrow,
no, day after to-morrow, Saturday. There
are seven of us altogether, Sue Warner, Ruth
Brooks, Kate Julian, ‘Ted’ Moore, Isabel Lee,
‘Crullers’ Adams and my own self. Do you
think Aunt Milly will mind my bringing so
many?”

The Admiral chuckled.

“So many? Seven girls, with Welcome and
an old chap like myself to look in on you once
in a while to keep you out of hot water,—that’s
not many, Polly.”

Polly’s face brightened.

“I’m so glad you think so. I was half afraid
we should be too many. And it wouldn’t do to
ask one or two or three, and leave out any, because
we are all mates. You understand, don’t
you, dear?”

The Admiral said he understood perfectly, and
Polly paused long enough to hug him, before she
asked,

“Have you ever seen the place at all?”

“In a general way, but I don’t remember much
about it. It’s a quiet, pretty bay, and there’s a
village at one end and a row of summer cottages
along the shore. I went up there to attend a
regatta one year, the first year Milly joined the
yacht club. She did it for the sake of the boys,
because they were very enthusiastic over their new
boats.”

“But you’ve never been on Lost Island.”

“Never.”

“It’s got such a queer name, hasn’t it? Lost
Island. I wonder if it ever did get lost.”

“I believe it did. Seems to me that Milly used
to tell how the shore line shifted about with winter
storms, but you girls won’t be there in stormy
weather. If you catch a few heavy equinoctials
along at the end of August, it’s about all you can
expect. From what Milly wrote to me, it is altogether
sheltered from the open sea, and the very
best place you could possibly find for a club for
girls. Better figure on a good stock of life preservers.”

“I did put down life preservers, grandfather,”
Polly said seriously. “And I showed Aunty the
list, and what do you suppose she said? She told
me that Annie May’s doughnuts would make the
best ones she knew anything about. Isn’t that
delicious?”

“Is you out in dat dew and damp, all uncovered,
chile?”

Welcome’s resolute tones rang out from the
upper window, and Polly obeyed instantly. She
might coax and persuade the Admiral, but with
Welcome there was no compromise, and Polly
knew it.

“I’m coming right in-doors now, Aunty.”

“Well, I should say you was. Dis window
sill’s jest a-soppin’ wet now. Admiral, you ain’t
got any more common sense about dat chile’s
welfare dan if you was a stotin’ bottle.”

The Admiral rose from the stone seat and tried
to argue the point, while Polly’s dimples danced
mischievously at the quick fire between the two.
Dearly did she love a bout between them.

“Aunty Welcome, I really must insist, I really
must, on your treating me with a little more respect.”
It was comical to listen to the Admiral’s
appealing tones. “I cannot stand such talk forever.
Even a worm will turn, Welcome, you
know, even a worm.”

“Pouf,” came from old Aunty’s indignant lips.
“Whoever heard of a worm’s a-doing anything
when it did turn? You come along in out of dat
night air, sah, or you’ll get de collywobbles you’-sef.
Come along, now.”

The window closed emphatically, and Polly
meekly slipped her arm around the Admiral’s
elbow, and they went up to the house together.

CHAPTER III

POLLY SHIPS HER CREW

The following day Polly was very busy, mysteriously
busy, but not one word did she speak to
anyone of the household, regarding her purpose.
She pored over books in the library, and wrote
items down for future reference. But the Admiral
was able to guess her intentions, for every
once in a while, she would hail him with various
queries.

“Grandfather, dear, what’s a cuddy?”

“Small cabin up for’ad,” responded the Admiral.
“Why, matey?”

“Is it anywhere near the lobscouse?” asked
Polly anxiously, tapping her under lip with her
pencil.

The Admiral laughed till the tears came in his
eyes, and he had to blow his nose vigorously.

“I’m sure I don’t see why that’s funny,” protested
Polly with dignity. “It says here that
they tackled the lobscouse in the cuddy.”

“I haven’t the least doubt of it,” laughed the
Admiral heartily, “and not one scrap did they
leave to throw to the porpoises, either, did
they?”

But Polly refused to be teased, or daunted in
her purpose. When the girls arrived on Saturday
afternoon, she was prepared to meet them,
and very businesslike and imposing the library
appeared with the earnest faces gathered around
the old flat-topped mahogany table that stood in
its center.

“We all came, Polly,” said Sue, fanning her
flushed face with a blotter, comfortably. Sue
rarely stopped for the fitness of things. If she
needed anything at all, she always took the first
substitute at hand, rather than go without. “It’s
getting pretty warm weather, sister clubbers,
know it?”

“Sister clubbers?” repeated Isabel. “Sue, how
you do talk.”

“Well, it is hot, all the same, isn’t it, Polly?”

Polly laughed, and stepped to the doorway to
receive from Aunty Welcome’s hands a generous
tray with ice-cold fruit lemonade in a tall cut
glass pitcher, covered with a snowy napkin, and
a plate of fresh honey jumbles.

“You be suah and stir dat up well from de
bottom, chile,” cautioned Aunty. “Doan’t want
all juice when you got orange, an’ banana, an’
strawberries, an’ cherries, an’ mint leaves.”

“Oh, you darling Aunty Welcome,” cried
Ted and Sue, and Ruth blew the old mammy a
kiss from her finger tips, while Isabel and Kate
smiled. They were all favorites with her, and
knew mighty well how to value her favor.

Polly set the tray at her end of the long table,
and poured out the luscious summer drink while
she went on talking.

“There’s one more to come still, girls. I hope
you will all agree with me and be nice to her.
It’s Crullers.”

“Crullers! Why, she has gone home,” exclaimed
Isabel.

“No, she hasn’t,” said Polly, calmly. “Her
brothers have the measles, and everybody else’s
little brothers and sisters are likely to have it at
Sharon Hill, where she lives, so Crullers cannot
go home for a vacation. I found her crying
when I left you girls last Thursday, and I told
her to come to-day. Do you mind?”

“I don’t,” Ruth spoke up cheerfully. “I always
liked Crullers, poor little thing.”

“Poor little thing,” Isabel repeated, dubiously.
“She’s heavier than I am, and can eat nearly a
whole pie at once.”

The other girls broke into a peal of laughter
over the protest. Nobody dreamt of taking
Isabel or her protests at all seriously. She was
always the first to see the windmills waving their
terrible arms in the distance, and the first one to
plan the attack on them. Crullers was a favorite
with all the day scholars at Calvert Hall.
Her name was Jane Daphne Adams, but the
combination had proven too great a strain on the
Hungry Six’s sense of humor, so they had cut it
short to Crullers. Four times a month a large
box arrived for Jane Daphne, filled with crullers
from home, and she never failed to donate them
to the chafing dish feasts. Therefore she herself
had been named in honor of them.

Before there was time to say any more, there
was a step in the hall, and Crullers herself appeared,
rather shyly, in the library doorway.
She was plump and rosy-cheeked, with deep
dimples and big blue eyes that seemed to question
everything, and if there was anything at all
in the way that Crullers could fall over, she always
took a tumble. At school the girls had declared
that Crullers would trip over her own
shadow any time. She was fifteen, and slow in
every way, slow to think, or act, or speak, or
learn, and awkward as some overgrown lamb;
but behind the awkward shyness there lay a
staunch, faithful nature that Polly knew and
loved. She had found out long ago that it was
far safer to depend on Crullers’ slowness, than
on Isabel’s hasty willingness that usually burnt
itself out like a pinwheel in two minutes.

“I didn’t know you’d all be here,” said Crullers,
hesitating. “Hello, Polly.”

Polly kissed her, and seated her next herself
at the table, close to the pitcher of lemonade, for
she knew the surest way to Crullers’ heart.

“We expected you,” she said, just as if all of
the girls had signified their intention of adopting
Crullers into their new circle. “Now I
think we may proceed with the business of the
afternoon. I want to read a letter to you girls,
first. It came from my Aunt Milly last week.”
Polly paused, and smiled, as she always did when
she mentioned the bevy of aunts who watched
over her from a distance. “Aunt Milly is grandfather’s
youngest daughter, and she’s a dear.
She lives in Boston, or at least just outside, in
Newton Centre, and she’s married and has four
boys.”

“What are their names?” asked Sue, promptly.

“It doesn’t matter, for they will not be there,”
answered Polly, firmly. “Here’s her letter.”
And she read it aloud.

“
My Dear Polly
:

“I am writing this hastily, on the eve of our sailing
for London town. Your Uncle Thurlow was compelled
to go abroad this summer on business, and offered to take
the boys also, so we are all going to join him in London.
It has occurred to me that if you and father have not
already made summer plans, you would enjoy yourselves
at Eagle Bay. Lost Island has been the boys’ favorite
outing place for years, and I am sure you would like it.
It is on the coast of Maine, not far from Bar Harbor, but
somewhat out of the summer tourist’s beaten track. If
you get tired of roughing it in the boys’ bungalow on the
island, you could stop at the hotel on the main shore. But
if you care for the open, there is a good camp outfit down
there, and some boats, and perhaps you might turn it into
something worth while.

“It is not really an island, except when the tide comes
in. There is a neck of land that connects it with the
main shore at low tide. The boys wish me to add that
the Captain will show you about everything, and that he
and Tom have the yachts down at their landing. I hope
you will go, and spend a happy vacation.

“Lovingly always,

“
Aunt Milly
.”

“Who’s the Captain?” asked Kate.

Polly shook her head, and laid the letter on the
table. “I don’t know any more about it than
you girls do, but I want to go. Grandfather
is willing to act as consort, he says. You know,
a consort is the ship that trots along to look after
other ships. That means he will stay up at the
hotel near the telegraph office, and have regular
meals. I know him like a book. But Aunty
Welcome will go along as cook, and I suppose
we should have a chaperon.”

“Oh, let’s don’t,” implored Sue, pushing back
her hair from her forehead, as she always did
when she was listening intently. “Ruth is seventeen,
and Kate is going on eighteen. Let’s do
it all ourselves. It will be ever so much more
fun.”

“And it won’t be as if we were wrecked on a
desert isle, Polly,” laughed Ruth. “There are
sure to be plenty other vacationers around with
whom we will get acquainted. I suppose there’s
a real house, isn’t there?”

Polly nodded her head.

“I guess so, from the letter. Aunt Milly always
lived at the hotel up the beach, and the boys
had an old fisherman’s cottage—”

“Do you mean a fisherman’s old cottage?” suggested
Isabel.

“Well, anyway, it was a sort of bungalow,
where they camped out. Grandfather says he
remembers that much. We don’t want to take a
lot of things along, girls, just enough to get on
with. I can put all I shall need into a couple
of suit cases, and that will save bothering over
baggage.”

“But, Polly, what shall we do after we get
there?” Isabel asked, anxiously. “I’m afraid I
don’t quite understand. Are we going to camp
out?”

“We’re going to do just what seems best to us
after we arrive,” said Polly cheerfully. “The
boys had a yacht club, I know, and if they had
one we can have one. I want to go ever so much,
and I want you girls to go too. If grandfather
goes, and Aunty Welcome, nothing can happen
to us, don’t you see it can’t? I suggest that we
organize, or rather reorganize, right now, and
start our first vacation club, and call it, call it—”

“The Squaw Girls of Lost Island,” said Sue
solemnly.

“Oh, Sue, don’t make fun of it,” said Kate reproachfully
as she leaned forward. “I think it
will be splendid, Polly. You can count me in,
and I’ll bring my kodak along, too, and perpetuate
our memory forevermore.”

“Polly,” asked Ruth, suddenly, her brows
meeting in a little frown of perplexity. “May I
say something, please?”

“Yes, ma’am,” replied the chairman,
promptly, reaching for the lemonade. “Try
some of this, though, before you get strenuous.”

“I only want to say that I’m afraid I can’t
go, because—” Ruth hesitated.

“Oh, Ruth, you must go,” cried Polly, anxiously.
She dreaded long explanations. She
knew that Ruth was going to tell right before
the girls that it would cost too much, and that
she felt it her duty to get ready for her kindergarten
training.

Ruth seemed to read her thought as their
glance met across the table, and instinctively she
shook her head, with its close bands of brown
braids, bound around like a laurel crown.

“But we really need you, Ruth,” persisted
Polly. “Kate will be the ship’s husband—”

“The what?” laughed Kate. “This is all news
to me. Isn’t it just like Polly, girls, to arrange
all our destinies, and then placidly break the tidings
to us at the last minute.”

“Miss Calvert says I am a born organizer,”
Polly declared, decidedly, “and how on earth can
one organize if one lets every member have her
own way? Ruth, you must go along. As I
said before Kate will be the ship’s husband. I
notice that no one present has the least idea what
that means. I didn’t myself until yesterday.
When a ship is in port fitting out for a cruise,
the ship’s husband is the person who attends to
all repairs, and fits her out for the new voyage.
I like it better than steward, don’t you? So I
want Kate to manage that part of our club
business. Keep an eye on general supplies, and
profit and loss, and all that sort of thing. You
know what I mean, don’t you, Kate?”

“Aye, aye, sir,” said Kate, saluting with uplifted
finger. “Seems to me, though, if I am to
be a ship’s husband to a yacht club, I’ll be a
Mormon, won’t I?”

As the laughter subsided, Polly went on.

“So if you look after that part of the club,
and I take care of the general business, Ruth
ought to be in charge of the bureau of knowledge.”

“Polly,” exclaimed Sue. “Do talk so we’ll
understand you.”

“I am,” answered Polly, emphatically. “If
we go to the seashore, we shall do something besides
sail boats, and lie in the sand, shan’t we?
We’ll study shells and seaweeds, and swim, and
fish, and all that sort of thing. Ruth is the only
one among us who has studied up and knows
about such things, and she could take charge
of all that part of the vacation, show us
how to make collections, and preserve them, and
so on.” Polly hesitated. Out on the veranda,
behind the honeysuckle vines and creepers, dozed
the Admiral, with Tan at his feet. Polly wondered
whether he had heard the discussion, and
if he had, why he didn’t come to the rescue. He
always did when there was rough weather or any
breakers ahead.

“Would you go, Ruth, if you could?”

Ruth weakened. Polly’s eyes were eloquent,
and her tone persuasive.

“I should be very glad to, Polly,” she replied
quickly. “It’s splendid of you girls to want
me—”

“We couldn’t get along without you,
Grandma,” laughed Ted and Sue together.
“Will you surely go?”

“Well,” promised Ruth. “I will go if I can,
and maybe I won’t be glad to.”

“We need you,” Kate put in, in her steady,
serene fashion. “I’ve never been to the shore.
It must be glorious. The Potomac is dear to us
all, of course, and old Chesapeake seems like an
ocean in itself, but I mean right on the banks of
the real sea—”

“‘Old ocean’s grey and melancholy waste,’”
quoted Polly. “That’s where we’re going, Kitty
Katherine.”

“Neither have I,” Isabel put in reflectively.
“Of course we’ve been to summer resorts, and
stayed at hotels, papa and mamma and the boys
and I, but I mean to go to a stretch of shore
where you couldn’t find a single peanut shell, or
old tin can around. I hope there are great rocks
and plenty of shells, Polly.”

“There will be along the Maine coast,” Ruth
explained. “When you get south of Cape Cod,
you rarely find beautiful shells. I forget the
reason myself, but it is something about the tidal
currents. Between Cape Cod and Cape May,
the shells are more common, and there are not so
many washed up along the shore.”

“Didn’t I tell you that Grandma’s knowledge
would be valuable,” Polly cried, triumphantly.
“Every time we get stranded on any point of information,
we can appeal to our Bureau, and find
out the facts. Crullers, dear, you take the last
jumble. We’ll make you the cook’s assistant,
and you shall eat until your eyelashes have to be
done up in curl papers, and your finger nails
crack.”

Crullers smiled at the prospect, as she adjusted
her wide brimmed, dark blue sailor hat, with her
class pin fastened to the band in front.

“I am willing to help any way I can, if I may
go with you,” she said.

“How much do you figure it will cost each of
us, Polly?” asked Kate, practically. “As ship’s
husband, I have a right to know.”

“Only what we eat and possibly, repairs on the
boats,” answered Polly. “Grandfather says he
will take us up to Portland by sea, and we are to
be his guests. From there we go by train to
Eastport, the nearest village, and then to the
island some way. You figure out how much it
will cost to feed us all per week for eight weeks,
and leave a margin on fish and canned goods.
We can catch the fish when we get there, and
grandfather says he will ship a box of canned
goods up from New York.”

“I think the Admiral is too kind to us,” protested
Ruth, but Polly frowned at her.

“Isn’t it my plan?” she asked. “If I am to be
commodore of a yacht club, I must look after
things, mustn’t I? Talk it over at home, now,
and meet here again Tuesday, if you all can.
We want to leave within two weeks, and less, if
possible.”

“I say the end of next week,” said Kate, judiciously.
“It can be done, Polly.”

“And don’t forget to bring along the chafing
dish,” added Sue.

Polly walked down with them to the wide entrance
gates, where Aunty Welcome waited, with
a bouquet of fresh cut roses for each girl.

Up on the veranda the Admiral surveyed the
scene with a good deal of satisfaction.

“They make me think of a lot of butterflies,
Tan,” he told the old setter. “Or flowers, Tan,
that’s the best simile, a garden of girls. It keeps
the heart young just to listen to their laughter,
old fellow.”

Tan beat his tail on the floor gently to show
he had caught the sentiment, and approved, and
the Admiral’s face still wore a smile of pleasure
when Polly came up and dropped into the chair
beside him.

“How’s she bearing on her course, matey?” he
asked.

“Handsomely, sir, handsomely,” laughed
Polly. “I am sure they’ll all go. I wonder if
they can sail boats.”

“Best find out before you start them off for a
yacht club,” advised her grandfather. “Don’t
ship any crew on false premises. You let them
know what is ahead of them before they sign
articles, or you’ll have foul weather as sure as
you’re afloat.”

“That may be right, grandfather, dearest,
when you’re really shipping sailors, but when
you’re only taking a lot of land lubbers, you have
to explain things to them by degrees, or they’ll
run away.”

“And how about yourself?” The Admiral
reached down, and pulled at the long, brown
curls that were tied loosely at the nape of his
shipmate’s neck. “Does the commodore of the
yacht club know the difference between a skip
jack and a cat boat?”

“Maybe she doesn’t now,” responded the commodore
stoutly, “but she will. Just you wait,
and see. And anyway,” she added in a softer
tone, with one of her quick side glances of coaxing
merriment, “if she doesn’t, she’ll have her
consort handy, right over on the hotel veranda.”

CHAPTER IV

FITTING OUT

The following week was filled with what
Aunty Welcome called “doings and makings.”
Every day found some of the girls at Glenwood,
or Polly making diplomatic visits around
to the various families, winning over fathers and
mothers to the project. And she did not go unprepared,
nor unarmed. Not Polly. Whenever
Polly took up a new plan in earnest, she
went at it thoroughly, and gave it a complete
overhauling before she accepted it herself. Mrs.
Lee was the hardest of the mothers to win over,
perhaps because Isabel herself viewed Lost
Island rather doubtfully.

“Do you think it is quite safe, Polly?” asked
Mrs. Lee for the twentieth time, as Polly sat beside
her on the long, cool veranda at the Lee
home. “Isabel cannot swim a stroke, and I am
half afraid to trust you girls around the sea.
Does the Admiral really approve?”

“Yes, indeed, he does, Mrs. Lee. He says he
cannot think of any better way for us girls to
spend vacation after the winter at the Hall. It
will mean the sea air, and bathing, and plenty
of exercise. I think Isabel really needs a
change. She took her mathematics quite hard
this year.”

Mrs. Lee smiled at the flushed, eager face
bending towards her. Twenty years back, when
she had been a girl like Polly, she could remember
just such an eager, happy face at Glenwood,
the Admiral’s only boy, Phil, Polly’s father.
Even with four sisters to spoil him, he had remained
the same frank, chivalrous character all
his life.

“Polly, you’re a splendid pleader,” she said.
“I suppose I shall have to let Isabel go. Shall
you go by rail or steamer?”

“By steamer, grandfather says. To New
York, then to Boston, and then up to Maine.
We will have to take it in sections. And Aunty
Welcome is going with us, and grandfather
too.”

“Are you certain this island is suitable for you
to live on? Perhaps there is only a boathouse
there.”

“We’ll just have to wait and find out,” said
Polly, hopefully.

“Have you figured out the cost at all?”

“Oh, it won’t be much over two dollars a week
for each of us, Kate says. Lots of people have
house parties, you know, so grandfather says
this is to be my yacht club party. As soon as we
get there, we will organize properly, and see
what the place is like. Isn’t it comical,” went on
Polly, with one of her swift characteristic
swerves in the conversation, “every one of the
girls, Mrs. Lee, has gone at the plan in her own
way! Ruth is designing our yachting suits.
What do you think they are? Dark blue duck,
with middy blouses, and big white collars with
blue anchors on the corners; and for best, white
duck suits with dark blue collars. We’re going
to take two kinds of hats with us: big, rough
straw sun hats to wear on the beach, and white
duck hats for yachting, with turned down brims.
Isn’t that a good idea? Ruth’s aunt is a
dressmaker, and offered to do all the cutting
and fitting for us, and Kate can run a sewing
machine, so there we are. I tell you, this commonwealth
plan is a splendid one when it comes
to saving money.”

Mrs. Lee joined in her laughter, and asked
about how much luggage they were going to
carry.

“No trunks at all,” answered Polly. “I think
we can manage with suitcases. Two of the
Seniors we know at Calvert Hall did Belgium
and Holland last year with suitcases. It saves
a lot of bother if you have to change cars, or
boats, as we will. Ruth says she doesn’t care
what she wears. She’s going to have morning
classes for the rest of us, on shells, and fishes, and
mermaids, and all that sort of thing, and Kate
has her kodak, and we’re going to develop our
own snapshots.”

“Well, I suppose Isabel will have to go, but I
shall add as my contribution to the outfit—life
preservers and water wings—just to be sure you
will be safe.”

“Water wings,” thought Polly all the way
home. “I wonder what those are. I’ll ask
Ruth.”

Sue came down to Glenwood that afternoon,
and the two sat on the box couch up in Polly’s
room, a “Ways and Means Committee of two,”
so the Admiral said.

“Do you know, Polly Page,” said Sue, with
emphasis, “here we are planning to start a yacht
club, and I never was even on a sail boat in all
my life. Ted has been, though. She says she
knows how to sail a ‘cat,’ because her brother
Bob had one at Lake Quinnebaug last year, and
she watched him.”

Polly looked at her meditatively.

“What’s a ‘cat’?”

“A boat. Ted says it’s a boat built as near
like a box as it can be, and it won’t sink. I guess
even if it happened to turn turtle, you could
climb up on the outside, and sit there till things
cleared up a bit.”

Polly broke into one of her quick peals of merriment.

“We’d stick like postage stamps, wouldn’t we,
in a good rolling sea on the outside of a boat like
that. I want a thin one, Sue, one that just clips
through the water. The trouble is that most
girls are as afraid of the water as cats. Yes,
they are. Why, even Ted is afraid! She saw
her brother sail a boat, but what does she know
about it herself. We girls won’t have any boys
around to sail our boats for us. We’re going to
learn how to manage our own craft, and it will
do us good too. I had a letter from Aunt Milly
again. She says there are five good sail boats
up at Eagle Bay that the boys left in charge of
the Captain, and they won’t need much overhauling
this year because Uncle Thurlow had
them all repainted and caulked last spring.”

“Where do they stick the cork?” asked Sue, interestedly.

“Goose, caulk the seams, I mean, put a kind
of wadding or interlining between the seams in
the hull. And she says if we should need any
more boats, the Captain has several at his landing
of the same build, and uncle left word with
him to take care of us. I don’t know whether
we had better sail in pairs, or each have her own
boat.”

“Oh, can’t I sail with you, Polly?”

“You would do better with Kate, and let me
have Crullers.”

“She can’t sail one bit.”

“No, but she’d make lovely ballast.”

“Isabel says we must have club colors,” Sue
exclaimed, with one of her mental somersaults.
“She wants pale pink and green.”

“Too much like shrimp salad,” said Polly
gravely. “We want something distinctive, and
yet simple, that will stand sea and sunshine.
Let’s see, sea and sunshine, blue and gold. A
golden sun on a field of blue for a pennant, and
for club colors, blue and gold. How would that
do?”

“I like that,” assented Sue. “Can I make
them up, Polly? Let me take care of the colors.
I haven’t anything to do for the club specially
as yet. Ted’s making up lists of rare shells and
says she’ll bring the marshmallows.”

“Marshmallows?” laughed Polly. “What
are they for?”

“To toast over a driftwood fire, nights on the
beach. Ted says they’ll come in very handy,
when we’re all gathered around telling stories.
You take a long stick, put a hatpin through one
end, stick a marshmallow on the end of the hatpin,
and toast it. It’s just like broiled whipped
cream.”

“Oh, I know,” Polly leaned her chin on her
palms, and spoke confidentially, “we’re going to
have a dandy time, know it, Sue? Ruth has her
guitar, you, Ted, and I have mandolins, and
we’ll keep up a glee club. The dear old book of
class songs went into my suitcase first thing.
You just ought to see Aunty Welcome’s outfit.
She has a medicine chest that must go even if
everything else gets left behind. Arnica, and
quinine, and ginger, and bandages. Oh, I don’t
know what she isn’t taking along. She says
she’s prepared for any emergency except the end
of the world, and if that happens, she’ll just fold
her hands together, and hope for the best.”

“Maybe it will all come in handy. Have you
thought about a swimming suit?”

Polly nodded.

“Gray flannel,” she replied enigmatically.
“Four yards double width. Short sleeves, low
neck, skirt and waist joined together, and bloomers.
All trimmed up cute with wash turkey red
braid. I bought a pattern, and Aunty Welcome
and I made it our own selves. She says it’s too
pretty to get all wet. Ruth made hers too from
my pattern. Why don’t you buy the kind of
flannel you want, and let her cut it out for you,
and we’ll all help.”

“Why not hold a sewing bee, and get everything
all done up at once?” Sue’s eyes sparkled
at the notion. “I’ll tell the rest, and we’ll all
come over to-morrow.”

“Go ahead,” agreed Polly. “I don’t care, so
long as we get all through this week. It won’t
be any fun finding ourselves in the middle of
July, with only a month and a half for vacation.”

So the following day, the entire delegation
waited upon its commodore, with raw materials
for bathing suits and caps. Polly turned the
big upper spare chamber into a sewing-room,
and with Kate at the helm, they started out in
earnest. Ruth cut and fitted, under Kate’s directions,
and Kate ran the sewing machine. At
about four o’clock they finished, and on the bed
lay the rest of the suits completed.

“That’s what I call getting swift results from
good intentions,” said Kate, with a sigh of relief.
“Polly, can’t we have some jumbles?”

“Aunty’s fixing something, but I don’t know
what it is, and I wouldn’t dare disturb her till it’s
all ready,” answered Polly. “Come down into
the library, and let’s look at the time-tables
again.”

There was no one in sight, as they trooped
down the broad staircase, and the library was
shady and still. They pored over time-tables of
steamers and connecting trains for a while, and,
as Polly said, made the trip twenty times before
they had started.

“But we really must be serious, and look after
all these points,” she added. “We’ve had fun
all winter with the Hungry Six. This club has
a real reason for its existence, a purpose, and we
must make it worth while. It always seems to
me as if girls could do so much better if they
would hold hands, and work in unison—”

“Co-operate,” suggested Ruth.

“Yes, that’s just the right word,” Polly
agreed, earnestly. “Boys always co-operate in
their clubs. They seem to have the real feeling
of fellowship. You know what I mean, Kate?
Where all work together for the honor and glory
of the whole, not just for yourself as a member.”

“Fraulein called it the
esprit de corps
,” said
Ruth. “It means the spirit of the body, or
brotherliness.”

“Sisterliness, too,” Polly added. “But it
means more than that. It stands for trueness to
one another, and pride in the honor of the club,
don’t you know. You don’t do anything wrong,
and you don’t let any other member do anything
wrong, if you can keep them out of it, for the
honor of the club. Anyway, it’s what we girls
want in our club, and plenty of it. Don’t you
all think so?”

Six heads nodded emphatically.

“I think we should draw up a set of ironclad
rules, and sign them,” said Ted, solemnly.
“Polly, I’ll prick my finger if you say so, and
sign with real red ink.”

“You’d better not make fun of this, Ted,” protested
Sue. “Polly’s commodore, and you’ll
find yourself blithely walking the plank, if you
aren’t good.”

“Indeed, she won’t,” said Polly. “I know
you’ll all stand by me. If you weren’t the
truest, dearest lot of girls I ever heard of, I
wouldn’t go to Lost Island at all.”

“Here too, Polly,” echoed Kate, with her quick
smile.

“Three cheers for Commodore Polly!” Ted
stepped up on a chair, and waved a newspaper
as the girls rose, and joined her.

Just at this point the heavy portìeres parted,
and Welcome’s turbaned head appeared in the
doorway.

“For de mercy’s sake, ain’t you ’shamed to
make sech a hullabaloo, and de Admiral entertainin’
company.”

“Who is here. Aunty?” asked Polly,
cautiously.

“Senator Yates,” said Welcome. “He dun
traveled clar down from de Capitol on purpose,
and he’s talking business. Doan’t you let me
hyar any sech commotion again. Shoutin’ like
you all’d found a teehee’s nest. What you
s’pose my mammy’d done to me if I’d made a
shoutin’ noise like dat when she had company
folks ’round? If I hyar any more of it, you
can’t have any banana fritters and whipped
cream. No, sah, not one. Sound like a pack
ob geese and guiney hens, all tied in a bag.”

“Oh, please, Aunty, we’ll be good.”

Seven pairs of young arms clasped themselves
around the tall old figure, their owners promising
absolute quiet, if only the banana fritters
would be forthcoming, and Welcome was holding
out with dignity, when all at once the Admiral
strolled along the hall from the garden,
and with him was Senator Yates.

“My,” whispered Crullers, as she caught sight
of them. “I never saw so many titles, Polly, as
you have here in Virginia. Seems as if every
one of you girls has a major or a senator or a
general in the family.”

“So dey have,” said Welcome, proudly.
“Virginia’s wah dey makes ’em, chile. I
wouldn’t give two cents for a gentlemun who
couldn’t wear some kind ob a uniform, ’deed I
wouldn’t. I wouldn’t take any stock in his pretensions
at all.”

The Senator was taller than the Admiral, and
smooth-shaven. He was one of the youngest
men in the Senate, and was a power in the Old
Dominion. Polly had seen him at Glenwood
often, but to the other girls he was a stranger.

“I trust we are not intruding, young ladies,”
said the Admiral pleasantly, as they entered the
library. “This is a business meeting, isn’t it,
Polly? Senator Yates wishes to address the
club on a matter of interest to you all.”

The Senator’s eyes twinkled, as Polly sedately
performed her duty as hostess, and presented
him to the girls in turn.

“I can tell you about it briefly,” he said.
“The Admiral understands the details fully, and
will explain them to you later. Mrs. Yates and
myself are greatly interested in your summer
project. We believe in outdoor sports for girls
and boys, and we’d like to see our young girls as
healthy and rosy as wind and sun and fresh air
can make them. It happens that we are immensely
fond of yachting ourselves, although
ours is only a steam yacht, and we miss half the
fun you will have with sailing craft. At all
events, this is the reason for my errand to Glenwood
to-day. Saturday we sail on a short cruise
up to Nova Scotia, and around the coast to the
mouth of the St. Lawrence. If you can get
ready in time, and would care to be our guests
as far as Lost Island, Mrs. Yates and myself
would be delighted to have you and the Admiral.
It is only a family party, Mrs. Yates, Marbury,
and myself. As she told you on Commencement
Day, Mrs. Yates was a Calvert Hall girl,
not so many years ago but what she is interested
in the old school still, and she feels in extending
this invitation to you, that it will be a mutual effort
at reviving the school spirit. What do you
think of the plan, Miss Polly?”

Polly’s dark eyes were a-shine with surprise
and quick, radiant happiness. She almost
caught her breath at the idea.

“I—I think it’s just splendid, Senator Yates,”
she cried. “I don’t know how we girls can ever
thank you for your kindness.”

“Shan’t we be too much trouble?” asked Ruth,
anxiously.

“Not one bit of trouble,” replied the Senator
heartily. “Seven girls in all, did you say, Miss
Polly?”

“Yes, sir, seven in all.”

“And do you think you can get ready by Saturday?
Only two days more.”

The girls looked at one another, a little perplexed
at the brief notice, but Polly waived all
doubts aside.

“We will be ready,” she said, positively. “We
must.”

“I will send the motor boat up the river after
you at seven in the morning,” continued the Senator.
“The
Hippocampus
weighs anchor at
eight. You had better make your arrangements
to meet here at Glenwood, and go aboard at the
Admiral’s landing. It will save time. And I
am very, very glad that I am able to take back
the news of your acceptance to Mrs. Yates.”

When they were alone once more, Polly sank
down in a Morris chair, and smiled blissfully.

“Girls, have you ever seen the
Hippocampus
?”
she asked.

“It’s a steam yacht, isn’t it?” said Sue, while
the rest listened eagerly.

“It’s a dream afloat,” said Polly, solemnly.
“All shining brass, with a white hull, and silk
curtains—silk curtains at the cabin windows,
children—and tufted leather walls, and—”

Ted perched herself on the window-seat, and
sang softly, with a comical lisp,

“I saw a ship a-sailing, a-sailing on the sea,

And it was filled with pretty things, for Polly and for me.

There were raisins in the cabin, sugar kisses in the hold,

The sails were made of silk, and the masts were made of gold.”

“Goose,” exclaimed Polly, tossing a sofa pillow
at the scoffer. “Wait until you see it.”

“There’s one thing certain,” said Ruth, “we
shall appreciate our own little flotilla all the
more, when we have seen this queen of the seas.
I think we should send Mrs. Yates a united vote
of thanks.”

“I’ll do it,” Polly declared, reaching for note
paper at once. “I’ll do it now.”

Aunty Welcome put her head in at the door.

“Anybody hyar want banana fritters, an’
whipped cream?”

The meeting was broken up instantly, and the
girls followed Welcome out to the arbor where
the feast was spread. But Polly lingered until
she had written the note of thanks to Mrs. Yates,
and when it was completed she went to find the
Admiral and get his opinion.

“Is that right, grandfather?” she asked, with
one arm around his shoulders, as she knelt beside
him at his desk.

“Seems to be all shipshape,” answered the Admiral,
heartily. He smoothed Polly’s head
tenderly. “How is the Naval Board of Special
Inquiry?”

“Eating banana fritters, sir,” whispered
Polly. “We’re going to sail Saturday morning
sure.”

CHAPTER V

ON BOARD THE “HIPPOCAMPUS”

The morning of the sailing came quickly, it
seemed to the little band of voyagers. Polly
was up, and fully dressed by five, making her
final arrangements, and the Admiral was “on
lookout,” as he said, with Aunty Welcome’s
nephew, Stoney, carrying the luggage down
from the house to the boat-landing.

When the girls began to arrive, Polly was
busy pinning and hooking Aunty Welcome’s collar
and belt at the last minute, and it was a labor
of love.

“Don’t squoze me, honey, don’t squoze me a
particle,” cautioned Aunty, puffing over the unusual
exertion. “’Deed, I feel as if I had de
equator twined around me now. Whar’s dat big
palm leaf fan? Stonewall! You, Stonewall
Jackson U. S. Grant Brown, you bring me dat
fan instanter, sah, hyar me?”

Stoney grinned, and slipped off the Admiral’s
steamer trunk with the fan. Stoney was proud
of his name. Aunty had been strictly neutral
during the war, and when Stoney had been
born, she had been his sponsor, and had perpetuated
her neutrality in his name, with a slight
leaning towards the South.

“You had better go ahead with the trunk now,
Stoney,” Polly told him. “Here come the girls.
You go too, Aunty, and that will give you a
chance to rest in the launch a minute.”

“Ain’t you most ready, you’ own self, chile?”

“All ready,” laughed Polly, as she took her
long gray cloak over her arm, and her mandolin
case. “I want to say good-by to Mandy and
the rest.”

So while Stoney and the others trudged ahead
down the path that led to the little landing by
the riverside, Polly ran to the kitchen, and
kissed the black, shiny cheek of old Aunt Mandy,
the housekeeper, and shook Uncle Peter’s hand.

“Keep out of deep water, honey lam’ chile,”
cautioned Mandy, the tears running down her
cheeks fast. “And may de good Lord hol’ you
in de holler of his hand safe from de fury of
tempest, and leviathan, and—and cramps when
you’s in swimmin’.”

“Amen, praise de Lord, oh, mah soul,” added
Uncle Peter, fervently, and Polly went out into
the garden, with her own lashes wet with tears,
for they had been kind to her ever since she
could remember toddling to Mandy after raisins
and sticks of cinnamon.

As Polly left the kitchen, she saw the other
girls coming up the broad walk from the gates,
with suitcases, wraps and parasols, for the morning
was a still, close one, and the latent heat of the
day seemed to lie about the horizon in a golden
haze.

The motor launch was waiting for them when
they reached the landing. A sailor in white
duck, with the name
Hippocampus
in gold letters
on his cap, stood on the little dock, and the
Admiral assisted them on board.

“’Deed, Marse Bob,” Aunty Welcome protested,
as she hesitated to take the step into the
launch. “’Deed, I know I’ll swamp you, I
know it. I don’t trust dat lil toy boat no more’n
I would a tea tray. Nevah see sech a shiny lil
baby boat in mah life. Well, for mercy sakes, if
I ain’t in it all safe.”

And she laughed till Polly warned her she
would surely burst the equator, as she settled
down in the stern of the little launch, and they
left the landing for the open river.

The girls said very little. With flushed
cheeks, and eager, sparkling eyes they were too
much engaged in watching all the new sights
that unfolded as the launch sped along. On one
side were the hills of Virginia, gray green in the
morning light like grass with the dew on it.
Dense patches of wild rice glimmered through
the morning haze to the left. About a mile down
the river lay the
Hippocampus
, spotless and
silent, like a water lily on the river’s surface.
None of the girls had ever been on a steam yacht
before. They watched this one with eager interest
as they drew nearer and nearer to it.
Everything on board was quiet. A gaily striped
awning was spread up forward. The pennon
of the Chesapeake Yacht Club, of which the
Senator was a member, fluttered lightly from the
mast head, in the gentle breeze. As the launch
came alongside, the Senator himself, in white
flannels, appeared on deck, and greeted them
warmly.

“I thought you always had to climb a ladder
of rope, when you went over a ship’s side,”
whispered Sue to Polly, as she saw the neat
gangway of steps that led easily from the launch
to the deck of the yacht. “This is much better,
isn’t it?”

“Indeed it is,” smiled back Polly, holding to
her cap, as the wind blew freshly up the river
from the bay. “Did you notice the figure-head?”

It was turned fairly to them, so they had a
good view of the prow with its figure-head, a
great golden sea-horse, curving proudly up from
the waves.

“But its head looks like a dragon’s instead of
a horse’s. I wonder how they travel through the
water?” asked Ted.

“Just as easily as a jelly fish,” laughed Polly.
“They don’t seem to help themselves at all, just
go along with their heads held up high, as if
they thought they owned the whole ocean. And
they are such tiny things, that it seems comical.
Think if a sea horse and a sea cow were to get
into a quarrel. A sea cow could eat a peck of
sea horses at one gulp, and then ask for some
dessert.” And Polly added on the spur of the
moment:

“Whenever you see

A Manitee,

A Hippocampus said to me.

Be sure and treat,

Her awful sweet,

Or she’ll gobble you up, from head to feet.”

Polly repeated the lines sedately, but her eyes
were brimful of fun, as she stepped from the
launch, and followed Ruth up the brass railed
gangway. The latter had rubber-padded steps
to prevent feet slipping.

It took the united efforts of the Admiral and
two sailors to get Aunty Welcome up that narrow
flight, but they succeeded. Mrs. Yates was
awaiting their coming, forward beneath the awning.

“I am so very, very glad to have you with us,”
she said cordially, as she clasped each girl’s hand
in hers, and smiled at their happy faces. “Both
the Senator and myself feel indebted to you all
for consenting to be our guests as far as Maine.
This is Aunty Welcome, isn’t it?” She turned
to a broad-shouldered lad beside her. “Marbury,
won’t you take Aunty into the cabin and
introduce her to Dido, so that she will feel at
home?”

Marbury obeyed, willingly, for under the
united fire of seven pairs of eyes, he began to feel
somewhat uneasy. In the door of the forward
cabin stood the stewardess, Dido, bowing and
smiling broadly, in her snowy dress of white
linen, with a white cap on her head, and Aunty
Welcome was glad enough to find a kindred
spirit.

A cabin boy carried the suitcases and various
wraps away and the girls seated themselves in the
cosy wicker-chairs under the wide awning, and
tried to think it was not all a dream.

All about them lay the beautiful river, broadening
out as it approached Chesapeake Bay.
To the east the water glittered like quicksilver
under the sun’s rays, and gulls darted back and
forth with graceful, wide spread wings. Sometimes
they rested on the water and rocked lazily
to and fro like wild ducks. Standing on one leg
on a stretch of marshy land, where the wild rice
grew thickly, a sleepy crane watched them weigh
anchor. The yacht hardly made any more effort
about it than the little motor launch had,
and before the girls realized they had started,
they heard the signal bells and felt the gentle
vibration of the engines.

Ruth touched Polly’s hand lightly with her
own, as it lay on the arm of her chair. Her face
was turned seaward, and her chin was uplifted,
as if she were drinking in the delicious air.
There was a faint glow in her cheeks, and a smile
on her lips.

Tony, the cabin boy, came back, and deftly
spread a square of snowy linen on the green
wicker table, then returned, bearing a huge tray
laden with iced chocolate, strawberries served on
crisp lettuce-leaves like eggs in a nest, buttered
waffles, broiled fresh mackerel under a
silver cover, and lyonnaise potatoes.

“The Senator and Admiral will take their
breakfast below together,” Mrs. Yates said. “I
thought perhaps you girls would enjoy it better
on deck, as the view down the river is beautiful
at this hour of the morning. Polly, you may
serve in the Senator’s place, while I pour the
chocolate.”

That was a memorable morning for the girls.
Polly said in her impulsive way:

“Here we had expected to ‘rough it,’ as the
boys say, camp out, and learn how to sail boats,
and do our own cooking on a deserted island,
and just look at this. I declare it’s enough to
spoil us for the island camp. Who would want
to bother over sails and rudders, and jibs and
booms, and things, when you can manage the
whole ship this way, just by touching an electric
button.”

“Where’s the button, Polly?” asked Crullers,
dreamily. “I didn’t see any button.”

“There are a whole row of them up in the pilot
house,” Polly returned. “I saw them as we came
past. But still,” with a wave of loyalty towards
the unknown island and its yacht club, “I think
I would rather have to fight my way against the
waves. It must be glorious to feel like that gull
over there, as if you had wide spread wings and
were flying low before a gale.”

“Just wait till Polly tries it,” laughed Mrs.
Yates. “It sounds so much easier than it really
is. I remember my first yachting experience
when I was your age, Polly. My father bought
a winter bungalow on the Carolina coast, not far
from Charleston, and it was my first winter in a
warm climate. I had three big brothers, and the
dearest possession they owned in common was a
sailboat that they built themselves. I think they
used to call it a knockabout, and the name of it
was the
Say When
.”

“Isn’t that a dear name for a boat?” cried
Polly.

“We went out one day in it, and were running
along with a beam wind on a smooth sea, when
all at once a puff of wind hit us, and before the
boys could start the sail, to jam her down, she
was over on one side, and we all scrambled up
on the planking, to windward, and hung on until
the squall was over, when she righted herself,
but we bailed out over thirty buckets of salt
water.”

“I hope we shan’t have any such accident at
Lost Island,” said Polly. “Won’t a yacht sink,
Mrs. Yates?”

“I cannot answer that positively, but I hardly
think one will. Its canvas and the shape of
the hull too, I believe, usually buoy it up; while
a heavy boat that carries machinery will sink
quickly. By the way, have you thought to bring
any buoys or life preservers?”

“We have some water wings and life preservers
that Mrs. Lee gave us, so we shan’t sink
when we’re learning to swim,” said Sue hopefully.

“And Aunt Milly says there is a life-saving
station only a mile and a half up the beach, and
they have a coast-guard service that passes
within hail of us through the night. I think
we’ll be safe.”

Mrs. Yates smiled at Polly’s assured tone.

“I should feel pretty confident myself with
such protection close by,” she said. “Still it is
just as well for you to take precautions yourself,
in case of sudden danger. Go down to the station
as soon as you conveniently can, after you
are settled, and watch them at their drill.”

“You mean in giving first aid to the injured?”
Ruth asked.

“Yes, and in learning how to behave in case
of a boat’s capsizing, or if one of you should fall
overboard. You want to know how to act to
help yourselves. How many in the club can
swim?”

Polly glanced around and took stock of her
crew.

“Ted and Kate and myself.”

“I’ve only tried swimming in fresh water,”
said Ted.

“You will find salt water easier. It is buoyant,
and invigorating. But don’t be venturesome
or foolhardy in strange waters. Have you
any idea of taking up a course of summer
study?”

“Oh, yes,” cried Ruth. “Every morning we
shall have regular class work, and I am teacher.
I brought several books with me, Mrs. Yates, but
do you know, they all seem so far advanced for
beginners. I mean, they take it for granted that
the reader knows all about shell life, and sea
flora, and they talk about it all so scientifically,
arranging them in groups, and using the Latin
names. I wish I could find a book telling the
intimate family side of beach life. I’d like to
be on real friendly terms with every starfish
and crab I meet, not just have a bowing acquaintance,
and say, ‘Ah, good morning, Monsieur
Crustacean, are you a king crab, or a hermit?’”

Everyone laughed, even Marbury, who had
come on deck after breakfasting below with his
father and the Admiral. The girls had finished
also, and Mrs. Yates suggested that Marbury
show them over the yacht.

“Come back to me when you have seen everything
you care to,” she told them before they left
her, “and I will show you my sea-going library
and my collection of ocean treasures. I started
them both years ago, when Marbury was a baby,
and we took our first ocean voyage. It may help
you in forming collections of your own, and in
trying to classify them.”

Marbury and Polly led the way over the yacht.
It was as large as the revenue cutter they met
coming up the bay, and quite as smart in its
white and gold hull, and clean-cut smoke-stack
and rigging, outlined against the cloudless sky.
The forward cabin was the Senator’s special domain.
Walls, lockers, and chairs all were covered
with buff leather, and it was fitted with a
broad center table, and desk, with wall brackets
supporting cabinets containing all manner of
ocean curios. The dining-room was next to it,
although there was a smaller one below used for
breakfast by the Senator. The main cabin
was a delight to the girls. Ten staterooms
opened off it, and they were not like the little,
narrow “cubby-holes” generally found on steamers.
Daintily furnished little rooms, with lounging
chairs and couches of willow, covered with
apple green chintz sprayed with pink blossoms.
Curtains of the same were looped back from the
white berths. Four of these rooms were given
up to the girls, and they “paired off” accordingly.
Polly and Crullers took one, Sue and
Ted another, Isabel and Ruth a third, and Kate
was all alone in the fourth, as befitted the
chaperon of the party.

“Polly,” asked Mrs. Yates, after dinner that
evening, “didn’t I notice a mandolin with your
luggage?”

“Yes’m,” answered Polly, who in spite of her
“nearly fifteen” years, still clung to the old-fashioned
mode of speaking to a person older than
herself. “We girls have a glee club of our own.
Sue, and Ted, and Ruth, and myself. Ruth
plays the guitar, and the rest of us mandolins. I
thought it would be fun to take them along and
play nights when we felt lonely.”

“I hope you will feel lonely to-morrow night
then,” Mrs. Yates replied, smiling. “I won’t
ask you to play to-night, for you must be tired,
but to-morrow evening we will have a concert.
I dearly love the sound of music on the water,
and so does the Senator. We have a piano on
board, you know, and Marbury has his banjo,
although I tell him it always makes me think of
the old riddle ‘what makes more noise than a
pig going under a gate?’ You know the answer.”

The girls laughed, all except Crullers, who
puzzled and pondered over the riddle all the rest
of the evening. Crullers always pondered over
anything she could not see through. That night,
when they had retired to their berths, and only
the light from the cabin shone in the stateroom
over the doorway, Polly heard a sleepy voice
across the room say,

“Polly, I know. Two pigs!”

Polly sat upright in bed, and threw a pillow
with telling force at the figure in the other berth,
but there was only a stifled giggle in answer, and
she cuddled down under the blanket, and fell
asleep.

CHAPTER VI

THREE DAYS AT SEA

The three days out at sea passed all too
quickly. The weather kept clear and cool up the
coast, and the nights were perfect. In spite of
Crullers’ unwillingness to rise early, the other
girls were on deck at sunrise the first morning,
and were rewarded by an invitation to the bridge
with the Captain and Senator Yates. Polly
made friends with the Captain at once.

“His name is Captain Sandy Saunders,” she
told the girls. “And he sailed first of all from
the Hebrides, he told me, when he was a bit of
a laddie.”

As Kate had remarked teasingly, Polly had a
terrible weakness towards panhandle names, just
the same as Aunty Welcome, and this was really
a very interesting Captain.

“He looks quite a good deal like a moon fish,”
said Ruth, thoughtfully, the first time she had
seen him. “They are found in West Indian
waters, girls, and look just like decapitated
pirates, round, and pink-faced, with little round
mouths and round eyes, and a tuft of fin like
hair on top.”

“I don’t think that is one bit complimentary,
Ruth,” Polly had declared, indignantly. “My
captain doesn’t look like a decapitated pirate.”

And yet the next time she glanced up at the
pilot house, and saw the captain standing beside
the wheelsman, she had to smile. He wore a
blue coat, with brass buttons, tight to his neck,
and a high white collar, and white duck trousers,
with a stripe up the sides. And his face was
round, and smooth shaven, and very sunburned,
with round eyes, so blue that they seemed like
glass marbles. But before that first day was
over, Polly and he were firm friends and shipmates.

The Admiral did not rise until six o’clock. As
he had remarked the night before, he had watched
the sun rise from nearly every body of salt water
on the globe, and now he was convinced that it
could get up without his help, and he needed
his beauty sleep badly.

To the girls, it was a wonderful sight, that
first sunrise. The clouds turned to flakes of
radiant gold and rose and violet, shot through
and through with silver lights. When the sun
rose over the horizon line, every wavelet caught
its glory in miniature, and the whole wide sea
looked like “gloryland,” as Aunty Welcome
said. Isabel leaned over the rail at the stern,
looking out at the widening wake of pearly foam,
that glittered and sparkled like countless diamonds
in the sunshine.

“I wonder whether that isn’t what makes the
pink tint inside sea shells,” she said musingly to
Kate. “Maybe they caught some of the color
and imprisoned it.”

Polly came hurrying along deck, her cheeks
aglow, her cap on the back of her head, and
hands deep in her reefer pockets, for the early
mornings were cool.

“Girls, there’s a school of porpoises moving
off shore,” she called, excitedly. “You can see
them around the prow plainly.”

They hurried after her, and reached the extreme
point of the prow, beyond the neat coils
of rope and the capstan.

Polly laughed over the latter.

“I used to call that the captain,” she said.
“There was a song grandfather sang to me,
something about ‘We’ll heave the capstan round,
my boys,’ and I always said, ‘We’ll heave the
captain round, my boys.’ I remember he told
me such things never happened on well-regulated
ships.”

“Well, forevermore, girls,” exclaimed Sue, as
she leaned over the prow, until she could have
reached down and touched the gilded crest of the

Hippocampus
itself. “There are a lot down
there, and they’re going as fast as we are!”

It was strange to watch them. There seemed
to be a dozen or more, about three or four feet
long, and as they played and frolicked in the
leaping spray from the cutwater, they would roll
and toss and turn half over like kittens. Underneath,
their bodies were a deep shell-pink, and
the rest was brownish-green.

While they were watching them, Marbury
came along deck holding something in his hand.

“One of the sailors found it back there on the
aft deck while he was swabbing it just now,” he
called. “It’s a flying fish.”

The girls examined it with eager interest, pulling
out the delicate, bat-like wings that folded
close to its sides, just like a junk boat’s sails, as
Polly said. Then they had the fun of letting it
go over the side of the boat, and it sank out of
sight.

“But it’s half dead now,” said Marbury.
“There’s not much use in putting it back.”

“Yes, there is,” answered Polly, cheerfully.
“It will have the fun of telling all the other fish
its wonderful adventure, and will die happy. I
can see a ridge of land way off there to the west,
can’t you?”

“Barnegat, and the Jersey coast, I think,”
Marbury told her. “There’s bully yachting all
along there, on account of the inlets. I camped
out near Cape May one summer with a crowd
of boys from the naval ‘Prep.,’ and we had fine
fishing and sailing. The beaches are long and
shallow. Up in Maine you’ll find them short
with plenty of rocks.”

“Short around where the rocks are, you mean,”
said Ruth. “There are long, flat reaches of
sand up there, too.”

“Anyway, we like rocks,” put in Polly, comfortably.
“I don’t think a long, shallow beach
is good for yachting. Where are you at low
tide? Up in the sand somewhere. And where
are you at high tide? Swamped.”

Marbury laughed at her, heartily. He was a
tall, stalwart naval cadet of nineteen, with the
Senator’s own merry eyes and quick gift of understanding.

“That makes me think of one of father’s
stories,” he said. “Uncle Joe, an old darkey
down home, used to say he’d a heap rather be
killed on land than on water, ‘’case if dey’s an
accident on land, why, dar you is, and if dey’s a
blow-up in de middle ob de ocean, whar is
you?’”

“I don’t care,” persisted Polly, even while she
laughed at the story with the others. “Most
people are afraid of rocks when they’re boating,
but rocks won’t hurt you if you know how to
manage them. I’d rather have rocks along shore
with some water around them, deep enough to
let a three-foot draft boat slip in, than half a mile
of wet sand to climb over after you’ve anchored.”

“You won’t get any three-foot draft on a catboat
unless your centerboard’s down,” Ted said.
“I know because I’ve heard my brothers tell
about theirs. It hasn’t any more keel than a
washbowl. I like a ‘cat’ myself, because you jam
her down against the wind, and lie back and rest.
In a yawl or knockabout, you have to change
around, and shift about, and fuss every time you
tack. I don’t think that’s any fun.”

Polly’s brown eyes sparkled, and she stuck her
hands deep in her reefer pockets, and looked out
at the wide ocean as if she wanted to clasp hands
with it.

“I do,” she said. “I’d like to have a boat that
was nearly all sail, and just me sitting on a
plank. I love to feel the wind in my face, and
reach out to it. A catboat’s a regular tub.”

“No, it isn’t, Polly, truly,” Ted protested.
“There’s a picture in my Tennyson of the passing
of Arthur, and the three queens came after
him in a catboat. You can tell it is just a catboat
by looking at it.”

Everyone laughed, but Ted stood her ground
sturdily.

“Not a catboat, goose,” explained Ruth, merrily.
“It must have been a ‘shallop flitting,
silken sailed, skimming down to Camelot.’”

“There,” cried Sue. “I’ve been wanting a
boat all along, that would be different from those
the other girls sail, and now I have it. My boat
shall be the only unique one in the yacht club.
I shall get me a shallop.”

They trooped in to breakfast with rosy cheeks
and laughing lips. Mrs. Yates was awaiting
them. The Admiral and she were talking over
old Virginia days, and the girls were glad to
listen to some of those tales of long ago, while
they partook of deliciously-fried scallops, crisp
bacon on toast triangles, corn fritters, and fried
sweet potatoes, served as only the Senator’s plantation
cook could serve them.

After breakfast, Ruth said that Kate and she
were going into the cabin to study Mrs. Yates’s
sea library and collections.

“We’ll all go,” proclaimed Polly at once. “It
will never do to let these two know so much more
than the rest of us.”

So all the forenoon they pored over the pressed
seaweed folios, excepting the hour for morning
service, when the Senator called all hands into
the cabin and read the dear, familiar words they
all loved.

After dinner they went back to the collections
and the library, and this time Mrs. Yates herself
joined them, and explained many things
they did not know about. Besides the seaweed
folios, there were glass cases hanging against
the walls, containing shells and all manner of
sea curiosities. Ruth was in her element. With
her eyeglasses clipped firmly in place on her
nose, she traced the pedigree of the rarest specimens,
and told the other girls all about sea
urchins, Japanese trumpet shells, chambered
nautili, and jellyfish, that Mrs. Yates called
the phosphorescent mushrooms of the sea.

“Just wait till we reach our island,” Ruth told
the rest. “Every morning early I shall hunt
along the beach and in the enchanted gardens
the tide leaves in the rock hollows, and I shall
get results.”

“What sort of shells are those, Ruth?” asked
Crullers, in her slow sleepy way. “I don’t remember
hearing about them.”

“Results, Crullers, results,” repeated Ruth,
patiently, but forcibly. “The effects of a cause.
The shells and things left by the tide. Then
after we have classified, and studied them, we’ll
arrange them for preservation. Which tint
would the sea weed look best against, Polly? I
brought brown cards and gray and green, for
mounting.”

“Brown,” Polly told her, “biscuit brown.
Don’t you know what beautiful colors the seaweed
dries to, purples, and lavenders, and deep
maroons, and woodsy browns. Save your green
boards for ferns, and shore flowers, and your
gray ones for the mosses and lichens.”

“And, by the way, Polly,” added Mrs. Yates,
“here is a hint that may prove useful. Don’t
use any glue or mucilage to fasten your seaweed
or other vegetation to the boards. Marbury has
some fine wire brads that answer the purpose
admirably. They are sharp and flexible, and
nearly invisible after they are fastened to the
boards, and your specimens are held securely in
place.”

“That’s a splendid idea, Mrs. Yates,” cried
Kate and Polly in one breath. “We wondered
how we could fasten them.”

“What is the best way to preserve shells, Mrs.
Yates?” asked Ruth, eagerly, leaning her chin
on her two palms, and bending forward.

“Well, that depends on the size. Your large
ones must be packed separately—”

“But we shan’t find very large ones along our
coast, shall we?”

“Indeed, you will, especially along the Maine
shore. Even the large periwinkles, that are pink
and brown mottled, are too large to put in bottles.
You will find as I did, that the easiest and
simplest way to dispose of shells is to make
things out of them during the summer. It
passes the time, and is very enjoyable. Have
you seen the portìere that hangs between my
stateroom and Marbury’s? It is made entirely
of shells, strung on silken cords. Marbury collected
the shells and I made it one summer when
we took a cottage near Greenwich, Conn. There
is a dearth of dainty shells along the Long Island
Sound shore, but these are very pretty, and are so
soft that you can pierce them easily with a needle.
I don’t remember their name, but Marbury used
to call them in fun, Neptune’s finger-nails.”

The girls wanted to see the portìere at once,
and they followed Mrs. Yates along the cabin
to her own special quarters, a cool, commodious
stateroom that was her very own, as Polly said.
Next to it on one side slept Marbury, and on
the other was the Senator’s apartment. The portìere
of shells was exquisite, the girls agreed.
The shells were hardly larger than finger-nails,
in fact, and as delicate, and translucent as sea
foam. Some were palest pink, and others clear
amber, and still others were a faint pearl, or
vivid green.

“It makes me think of those funny wind harps
that the Chinese use to scare away evil spirits,”
said Kate. “Listen how the shells tinkle when
the wind sways them to and fro. I’d love to
carry one back to Miss Calvert, girls, as our
summer gift.”

“We’ll do it,” said Polly at once, “if there are
any of these shells at Lost Island. Mrs. Yates,
what is this stretched over your walls, please?”

“Just everyday fish net,” answered Mrs. Yates,
smiling as Polly and the rest examined the
tightly stretched, dark green net that covered
the stateroom walls, taut and snug. “It was
Marbury’s idea. He told me the boys at the
naval academy used it on their walls when they
camped out, to hang specimens on, or any odds
and ends. I wanted something that would not
deface the woodwork, and Marbury put it up
for me. It is very handy to slip pictures in, or
ornaments of any kind.”

“It would make good window curtains too,”
said Kate. “Perhaps we may be able to get
some from the fishermen, Polly. It would come
in handy somewhere, and if we didn’t do anything
else with it we might even use it to catch
fish in.”

The next day Marbury showed them his lines
and fishing tackle, and gave them general hints
on the gentle art of landing cod and mackerel
and other fish.

“And what about lobsters?” asked Crullers.
“I like lobster all cooked up in cream the way
Polly makes it in the chafing dish. How can we
catch them?”

“Here you are, Crullers,” called Ruth, from
the other end of the cabin. “You sit down here,
and read all about it. I have just finished, and
I feel as though I could set any lobster pot along
the coast, now.”

That evening was the last they were to spend
on the yacht. It was Monday night, and the
captain promised that if all went well they should
waken in harbor the following morning. So
after dinner they gathered in the cabin, and Mrs.
Yates played for them on the piano, while out
in the moonlight the Admiral paced the deck with
the Senator, and put his head inside the door every
now and then to suggest some favorite.

“Isn’t it queer, Polly?” Isabel said softly, as
she watched them, the Senator in his white flannels
and Mrs. Yates all in white too, with her
soft, fair hair worn in a single coronet braid
about her head. “Isn’t it queer that the nicest
people are always the simplest in their ways,
and the most unaffected. It’s only the others—”

“The nobodies,” assented Polly, quickly, nodding
her head. “I know just what you mean.
They act as if they had swallowed a pound of
starch. Grandfather told me that Mrs. Yates
was the only daughter of the old Arnold family,
in Washington. He said he remembered walking
one day along the street, and meeting three
colored nurses in a solemn procession. There was
one to carry a parasol over the oldest one, and
another to carry the baby’s wraps, and finally
the baby herself in the arms of the chief mammy.
Just think of it. And that was Mrs. Yates when
she was Peggie Arnold.”

“Mrs. Yates,” came the Admiral’s round tones
from the doorway, “do you happen to know
‘Billy was a Bo’sun’?”

In answer Mrs. Yates’s fingers ran off a little
prelude, and she sang, while all the girls clustered
around the piano to listen to the brand new song:

“Oh, Billy was a bo’sun, bold and brave,

William was a gay young sailor,

Sailed upon the south sea wave.

Oh, William was a gay young tar.

His ship was called the “Mary Ann,”

William was a sailor,

And down the African coast she ran,

For gold and i-vor-ee!

For gold and i-vor-ee!

Oh, Billy was a bo’sun, bold and brave,

William was a gay young sailor,

Sailed upon the south sea wave,

William, he was a gay young tar.”

“That’s the one,” applauded the Admiral,
gaily. “I sang that chanty before now in a fo’cas’le
on a trading ship bound for the Straits,
when I wasn’t much older than Polly there.”

“Mother knows all the sailor songs and fisherman
croons of the seven seas,” said Marbury, as
he leaned towards his mother, turning pages when
she needed help. “I’ve kept count to-night, and
in the last half hour she has skipped from an
Iceland lullaby to a Greek rowing chorus we
boys used to sing when we were at shell practice
on the bay. Then that rippling one was a gondolier
song we heard at Venice, way out on one
of the small canals around the islands. And
just before this last, Mother, wasn’t that the little
lullaby you heard at Iona?”

“This?” Mrs. Yates ran over the simple, soft
melody, and Polly caught the words.

“Day has barred her windows close, and gaes wi’ quiet feet,

Night wrapped in a cloak of gray, comes saftly doon the street,

Mither’s heart’s a guiding star, tender, strong, and true,

Lullaby, and lulla-loo-oo—

Sleep, lammie, noo, sleep, lammie, noo.”

“Oh, that’s a darling,” cried Polly. “Please,
please, sing some more.”

“We’re going out on deck, now,” said Mrs.
Yates, rising, with one arm around Polly. “The
moon is rising, and I want to hear the Polly
Page Glee Club this last night we will be together.”

“If a mere banjo player may join in too,” suggested
Marbury, his eyes twinkling with fun,
“we’ll show the sharks and mermaids what real
talent can do.”

The girls often looked back on that evening.
It seemed almost too happy and perfect to be
quite real, Polly said. The night was wonderfully
calm and clear, a night when all the stars
looked nearer than usual, Sue declared.

Even the Admiral’s rolling basso was frequently
heard, and the Senator hummed contentedly, when
they happened to strike a special favorite of his.
All the old college songs and heart-throb tunes
that are handed down over cradles of nations
were touched up by the glee club that night, and
last of all, Polly’s clear soprano started up the
Admiral’s favorite, “Tom Bowling.”

“Just leave that one to the echoes,” he said,
as the sweetly-plaintive old melody died away on
the still night air. “And now, to your bunks,
every girl Jack of you, for you’ll wake up to-morrow
with Maine under your noses, and Lost
Island to shake hands with before breakfast.”

CHAPTER VII

LANDING AT LOST ISLAND

“Polly! Polly!” came a sleepy, anxious call
from Crullers’ berth the next morning, and
Polly sat up drowsily. It was still dark in their
stateroom, but between the narrow shutters at
the window, there stole a gray gleam of dawn.
Polly sprang out of bed, and let down the shutter.
And she half smiled as she did so, remembering
how the first morning Crullers had tried
to do so, and had started to cry because she had
let the shutter fall down the side of the boat.
Everything on the yacht was silent. The engines
had stopped. There was no throbbing, no
vibration, nothing, except stillness. Even to
Polly’s practical mind there came a vague sense
of danger, as she looked out of the window.
Then she laughed.

Crullers was already out of bed, a blanket
wrapped around her, as she dropped on her knees
and peered under the berth.

“What are you doing?” asked Polly.

“Looking for the life preservers,” came
back Crullers’ half-smothered tones. “Are we
wrecked, Polly? Oh, I wish I had stayed at
home.”

“Oh, do get up from there, goose,” Polly
laughed. “We are on the coast of Maine, that’s
all. Hurry up and get dressed. It’s half-past
three. Let’s go out on deck and watch the sunrise.”

“Oh, Polly, I’m so sleepy,” pleaded poor Crullers.
“If it isn’t a wreck, I’m going back to
bed.”

“Indeed, you’re not,” cried Polly, as she
brushed out her heavy curls vigorously. “I’ll
throw pillows at you if you dare to try it. If I
had a clothespin handy, I’d stick it on your nose.
Oh, Crullers, that makes me think of something
funny. Now listen, for it may wake you up.
Stoney was bound he’d sleep mornings, and
Aunty Welcome marched upstairs one day and
stuck a clothespin on his nose, sure enough. She
says it’s the greatest discourager of sleepiness she
knows of, and Stoney got up fast enough after
that at first call.”

“It’s awfully cold, isn’t it?” shivered Crullers,
groping around after her stockings. Polly
turned on the electric light overhead.

“Cold? The second of July. Fiddlesticks!”
She put her head out of the little, narrow window,
trying to discern the shore outline. “I can’t
see anything but dark, hilly-looking bumps.
We’re in a bay. There’s a big light way off
over there, blinking. It’s a lighthouse.”

There came a light tap on the door.

“Who is it?” asked Polly. “We’re up.”

“It’s me,” said Sue, intimately, but without
regard for grammar. “I’m so glad you’re
awake, Polly. Ted and I got up as soon as we
heard them dropping anchor. Oh, it’s glorious.
The sunrise is just breaking through the clouds,
and the tide’s way out, and we’re in a big bay,
Polly, with a lot of little islands scattered
around, as if some giant boy had been throwing
giant pebbles. We just saw a lot of fishing
smacks go by on their way out to the banks.”

Ten minutes later the four stood on deck.
Marbury was the only one there to greet them,
except Captain Sandy Saunders and one lone
sailor. It was quarter of four.

“We got in earlier than grandfather expected,”
said Polly after the good-mornings had
all been said. “Just look at all those islands.
How will we know which is Lost Island among
so many?”

“You don’t call every rock with a clump of
pines hanging to it, an island, do you?” Marbury
asked, teasingly. “I don’t know which one
of those is your island, but I think it must be
larger than these dots of land. Do you see that
inlet in the main shore over east? The mate
tells me that the village lies around there, about
quarter of a mile up the river. Eastport is the
name of it. All along the north shore of the
bay are summer cottages, and that big building
where you can see lights is the hotel. It stands
between two bluffs. That other large building
with the two rows of verandas is the Orienta
Yacht Club. Father says he knows the commodore
of it, Mr. Millard.”

“I don’t see how you found out so much about
it, while we have been asleep,” said Polly.

“Don’t you?” Marbury’s eyes were full of
mirth, as he turned to her. “I don’t know
whether I had better tell you or not, but I will.
Our mate’s home is at Eastport, and he told me
all about the place.”

“Doesn’t he want to go home for a little visit
while you are at anchor?” asked Sue, quickly.

“I don’t know. There will hardly be time, for
we’re to sail as soon as we put you ashore and
find you are safely located. Perhaps he’ll send
a message by you.”

Nobody but Sue thought any more about it,
for the Admiral appeared on deck just as the rim
of the sun appeared above the horizon.

“Good-morning, everybody,” he called, in his
deep, cheery tones. “God bless us all, what a
morning this is! Wind’s due south, isn’t it,
Cap’n? Bears the fragrance of a thousand
shores and sea-girt flowering isles upon it.”

“Grandfather, you’re getting as poetical as
Isabel. She has been declaiming, ‘Build thee
more stately mansions, oh my soul,’ ever since we
first called her, and she isn’t all dressed yet. If
you didn’t have me to stand by you for a good
shipmate, you’d be the most rollicking old tar
that ever trod a deck.”

“I declare, Polly, I’ll appeal to Mrs. Yates
the instant she appears,” quoth the Admiral,
laughing. “I am dignity itself.”

Polly slipped her arms around his neck, and
kissed him, her brown eyes brimful of mischief,
and they went over to where Captain Saunders
stood.

“It’s four thirty-five now,” he said. “Breakfast
for all hands at five are the Senator’s orders,
and ashore at six.”

“Are we to go direct to the island?” asked
Polly.

“No,” the Admiral spoke up. “I have talked
it over with Mrs. Yates, and she agrees with me
it would be better for you girls to put up at the
hotel first, until you find out how the land lies.
I always had my doubts about Robinson Crusoe’s
comfort, and I want you to be situated comfortably,
before I leave you.”

“I thought you were going to remain up here
right along, sir?” said Marbury.

“Not exactly. This yacht club opens for a
couple of months, and I cannot put in all that
time with the rocking chair fleet over yonder on
the veranda of the hotel or boat club, can I? I
shall stay around within hail, until they get their
bearings, and are fairly on their course, then I
am going South until the regatta in August.”

“Who is that man over yonder?” asked Sue
suddenly. She had been far up in her favorite
seat in the prow, as close to the
Hippocampus
as
she could get, watching the outline of the shore
shape itself clearly from the shadows. A dory
was just coming in from the channel that led
to the open sea, with one man in it, and a lot
of lanterns for cargo.

“One of the men from the station,” Captain
Saunders explained. “You can see the lighthouse
out on the Point yonder, can’t you? Those
buildings at its base are where the light-tender
lives, and farther along shore you can see the
roof of another building, with a tall spar on it.
That’s the life-saving station. Every night and
morning one of the men goes out to hang the
signal lights on the piling that marks the channel
to the inlet yonder. It’s a narrow passage,
and there’s a bad ledge of rock off to the
southeast. That arm of land to the south they
call the Sickle.”

He pointed to the stretch of shore that extended
from the mainland for several miles, and
curved around Eagle Bay like a half moon.

“Why didn’t they call it the Crescent?” asked
Isabel, meditatively. “It’s so much more expressive.”

“So is Sickle,” laughed Polly, waving her
handkerchief towards the dory. “Maybe this
one gathers in the harvest of the sea.”

“Polly, don’t do that,” exclaimed Ruth.
“They’ll see you.”

“I hope they do,” responded Polly, delightedly.
“I wasn’t waving at the boat, goosie.
There,” as one figure in the dory lifted an oar
in salute to her, and waved his cap. “I’ve made
one friend, anyway, on this foreign coast of Barbaree.”

The breakfast gong struck. It was one other
thing in the daily life aboard the
Hippocampus

that pleased the girls. At each meal the steward
would strike a musical Chinese gong with two
muffled sticks, and the sweet, vibrating chimes
would sound clearly through the cabin.

“When we get settled in our club house,” Polly
said, as they started for the dining-room, “we’ll
have one of those gongs if I have to make it
myself.”

“Polly, do you realize,” said Isabel, regretfully,
“that after all this splendor we are going
bang on a desert isle?”

“‘Quoth the Raven, Nevermore,’” Polly said
in a deep, mournful tone that matched Isabel’s
exactly, and made them all laugh.

“Not that I mind it,” added Isabel, hastily. “I
expect Polly’ll have us all in sou’westers and oilskins
before we get through, patrolling the beach
with the life-guard. I wish I could swim. Is
it hard learning, Senator Yates?”

“Not very.” The Senator’s face wore a reminiscent
smile. “I was about seven when I
learned. Tad Newell was my chum those days.
He was my cousin, and about twelve years old,
and he could swim like a tommycod. So he undertook
to teach me. We went down to the old
swimming hole on Tad’s place, and I took off
my clothes, while Tad tied a rope around my
waist. ‘Now, all you need do, Charlie, is to let
yourself go,’ he told me, ‘and I’ll hang on to the
rope till you learn to swim.’ So I jumped from
a rock into the water, and let myself go, but that
rope parted. Tad yelled to me to strike out and
tread water. I did as I was told, and the first
thing I knew I was swimming around the old
pond all right. ‘Golly Ann,’ Tad called out,
‘I’ll bet a cookie if that old rope hadn’t given
way, you’d have been trailing around here on the
end of it for an hour.’”

“We’ll remember that story, and provide good,
strong ropes,” Polly said, laughing. “Crullers
declares she will put on a life preserver, but
I like the water wings the best. I do hope we
may be able to see the island to-day, and the
bungalow, or club-house, or shack, whichever it is.
Ruth brought a flag along to raise as soon as we
land, and our own yacht club pennant, golden
sun on a sea of blue.”

By six the girls were through their breakfast,
and ready to go ashore. Marbury stayed with
his mother, but the Senator went with them as
far as the hotel landing. Another trip brought
their camp kit and suitcases, and finally,
about nine, they all stood on the broad veranda
of the shore hotel, waving handkerchiefs in farewell
to the Yates family, as the
Hippocampus

left the little bay and steamed out beyond the
point of the Sickle, on her way up to Nova
Scotia and Prince Edward’s Island.

“But they’re certain to stop and see us on their
way back the end of August,” Polly said cheerily.
“We’ve had a fine trip, and I think it was
mighty lucky we had it at all. So now it’s over,
let’s not sit down and weep. Isabel’s wiping her
eyes now. Face about the other way and be
happy. Where’s grandfather?”

Down at the far end of the veranda he sat in
a comfortable armchair, chatting with another
elderly gentleman.

“He has joined the rocking-chair fleet so soon,”
Kate exclaimed. “And Aunty Welcome’s upstairs
telling the chambermaids all about Virginia.
Let’s go and find the captain who knows
all about the island and the yachts.”

“But we don’t even know his name,” said
Isabel.

“We shall, though, soon,” Polly replied. Her
eyes were bright with excitement. “I am going
to ask everyone I meet, very nicely, if they can
direct me to the captain, and you see if we don’t
find him.”

Up the boardwalk they started, going towards
the village. The hotel was a low, two-storied
frame building, with broad verandas
around it, and tall, rocky bluffs on either side.
Behind it, through a break in the bluffs, could
be caught a glimpse of hills, blending one into
the other, and rising higher and higher against
the skyline, until they seemed to become a part
of the clouds themselves.

The crescent-shaped shore was rocky also.
Before the hotel was a long stretch of smooth
beach, and the island shores looked sandy from
a distance, but for the rest, rocks seemed to predominate.
Not the smooth, shelving sandstone
the girls were used to seeing, but great, rough
masses of brownish green, that appeared to have
the hardness and weight of iron slag.

“Just look at that group way out yonder in
the bay,” Ruth exclaimed. “Aren’t they like a
herd of hippopotami under water? I expect to
see them rise up, and start away any minute.
And, see, girls, every single one of those islands
has trees on it. I wonder which is Lost Island?”

“Seems to me,” said Isabel, critically, “that a
sandy beach would be much better for our sailing,
than those rocks. Suppose we bump into
them.”

“Don’t worry, Dame Isabel,” Polly slipped
her arm around her, happily. “If we bump into
them, we’ll at least have the satisfaction of knowing
they didn’t bump into us, won’t we? Here
cometh a native of this wild and rocky shore,
mates. I think he’s Boy Friday.”

Swinging leisurely along the beach was a tall,
long-legged, stoop-shouldered boy of fifteen
years or so. He wore overalls, turned up around
his bare legs, and a huge straw hat hid his face
in shadow. Sue declared that he resembled the
crane they had seen away back in the wild rice-fields
along the Potomac. But he was a friendly-looking
native, at all events, and he carried a
pail of freshly-dug clams, and over one shoulder
a hoe with a broken handle.

“Don’t scare him, girls,” cautioned Polly; but
she had scarcely spoken before the boy waved
the hoe at them in a neighborly salute, and sent
out a hail.

“Hello!”

“Hello!” shouted back Polly and Sue, but the
more sedate members of the club waited until
he caught up with them before delivering any
greeting.

“I saw you come ashore this morning,” he said,
smiling at them frankly. “I was out with father
taking in the lights, and we saw somebody wave
at us from the yacht—”

“I did,” smiled Polly.

“Did you? I waved back. And father said
he guessed you must be the folks we was looking
for, so I’d better stop over at the hotel this
morning on my way back, but I went clamming
first. Got some whoppers too, regular quahaugs.”

He held out the pail for their admiration, and
the girls duly admired, but it was not with the
thought for those particular clams. As Kate
said afterwards: “I thought right away that if
he could get them, so could we, and what dandy
clam frys we’d have in the dear old chafing-dish.”

Polly looked at him steadily for a minute more
before she hazarded a guess.

“Is your father the captain?”

The boy nodded, smiling until his mouth
looked like the Cheshire cat’s.

“Yes’m. Cap’n Ben Carey, formerly of the
schooner
Mary
, now on duty at the station down
yonder on the Point. They call our end of the
bay Fair Havens. It’s in the Bible, too.”

“Is it?” Polly and the others were now interested
fully. Even Marbury, with all his cadet
training back of him, had been somewhat shy
with all seven girls around him, plying him with
questions, but this boy was not.

“What’s your own name?” asked Sue.

“Tom Carey.”

“Can you sail a yacht all by yourself?”

“I can sail anything,” answered the clam digger,
modestly.

“The captain is in charge of Lost Island, isn’t
he?” Polly inquired. “I am Polly Page, Mrs.
Holmes’s niece.”

Tom nodded, and put out his hand.

“I know. We’ve been looking for you any
time. We’ve got five of the Holmes boys’ boats
down at our place. Father got a letter from
London telling him you was coming, and he
gave me the stamp to keep. Going to look at
the place this morning?”

“We want to go over as soon as we may,”
Polly said. “How far is it?”

Tom pointed to the opposite shore of the bay,
about midway between the Point and the hotel.

“It’s right over yonder, where the beach looks
flat all to once, then it hunches up into a big knob
of land. It isn’t a whole island. There’s a ridge
of land joins it on the main shore. It’s a good
beach for sail boats. There’s five of them all
together, and father’s got a lot more. He rents
them for the season to the cottage folks along
shore. He owns a sloop, too, and he lets that out
to folks who want to sail clear out to the banks
and fish. And Nancy has her own boat too.”

“Who is Nancy?” asked Ted.

“My sister,” Tom’s head lifted a trifle higher
than ordinary, as he said it. It was easy to see
the estimation he had of Nancy. “They’ve got
a junior yacht club over at the Orienta, and not
one in the lot can sail as well as Nancy. Look
over there.”

Around the shore at the inlet came a trim
catboat, tacking and beating down across the
bay as a puff of wind hit her as easily as a gull
swerves from its course.

“That’s Nancy,” Tom said proudly. “She’s
been over to the village, most likely, for mother.
She don’t like the walk around the shore road.
Guess she’s bringing back something from my
aunt’s.”

“How old is she?” Isabel’s tone was quite
respectful, as she watched the single figure in
the boat, just a mere dark speck, half hidden by
the sail.

“Thirteen. I’m going on sixteen. We look
after things at Fair Havens while father’s on
duty down at the Point.”

“Is he a real life-saver?” asked Polly, eagerly.

“Yes,” said Tom, simply, adding, “He’s got
some medals. He’s a coast guardsman. Do you
want to go over to your place right now? I’m
going along home, and it’s only a step from
there.”

Polly considered. It was nearly noon, but
they all wanted to see Lost Island so very much
that she knew they would not mind giving up
their luncheon at the hotel for the trip.

“Have you got a boat that will carry us
all?” she asked, doubtfully.

“We won’t need a boat. I said they only
called it an island, didn’t I? It isn’t a whole
one. It’s a sort of knob that sticks up out of
the water, with a good bit of beach, and at high
tide it’s pretty well surrounded, except for a
ridge of hummocks you can walk over. If we
follow this shore road, it leads right to our house,
and your place, and then straight along and
minds its own business till it gets out to the
Point.”

“Then we’ll be neighbors, won’t we?” said
Ruth. “I guess we’ll be very glad to have good
ones within hail before we get through.”

“We’ll all be good neighbors to you,” Tom returned
quite seriously. “We’re mighty glad
some real folks are going to live near us all summer.
It gets lonesome way out there on the bay
shore, and the village is two miles away. It’s
just exactly one mile from our house to the hotel,
then another mile on to Eastport.”

“Do you walk it often?” asked Ted, her hands
deep in her sweater pockets. “We’ll have to go
over after our mail, and I’m going to be post girl.
I love to walk, miles.”

“We don’t walk it much,” returned Tom, stolidly.
“You won’t either, after you find you can
clip across the bay in a ‘cat’ in quarter the time.”

They had turned about, and were walking
slowly back along the boardwalk towards the
hotel. The Admiral saw them coming, and came
down from the veranda to meet them. Polly
managed the introduction in her own way.

“Grandfather, dear, this is Tom Carey, the
captain’s son. He knows all about the island,
and takes care of the yachts for his father. And
may we, please, please, walk right over, and see
it all now?”

The Admiral referred the question to his watch.
Polly loved that watch. It was really an old
friend of the family. It was a thin watch, of
old gold, with a dull gold face, and black hands
and figures on it, and more than that, it struck
the hours, in a queer, high-pitched little ring.

“Eleven thirty-five it is, Polly. Will you be
back by one sharp?”

“Yes, sir,” promised Polly, and off they went,
Indian file, along the two-plank walk, with the
tall, awkward figure in overalls leading.

“Seems to be an able seaman,” commented the
Admiral, comfortably to himself, as he went back
to his easy chair and the budget of mail that
awaited him, and if Tom could only have heard
him, he could not have asked for higher praise.

The Admiral’s opinion was verified by the girls
before half an hour had passed. In that brief
time, Tom had subdued even Polly with the
breadth and depth and height of his knowledge
of boats and sailor craft. One mile from the
hotel they came to the Carey house. There was
a good-sized boat dock, with a dozen or more sail
boats moored alongside, and several row boats.
A large signboard nailed up on crossbeams notified
the passing world that it had reached the
port of “Fair Havens.” A boardwalk led up
from the dock over the beach to the house. It
made the girls think of a house built of cards
that first time they saw it. Not but what it was
solid enough, but it seemed to be in sections, and
one part leaned comfortably over for support on
all the other adjacent parts. Once upon a time
it had been painted red, but wind and storms and
the drifting, beating sand had scraped off nearly
every vestige of paint, and left the boards smooth
and clean as a freshly-scrubbed oak floor. On
the south side of the house around the kitchen
door was a little garden enclosed by a paling
fence, and hollyhocks grew nearly to the eaves,
in tall, regular rows like grenadiers. A honeysuckle
vine climbed over the side wall, and there
was the sweet fragrance of stocks and sweetbrier
over all, with sweet peas reaching out loving
tendrils through the palings.

“My sister takes care of our garden,” said
Tom, proudly. “She can do anything she sets
her hand to. Mother says she’s just like Aunt
Cynthy over in Eastport. She tried to paint
the fence white, but it didn’t last. When winter
comes, the sand just beats up here, and eats
it off clean. Don’t you want to stop in, and
get acquainted?”

Indeed they did want to, Polly replied
promptly, so up the plank walk they went to
the side door. Tom pointed out the arching
framework above it, and its crimson rambler.

“I nailed that portico up there,” he told them.
“And Nancy transplanted the rambler.”

“It’s ever so pretty,” the girls said heartily,
and Tom picked some of the sweet red roses for
each of them. Inside the house some one was
singing, but when they tapped on the door it
ceased, and Nancy herself came to greet them.
She was tall and tanned, this Maine shore girl,
and though she was only thirteen, her head topped
Kate’s. Her long fair hair was bound around
her head in two braids, and her eyes were as
frank and as blue as Tom’s; as Polly said afterwards,
her fair hair and blue eyes looked out of
place in contrast with her tanned arms and face.
But they saw at a glance that here was a neighbor
worth having, and one to be cultivated. Mrs.
Carey welcomed them warmly. She was just
Nancy grown plumper and older, and she even
wore her hair in the same way, two long braids
wound around her head like a wreath. Isabel
tried to do hers up that way the very next day,
but gave it up.

While they talked of their summer plans, and
Polly went down to the landing with Nancy to
look over the boats there, the girls watched Mrs.
Carey fry fish balls, and it was a ceremony. Not
in any ordinary frying pan did she fry them, but
in a deep kettle, just as Aunty Welcome fried
doughnuts, and when the balls came out they
were laid in a draining pan, all cooked to a delicious
golden brown, until your mouth watered
just to look at them.

“Don’t you girls want to sit right up to the
table and have a bite before you take the walk
over to the Knob?” asked Mrs. Carey suddenly.
“You’ll be famished before you get back to the
hotel. Of course you will. Guess I knew all
about girls and their appetites before you were
born. Nancy, you get some plates, and those
fresh-baked biscuits covered over on the bread
board there, and I’ll get a bottle of my Chili
sauce. I wouldn’t give two cents for fish balls
unless I could trim them up with Chili sauce.”

Taste good? The girls hoped all along the
road to Lost Island, after it was over, that Mrs.
Carey made fish balls often.

“Tom says she can make clam pies, too, girls,”
Crullers said, eagerly. Crullers was always
radiant when the subject came up of feeding the
inner girl. “And clam chowder, and fritters,
and Indian puddings.”

“What are Indian puddings?” asked Isabel.

“Hush,” warned Polly. “Don’t ask questions,
Isabel. You make Indian puddings out of cornmeal,
and cream, and molasses, and spice. Anybody
knows that. Whenever I used to feel sad
after Aunty Welcome had scolded me, she’d
always turn around and coax Mandy to make me
an Indian pudding just piled full of raisins.
Oh, girls, look! There it is.”

She stopped short, and pointed ahead of them.
They had come to a path leading up over the
rocks. The high-water mark could be plainly
seen, where the tide had left a little fringe of
shells, and driftwood, and seaweed. There were
pools here and there, too, and these were half
full of water. Tom was striding ahead down
the rocks to where a narrow neck of land joined
Lost Island to the mainland. But the girls
paused for a minute on the rocks, and looked
down with happy eyes on the future haven of the
Polly Page Yacht Club.

CHAPTER VIII

DROPPING ANCHOR

“I told you it was just a knob of land sticking
out from the shore,” said Tom. “It’s nearly
a quarter of a mile long.”

Polly lifted her head, and drew in a deep, long
breath of the cool, salty air that blew in from
the southeast. She looked down at the “Knob,”
as they soon grew accustomed to calling the
island. There was a fine incurved beach for
bathing, with a great, tumbled mass of rocks at
the farther end that rose higher and higher at
the end pointing towards the bay. Young willow
and scrub pine grew short and thick wherever
they could get a footing in the rock crevices, and
there was plenty of grass, but it was tall and
sharp pointed and tinted queer colors from the
tide.

“You can walk away out yonder into the water
at low tide,” said Tom. “The beach is a fine
one, better than we’ve got at Fair Havens.
There ain’t any deep holes at all. That’s a pretty
good landing too. It lops over some, but that
won’t hurt anything. You’ll get used to it, and
it’s easy to moor to.”

The girls scrambled after him down the rocky
path, and followed him as he picked his way over
the sand bar, stepping from one grass hummock
to the next.

“This is high and dry at low tide,” called back
Tom. “Guess you’ll have to jump some places
now.”

“Some places!” repeated Sue, holding up her
clean linen skirt in dismay. “I’m hopping like
a frog now, and my shoes are wet. We’ll need a
balloon or an air ship when the tide comes in.”

“Here’s the house,” came Tom’s cheery voice,
beyond a sand dune, his bare feet having carried
him swiftly over the places where the girls had
to pick their way. And all at once they saw it,
the place they had dreamed of, and talked of,
and hoped for, for nearly two weeks. It was
gray, and lopsided like the landing place, and as
weatherworn as the Carey’s paling fence. Some
fisherman had built it years ago, and shielded it
from the northwest winds by putting it close
against the sand dune; facing south, it looked
out over the Sickle. He must have had a variable
mind, that first fisherman, for he had started out
with two rooms, then added a lean-to, and yet
another lean-to, and then had built a third one
that leaned fairly over on the original lean-tos.
The lean-to portion of the house then leaned all
together on the sand dune, but the front part was
up on a rock foundation, and there was a fair-sized
porch across it that Mrs. Holmes had built,
when the boys had taken it for a summer camp.

But in spite of the new supports under the
flooring, it had a decided tilt to leeward, from
generations of storms that had whacked it, and
battered it, and all but demolished it. A tall flag
staff still reared itself squarely in front of the
steps, and at sight of it Polly ran ahead of the
others.

“What is it, Polly?” called Ruth, holding to
her hat.

“I know what she’s going to do, I know,” cried
Sue. “Salute the colors!”

Polly reached the flag staff, and took the “colors”
from her reefer pocket, where they had been
safely tucked away, against the time appointed.
She had made that flag herself. It had been her
special contribution to the general belongings of
the club, and as Polly ran it gallantly up to the
top of the pole, the girls sent up a good, round
cheer, and even Tom threw his cap high in the
air.

“’Rah! ’Rah! ’Rah!” he shouted. “She’s
a-flying a good one.”

“That’s a blue triangular pennant,” explained
Sue. “It’s a golden sun on a field of
blue.”

“A golden sun rampant, isn’t it?” Crullers
put in.

“No, dear, couchant,” Sue laughed. “Why
will you talk about heraldry when you don’t
know anything about it. I’ve studied it all
up.”

The sand had drifted up around the porch base
in regular hillocks, nearly to the railing.

“When we get too tired to use the steps,” Polly
said, “we can just step over the railing, and slide
down.”

“I can’t find a door,” said Isabel, doubtfully,
as she came around the house from a tour of
inspection, and Kate began to chant, teasingly,

“Oh, I wish my room had a floor,

I don’t care so much for a window or a door.

But I wish my room had a floor!”

“What’s that funny little cupola up on top?”
called out Polly.

“That’s the lookout,” explained Tom. “Lots
of houses alongshore have them. It’s so the
women folks at home can climb up there in foul
weather, and look out towards sea through
glasses, to see if the ships are coming home.”

“Oh, I like that,” Polly said. “I’ve got ever
so many ships that are coming home some day,
and when I get discouraged after this I shall
build a lookout in my heart and climb up there
with a spy glass and see how the weather is out
to sea, and maybe I’ll see a sail.”

“Polly, you sentimental goose,” laughed Kate,
slipping one arm around the commodore. “You
never see things just as they are.”

“I see them the way they ought to be, and
that’s better,” Polly smiled back. “Where’s
Tom?”

“Prying off the planks that are nailed over
the doors and windows,” Sue called, and presently
they all went inside.

There were no plastered walls or ceilings. All
the rooms were finished off like the interior of
a cabin, with narrow boards nailed close together,
and there was a spicy, pungent odor through the
house, like spruce woods. One thing the girls
hailed with delight. Right up through the center
of the house rose a great, old-fashioned round
rock chimney. Three fireplaces opened into it,
and you could stand in any one of them and look
up at the blue sky. Long shelves stretched
across the tops of the fireplaces, and there were
iron cranes on each side on which to hang pots.

“Where are the grates?” asked Isabel.

“Aren’t any grates,” responded Tom. “You
just lug in an armful of driftwood and pile it
on those rocks and start her up. We piled rocks
around outside for fenders, ’cause father thought
maybe the sparks would hit the flooring some
day.”

“Won’t we just pile on wood there on chilly
nights, girls?” Ruth exclaimed, kneeling down
and holding out her hands, as if she could feel
the blaze even then.

“And sit around on cushions, and tell stories,
and eat toasted marshmallows, and Aunty Welcome’s
hermits,” added Ted.

“Oh, poor Aunty,” cried Polly, in sudden dismay.
“I never told her where we were going,
and she’ll think we’re drowned sure. Let’s
hurry, now, and be businesslike. How much
furniture is here, Tom?”

“Ain’t any at all,” said Tom, cheerfully.
“Just some chairs, and a table, and some beds,
and dishes.”

“Well, that’s all we’ll need,” Polly told him.
“Did you think we wanted pianos or consoles?”

“Those aren’t furniture,” said Tom. “Those
are just fixin’s.”

“Where can we get fresh water?” Kate asked.

“There’s a well at our place. I’ll bring you
up some twice a day, and oftener if you need it.
You can freshen the salt water for cooking.
Mother’ll show you how.”

“I think it’s splendid to have near neighbors
like you,” said Polly. “Maybe we’ll be able to
do something for you before the summer’s over.”

Tom poked his bare toes into the sand sheepishly.

“Oh, that’s all right. Mother and Nancy are
mighty glad you’ve come. It gets pretty lonesome
way out here on the Sickle. I don’t mind
it so much, because I’m going into the coast
service with father as soon as I’m old enough,
but Nancy wishes she had some girls to talk to.
There’s plenty over in the village, but that’s too
far off, and the crowd at the Orienta or the hotel
and cottages, we folks don’t see much of. My
Aunt Cynthy says she’ll take Nancy any time
over in the village and bring her up, but mother
says she guesses she’ll hang on to her only girl.
Nancy likes you girls, because she says you seem
different.”

“How do you mean?”

“Oh, you’re not all starched up the way the
others are over at the hotel.” He squinted one
eye at the sun. “It’s half-past twelve, and more
too.”

Regretfully the girls took leave of their new
kingdom, but as they walked back along the bay
shore road to the hotel, they turned every now
and then, and saw the little blue and gold pennant
streaming valiantly in the breeze, and as
Polly remarked, it certainly did look home-like.

They did not stop at the Carey cottage going
back. It was a good mile around to the hotel,
and the Admiral was waiting for them on the
veranda.

“Polly, you go up and calm Welcome,” he
said, the first thing. “She’s been down to me
about sixty-nine times to ask me to send the life-savers
after you. You run up before you have
your lunch and show her there are no bones
broken.”

Polly obeyed gladly enough. The old colored
mammy was very dear to her, and her arms
had been the only shelter she had known when
the Admiral was away from Glenwood ever since
her own mother died.

“Deed, chile, if I ain’t powerful glad to see
you!” Welcome exclaimed, as soon as she set
eyes on her. “Praise de Lord, oh, mah soul!
Has you been way off in dat blazin’ sunlight and
no parasol? If you ain’t de carelessest chile I
ever did see. You’ll get so freckled dere won’t
anybody know you under your bridal veil, you
mind what I say, now.”

“No, I won’t, Aunty, truly. Listen. It’s
just the happiest sort of a place, and I know
you’ll love it. There are big fireplaces and a
wide porch to sit out on, and you can see way
out over the ocean and over the bay too. I don’t
see why we can’t go over as soon as we have
finished luncheon.”

“How do you intend totin’ me through all dat
sand?” asked Aunty with dignity.

“We’re not going to tote you at all. We’re
going to roll you,” laughed Polly, as she reached
up, and took the wrinkled brown face between
her fresh young palms. “Listen, you old dear.
Just you go down and have your dinner, and
then make out a list of what we need to cook
with, and I’ll send Tom over to the village after it
this afternoon.”

“Is dere anything to cook
in
?” asked Aunty,
still unmollified.

“One iron kettle, one spider, a baking pan,
and two sauce-pans,” enumerated Polly. “And
some dishes.”

“Well, it’s a mighty good thing I packed up
plenty in de boxes,” said Aunty solemnly, and
with deep gratification. “I felt it in mah bones
it was a desert isle, and I’ve done kept mah eye
on dose boxes ever since we left Ole Point Comfort
behind us. I’ve watched ’em, and I’ve sat
on ’em, and I just know dey’s safe.”

Polly said nothing, but she thought hard. She
had forgotten all about the two big packing-cases
that contained their bedding, and general
camp outfit. The last she had seen of them, they
had been stowed away on the lower deck of the

Hippocampus
for safekeeping.

“Don’t you fret one bit, dear,” she said at last,
“I’ll ask grandfather where they are, and if
they’re not here, then they must be there. Stoney
told me when I lost my cap overboard, a thing
is never lost as long as you know where it is.
Just make out that list, Aunty, for us, and we’ll
hurry up with luncheon, and coax grandfather
to let us go over this afternoon to the club-house
for good.”

It didn’t require very much coaxing. Polly
herself broached the subject at the table down
in the long, shady dining-room, and the Admiral
told her she might do as she pleased.

“I’m not going to interfere except when it’s
absolutely necessary. I’ll just stop here for a
while till you’re on your course, then I’ll go
South again until the regatta. You manage
your own fleet. I’ll be on that veranda for a
week longer, though, and if there’s any mutiny
or danger, just send a couple of rockets and I’ll
come alongside.”

“Wireless, Admiral Page, wireless,” Kate
corrected, in her amusing way. “We’re strictly
up-to-date, you know. Polly will have a wireless
apparatus over there sure as can be, and
you’ll get many a ‘C.Q.D.’”

“Grandfather, dear,” began Polly, suddenly
remembering, “where are the two big boxes with
all our things in?”

“On the way to the island this minute,” answered
the Admiral. “That is once I forestalled
you, young lady. But here’s one question I cannot
solve, so I shall have to put it before the
club. How are we to get Aunty Welcome to
the island?”

Polly meditated. So did the rest, but Ruth
solved the problem.

“When the wagon comes back from taking
the boxes over, send Aunty back in it.”

Polly hugged her joyously.

“Whatever should we do, Grandma,” she
cried, “without you to solve things for us. Here
I’ve been thinking we’d have to blindfold her
the way they do elephants to coax them on board
a ship. No, thanks, I don’t care for any shortcake,”
this to the pretty waitress, as she was
about to place a goodly slice beside her plate.
“I must hurry. Crullers, dear, you may have it
all.”

“Polly,” whispered Isabel, as they were leaving
the long dining-room, “those two girls at
that little table, over near the veranda doors, have
been looking at us ever since we came in.”

“Maybe they like us,” Polly said, happily.
She always took the cheeriest view of everything
as a matter of course. As the Admiral and his
fleet of clipper builts, as he called them, passed
the table Isabel had mentioned, Polly looked at
the girls seated there, quite frankly and interestedly.
There was no doubt but what they were
sisters, and Polly liked them at first sight. The
elder was about sixteen, and the younger seemed
to be about Polly’s age.

“I wonder who they are,” Isabel said, when
they were up in the long, cool, double parlors.
“I like them and I wish we could get acquainted
with them before we leave. They’re very well
dressed, Polly.”

Polly laughed at the serious, earnest tone.

“Isabel always judges people by their raiment,”
she declared. “I know if she met John
the Baptist in camel’s hair, and Peter Pan in
white flannels like the Senator wore, she would
drop Peter a gracious courtesy, and not notice
anyone else at all.”

“Oh, Polly, I would,” cried Isabel. “I am
not as bad as that, but I do believe that clothes
show character, just as cleanliness or good manners
do. I have seen ever so many persons whose
clothes may have cost lots of money, but they
looked like patchwork quilts. These girls didn’t.
They were dressed with taste, and their dresses
were hand embroidered linen too. I do wonder
who they are. I like the way they do their
hair, braided, then tied up Dutch fashion with
two big bows.”

“Do you want yours that way, you blessed old
looking-glass?” Polly crossed over to where
Isabel sat, and began to arrange her long fair
braids in the same fashion. “It’s easy enough.
All you do is cross them over, so, and then tie
your ribbon on, and let it flutter a little, like a
butterfly bow. You need very wide ribbon to
make it look right. There, now observe yourself,
Lady Vanitas.”

Just then Crullers whispered: “Here they
come.”

While Isabel was trying to balance herself on a
bamboo tabourette so that she could catch a
glimpse of herself in the mirror above the mantel,
the other girls entered from the corridor leading
to the wide staircase, and hesitated.

“Dorothy,” called a pleasant voice from the
hall. The elder girl looked over her shoulder,
caught Polly’s glance, and smiled, then they
both went on down the hall.

“Ready, mates?” asked the Admiral just then
and Polly inquired who the other two girls were.

“Commodore Vaughan’s daughters from the
Orienta Club,” answered the old Admiral.
“And very mannerly children they are, too.
You will meet them later. I was talking to the
Commodore just a few minutes ago.”

“Well, I’m glad we shall know them, anyway,”
said Polly, as she went up to where Aunty
Welcome was waiting for them. “I wonder,
girls, whether grown people speak of us as
‘children.’ I feel half-way grown-up now. I
don’t think I’m a child.”

“Listen to her,” laughed Ruth. “And she’ll
be fifteen next December. Don’t you remember,
Kate, in the ‘Mikado,’ where somebody tells the
three little maids they are not young ladies, they
are only young persons.”

“Has you been a-finding dat teehee’s nest
again?” asked Aunty Welcome, severely, as they
all trouped into the room the Admiral had reserved
for them. “Ain’t you ’shamed to come
along a hotel corridor giggling like geese. And
you-all from Virginny, too. Ain’t you got any
State pride?”

“Oh, we will be good, Aunty,” pleaded Sue
and Ted. “Don’t scold us. Just wait till we
get out on an entire island all our own.”

“I speck you’ll bring my hairs in sorrow to de
grabe before you get done,” Aunty prophesied,
but her eyes twinkled, as she looked around her
at her charges.

It was past three o’clock before the caravan
started. First a wagon was sent around by the
shore road, with Aunty Welcome and the luggage.

“That’s a pretty hefty load, son,” the Admiral
told the sunburned youngster who had agreed
to do the hauling down to the Knob, as all the
shore people called Lost Island. He laughed,
and slapped the reins on the horses’ backs.

“Guess the colts will get there all right, sir,”
he said. “They can both of them swim.”

“We’ll be there right away, Aunty,” Polly
called, receiving a reassuring wave from a large,
dark green cotton umbrella.

“Now, I begin to feel as though we were getting
down to business,” Kate said, decidedly, as
she came from the telephone booth in the hotel
office. “I’ve arranged for our groceries, and
they say they can send a team over about four,
because they deliver goods every morning and
afternoon to the hotel and cottages, and we might
as well receive ours that way, too.”

“Did you order stuffed olives and plenty of
chocolate, Kate?” Isabel asked.

“No, ma’am, I did not. We must have solid
food, the Admiral says, and no nonsense. Plenty
of fresh vegetables and fruit.”

“Well, I like the incidental trimmings myself,”
mourned Isabel.

“Ready?” asked Polly, and the caravan
moved, Polly and the Admiral bringing up the
rear.

Just then the two Vaughan sisters came down
the hotel steps dressed in dark blue linen yachting
suits, and as they passed, girl fashion, they
smiled at the strangers without the formality of
an introduction. Polly could not wait for time
to ripen the acquaintance, but paused and spoke
to them in her impulsive way.

“I only wanted to say,” she began, as the
other girls walked on with the Admiral, “that
we are from Virginia, from Queen’s Ferry, and
we belong to a—a—our yacht club. You can
see the flag flying over yonder where the shore
curves before you get to the Point. We’re going
to live there all summer, and we’d be ever so
glad if you would come down and see us.”

“We’d love to,” Dorothy spoke up, warmly.
“This is my sister Bess. We’ll try to come over
some day next week.”

“If you do, we’ll show you how to sail a
yacht,” Polly said encouragingly, but the girls
laughed.

“Oh, we go out every day on the bay in our
yacht. You can see her from here. We belong
to the Junior Sailing Club at the Orienta.”
Bess pointed eagerly down to the hotel landing.
“She is named the
Nixie
.”

Polly followed the direction in which she
pointed, and saw a slender, close-reefed yacht lying
just below the boat landing. It was clean
and looked well-dressed, the same as its owners
did. From where she stood Polly caught a
sparkle of polished brass work around the cockpit.

“We have plenty of boats, but we haven’t
learned how to sail them yet,” she said. “As
soon as we do, we’ll race you.”

“That’s a challenge, remember, and we take it
up,” returned Dorothy, laughing, and Polly hurried
ahead to join the others, feeling that she had
won two friends who seemed very much worth
while keeping.

CHAPTER IX

THE CAPTAIN CALLS

They reached the island about four-thirty,
and the remainder of the day was crowded with
things waiting to be done.

“Right now, in the beginning, let’s start with
some system,” said Kate. “If we don’t we’ll all
be getting in each other’s way. Polly, come in
here and stop gazing at the water. Help me
plan the house. There are three rooms upstairs,
just plain boarded chambers, but they’ll
do to sleep in if the nights are not too hot. I
ordered a bolt of mosquito netting, and we must
start in to-morrow to tack it up. There are five
cots upstairs, but only one bed downstairs, in the
bedroom off the kitchen. Can you figure out
where we are all to rest our weary heads? I
give it up.”

Polly considered.

“Let’s give Aunty the full grown bed, because
she’s old and will have all the cooking and washing
and ironing to do. I guess we’ll have to get
two more cots. When grandfather goes back to
the hotel, we can ask him to send them up to us.”

“Where will you put them?” asked Kate, quite
calmly. “On the porch?”

“No, ma’am. Right in this room. Daytimes
we can turn them into divans.”

“Isn’t she a wonderful schemer?” Sue put her
head in at the open window and laughed.
“Where did you pack the chafing dish?”

“In my little suitcase. Why?”

“Aunty says we may have supper out on the
porch and save trouble.”

“Then I’ll fix lobster
a la
Newburg in a jiffy.”
Polly forgot all about beds and such ordinary
things, and rose at once, but the majestic form
of Welcome appeared in the kitchen doorway and
waved a cooking spoon in her direction.

“Deed, an’ you ain’t a-going to eat any sech
mess before bedtime,” she said firmly. “Yo’ keep
your patience in evidence, chile, and your obstreperousness
in subjection, and I’ll have some frizzled
eggs ready before you know it, and some
toast and marmalade.”

The Admiral had declined staying for tea that
first night. He had looked the entire place over,
and, as Polly remarked, noticed points they never
would have thought of, the drainage, the shingles,
and the condition of the cellar. He even went
down to the boat landing, and examined its supports
and noted the high tide marks along its
piling.

“Seas went all the way over there, didn’t they,
Tom?” he asked, casually.

“Well, yes, sir,” acknowledged Tom. “They
always do slosh over some in heavy weather.
Ours do too. When the February gales hit the
Sickle, I tell you, we all jam down pretty close
to keep from being blown clean off.”

“How about the bay? Do you get many bad
puffs out there? It looks fairly well sheltered.”

Tom nodded his head with comradely understanding.
As he told his father that night, the
Admiral and he were good mates, and understood
each other perfectly.

“Oh, it blows up now and then, but if any
storms should hit us, don’t you worry. Father
and I’ll keep a weather eye on the Knob. You
see the beach patrol passes about six hundred
yards over to seaward. Sometimes I tramp it
with the men from the Station, because I’m going
as soon as I’m old enough.”

“You couldn’t do a braver thing, my lad,” responded
the Admiral, thoughtfully. “I feel
like saluting every time I see one of the boys who
wear the fouled anchor on their sleeve. They
are a courageous lot.”

While Aunty Welcome was busy preparing
supper, the girls went off down the beach, hatless
and happy, with sweaters buttoned to their
chins, for the evenings were chilly along the
shore.

Polly and Sue were ahead, and the rest followed
as they pleased. The tide was in full and
high, and they laughed and shouted to see the
long, foamy swirls of water slip up the beach, up
and up, each time a little bit farther, till they
all sprang back for fear of wet feet.

“Doesn’t it make you think of all the sea
stories you ever read?” cried Polly, her eyes shining,
her long curls blown back by the wind.
“When I feel the wind like that in my face, I
want to be a viking, and stand right up in the
prow of a boat, and sail, sail right out into the
sunset.”

“You’d look like the Winged Victory,” called
Kate. “But I know what you mean. Like
this?” She opened her white sweater coat, and
held it wide to the wind, like wings. “It makes
you feel like a gull.”

“Oh, my feet are wet, girls.” Ted sat down
on a rock, and deliberately took off her low tan
shoes. “What’s the difference? I’m going
barefooted and have some fun.”

Five minutes later Aunty Welcome looked
out of the kitchen door and saw a sight that made
her fairly gasp. Carrying their shoes and stockings,
a line of barefooted girls clambered up the
mass of rocks at the Knob.

“Well, for de land’s sakes,” cried Aunty.
“Who’d believe dose wasn’t a pack ob gypsies?”

But the girls waved back to her, and she had
to laugh over the sight after all.

“Those rocks up there are the highest part of
the island,” said Polly. “Let’s go clear up to
the top.”

The girls clambered after her, over the slippery
rocks, rocks that were gray with barnacles
down along their sides. The water had filled
up all the little hollows, and Polly bent down
over one to examine it.

“Just look, girls,” she said. “These are limpets,
the kind that open their shells to the tide, as
if they were thirsty. You know them, Ruth.”

“
Patella pellucida
, semi-transparent, sticks to
fronds of seaweed,” responded “Grandma,” in
her deliberate way.

She lifted a long, wet strand of seaweed, and
waved it in the air. Something fell off.

“It’s a crab,” said Ted. “Look at him play
’possum.”

Ruth poked at the shell diligently, until she
turned it over on its back.

“It’s a horse-shoe crab,” she said. “They call
them king crabs too. They shed their shells, and
then they are the soft shelled crabs. They’re
regular fighters unless you catch one with a new
shell, then he’s tame enough.”

“What are hermit crabs, Ruth?” asked Sue.

“I don’t know why they call them hermits, unless
it’s because they steal other shells and live in
them.”

“Hermits don’t do that, Ruth. They’re just
people who isolate themselves from the world.”

“Well, these crabs like to live all by themselves.
They hunt up snails, and eat the snail
and steal its shell. Sometimes two crabs will
fight over the same shell.”

“Just like people,” Sue said. “I think it’s
awfully queer how much people and animals and
fishes and everything look and act alike. Maybe
we’re much closer related than we think.”

“Now, Sue, I refuse to have this crab’s pedigree
traced to mine,” laughed Kate. “Throw
him back into the sea.”

“That’s good,” said Crullers, solemnly.
“Maybe he’s the father of a large family.”

Polly tossed it back into the next upcurling
wave, and they all made up some poetry on the
spot, and chanted joyously.

“Oh, I am a family crab, so treat me quite tenderly.

There are generations down below, and they’re all awaiting for me.

I’ve sisters and cousins and aunts, and some great-grand-children too.

So I beg you not to cook me into crab
a la
Newburg stew.”

Suddenly a hail came from the main shore, and
they were silent. It was past sunset, and a soft
twilight afterglow was settling over the world.
Coming along the ridge of sand from the Point
was a lone figure, and from where they stood it
looked immensely tall, outlined against the clear
orange of the southern sky. Even while they
hesitated, wondering who it could be, Nancy’s
clear voice called far down the shore,

“Ahoy, dad, ahoy!”

“It’s the Captain,” said Polly, starting to put
on her stockings instantly. “Hurry, and catch
up with him. Nancy says she goes to meet him
every night.”

They slipped on shoes and stockings quickly,
and ran back to the house just in time to see
Nancy and the Captain crossing the hummocks.
Polly never forgot that first look she had of Captain
Ben Carey of the Sickle Point Life Saving
Station. Tom was a pretty good reproduction
of him, but there was something in the Captain’s
expression that Tom lacked, a curious look in
his deep blue eyes, as though they had always
gazed out over wide distances. He was tall
and broad shouldered and mighty, the girls
thought. His face was smooth-shaven, but
tanned and weather-beaten and crisped into innumerable
fine wrinkles, until Sue declared it
made her think of a baked apple. His hair was
thick and curly like Tom’s, and his closely shut
lips seemed to be ever smiling out at a world
that even its Maker could still pronounce good
as He had at its first dawning. But it was his
voice that Polly loved best. Such a rich, hearty
voice it was, with a rollicking roll to it when it
burst into a sailor boy “come—all—ye,” and a
deep, resonant tone in speaking that simply won
your heart.

“Ahoy, there, ahoy,” he shouted back, as they
called to Nancy and him, and then Polly saw
that he was to be their best friend all that long
happy summer.

“It’s this way, you see,” he told them all, when
they had led him up on the porch of the cottage,
and gathered around for good advice. “I’ve
told the Admiral that he may leave you here alone
any time, and we’ll all keep an eye on you. Tom
and he were down to the Point awhile back, and
had a talk.”

“And he told us he was going back to the
hotel,” said Polly.

“Well, he changed his course. He says to me,
‘Cap’n, do you think they’ll be able to handle a
lot of yachts alone?’ And I told him, ‘Leave ’em
to me, sir, with an easy conscience. I’ll keep my
mind on them, and so will Mrs. Carey, and so will
the children. And as for handling the boats,
why, Lord love you, there ain’t nothing over fifteen
foot in the lot.’ My Nancy here runs all
over the bay in Tom’s knockabout, the
Pirate
,
and her own catboat. She’s been out around the
Point too, alone, in fair weather. And she’s
only thirteen. Tom is going on sixteen, and
I guess betwixt the two of them, you’ll turn into
able seamen, and learn how to handle a boat.
If you don’t, they won’t sink anyhow. You
want to learn how to swim, every girl jack of
you, first of all. What would you do out in the
bay if the boat took a notion to stand on her
beam ends, and ship a lot of water clean over into
the cockpit? I’m a believer in swimming. It’s a
good deal like unto the Kingdom of Heaven, I’m
thinking. Learn how to swim first, and all these
things shall be added unto you.” He smiled
around at the circle of young faces, and rose.
“Come on, Nancy. Mother’ll have supper piping
hot, and she’ll give us pickles if we’re late.”

“Oh, please wait just a minute,” begged Polly.
“We have so much to ask you, you know. You
believe in prevention first, don’t you?”

“Prevention first,” answered the Captain, a
trifle gravely. “Indeed I do, indeed I do;
with over a thousand youngsters dying off
every year at our summer resorts, just from carelessness
in swimming and handling boats when
they don’t know how to do either one right.
Why, if I had my way, I’d take every land lubber
in the lot, and put them through a course of
sprouts, so they could qualify for a volunteer life
saver ever after. Yes, I would.”

“I can’t swim,” said Sue, ruefully. “And
Polly and Kate and Ted can only paddle around
a little, and they think they could save all of us.”

“Then not one of you can go out in a yacht
alone until you can all swim like a school of
tommycods,” said the Captain, positively. “If
I’m to be responsible for this station, I’m going
to have things shipshape and seamanlike. To-morrow
morning every one of you be ready at ten
sharp, and Nancy and I’ll be over and teach you
how to keep your chins out of water, anyway.
And not one boat shall Tom bring over until you
have learned.”

“Captain,” asked Polly, seriously, leaning forward
with her chin on her palms, “Did anything
ever happen to make you feel that way?”

The Captain eyed her whimsically.

“Found me out, didn’t you? Well, I don’t
care. I’ll tell you about it, and maybe it will
make you keep an eye on the buoys and signal
lights. I used to have a knockabout called the

Three Widows
—”

“What a funny name for a boat!” exclaimed
Crullers.

“She was named before I got her, by a skipper
out of Noank, down on the Connecticut coast.
Pretty light she was, too, and frisky in a gale.
Tom and I could haul her close, but I didn’t let
her out to any of the summer folks. Cats and
flaties are the best for them, and then they can’t
drown unless they jump overboard. But, anyway,
this day I had been on duty down at the
Point all night, and it was late before I got
home. It was in September, and we’d had a
regular run of nor’westers with thunder storms
and general equinoctial cut-ups. Most of the
summer folks had gone home except a few down
at the hotel, and while I was on duty they persuaded
Tom they could sail the
Three Widows
.
And they didn’t know when to stop.” The Captain
paused to let this part of his narrative sink
deeply into the memories of his listeners.

“They sailed clear out around the Point, and
when the big sea hit her just outside the channel
in the open, she keeled over like a pasteboard
box. We’d seen them by that time. Billy
Clewen, the keeper at the station, sings out to
us, and we got the boat out. There were five
aboard, three lads and two of their sisters.
Three went down while we were getting to them,
two boys and a girl.” The Captain cleared his
throat, and before he continued he looked out
over the bay for a minute to where a lone star
had lighted its signal fire in the eastern sky.
“The last one of the lads managed to get his
sister where she could get a grip on the centerboard,
and the two of them clung until we took
them off.”

“And the rest?” asked Polly, softly.

“That’s what I’m telling you. There wasn’t
any rest left. None of them could swim an inch,
and they went down. And that night their
fathers and mothers came down along the Sickle
yonder, and they walked the beach with us men,
walked hour after hour, and sometimes the
women folks would break down and cry. I
found one of the lads myself, and brought him
back to his mother, and while my heart sympathized
with her, my common sense asked why in
tunket she hadn’t taught the lad to swim and
manage a boat right before she’d let him come
nigh salt water. There won’t be any boys or girls
that I have dealings with go into it till they can
swim like a tommycod. That’s all. To-morrow
at ten.”

“We’ll be ready, Captain Carey,” Polly
promised. After the captain and Nancy had
gone, the girls were rather subdued for a while,
thinking over the Captain’s words, and as they
stood out on the porch after supper, and looked
seaward, they thought of what that night’s vigil
along the lonely shore must have been, waiting
for the bodies of the loved ones to be washed up
by the waves.

It was strangely quiet away out there on the
little island. They could hear the running feet
of the surf along the shore, and its steady break
against the rocks up at the Knob. The darkness
seemed to fold itself around them like a
tangible presence, but it brought no sense of fear,
rather of peace and restfulness.

Over on the bay shore there were plenty of
lights to keep them company. As Ted said, the
hotel looked like a Mississippi steamboat with its
triple rows of bright lights. Far out on the end
of the Sickle, they could see the Point light
blinking like some great eye.

“Oh, look, Polly,” cried Isabel. “Isn’t it
beautiful?”

Polly leaned on the veranda railing and nodded
absently, her eyes half closed like the Captain’s,
as she watched the bay.

“It makes me feel as though somebody were
watching us,” she said. “Doesn’t it seem queer
to think that while we are all asleep, the life
savers patrol the beach, taking care of things.
Grandfather’s a sort of a coast patrol. He’s on
the retired list, Rear-Admiral Robert L. Page,
you know. He cannot go to sea any more on
active duty, but he’s our coast patrol, and he sees
that all wrecks are looked after, and relief sent.
I think he’d make a good one.”

“You don’t mean that really, do you, Polly?”
Isabel never could catch a figure of speech until
it had been fully explained to her. But Polly
only smiled and straightening up she started to
sing, her full, young soprano voice floating out
clearly on the still night air.

“Sunset, and evening star,

And one clear call for me!

And may there be no moaning of the bar

When I put out to sea.”

Softly the other girls came from the inner
room, and joined in the old, sweet words.

“But such a tide as moving seems asleep,

Too full for sound and foam,

When that which drew from out the boundless deep

Turns again home.

“Twilight and evening bell.

And after that the dark!

And may there be no sadness of farewell,

When I embark.

“But though from out our bourne of Time and Place

The flood may bear me far,

I hope to see my Pilot face to face

When I have crossed the bar.”

There was silence for a few minutes, then
Aunty Welcome’s voice came from the kitchen,
in agonized accents,

“For de mercy sakes alive, he’s got me by
mah toe!”

Sue was the first to grasp the situation, and
she made a frantic dash for the door.

“It’s my pet crab,” she exclaimed. “I found
him down on the rocks after you girls had gone
away, and I brought him back and put him
into a tin can in the kitchen so we could tame
him.”

“Tame a crab, you goose,” cried Polly, and
she followed at headlong speed, for Aunty’s
wails rose higher and higher.

The crab had managed to wriggle out of the
tin can where Sue had left him to meditate, and
had started on a leisurely examination of the
kitchen floor. Aunty Welcome’s big toe had
proved a happy diversion, as she was going to
bed, and he had caught at it instantly. Polly
disconnected him with difficulty, took him down
the beach, and threw him out into the water.

“Now, you stay there, you family crab,” she
cried.

“Oh, Polly, how cruel, when I wanted to tame
him and study his construction,” Sue protested.

“I reckon that was what he was trying to do to
Aunty, study her construction,” laughed Polly.
“Let’s turn in now. And, say, girls,” she paused
a minute, her face suddenly sober and earnest.
“I don’t know just what it is, but doesn’t it truly
seem as if we were nearer Heaven away out here?
I wonder why? And didn’t you notice that the
Captain and Tom speak of God as if they almost
knew Him, instead of just worshiping Him?
Did you hear them singing ‘Pull for the Shore,’
as they walked down the shore road to-night?
While we are all here, let’s say our evening
prayer together out on the porch, and put in the
one about ‘all perils and dangers of this night.’
You know, Ruth.”

So out there in the darkness the girls knelt,
with their heads bent on the railing looking seaward,
while Ruth’s voice led them in the beautiful
old evening prayer.

“‘Lighten our darkness we beseech Thee, O
Lord, and of Thy great mercy save and defend
us from all perils and dangers of this night; for
the love of Thy only son, our Saviour, Jesus
Christ.’”

And from the far corner of the veranda, they
heard Aunty Welcome’s deep-toned response,
“Amen, chile, Amen.”

So ended the first day on Lost Island.

CHAPTER X

A HOME ON THE ROLLING DEEP

At ten o’clock sharp the next morning the girls
saw the Captain’s dory round the curve of the
bay shore from Fair Havens, and make for the
Knob. Nancy waved her hand to them, her face
shaded by a pink sunbonnet. The girls were already
in the water, paddling around in their new
swimming suits, and splashing one another.
Ted, Kate, and Polly, could just manage to keep
their chins above water, and float, but the rest
kept at waist-deep limits.

“We brought along some ring buoys,” said
Nancy, as she stepped out of the dory, and
helped run it up the beach. “That’s how I
learned to swim. If you just hold on to one and
start out with your feet, you can learn to use one
arm at a time.”

That they were very willing and obedient
pupils, even the Captain had to admit. Nancy
was the teacher, while the Captain stood by in
case of trouble, and gave orders.

“Let yourself go,” Nancy urged Sue, as the
latter clung closely to her in the deep water.
“Just let yourself go, and you’ll find out you’re
floating.”

Sue obeyed, willingly enough, and the next instant
a pair of stockinged feet waved in the air
above the water. As Nancy pulled her up,
spluttering, she laughed, and insisted on going
ahead, and before she realized it she was making
the stroke properly and could keep herself afloat.

Polly had caught the stroke almost at once, and
was swimming around helping Nancy. Ruth
and Kate went about it practically, counting their
strokes, and trying first in water up to their armpits.
But Isabel waded in and sat down at ease
in the water, just where the waves could curl up
around her comfortably. Then she proceeded to
loosen her hair, and give it a good wetting.
Then back on a rock she climbed, and sat there,
letting it dry in the sun.

“Come on in,” called Polly, splashing her with
water. “You mustn’t sit up on that rock and
play you’re a nixie or a mermaid while we have
to work so hard. Come on in, and swim.”

“Oh, Polly, I don’t think I want to,” said
Isabel, anxiously. “I can’t keep the water out of
my eyes.”

“Fiddlesticks,” cried the Commodore; “come
and splash her, girls,” and they drove Isabel
back to work like the rest.

“Now then, now then,” shouted the Captain in
his rolling bass. “Keep at it lively, keep at it
lively. Tom’s coming with the boats at noon if
the wind holds fair, and you must learn how to
keep your heads out of the bay.”

So they kept at it diligently, and when it was
over they went up on the beach. While they
lay around in the warn sand, the Captain took
Nancy and gave a regular life-saving drill to
show them what to do in case of danger.

“First aid to the injured class,” Polly called
it, and it was a good name.

“Don’t scream and get excited. That’s the
first and last rule I want to give you,” he told
them, emphatically. “What would you think of
a boat crew of life-savers whooping at the top of
their lungs when they were going out at a call?
If you do happen to fall overboard, or you see
one of the others in trouble, don’t run and call
for help. Keep cool, and get right down to
business.”

“Don’t people who are in danger of drowning
try to catch hold of any one who goes to rescue
them, and they both are lost?” asked Isabel,
doubtfully. “I should think it would be better
to throw them a buoy or a life preserver or something.”

“That’s something you don’t worry about,”
the Captain told her, comfortably. “I guess if
people had always been thinking of that sort of
thing, there would never have been any life saving
apparatus at all. I sorter feel that we must
leave a whole lot to Him who holdeth the sea in
the hollow of His hand. Now, remember what
I did just now, and how I did it. I’ll drill you
on it next week. You never can tell when it will
come in handy. Don’t start giving a drowned
person strong black coffee or clam chowder the
first thing to brace them up, do you mind me?
’Tain’t done by real life savers.” The Captain’s
eyes twinkled. “Just roll them over a barrel, or
your knee, and get the water out of them; then
take hold of their tongue, using a piece of clean
cloth, and get somebody else to work their arms
up and down, and if there’s any beat left in their
heart it’s going to start up again. And when
you do start them going, then it’s time enough to
give them coffee, or hot ginger tea, or anything.
Mother’s great on hot ginger tea, and I don’t
know but what prayer and ginger ought to be
counted in with the first aid to the injured. I
use them both myself in strong doses.”

Promptly at eleven they all straggled up the
beach, a happy, dripping lot, running in to dress
and get luncheon over before Tom came with the
boats.

A Happy, Dripping Lot

“Do you think we’ll do, Captain?” asked Polly,
when she reappeared.

“Do? Of course you’ll do. I’ll come over
every morning on my way to the Point for a
week and drill you until you can swim. Now you
take Nancy and Tom out with you this afternoon.
It’s calm and easy, with a light breeze
blowing off shore. Better try going out in two
of the boats for a few days with Nancy and Tom
to show you how to handle them.”

Sue ran upstairs to the “lookout,” to see if their
fleet was in sight.

“Sister Anne, Sister Anne, do you see anyone
coming?” called Ted, merrily.

“Here’s Tom,” Sue cried. “Oh, I wonder
how soon I can make a boat act like that.”

Tom came around the bay from Fair Havens
beautifully. He was showing off his sailor craft
freely, and the fifteen-footer was as tame to his
touch as a horse to the rein. Polly watched him
eagerly, as he brought it gracefully to the landing.
The name on the prow was the
Tidy Jane
.

“That’s the best sail boat in the lot,” the Captain
declared, as he left them. “Nancy named
her after the first fishing boat I sailed on up to
the Banks of Newfoundland. And she’s a good
one. She’s shapely as a sloop-o’-war, and twice
as slippery.”

“Then she ought to be the flag ship,” said
Kate. “Why don’t you take her, Polly?”

Polly’s face fairly glowed with pride and
pleasure. Although in a way the whole club
owed its existence to her, and she was the ruling
spirit, yet she never allowed the girls to give her,
as Crullers said flatly, “the best of everything.”
In a hundred ways she showed a steady, loving
generosity and unfailing thoughtfulness and
courtesy to her “crew,” as the Admiral called
the rest of the club, but Polly said he was wrong.

“A crew mans one boat or vessel, but we are an
independent club of yacht racers.”

So to-day when the
Tidy Jane
was handed
over to her, she hesitated, saying that it didn’t
seem fair to the rest. But the rest insisted and
Polly consented.

“Why, I’d love her just on account of her
name,” she said, as she ran down to the landing,
and stepped over into the cockpit. “You go
back and get the other boats, Tom, please. We
shall want to look this one all over till we know
the name of every part of her and just what it
is for.”

“I’ll bring up a knockabout next,” said Tom.

“What’s the difference between a catboat and
a knockabout?” asked Ted.

“A cat’s different from all other yachts because
her mast is set right up in the eyes of her,”
explained Tom. “And she’s broader beamed,
and wider, and has only one sail.”

“She’s a beauty,” Sue exclaimed, and Polly
nodded.

“I know it,” she laughed.

Tom made six more trips, and finally the last
of the boats lay close to the little landing. It
was a long-remembered afternoon, as under
Tom’s guidance the girls had their first lesson in
sailing them. The day was a perfect one. A
southerly breeze came up, just enough to bear
them lightly on their course over the bay. The
Admiral had come down during the afternoon
and had given much valuable advice; but as Polly
said herself, as she stood on the porch at sundown,
her face already tanned and sleeves turned
back to the elbows:

“All the advice in the world won’t help us to
sail these boats till we know all about them ourselves,
know every bit of wood in them, and
every inch of sail, and every cleat and bolt and
pin—”

“Don’t they call them pintles?” suggested
Kate, but Polly never noticed the interruption.

“And we know what they’re going to do next
in all sorts of weather. But I like it, don’t you,
girls?”

“It’s glorious,” cried Ruth, enthusiastically.
Her hair was hanging down her back, while she
brushed it vigorously, trying to get the salt water
harshness out of it. “I’ve named my yacht the

Iris
. It means a rainbow.”

“Mine’s the
Patsy D.
,” Sue said complacently.
“I’ve always wanted a boat named the

Patsy D.
”

“
Patsy D.
,” exclaimed Polly, laughing.
“Why do you want to call her that?”

“Because,” said Sue, firmly, “I want a name
that will be simple and vigorous, and easy to say,
and besides the only boat I ever had a really
happy sail on was named the
Patsy D.
It’s the
excursion steamer that runs around Chesapeake
Bay for Sunday-school outings, and last year
she bumped into something and spoiled the shape
of her lovely nose, and now she’s a barge down
at Newport News. So I shall perpetuate her
memory and call my yacht the
Patsy D.
; and
you may name yours after all the rainbows and
other beauties in creation. I believe that names
should be suggestive of pleasant memories.”

“Hurrah for the
Patsy D.
,” sang out Ted
from the couch corner.

“I don’t care if you do make fun of it. She’s
the
Patsy D.
all the same,” said Sue, stoutly.

“How can she be the
Patsy D.
?” asked Polly,
teasingly.

“Well, she is,” retorted Sue. “Maybe her
real name’s Patricia.”

“My boat is the
Witch Cat
and Kate’s the

Hurricane
,” said Ted slowly; “so we shall not
have the trouble of naming ours.”

“Tom says my boat is called the
Spray
. Do
you like that, Polly?”

“Yes, I do,” said Polly. “Don’t you?”

“Not very much. I thought I’d change it to
the
Lurline
, or
Lorelie
.”

“I like the
Spray
the best. The name of the
yacht Dorothy and Bess Vaughan sail is the

Nixie
. You don’t want to get too near to that.
Crullers, have you named yours? It’s the smallest
one in the lot, isn’t it?”

“Yes. Her name is the
Yum-Yum
. The sail
is like a junk boat’s,” Crullers announced,
thoughtfully; “or a bat’s wing.”

“Tom says the boys fitted it out that way, just
for a novelty. It’s broad, and deep, and wide,
and positively unsinkable.”

“I’ve got two life preservers, and three ring
buoys in the lockers,” Crullers said. “Tom and
the Captain put them in there so I’d feel perfectly
safe and easy.”

“Safe and easy? Safe and easy?” Aunty
Welcome’s voice came from the kitchen. “Dey
ain’t nuffin on earth could make me feel easy
a-sailing round on de face ob de deep like a leviathan.
You couldn’t get me on dat waste of
waters in sech a li’l’ boat for all de gold in de
bowels ob de earth. No, sah.”

“Oh, but, Aunty, you’re going in swimming
with us some day,” coaxed Polly.

“Deed, I wouldn’t any more’n I’d step into an
open grabe and pull de cover in after me,” protested
Welcome. “Last night I couldn’t sleep
a wink a-listening to de rolling ob de waves.”

“Girls, just look out there,” cried Kate suddenly,
as she rose and pointed over the bay towards
the Point Light. It was past sunset, the
purple hour, as Polly always called it, and the
whole world lay wrapped in softest violet.
From somewhere beyond the Point, a deep,
long-drawn whistle sounded, then another, then
another. A faint sound of music drifted to them
on the night air, and as the steamer rounded, they
caught a glimpse of her cabin lights, a row of
gleaming diamonds against the gloom of the
twilight. Then a search-light sent a quick arm
of radiance flashing over the bay, and for a second
the little group on the porch were right in
its path, before it swept on.

“I didn’t know any steamers ran in here,” said
Polly. “Isn’t that splendid? Perhaps it comes
often, and it’s really company just to see it go
by.”

“It must be the Portland boat,” said Kate.
“There’s one that makes a landing at Eastport,
Tom said, and stops first at the hotel pier, before
it goes up through the inlet.”

“Then that must be the steamer that grandfather
meant, when he said he would go back by
boat. He’ll go from Eastport to Portland, then
down the coast to Boston, and so on straight
south.”

“Then we’ll be alone away off here,” said Isabel,
sadly. “Doesn’t it seem deserted? Think
of it when there’s a storm.”

“And the thunders roll from pole to pole,”
groaned Polly, mischievously. “Sue, get your
mandolin, quick. Let’s play something that will
‘soothe this restless feeling and banish the
thoughts of day.’”

Across the inlet made by the Knob’s projection
into the bay, the sound of music floated even
to Fair Havens, and Nancy stopped her evening
task of washing the supper dishes to listen
at the open door. The girls over at the Knob
were singing, with the three mandolins and
guitar giving a splendid accompaniment.
Across the water the melody seemed indescribably
softened and enhanced, as the gay, girlish
tones rang out:

“Oh, a life on the ocean wave,

A home on the rolling deep,

Where the scattered waters rage,

And the winds their revels keep.

And the winds (bing, bing),

And the winds (bing, bing),

And the winds their revels keep.”

“I just love that bing, bing part,” said Nancy,
drawing in a deep breath. “May I go over some
evening, mother, and hear them play?”

“Indeed, you may,” Mrs. Carey replied
heartily. “For they seem to be as warm-hearted
and well-mannered a lot of girls as I ever did
see, and the Captain, your father, agrees with
me.”

“They’re not like those Vaughan girls from
the hotel,” Tom said, stopping his whistling long
enough to join in the conversation. “They had
that knockabout of theirs out on the bay to-day,
and when I sent out a hail at them they never
even waved a hand. Some folks haven’t any
more sociability than a mosquito.”

“They waved to Polly, Tom,” Nancy said;
“but then I do believe the fish would stand up on
their tails and waggle their fins at her, if she sang
out to them.”

“What was it that father said about her?” asked
Mrs. Carey, smiling till her blue eyes were almost
hidden in wrinkles, as she stopped her mending
a moment, and leaned back in the big, red
rocker beside the south window where the roses
climbed.

“Said she carried the starriest top-lights he ever
saw on a craft under her t’gallant eyebrows.”

Mrs. Carey laughed as she turned to her sewing.

“Well, she has a pair of the brownest eyes,
seems to me, I ever saw. And she’s lively too.
I’d a sight rather have those girls than a pack
of boys raising hob over there on the island all
summer long. I hope nothing will happen to
any of them.” She looked out of the window towards
the Knob. Its outlines showed up darkly
against the night sky, but the music had died
away and no light was to be seen. “I think I’ll
tell the girls to put a lamp in that side window
every night, so I’ll know they’re safe and comfortable.”

So after that first night, all summer long
while the Polly Page Yacht Club held forth on
Lost Island, a beacon light was placed at the side
window to assure the Careys all was well.

CHAPTER XI

SMUGGLERS’ ISLE

For the first two weeks hardly anything was
done, except steady, earnest lessons in swimming
and sailing. The excitement and novelty of it
made the sport a delightful one to the girls, and
they were out whenever the weather was good.
During the morning hours the bay held many
bathers, over on the hotel shore, and on the strip
of beach at the Knob likewise. Afternoons the
white sails spread and dipped like gulls out on
the water, and the
Tidy Jane
was usually the
first out and the last one in. After the first
week or so, Tom and Nancy helped only occasionally,
but the girls were doing so well they
did not need much direction now.

The Admiral returned south at the end of the
second week, but promised to run up for the regatta
in the latter part of August, and make sure
they were getting along.

“If it wasn’t for the Careys I’d feel as though
it were risky, my leaving you girls up here with
just Welcome to see that you have plenty to eat
and don’t come down with croup—”

“We don’t have croup, grandfather,” Polly interposed,
that last day, when he dined with them
in state at the little cottage.

“Well, never mind, whatever you should be
threatened with, I know that the Captain has you
on his mind, and you’ll be looked after and made
to behave if you get too headstrong.”

“What will he do to us?” Ted and Sue leaned
eagerly forward.

“Put you in irons down below,” laughed the
Admiral, and he sang a line or two of a rollicking
sailor song,

“Down below, down below.

Sailors often go below,

Storms are many on the ocean.

Sailors have to go below.”

But they missed him until the duties and excitement
of the yacht club made them even forget
his departure. Like everything else she
undertook, Polly went into the thing heart and
soul, with both feet and hands and her sleeves
rolled up, as Sue said. She was up at five and
down on the beach with Ruth, hunting over the
last tide’s treasures for new specimens for their
collections. Although Ruth was seventeen and
Polly not quite fifteen, they had been such
staunch, firm friends at school that the summer
vacation seemed to draw the ties of friendship
all the closer.

“Ruth always understands just what I mean,”
said Polly. “Everybody else thinks I am too
quick-spoken and changeable. But I’m not,
truly I’m not; am I, Ruth?”

“Yes, you are, too,” Ruth answered, in her
placid way. “But I like you for it. You’re
like a sea anemone. They can change their
colors, you know, to match their surroundings.
And I think it’s a good plan, the same as the
chameleon. Somebody, Emerson or Thoreau, I
forget which, says we should all keep our natures
in tune with the harmony of the spheres. What
does that mean but adapting yourself to your
immediate environment—”

“Cut out the big words, Grandma,” Polly said,
briefly. “It makes me think of Honoria, and
I’ll get homesick if you don’t stop.”

“Well, you know what I mean, Polly, don’t
you? It’s why you’re always a favorite with us,
even your very first year you could sit down
at Calvert Hall and listen sympathetically to
Miss Calvert’s detailed description of how much
she had suffered from neuralgia; then you’d go
right down to the kitchen and cheer up poor
Annie May and tell her the sun was surely coming
out right away, and her ‘rheumatuz’ would
be better. Then upstairs you’d fly, and help
Crullers with her Algebra, Sue with her English
Literature, and me with my Civics, and still have
time to get your own work done before class-time.
And you never grumbled one bit.”

“No, but I lose my temper all at once,” said
Polly dolefully, as she picked up a starfish out
of a tiny pool left by the tide and straightened
out its arms. “Never mind me now, though.
Let’s not talk psychics. Look at this fellow,
Ruth. Wonder if Sue would want to tame him
to walk a tight-rope.”

Polly lay flat down in the sand, despite her
fourteen years, and examined the starfish at
close range, in true youngster fashion, while
Ruth poked it over gently with a long splinter of
wood.

“They say if one of its arms breaks off, another
will grow in its place,” said Ruth.

“Will it? I wish ours would. Think how
nice it would be for all the cripples if their arms
and legs would only sprout again. Can starfish
see, Ruth?”

“Indeed they can. See that tiny red speck at
the end of each arm? That’s the eye. Its
mouth is underneath, and look at all the feet on
the under side of the rays, Polly. They say a
starfish is like a sieve, all tiny holes that the water
runs through.”

“Well, this one is going to be dried, neatly
dried,” said Polly. “It’s a shame to do it, but in
the interests of science he must be dried.”

“Don’t show it to Sue, then,” Ruth suggested.
“She’ll want to tame it, surely. She wants to
tame everything we find and make a pet of it.
Tom brought her two turtles this morning, besides
a tin box half full of periwinkles. She’s
trying to train them to come out of their shells
when she whistles to them; think of it, Polly.”

“Ruth, what’s a chambered nautilus?” Polly
picked up a round shell, white and fragile, with
little raised dots on it like lace work.

“That is not,” laughed Ruth. “That’s a sea
urchin, I think. You can find the nautilus only
in the tropics. They call them Argonauts too,
did you know it? I think it’s pretty, for they
say they can rise to the surface of the sea and
spread a little sail.”

Polly leaned back her head, her hands clasped
behind it, and repeated softly:

“This is the ship of pearl, which poets feign

Sails the unshadowed main.

The venturous bark that flings

On the sweet summer winds its purple wings,

In gulfs enchanted where the siren sings,

And coral reefs lie bare,

And the cold sea maids rise to sun their streaming hair.”

“Oh, I love that,” Ruth exclaimed, pushing
back her hair from her face, as she, too, leaned
back to listen. “Say it all, Polly?”

“Not now,” Polly shook her head, “wouldn’t
it be a good idea, though, for us to have a sea-poetry
night while we’re here? Build a great
driftwood fire on the beach, and invite everybody
we know, and toast marshmallows, and each one
recite or sing her favorite piece about the sea.”

“Fine, Polly, fine,” Ruth nodded her head emphatically.
“The Vaughan girls might come
over, and Nancy and Tom and maybe Mrs.
Carey. Let’s.”

They wandered away, then, towards the long
line of rocks that appeared at low tide at the
head of the Knob. Polly said they looked like
the Aleutian Islands in miniature, and she felt
like a lady Colossus stepping out over them. By
hunting very closely around them, one could find
what Ruth called “the enchanted gardens of the
sea;” little pools in the rocks, with sea moss that,
when turned over, was full of life, crawling,
sprawling, atomic life. The finest strands of
seaweed were away out there also, great loose
bunches, some like fern fronds, others like live
moss, and some like chains of big brown beads or
beans.

“Have you found any limpets yet, Polly?”
called Ruth. “They’re the wisest ’possums you
ever saw. They shut their shells up closely when
they know the tide has gone, and then when it
comes in, they lift up the top like a little tent, and
let the water in to take a drink.”

Polly had taken off her shoes and stockings,
and she paddled intrepidly about in the water, and
poked after new things. There had been a heavy
sea the night before, and the beach was strewn
with strands of seaweed, and driftwood, and a
fringe of shells at the high tide mark.

Among the odd things they found were oysters
fastened in all sorts of strange shapes to bits of
rock and wave-worn stones. Polly found a
smooth white one, nearly a perfect oval, with two
shells opening upward from it, like wings, and
she called it Mercury’s slipper. Another flat,
green rock had ten tiny baby oysters clinging to
it, the shells overlapping one another like barnacles.

So it went every day. When they had a
good-sized collection, they would go up on the
porch, to sort out, and share, and trade. The
prettiest ones they saved for paper weights, but
Isabel and Kate refused to declaim over the
oystered rocks. With pails they hunted up and
down the shore for the pink and green and opal
tinted shells that Marbury had nicknamed Neptune’s
finger nails. These shells were very shy
of the land. You had to walk along the very
edge of the water, and watch each incoming
wave, then catch the wisps of shells before they
slipped back into deep water. Some were pale
green, some a cloudy pearl like opals, and others
were deep salmon pink. Some were iridescent,
and gleamed in the sunlight beautifully. Isabel
had set her heart on stringing a portìere to carry
back to her mother, and Kate was making one
for Miss Calvert as a memento of their summer
vacation.

Sue’s hobby was the live castaways of the sea.
While the other girls hunted for shells and seaweed,
she it was who sought crabs, lobsters, fish,
and turtles. Tom brought her some fish poles,
and Nancy would join her as she sat on the
little, lopsided landing place, fishing tranquilly
hour after hour. Good luck attended her, too.
Many a savory mess did she bring up to Aunty
Welcome for their dinner, and several mornings,
long before the other girls were awake, she had
sailed away out with Tom and Nancy to what
the former called the Little Banks, where the
cod ran. One day when the wind had been in
the right quarter, they even sailed out around
the Point, and caught a glimpse of the open
channel out to sea, and the life saving station.

“Nancy,” Sue had said solemnly that day,
when they tacked and started homeward, “I
should think you would be so proud of your
father you wouldn’t know what to do. Don’t
you know that a life saver is a hero? Why,
down home, if a man saves anybody else’s life,
he gets a medal, sometimes from Congress, and
it is all written up in the papers, and away off
up here, these men go on saving people and
saving them, and no one hears anything about
it or seems to think it’s wonderful.”

Nancy nodded. “Oh, yes, they have medals
too, sometimes.”

“But not enough. How many people do you
really suppose the Captain has saved?”

“Oh, my, I don’t know,” laughed Nancy.
“There are ever so many of them. I don’t think
even father has kept track. He says it’s just
his day’s work, and his duty. His favorite
hymn is the one we so often sing at church over
in the village, ‘Brightly Gleams Our Father’s
Mercy.’”

Nancy’s strong young voice sang out the
sweet old hymn until it fairly echoed over the
waters. She was at the tiller of the
Pirate
,
Tom’s catboat, while Sue sat up on what Nancy
called “the lid,” the little deck between the cock
pit and the coaming, her feet dangling over in
true sea-rover fashion.

The lighthouse and life-saving station stood
out in silhouette against the bright, sapphire
sky, and the sea had the glimmer and the sheen
of a blue bird’s glancing wing, with tints that
changed prismatically with every cloud shadow.

“Nancy,” called Sue, suddenly, bending forward
to take a better look at an island they were
passing, “what’s that pile of rock over there,
shaped like a tower?”

“It is a tower, or used to be. That’s Smugglers’
Cove. Father says he’s heard his father
tell how a band of Nova Scotia pirates used to
put in this bay years and years ago, and land
their goods on this island, and a family of fishermen
lived here who were really smugglers.”

“Are there any left now?” asked Sue, her
blue eyes wide with interest.

Nancy shook her head, the fresh breeze blowing
her yellow hair back from her tanned, happy
face, that always seemed to be smiling like the
Captain’s.

“They didn’t play fair with the pirates, and
one night a ship was seen just outside the harbor,
and nobody knows her name, or where she
was bound. But after that night no living soul
was ever seen on the island again, and the pirates
never entered Eagle Bay after that. Father
says after a few years some fisher boys ventured
to land there, but they didn’t find anything.
The pirates had carried away everybody, and all
that belonged to them.”

“Maybe they left some buried treasure there.”
Sue’s tone was brimful of romance and wonderment,
but Nancy answered in a matter-of-fact
way:

“Maybe. Nobody knows. And years ago,
too, there was a big French boat wrecked off our
coast that was blown southward down the shore,
and folks say there was treasure on board, money
for the French provinces up in Nova Scotia and
Canada. So that’s down with the fishes too,
probably.”

“Oh, dear,” said Sue, ruefully, “and here I
thought it might be some place where we could
get it. Polly’d find a way if there was any sort
of chance. I wish we could train a tommycod
to go down and bring up one piece of gold at a
time.”

“It isn’t in pieces. It’s gold bars, bullion,
father called it.”

“Then it will have to be a tame tommycod.
Just wait till I tell Polly.”

Polly’s opinion was given swiftly. Her eyes
sparkled as soon as she heard the story of Smugglers’
Cove.

“Let’s take lunch, and all sail over there to-morrow
and explore.”

“The Commodore’s word is law,” replied Kate,
laughing. “Aye, aye, sir.”

They had found out the very first week after
their arrival that a row-boat was a necessity for
shore trips.

“Something like a dory or a ‘dink,’” Ted suggested.
“I know my brothers, when they took
the yacht out, talked about the ‘dink,’ and it was
a little boat swung up handily to use when the
yacht wasn’t needed.”

“That’s the dinghey, you mean,” Tom told
her. “You folks over here need a dory.”

“Well, what’s the difference between the two,
Tom?” Polly called from the inner room, where
she sat writing letters home, so Tom could take
them over to Eastport that afternoon.

“A dory’s a freebooter, and her own mistress,”
said Tom, “but a dinghey belongs to the ship her
painter’s fastened to.”

“Then we want a dory.”

Accordingly a dory found its way over, and
became part of the club’s equipment. The girls
liked it, too; they averaged from two to six trips
a day in it over to Fair Havens. It was handy
when they wanted to send by Tom or the Captain
to the village for groceries, for they could
bring them home in the dory from the Captain’s
house.

Friday night it was when Sue told of Smugglers’
Cove, and they decided to picnic there the
next day; so early the next morning Polly rowed
over to ask Nancy to go with them.

“I had better help mother with the cleaning,”
Nancy said, hesitatingly, but Mrs. Carey smilingly
waved her away.

“Land, Nannie, you’re only young once. Go
along and be happy. There isn’t much to do at
all.”

“We’ll have to start away from the island at
about five, Polly,” Nancy said, as she slipped off
her big apron and brushed her hair, “because
the Portland boat gets in to-day, and she’s due
at six-thirty. We had better keep out of her
way.”

“Yes, and you children don’t want to catch her
swell in those wisps of boats,” Mrs. Carey added,
firmly.

“They wouldn’t sink, would they, Mrs.
Carey?” Polly asked.

“Maybe they wouldn’t, but they’d ship a lot of
water, and rock so that any one who wasn’t used
to them, might be thrown overboard, and in a
heavy sea like the Portland boat leaves behind her
there’d be no picking you up.”

Polly forgot to tell the girls the warning, and
in the hurry of preparation for the day’s jaunt it
slipped from her memory. Aunty Welcome
packed a mighty lunch for them, but flatly refused
to be one of the party. It was their first
extended sail without Tom’s company to reassure
them against mishap, but the day was perfect
for sailing, and the yachts took the breeze as
lightly and as easily as gulls. Polly led, and
took a course across the bay towards the hotel,
then tacked, and started straight for Smugglers’
Cove. The
Tidy Jane
led the way gallantly,
clear to the Cove, as a flagship should, but the
girls declared it was no proof of the
Jane’s

superiority as a sailing craft. It was the way
the Commodore handled her. While the others
handled their main sheets gingerly and cautiously,
letting out and tacking slowly, Polly
was ready and waiting as soon as she reached
the end of the first course to let go, and the minute
the point was reached, biff! Polly’s sail
slackened, the boom swung about, and the cotton
caught the puff in a jiffy, and was off on
the new stretch.

“Some day you’ll do that, and you’ll tumble
over into the water,” Isabel told her. “I always
expect to get hit on the head when my boom
swings about.”

“Then you’ll be like Yonny Yohnson, the little
Swedish sailor from Stockholm that the Captain
told us about,” laughed Polly. “Listen,” and
she quoted: “‘Yonny Yohnson, he yump off
yib-boom into yolly boat, and spoil his yellow
yacket.’”

Crullers was always the last to get started
from the landing. Yachting with Jane Daphne
Adams, as Polly said, was a serious matter, and
she gave it her undivided attention. Her sail
was different from those on the other boats. It
was shorter and wider, and ribbed crosswise like
a junk boat’s sails. Tom told them that Phil
and Jack, Polly’s cousins, had put it on, just as a
freakish notion, and it surely was freakish to
look at; but it was easy to handle and Crullers
liked it. There was no cabin, but the cockpit
was roomy and had several lockers underneath
the seats.

“Cabin,” she had said quite scornfully, when
the girls had said it was too bad she didn’t have
one. “Call that little dark hole a cabin? Why,
it’s all you can do to turn around in it. And
even if I did have one, I’d only use it to sleep in,
and then where would my yacht be?”

“You mean where would you be?” laughed
Polly.

It was a little past eight in the morning when
they arrived at Smugglers’ Cove. There was a
line beach to run up on, and the shores looked inviting.

“This is a perfect cove,” said Ruth. “It must
have given the place its name years ago. Those
little bunches of grass over yonder look like an
atoll, girls, the way they bob up here and there
around the shore.”

It took some time for the newly fledged skippers
to drop anchor, and furl their sails, but
finally it was done. The tide was out, and the
girls took off their shoes and stockings and
waded up the beach from the boats, carrying their
lunch boxes and some pillows that Aunty Welcome
had put in at the last minute. It was
comical to see the procession of eight wading in,
each with a gayly colored sofa pillow on her
head, and a box under one arm, but finally everything
they wanted was ashore, and the invasion
of Smugglers’ Cove was complete.

Polly said it would be better to explore before
the sun rose high, and they started off, taking
the beach as the surest path. It was even a better
strip of sand than they had at the Knob, firm
and beautifully white, with the remains of millions
of infinitely tiny shells crumbling into it.
Polly took up a handful of sand and called Ruth
to come and look at it.

“I wish we had a microscope. It’s all fragments
of shells. Isn’t it lovely, Ruth?”

“Wait till you see the Castle,” Nancy called.
“That’s what everybody along shore calls it,
Smugglers’ Castle. The walls are made of rocks
and shells, and a sort of clay with shells stuck
in it.”

“Like the old walls at St. Augustine,” Polly
exclaimed. “They are like mosaic, the shells are
matched in so perfectly.”

“Oh, girls, I just thought of a good plan,”
Kate remarked, suddenly. “Wouldn’t it be
dandy for us to keep a log-book?”

“But do yacht clubs keep them?” Isabel said
dubiously.

“I don’t know whether they do or not,” Kate
returned. “But I think it would be fine for this
yacht club to. Keep a regular daybook of general
events, I mean, everything that happens to
us of general interest. Then at the end of the
vacation, have eight copies, and bind them in
linen covers to keep as souvenirs.”

“Kate, we’ll do it,” Polly said, approvingly.
“Call it the Memory Log Book of the Castaways
of Lost Island.”

“What a dandy place for ghosts,” Sue called
back to them, as she climbed up the rocks, her
shoes and stockings in her hand.

“Girls, look at this!” Polly stopped short,
and pointed down at the beach. There were
footsteps plainly to be seen in the sand.

“Who on earth could it be?” Isabel gasped,
while Nancy ran down the shore, and knelt to
look at them more closely. Polly’s eyes danced
with fun, and she sang softly under her breath:

“Oh, Robinson Crusoe, he lived alone,

On a little island, he called his own,

No one to say when he came home,

Robinson Crusoe,

What made you do so?”

“Don’t, Polly, please,” Ruth said softly, her
face rather anxious. “You can’t tell who may
be here now, looking at us, when we can’t see
them.”

“Who cares?” Polly laughed, merrily. “It
makes it all the better. I never read about an
island yet but what it had savages, or pirates, or
something on it to make it interesting. This
pirate wears real shoes anyway, so he’s partly
civilized. You can tell by the footprints in the
sand. But what are all these other funny marks
all around. One, two, three, one, two, three, as
if a campstool had danced a jig in the wet sand.”

“Maybe it’s somebody clamming,” said Crullers,
hopefully.

“You don’t clam that way,” Polly told her.
“You dig for clams. You don’t spear them.”

“I don’t,” Ted said quite seriously. “I take
my mandolin and sit down on the sand, and play
to them, and they all come out and smile at me.”

“You silly goose,” Polly laughed, but Ted ran
on ahead after Sue. She had vanished suddenly
over the rocky ledge ahead. They could hear
her in the distance singing “Nancy Lee” at the
top of her healthy young lungs; then all at once
there was a dead silence.

“Maybe they’ve caught her,” whispered Isabel.
“Let’s run for the boats.”

“Run, and leave Sue behind?” Polly’s tone
was full of reproach. “Not if I know it. Here
are seven of us, and we’re all good and hearty.
We’ll go and find out the trouble.”

They turned away from the beach and started
up the rocks, Nancy and Polly leading. At the
top they paused. The entire island lay outspread
before them. It was a mass of sand, with
gradually rising rock ledges towards its center,
and scrub pines and willows everywhere. Right
in the center, on the highest rock, rose the Castle,
or “Smugglers’ Tower,” as it had been called.
It was built over the site of the old fisherman’s
hut, and was half overgrown by moss, vines, and
clambering shrubs. Inside the ruins, willows
and young birches had grown up in defiance of
the place. But Sue was nowhere in sight, and
they could see all over the island from where they
stood.

CHAPTER XII

“GIRL OVERBOARD!”

“Don’t call out to her,” whispered Polly.
“Wait here just a minute, while I climb down
these rocks. This is the way she went, you can
see her tracks.”

“Tracks, on a rocky path,” murmured Ted,
helplessly. “Polly, where are they? I don’t
see any?”

“Here, where the grass is trodden down.
Now, don’t get frightened. Just wait for me.”
Polly started down the rocky path, and at its
base looked around cautiously. Not a living
soul was in sight anywhere, but even while she
hesitated, she saw Sue’s form come apparently
out of the ground itself over in a rocky enclosure,
well sheltered from wind and wave.
Polly turned, called to the rest to follow, and ran
ahead to join Sue.

“It’s a camp,” Sue said excitedly, as she
reached her. “And there’s a real cave, Polly,
and a bed in it, and dishes, and the bed’s just
been slept in, and there’s a coffee pot in there
that’s still warm.”

“Sue, I never knew you were such a splendid
detective,” Polly answered, warmly. “Let’s
drink the pirates’ coffee right away.”

But Ruth and Kate arrived and advised caution
until they found out just what the mystery
was.

“It’s probably only some fishermen,” said
Nancy, in her matter-of-fact way. “Father’d be
sure to know if any strangers had arrived and
settled here.”

Polly started for the entrance to the cave.

“There may be somebody in there,” Ruth
cried. “Please don’t go in.”

“There’s nobody at home,” Sue replied. “I’ve
been in.”

It was a good-sized cave, Polly saw, as soon
as she ventured into it. The floor was of finest
sand. There was a bed, a very primitive bed,
but yet a bed, made of branches of pine with
blankets spread over them. Some boxes served
as seats, and a ledge of rock as a shelf for some
dishes. But Polly’s quick eyes noticed a couple
of suitcases in one corner and sundry articles of
clothing lying around such as no consistent
smuggler or pirate would have deigned to don.
When she came out into the sunlight and faced
the girls, she was smiling.

“Do fishermen around here have books and
magazines lying around in caves?” she asked.
“There are all sorts of such things in this cave.”

“Well, anyway, Polly,” Kate put in, in her
level-headed way, “whatever they have in there,
we have no business going in and rummaging
around, and they’ll very soon tell us so if they
appear suddenly. I move that we vanish.”

The motion was carried unanimously, and the
girls climbed the path back to the Castle.

“We can watch anyone who comes, from up
here,” Polly said. “They’ll see the yachts anyway,
and know they have visitors.”

“Maybe they have already,” Kate suggested.
“Maybe that’s what ails them. Maybe they’ve
seen us and have run away to hide.”

“Oh, such a hive of maybes,” laughed Ruth.
“Still, maybe it’s so, Polly.”

The idea gave them fresh courage, and they
hurried to the Castle, and hunted all over its
ruins, enthusiastic over the outlook for adventure.
But even when they had reached the topmost
point and the entire island lay before them,
not a sign of life did they detect. Save for their
own pretty fleet, riding at anchor down in the
cove, the shore was deserted, and not a single
sound disturbed the air.

“I think whoever it is has gone fishing for his
breakfast,” Nancy said, decidedly. “And it’s
probably only some of the boys from the summer
cottages or the hotel, having a little camp
for a day or two. Let’s go along as if nothing
had happened, and if they should come back,
we’ll just tell them we came over to see the
island and didn’t know it had any people on it.”

It seemed to be the only sensible thing to do,
so the girls agreed. As Ruth said, in these days
it was hardly likely there were pirates on the
island, and a party of ordinary campers wouldn’t
eat them up or open fire on them from any secret
place. So in spite of their curiosity and natural
uneasiness, the girls managed to spend a happy
day. They dug clams and roasted them down
on the beach for lunch, and even borrowed a few
things from the cave outfit, pepper and salt,
some forks, and an extra bottle of Chili sauce.
With a plentiful supply of crackers, and all that
Aunty Welcome had put into their lunch boxes
besides, it was a feast. After it was over, the
girls returned what they had borrowed, and
placed a conspicuous sign on them, written by
Polly:

“
Dear Smuggler
:

“Thank you for your pepper, salt and Chili sauce. We
leave in return this jar of Aunty Welcome’s marmalade,
and half a nut cake, and six crullers, and some hermits.
Do you know what hermits are? We thought it would be
appropriate to give you some.”

“Put in an invitation for him to come over and
see us,” Ted added, after the six had stood off
and regarded the sign critically. So Polly
added down at the bottom,

“And we should be happy to entertain you at any time
at the yacht club on Lost Island.”

“But what if he should come?” asked Isabel.

“He won’t,” retorted Polly, happily.
“Smugglers aren’t a bit sociable. But if he
should, we’ll survey him in the offing, and if he
comes in a long, low rakish looking craft, we’ll
all take to our heels, and run at once for Fair
Havens. This is what grandfather would say
was a courtly and polite thing to do after we had
taken his Chili sauce, and it really was extra
nice.”

Later Kate climbed to the top of the ruined
tower again, and returned, after making a careful
observation.

“When you were in the cave, Polly, did it
seem to grow larger towards the interior?”

“I think so. I could stand up in it easily, and
it arched at the back.”

“I don’t think it’s a cave at all. I was on a
direct line with it up in the tower from the place
where I stood, and I’m wondering if it isn’t a
passage cut through to the tower to make a way
of escape at some time.”

“Kate, I never thought that you were a romancer,”
laughed Polly. “If it had been
Isabel, we wouldn’t have been surprised, but for
you—” she shook her head doubtfully. “I
shouldn’t wonder if there were sea chests of gold,
and all sorts of loot hidden away in there, but
I’m not going in after them. Come on, girls.
It’s after five, and the wind will die down soon.”

“I don’t see how we’re going to beat back
against it, anyway,” Isabel said. “It’s blowing
this way from the Knob instead of towards it.”

“Oh, we’ll get back some way,” Polly led the
way down the rocks to the shore, and the rest
followed. But it took some time to gather up
the shells and seaweed they had collected, so that
when they were ready to start the sun was sloping
well down in the west, towards the back of
Bald Bluff on the ocean shore.

Crullers had a hard time getting started.
The other girls were well along on their course,
before she left the shelter of the Cove, and even
then, she failed to catch the puff of wind that
should have carried her towards the inlet, where
Polly said, they would tack, and cut across the
bay in a triangle.

“I don’t see how you can do it, Polly,” Kate
said doubtfully.

“The wind will change when the tide comes
in,” Polly called. “We’ll be all right.”

“Oh, Polly, look at Crullers,” Sue cried, all at
once, as she happened to glance back over her
shoulder. “She’s off the course, and making for
the open channel.”

The yachts were spread out like a line of
geese, one behind the other, and Crullers’ was
last of all. Polly stood up, one hand on her tiller,
and looked back. Crullers was waving
wildly and shouting something to them, but the
wind carried her voice the other way. And the
little, broad-keeled “cat” was taking her own
pleasure, headed merrily for the open channel.

“Crullers, sit down and steer,” shouted Polly.

“I can’t,” cried Crullers, helplessly, “the
wooden thing in the handle part of it’s broken.”

“Now what does she mean by that, the little
lubber,” thought Polly. “It must be the pintle
bolt. I’m glad she’s got three ring buoys in the
locker.”

The other girls were dazed and couldn’t think
what to do. Polly slackened her sail, and put
about. As she passed the others, she called to
them to keep along as they were and she would
look after Crullers.

“I don’t see what she’s making all that noise
about,” Sue exclaimed, as they heard Crullers
calling to them, frantically. “That boat of hers
wouldn’t sink if you jumped on it, and she’s got
all those life preservers packed away in the lockers,
and the buoys too. There’s no danger at all.
She’s just scared.”

But suddenly there came a sound from the
channel that made their blood chill, the long, hollow
boom of a steamer’s signal.

“Polly! Polly! Polly!” cried poor Crullers,
in agony, and then they saw her drop down in
the boat, and cover her face with her hands.

“It’s the
City of Portland
coming in, Polly,”
Kate shouted, with her hands up to her lips.

Polly shook her curls out of her face and
nodded. “I’ll get her all right,” she called back.

One hand held the tiller firm and steady, the
other had loosened the main sheet, and held it so
as to get the benefit of every breath of wind.
Her head was bending forward, her eyes half
closed like the Captain’s, as they watched the
squat little catboat ahead with Crullers crouching
it.

The big boat whistled again, sharp long calls
of direction, of which not one of the girls understood
the meaning. Crullers stood up.

“Sit down,” called Polly, “sit down, and
steady your boat, you little goose. Hold her off
to windward, Crullers, not that way, towards the
island, towards the island! Oh, can’t you hear
anything? Loosen the main sheet, that rope
right there at the end of your boom, and let the
wind swing her about. Oh, dear, can’t you do
what I say, Crullers?”

Crullers’ fingers fumbled over the main sheet.
They were out in the channel now, with the Point
of the Sickle lying at their right hand, and the
lighthouse and station in plain sight. Just as
Polly set her teeth, and tried to make straight
for the other boat, the great white steamer,
City
of Portland
, hove into sight, steaming up the
channel. Then something that Polly had either
read or heard flashed through her mind. A sailing
vessel has the right of way. But Crullers
did not know that, and when she saw that monster
bearing straight down on her, all her courage
and presence of mind left her. The one thing
she did remember were the ring buoys in the
lockers at the stern.

The
Portland
was blowing its whistle steadily
now, and Polly called as she came near, “It’s
all right, Crullers. They’re holding up to let us
pass. Keep right along.”

Crullers was ahead, and did not seem to hear
her, and just as she felt sure they would pass
safely, she saw Crullers deliberately stand up in
her rocking, unsteady little craft, with her two
arms thrust to the shoulders through a couple of
ring buoys, and another held fast in her hands.
Her round, good-tempered face was blanched
white, as she turned towards Polly.

“I’m going to jump, Polly!” she called out
shakily.

“Don’t you dare to!” Polly cried, but her
words had no effect. They were right in the
path of the
Portland
, and under her great
bow. The Captain was shouting something to
them, as he leaned out over the bridge. Bells
seemed to be ringing, and the rails were lined
with tense, startled faces. Polly could hear some
women screaming up on deck. The engines had
stopped on the big boat, and she was drifting
easily with the incoming tide towards the inlet.
It seemed in that second of time as if everybody
on the steamer was shouting out something different
as Crullers jumped into the water.

There was hardly any sea on. The bay was
beautiful in the soft golden glow before sunset.
The tide had turned, and was coming in in long
easy swells like the waves from the wake of a
steamer. It seemed to Polly afterwards, when
she looked back to that time, as if she saw everything
in the visible universe in those few seconds.
The big boat standing off, and booming, booming
at them distractedly; Crullers’ little catboat,
righting itself gallantly after her jump, and
starting off on its own hook towards the Point;
Crullers herself, looking so comical in spite of the
tragic danger, with the ring buoys around her
arms like a new fashion in sleeve puffs, and the
third one hugged to her breast as she slipped under
the water; and most vivid of all, perhaps, the
Life Saving Station, where they evidently had
been seen, for somebody was running back up
the beach towards the low white building.

Then suddenly she saw Crullers’ taffy-colored
pigtails, lank and drenched, and her face dripping
and deathlike, as she came up. It seemed
the easiest and most natural thing in the world
to lean over and catch hold of the pigtails. Polly
never thought of doing anything else, but as she
did so, and Crullers caught hold of the
Tidy
Jane
and was helped and pulled over into its
cockpit, a great, swelling cheer went up from the
decks of the
Portland
, and the captain swung
off his cap in salute to the little Commodore
of the Yacht Club, as she tumbled her drenched
mate on the locker, and went back to steering.

The
Jane
came about handsomely, and the
engines on the steamer started to throb. Then
Polly glanced up, with one of her rare, frank
smiles that won her so many friends, and waved
her hand back to all the faces that seemed to
smile at her, and at the big, burly Maine captain,
who laughed as he shouted down to her:

“Well done, mate, well done!”

CHAPTER XIII

POLLY’S “CURRENT EVENTS”

“Put it down in the log book, Kate, under
the head of current events,” Polly said that night,
as she sat beside Crullers’ couch, and they all
discussed the rescue. “And don’t say heroism
again. It wasn’t anything of the kind. It was
just plain common sense.”

“That’s so,” agreed the Captain, smiling
shrewdly. “It’s an awful embarrassing thing,
this being a hero, Miss Polly. I’ve had to go
through it several times, more or less, whenever
I happened to haul some landlubber out of deep
water, and I can sympathize with you.”

“Just the same, Captain, you’ll never know
how glad I was to see that life-boat round the
Point. The tide was setting me at my wits’
end, and I never would have got the
Tidy Jane

back by myself.”

“She’s powerful skittish once she gets the
smell of the open sea,” the Captain remarked.

“Yes, and they helped me get the salt water
out of Crullers too,” added Polly. “I’ll bet a
cooky she won’t like salt for a year, after that
one good taste of it.”

Crullers laughed feebly. But the other girls
could not make light of the affair. It had
seemed altogether too serious and tragic, when
they had watched those two frail, white-winged
little boats drifting straight in the face of danger,
and then Crullers’ frantic leap into the
sea, and the coming of the life-boat around the
Point. It all savored too much of real tragedy,
Kate and Ruth said, and it ought to teach them
a good lesson.

The life savers had picked up Crullers’ boat
midway down the channel, and had towed the

Tidy Jane
in under bare poles. Polly and
Crullers had been taken up to the Station, Crullers,
dripping and half unconscious, carried in
the arms of the Captain, while Polly walked
along the narrow boardwalk behind them, and
the rest of crew followed, five men altogether.
At the Station, Crullers had a personal experience
with “first aid” methods, for she had not
kept her mouth closed when she had gone under,
and as the Captain said she had “shipped a sea.”

The other girls returned to Lost Island in
their boats, as soon as possible, and prepared
Aunty Welcome; then walked back on the shore
road to meet the Captain when he came along
carrying Crullers wrapped up like a papoose
in a real, United States Life Saving Corps
blanket.

That night Mrs. Carey had come over to the
island cottage to make sure that Crullers was
doing well. Aunty Welcome had dosed her with
hot ginger tea, which as Polly said was punishment
enough in itself with a July thermometer
climbing toward the nineties. She had also had
a warm mustard bath, and lay wrapped in a
blanket on a couch in the living-room. The
Captain sat on a camp stool, and whittled away
at a new pintle bolt for Crullers’ rudder. He
said nothing all the time the girls told of the
day’s adventures to Mrs. Carey, not even when
Polly said she was glad the life boat had come
after them, but he nodded his head slowly.

“Aren’t you going to scold us any?” asked
Polly, finally. “We should have started for
home sooner, and maybe we didn’t manage the
yachts just right. It was a queer wind that
came with the tide. It blew from the southwest—”

“West by sou’west,” corrected the Captain
gravely.

“Yes, sir,” Polly agreed. “So we had to beat
our way back criss cross over the bay to catch
any good from it.”

“You needn’t explain,” the Captain shook his
head, his eyes twinkling under their shaggy
brows. “I’m ashamed of you all, getting the
crew out on a day when there was hardly a ripple
on the bay.”

“We didn’t call for help,” Polly pleaded.
“They must have heard the
Portland’s
whistle.
I am sorry about it. The captain of the
Portland

must think we’re a nice lot of yacht lubbers.
More likely he’s calling us yacht lubbers.”

“I met him at the hotel to-night when I went
down to telephone,” said the Captain, slowly.

“Oh, what did he say about us?” the girls
broke in. “Please tell us, Captain Carey.”

“He said that the girl in the
Tidy Jane
deserved
a medal for the way she handled her boat,
and saved the little fat one.” The Captain’s
face was quite serious.

“I didn’t do anything to Crullers except pull
her over into the
Jane
,” said Polly, blushing.
“She’d have kept afloat anyway till the life boat
reached her. She was floating lovely with all
those little buoys on her.”

“I was not,” protested Crullers, indignantly.
“I was just full of salt water. I swallowed
gallons of it when I went under that first time.”

Polly was watching the Captain’s countenance
as the barometer of his opinion on the matter,
but it betrayed little. He listened to all they had
to say; then finally leaned back and closed his
big jack knife. Mrs. Carey had gone out into
the kitchen to confer with Aunty Welcome about
the need of a doctor.

“I was expecting it,” said the Captain at last.
“I’ve been telling all along, to Tom, and Nancy,
and mother, that there’d be some doings pretty
soon, and they came a little sooner than I expected.
You’d better not go sailing about too
much after this unless you’re sure of yourselves.
For if you can get all tangled up like that on
a fair day, where would you be in a sudden
squall? I’ll expect now every time we get a
good breath of wind to look over the bay and see
one of the yachts floating around bottom up, and
a couple of you youngsters hanging on to it by
your eyelids. Now mind what I say, keep down
at this end of the bay, out of the channel and
away from the other craft, till you know enough
to get out of the way. What were you doing
out there anyhow, trying to round the Point?”

The girls had nearly forgotten their adventure
at Smugglers’ Cove in the newer excitement
of the accident, but now they told of the day
there, and of the mystery, until the Captain
leaned back his head and laughed over it.

“Now, who do you suppose it can be, Captain?”
asked Isabel and Ted in one breath.

“Is there a passage from that cave up to the
old ruins?” Kate added.

“They were footprints with shoes on,” Sue
exclaimed.

“Were they indeed?” The Captain laughed
till he coughed, and wiped the tears out of his
eyes. “Well, now, you take my advice and keep
off the island, for I’m thinking it’s inhabited.”

“Do you know who lives there?” Polly leaned
forward to meet his glance, and the Captain
slowly winked, oh, but so wisely and cautiously.

“I am saying nothing,” he told them. “Can
you hear me?”

Mrs. Carey appeared in the doorway just
then.

“Come along home, father,” she said. “We’ve
decided not to get any doctor. I guess Welcome’s
about right. She says they frets around,
and muddles things up, and gets in the way, and
she can mix up just as queer a mess as they can
any time. I don’t think the child is hurt much,
anyhow. She’s pretty well scared, and salted,
and that’s about all. Polly, I’ll send over some
fresh string beans and a mess of peas in the
morning by Nancy, and Tom’s going to the village
if you need anything.”

“Aren’t they good to us?” Polly said, as she
came back after saying goodbye and watching
the gleam of the lantern swing along the hummocks
over to the shore road. “I thought he’d
scold us hard.”

“We deserved it,” Kate answered, calmly, as
she stuffed a couple of sofa cushions back of her
head, and clasped her hands on them. “Here
we’ve stopped a steamer, excited all her passengers
and crew, made the life-savers hustle out
in fair weather, and generally let everybody
around Eagle Bay know what a lot of lubbers
we are at handling yachts, all because Crullers’
pintle bolt got twisted and she took a jump overboard.
It’s lucky, Polly, the Admiral isn’t here.
He’d send us all back to Queen’s Landing in a
jiffy.”

“We didn’t mean to make so much trouble,”
Polly answered cheerily, as she shook up Crullers’
pillow, and got her a glass of fresh water
for the night. “I’m only thankful it was no
worse. Let’s make the best of it. Let’s make
an interesting invalid out of Crullers. Aunty
Welcome says she must stay in bed to-morrow
till all danger is over of chills or fever or stomach
upsetness. I’m going to loan her my pink
kimono to wear over her nightgown, and we’ll
bring in some wild roses from the shore road,
and entertain her with a—oh, girls, I know
what.” Polly stopped short, her eyes sparkling
as they always did when she had a sudden idea.
“Let’s give her a ‘Sea Social.’ We were going
to have one some evening, but now we’ll do it
to-morrow afternoon. We can get the Vaughan
girls over. Have Tom leave word at the hotel
for them, and Nancy will come, and we’ll all
sing sea songs and recite sea poetry, and we’ll
have a lunch right out of the sea, fried flounder.”

“I wish we could have crab
a la
Newburg,”
Isabel remarked musingly. Polly went to the
open window, and stretched out her arms seaward,
as she sang:

“Flounder, flounder in the sea,

Come, I pray, and talk to me.

For my wife, Dame Isabel,

Wishes what I fear to tell.”

She turned just in time to catch the pillow
that Isabel sent flying across the room, and they
all sat down to make up a program for Crullers’
“Sea Social.”

It was a great success. Even Mrs. Carey
came over, with a fresh gingerbread and a pail
of rich cream.

“They go mighty nice together,” she said,
smilingly, and the girls agreed with her before
the feast was over.

Dorothy and Bess made the trip across the
bay in the
Nixie
, to call on the invalid, and lend
their share to the social side of the afternoon.
Crullers had never been the guest of honor anywhere
before, but she was that day, as she sat
up on the couch in the living-room, with Polly’s
long pink kimono around her, and pink wild
roses fastened on each side her braids, above her
ears, in Japanese fashion.

The glee club played all the sea songs they
could remember, and all hands piped up merrily
from “Nancy Lee” to “Anchored.” Then Polly
announced that the best part of the program was
yet to come. Each of the girls would render
her favorite poem about the sea, and Crullers
had to start the ball rolling.

“I only know the one about the ‘Schooner
Hesperus,’ Polly,” she said, shyly, “and I like
it best of all.”

“Say it, then,” Polly told her. “We like it,
too.”

Then Kate recited “The Three Fishers,” her
slow, contralto tones and rather dreamy air well
fitting themselves to the sad old verses. Isabel
gave “Annabel Lee” most touchingly, and Polly
ordered a quick song in happier vein to offset
the sadness of the two. So after a rousing
“Billy was a Bo’sun,” Ted got up, and declaimed
the only poem on the sea she knew, one she had
had to memorize at Calvert Hall as a punishment
for putting the house cat into Fraulein’s
shirtwaist box, and scaring her nearly into a
fainting fit (Fraulein, not the cat).

“The mountains look on Marathon,

And Marathon looks on the sea,

And sitting there a while alone,

I dreamed that Greece might yet be free.”

Polly always liked to watch Ted’s face when
she came to that verse. She would lift her chin,
and her gray eyes would flash, and her fists
clench. At Calvert Hall Ted had always been
the most successful “declaimer,” as Miss Calvert
termed it, and she “fixed Greece good
and plenty” this time; so Sue said when it
was over.

Dorothy declared she didn’t know any poem
about the ocean, but she would sing “Sweet and
Low” if they liked.

“Not too low, please,” Crullers said, eagerly,
“or I won’t hear all the words away over here.”

“I declare, Crullers,” laughed Kate. “We
should have nicknamed you Stubs, for if there’s
a possible thing for you to stumble over, you do
it.”

Polly recited her favorite, “The Chambered
Nautilus,” and as she came to the last verse
Mrs. Carey closed her eyes and smiled, her
hand up to her face, as the grand old words
rang out.

“Build thee more stately mansions, oh, my soul

As the swift seasons roll.

Leave thy low vaulted past,

Let each new temple, nobler than the last,

Shut thee from heaven with a dome more vast,

Till thou at length art free,

Leaving thine outgrown shell,

By life’s unresting sea.”

“Oh, I love that,” Nancy cried, her blue eyes
sparkling as Polly finished. “Father would,
too.”

“Now, there’s just Bess, and Mrs. Carey, and
you left, Nancy,” Kate said. “Come, Bess, do
something.”

“Oh, I don’t know anything,” Bess said,
shyly.

“Yes, she does, too,” Dorothy laughed.
“Make her say the poem from ‘Alice in Wonderland’
about the whiting and the snail.”

All the girls added their persuasion and Bess
agreed. She was only thirteen, and small for
her age, with a mass of yellow, square-cut curls
around her mischievous face, and she had plenty
of freckles. The piquant, teasing look on her
face was delicious as she asked, plaintively, coaxingly,

“Will you, won’t you, will you, won’t you, won’t you join the dance,

Oh, will you, won’t you, will you, won’t you, won’t you, won’t you join the dance?”

“Now, Mrs. Carey and Nancy are next,” Kate
said, as soon as the applause had stopped, and
Crullers leaned back on her pillow flushed and
radiant over the merriment.

“Well, now, we didn’t expect to speak any
pieces,” Mrs. Carey answered, her pleasant
motherly face beaming around at them with love
and kindliness. She used to say that she’d got
so in the habit of mothering the two children
and the Captain that it was just second nature
to her to mother anything in sight. “I don’t
know any poetry, and neither does Nancy, but
if you like I’ll read you something that we
think’s the finest poetry ever was written about
the sea, and then Nancy can sing her favorite
hymn, ‘Pull for the Shore.’”

She stepped back into the kitchen and spoke
to Aunty Welcome, and presently returned with
the latter’s Bible in her hand. Sitting there
in the cool, cosy room, whose windows all opened
to the sea, she read that beautiful Psalm that
both she and the Captain loved to read aloud,
the One Hundred and Fourth, with its grand
old song about He “who layeth the beams of
his chambers in the waters: who maketh the
clouds His chariot: who walketh upon the wings
of the wind: who maketh His angels spirits, and
His ministers a flame of fire.”

Then Nancy’s clear, sweet voice fairly made
the little room ring with the hymn she loved:

“Light in the darkness, sailor,

Day is at hand,

See o’er the foaming billow,

Fair haven land.”

After it was over, and they had all gone excepting
the yacht club girls themselves, Crullers
said she thought it was the happiest time she had
ever had, and the next day she was able to “rise
and shine,” as Aunty Welcome told her, and take
up life again.

Things were very quiet at the island for a
week after the mishap in the bay. The girls restricted
their sailing to the west end of the bay,
down towards Fair Havens, and Polly was busy
finding out how to manage yachts, keep them in
repair, and so on, and she called Tom to account
roundly.

“Just look at these seams in the
Tidy Jane
,
Tom,” she said one day, when they were down
at the landing overhauling the boats. “Don’t
they need re-caulking?”

“I guess not,” Tom responded, easily. “Father
and I went all over them last spring, when
we did the rest. They’ll swell after they’ve been
in the water a few weeks anyhow. Sometimes
when you caulk a boat up too tight, she’ll spring
on you.”

“All right, then, but just look at the paint,
will you? It’s fairly peeling off in some places,
Tom. You won’t find any of the Orienta boats
looking like that.”

Tom looked at her, his eyes beginning to
twinkle as his father’s did.

“I know what you’re up to,” he laughed.
“You’re going to race in the regatta!”

Polly said nothing, but she kept on her course
of fitting out for the race. The Orienta was to
open its club house the first of August for the
regatta season. It had been open as a club house
since the first of June, but officially it welcomed
the sailing world from the first of August until
the fifteenth, the day of the first run. Even
from the porch of the little cottage on the Knob,
the girls could look across the bay to where the
handsome red and white club house stood midway
between the hotel and the row of summer
cottages that straggled along the north shore all
the way to the Inlet. As long as the girls lived
on Eagle Bay, they never knew the name of the
little river that rambled down between the bluffs
and mingled with the channel waters. Everyone
called it the Inlet, so they did too.

At one side of the club house was built a tall
yacht shed, for the housing of such boats as were
left there in the winter time. The best ones
came up from the south, Dorothy said. Not
way down south, but around Boston harbor, and
Long Island, and New York. Her father’s big
sloop would be the flag ship at the regatta, she
told them, for he was the commodore of the
challenging club.

“They don’t have a flag ship at a regatta,”
Tom had interposed. “I never raced in one, but
I’ve watched them ever since I was knee high to
a toadstool. There’s just the racing yachts, and
the judge’s boat, and they divide them into different
classes.”

“I thought that was what they called it,” Dorothy
said, in her pretty, half serious way, and
Tom walked away, grinning blandly over the
ways of girl people in general.

The Admiral had written that he was surely
coming north regatta week, and Polly felt a
growing emulation in her breast, a feeling of
pride in the Polly Page Yacht Club, against this
mighty rival.

“Let’s go over there and watch them overhaul
their yachts,” she said finally, the day before the
opening; so they tramped around the shore road
to Orienta Point. Almost the first persons they
saw were the Vaughan girls, sitting up on the
broad veranda with a lot of ladies and young
girls.

“This looks like a celebration of some kind,
girls,” Kate said, merrily. “We had better be
careful.”

The others hesitated for a moment. They
were dressed as usual in their dark blue yachting
suits, with white sailor collars, and white duck
knockabout hats to match. Even from where
they stood, there was surely a festive appearance
to the club group. But the girls had already
seen them, and came hurrying down the steps to
meet them, with outstretched hands and glad
smiles of welcome.

“Oh, I’m so glad you came over at last,” cried
Bess. “Mamma wants you all to come up and
join us. To-morrow’s the official guest day, but
mamma’s giving a tea this afternoon to the lady
visitors, and we Juniors are helping pass cake
and things. Come up, now, for we’ve just been
telling about how Polly saved Crullers’ life the
other night.”

“Oh, but I didn’t,” exclaimed Polly, reddening
under her coat of tan. “Truly, Bess, I
didn’t. Crullers, I mean Jane Daphne Adams
here, jumped overboard, and she was floating
comfortably with three buoys attached to her
when I helped her into the boat.”

“Well, the captain of the
Portland
didn’t tell
it that way,” Dorothy said. “He came up to
the hotel that evening and told us all about it.
He said that you were the pluckiest girl he had
ever seen handle a yacht alone. Won’t you
please come up, and let mamma talk to you about
it? She’s ever so anxious to meet all of you girls
from the island camp anyway, for Bess and I
have talked of you so frequently.”

“But we really hadn’t better to-day, had we,
Polly?” Ruth’s eyes questioned Polly. What
would Miss Calvert say if she knew six of her
best girls had attended a yacht club afternoon
tea in blue duck.

“It’s the correct thing to do,” Bess persisted,
laughing at their perplexity. “The law of yacht
clubs gives a tacit membership, papa says, to all
members of other clubs who may be in the neighborhood.
And they can’t always be in party attire,
you know.”

“Oh, let’s, Polly,” pleaded Isabel. So Ruth
and Polly led the way up the broad steps to the
veranda, with its handsome awnings, potted
palms, and dark green wicker chairs and tables
scattered invitingly about.

Mrs. Vaughan welcomed them cordially and
introduced them to the other ladies and a lot of
the “Juniors,” girls of their own age, and friends
of Dorothy’s and Bess’s.

“And you are all Southern girls, Dolly tells
me,” she said, looking from one face to the other.
“Virginia girls. How did you ever happen to
drift away up on our rocky coast?”

Polly explained how it had all happened, and
then she discovered that Mrs. Vaughan was an
old friend of her Aunt Milly, Mrs. Holmes, and
knew the four boy cousins.

“So you must not remain isolated over at the
Knob after this, girls,” she told them at parting,
when they had partaken of ice cream, delicate
shrimp and lobster salad sandwiches, and tea.
“The Orienta is very gay during August, and
we have a good many Junior functions for our
younger element. I will speak to the Commodore
about your club and see that it is listed for
the regatta, and whenever you are able to come
over I will chaperon all of you and see that you
get back safely. We have our touring car up
here, and you can all go home in that, you know,
any time.”

“Well, forevermore,” gasped Polly, as they
trudged back homeward with the sunset spreading
its glory over the world of land and sea and
sky. “Girls, we have stumbled all unawares into
society. Let’s conduct ourselves as angels.
Whatever will grandfather say!”

“Did you notice their dresses?” asked Isabel,
her eyes dreamy with rapt remembrance. “That
one which Mrs. Vaughan wore was sheer, hand-embroidered
batiste, and the long coat was of
real Irish crochet.”

“I don’t believe she sleeps one bit better than
I do,” said Sue, recklessly.

“But, Sue, did you notice Dorothy’s dress?”
persisted Isabel. “It was white organdie over
pale yellow silk that just matched the tea roses
in the pattern. I love clothes that show good
taste.”

“Now, Lady Vanitas,” said Polly, reprovingly.
“Don’t let your heart dwell so on raiment.
Lilies of the field, you know. It was
pretty, and there you are. We’ve all brought
our Commencement Day dresses along for Sundays,
so we’ll freshen them up, and I guess we
can go to the ball without the help of any god-mothers
or pumpkins. I don’t feel one bit bothered
over the social side of it, but how can we
hold our own in a regatta, girls? It’s so kind
of Mrs. Vaughan to invite us to join them, isn’t
it? How funny our little fifteen-footers will
look alongside the big forty- and sixty-footers.”

“But she said they were going to have special
entries for the Junior events, don’t you remember?”
Sue interrupted eagerly. “I don’t see why
we couldn’t enter for them. Dorothy and Bess
are going to sail their yacht, and they say there
are five or six others who are going in.”

“Then we will sail ours,” Polly retorted. “I
have intended to all along, but I wanted some
encouragement. I wouldn’t race with a great
yacht towering over me like a genii just out of
a bottle, but I’ll pit the
Tidy Jane
against any
yacht of her build along the whole coast of North
America.”

“Hurrah!” Sue threw her cap up into the air.
“Wait till you see the
Patsy D.
come up gallantly
in the wind, and grab the Orienta Junior
cup away from all of you.”

It gave them plenty to talk about and plan
for, at all events. As Ruth said the following
morning, the summer was not half long enough
for all the things they planned to do. They
rose early, any time between five and six. Nobody
except a clam could have slept with the sun
coming up like a great, golden blossom behind
Bald Bluff, and the sea running along the beach
with little waves like dancing feet, calling to one
to come and play too.

They tried over and over again to divide each
day systematically, but, as Polly said, “current
events tripped them up.” Aunty Welcome protested
that she would do the washing, ironing,
cooking, and kitchen work, but not a tap more;
so each took care of her own room, and Polly
looked out for the living-room besides. Sue had
chosen the veranda for her special charge, and
she kept it spotless. They had brought along
two hammocks, and had found another one
rolled up with the porch mats under a window
seat. The three hung out on the veranda temptingly,
and through the long warm afternoons,
when they were not sailing, the girls would sit
out there and make all sorts of decorative things
out of the shells in their collection, while Ruth
read aloud. The very week of their arrival, she
had gone across the bay with Nancy in the

Pirate
and had discovered the village circulating
library.

“I do believe, Grandma,” Polly had said, merrily,
when she saw her returning with a brand
new book, “that if you landed on the coast of
South Africa, you’d ask the first gorilla you met,
very politely, if he would please direct you to the
nearest circulating library.”

But Ruth refused to be teased about her
hobby, so the girls desisted. She loved books,
however, and would have walked all the way to
Eastport in order to get a fresh one. So with
her rimless eyeglasses planted firmly on the
bridge of her nose, the nose that turned up ever
so little at the world in anxious inquiry, she
smiled placidly at Polly, and hugged a new volume
to her heart every time she went over the
bay.

“You’re all ready enough to listen while I
read aloud, just the same,” she told them, when
they all settled themselves out on the porch, and
called for the after-dinner reading. No one
contradicted her. Polly was over in her favorite
hammock at the southwesterly corner, her lap
full of shells, and some sandpaper, with which
she was trying to polish their outer side. Sue,
Isabel, and Crullers leaned against the railing,
so that their hair would hang over and dry in
the sunlight. Only two of the girls wore caps
when in bathing, and Aunty Welcome declared
that their hair would be fairly pickled before they
reached home.

“It’s ‘Treasure Island’ this time, girls,” Ruth
announced.

“Smugglers’ Cove,” murmured Sue, mischievously.
“See what an effect it had on her, oh,
dear; oh, dear.”

Ruth uttered a sudden exclamation, and
slipped into the house.

“There was another parcel in our mail box
to-day,” she said, as she came back. “I forgot
to give it to you.”

“This makes the fourth,” Polly declared, taking
it from her, and handling it gingerly. “And
they all come from Smugglers’ Cove. The first
one had new magazines in it, and some patent
fish hooks that Sue ran off with, and we haven’t
seen since.”

“The second was chocolate mints.”

“Oh, my, weren’t they good?” Crullers added.

“Third, a full and complete Manual on
Conchology and Sea-life, suitable for young persons
marooned on an isle,” concluded Polly, returning
with a pair of scissors to cut the twine.
“I wonder what this is?”

It was addressed, as the other parcels had been,
simply to “The Yacht Club, Lost Island, Eagle
Bay, Maine.” Polly opened it while the rest
stood around. One wrapping after another was
removed, and finally a box appeared. When
this was opened, there lay a microscope, a fine
one, with several different removable lenses for
observing specimens.

“Well, what a darling, tasty old pirate he is,”
exclaimed Polly, joyously. “He seems to know
all our needs. We’ll have to send something to
him in return, girls.”

“I’ll make him a shell portìere to hang in front
of his cave,” said Kate, soberly. Scarcely had
she spoken when a strange and unusual sound
broke the stillness of the bay.

“That sounds like a motor boat,” Polly said,
instantly. “Maybe it’s the one from the
Hippocampus
.”

It was surely a motor boat, but not the bright-railed,
mahogany-trimmed one from the
Hippocampus
.
This was white, with a high, pointed
prow, a cabin, and a cockpit similar to Nancy’s
knockabout. But there the resemblance ended.
The mast had been removed, and a small gasoline
engine provided the power.

“I can see the name on the prow,” called Ted
presently. “It’s the
Natica
.”

“Natica means a sea snail,” Ruth explained,
with absent-minded reversion to lessons, but
Polly dropped her shells helter-skelter into the
hammock, and rose.

“I know who it is, girls,” she cried. “That’s
our smuggler!”

CHAPTER XIV

“MR. SMITH OF SMUGGLERS’ COVE”

“Ship, ahoy!” called out the lone occupant
of the boat, as he waved his hand to them, and
came alongside the landing. The girls saw at
once that he was an elderly man, with a square-cut,
iron-gray beard that curled upward at its
edges, and a moustache. He wore a white
sweater and linen trousers, and that was as far
as their observation went at first sight.

“Won’t you come ashore?” called Polly, with
cheery hospitality, as she waved back to him.

“Now, Polly, be careful,” warned Kate.
“You don’t know whether he’s Captain Kidd, or
Neptune in disguise, or Andrew Carnegie. He
really looks like all three.” But Polly disregarded
the warning. She ran down the steps,
and met the stranger half-way up the little boardwalk
from the landing, after he had moored his
boat.

“He has something under his arm, girls,” Sue
whispered. “Looks like a bottle—no, it’s our
marmalade jar, all washed up nice and clean.
Isn’t he the tidy old smuggler, though?”

“Good afternoon, young ladies.” As the
stranger greeted them, he raised his cap with a
gesture that even the Admiral would have approved
of. “I have come to return the marmalade
jar, and to thank you for the treat. It
was the finest I ever ate.”

“You may have more of it if you like,” offered
Polly, instantly, with all her Virginia grace and
hospitality to the fore. “We have plenty of it
on hand. And you need not have brought back
the jar.”

“But I wanted to, I wanted to.” He smiled
around at them through his rimless eyeglasses,
with the friendliest interest. “It gave me a good
excuse for calling. I’ve been wanting to come
ever since I saw the first smoke rise from your
chimney.”

“Did you think that perhaps we were pirates
too?” laughed Sue.

This “unfortunate remark,” as Isabel called
it later, required explanation, and the girls were
only too ready to tell all their suspicions about
the Cove, and its unknown Robinson Crusoe.
He listened to them with the keenest amusement,
his dark eyes twinkling under their “pent-house
lids,” as Ruth called the bushy gray eyebrows.

“So you considered me a pirate or a smuggler,
did you?” He laughed richly over the idea, but
Polly shook her head.

“Not exactly. We thought you might be.
We almost hoped you might be, so we could find
chests of gold in that cave. You see, nobody
around here knows anything about you, or where
you came from, or when you came.”

“I came up from the South in a motor boat
along the shore,” he replied promptly, almost
happily. “And a rousing good time I had too.”

“But where were you all the time we were on
the island, and Crullers nearly was drowned when
she got in the way of the
Portland
?” Polly
leaned forward, her chin on her hand, as she
always did when she was perplexed.

“I had gone away from the island for the
day,” he explained. “Up to Pautipaug Beach.
It is about twelve miles along the coast towards
Bar Harbor.”

“Well,” sighed Polly, “we’ve called you the
Mystery, and it certainly suits you, for nobody
knows even your name.”

“That’s just what I wanted,” he answered,
comfortably. “That’s why I came here.” He
leaned back in the most comfortable chair the
club boasted, and piled cushions behind him,
while Ted slipped away to tell Aunty Welcome
of the guest of honor. “I’ve rented Smugglers’
Cove for the summer for research, yes, that’s a
good word, very explanatory and truthful, for
research. And—well, that’s all there is to it.”

There was a dead silence, while each of the
girls regarded the mystery from her own point
of view. Nobody questions a guest, not around
Queen’s Landing, Virginia, not even when he
is shrouded in mystery, so they gave it up.
But Polly had a brilliant strategic plan occur
to her. She would introduce all of the girls,
gracefully, easily. Then he would have to introduce
himself to them in return. It was simple.

“We must introduce ourselves to you, so you
can tell one from the other,” she said. “This is
Ruth Brooks. Sometimes we call her Grandma.
She is our instructress in conchology, and also
librarian, and acts as ballast for the entire establishment.”

“Polly, stop using such big words,” laughed
Ted. “Polly loves big words. She told me once
that Napoleon and the Admiral always used
them, so she was going to.”

Polly went on merrily. “This is Isabel
Moore, our mirror of fashion, Lady Vanitas.
She should have been Solomon’s favorite daughter
and shared his raiment. Kate, look around
this way please, because your Greek profile is
your strongest point. It is pure Greek, isn’t it?”
she appealed to their caller, and he nodded delightedly.
“Miss Julian is our club chaperon,
and also the ship’s husband for the entire fleet,
and also the Imperial Keeper of the Memory
Log. If it were not for her and for Isabel, the
rest of us would be just Girl Fridays on a desert
isle. Jane Daphne Adams, where art thou?”
Crullers rose from a hammock, her hair tousled
like a Scotch terrier’s. “Crullers, have you been
asleep?” Polly demanded, and Crullers nodded
drowsily. The other girls laughed mischievously.
It was just like Crullers to fall sound
asleep at an important time. But Polly went on
just the same. “This is Crullers, or Jane
Daphne Adams, who fell overboard—”

“And woke to find herself famous, while they
pumped out the salt water,” put in Sue, gravely.

“There are two more, Mr. Smuggler Man,”
laughed Polly, “but I daren’t present them.
Their names are Ted and Sue, and one is just
as bad as the other.”

“Polly Page!” came an indignant gasp from
the living-room, where Ted had retreated to help
Aunty arrange the tea-tray daintily. “Just
you wait till I come out there.”

“I am delighted to meet you all,” the Unknown
said heartily. “I am certain this is the most
unique club roster in the world. But you
haven’t introduced yourself.”

“Let me, please,” Ted’s curly red hair showed
at the open window. “Miss Polly Page, of
Glenwood, Queen’s Landing, Virginia; Commodore
of the Polly Page Yacht Club, Founder
of the Hungry Six, Volunteer Life Saver of
Eagle Bay—let’s see, anything else, girls?”

“Custodian of the Club Chafing Dish,” Sue
added.

“Oh, stop, please, girls; I’ll be good, truly,”
pleaded the Commodore, flushing and laughing
at the way they had turned the tables on her.
All her strategy had not resulted in the stranger’s
revealing his name.

“I am sure we shall be the best of neighbors
the rest of the summer.” The stranger smiled
at the circle of eager, girlish faces around him.
“If you will promise to keep me supplied with
Virginia marmalade, put up by Aunty Welcome,
as you call her, I will promise you a steady
output of new magazines and books. Is it a
bargain?”

“It is,” said the girls, resolutely, and then they
remembered the mysterious parcels that Ruth
had brought back from Eastport, and thanked
him for their contents. But suddenly Crullers
asked, in a gentle, interested way, the one question
they had all avoided.

“What’s your name?”

“Smith,” replied the stranger, very simply,
then he smiled around at them again in his whimsical,
almost mischievous fashion, for there was
frank disappointment on their faces. “There
are a great many members of our family. I
should have said Bold Daniel, or Blackbeard,
should I not?”

“Well, we did rather hope you might turn out
to be at least a smuggler,” Polly said, as she
took the tea-tray from Ted, and set it down before
their guest on a chair, for tea-tables existed
not on Lost Island. “Won’t you try some of
Aunty Welcome’s famous hermits, and sponge
cake, and marmalade, and a cup of tea?”

For over an hour they entertained Mr. Smith
of Smugglers’ Cove. He sat there with them
on the porch till the sun went down, chatting
happily, entertaining them with tales of adventure
all over the world, and droll anecdotes that
covered forty years of public life. He seemed
to the girls, that first day, to be the most astonishing
traveler they had ever met. He had served
in many campaigns. He could tell them a story
of the Civil War, and jump down to Chili with
another tale about when he helped put through
the first railroad that crossed the old trails of
the Incas. Then before they could catch their
breath, he was describing Egypt when the Suez
Canal was being built, how one night he had
watched the funeral of a little English baby,
the child of one of the chief engineers.

“There was no coffin for it, no procession,
nothing but the young, fair-haired English girl-mother
standing on the shore, and a tall, bare-legged
Arab, carrying the little form in his arms
wrapped in the British flag, as he crossed over
with the consul to the ‘Isle of the Sleepers,’ as
the Arabs called their cemetery.”

“Oh, tell us some more,” pleaded Ruth and
the rest, as he paused.

“Let me see,” he would lean back his head,
and think of something else, his eyes twinkling
with the pleasure of it all. “Did I tell you about
the time I took tea with the king of Masailand
in West Africa? Didn’t I? And he gave me
a sack of purest ivory for a paper of pins?”

So he talked on, until the last rim of the sun
dipped behind the purple hills in the west, and
he started up.

“Bless my heart and soul, I must be going,”
he exclaimed. “I expect the pirates to-night.”

The girls laughed, and Polly sighed contentedly.

“You’ve traveled everywhere, haven’t you?”
she asked.

“Not quite.” He smiled down at her from
behind his thick curly beard. “I have yet to see
Glenwood, Queen’s Landing, Virginia.”

“And we’d just love to have you see it too,”
responded Polly with quick southern warmth.
“It’s the dearest spot of all, we think.”

After the motor boat had passed from sight
around the Knob, the girls looked at one another
in perplexity.

“Now, who on earth can he be?” asked Ruth.
“For he must be somebody special, or he never
would have traveled all over the world, in every
place where interesting things have happened for
years and years. I wonder who he is.”

“Just Mr. Smith,” said Polly, shaking her
head. “But I think he is a mystery, girls.
We’ll ask the Captain about him.”

“There’s one thing certain,” Kate added.
“He’s a good neighbor to have handy.”

Before a week had passed, even Aunty Welcome
agreed with the verdict. Mr. Smith of
Smugglers’ Cove was surely a desirable neighbor.
Books and magazines found their way to
the house, as well as fishing tackle that made
Tom’s devices look antiquated. Several times
he presented the girls with a fine catch of mackerel
that was served in Welcome’s best Southern
style, and Mr. Smith always stayed to partake
of the feast.

“I met your grandfather, the Rear-Admiral,
Miss Polly, a few years ago, at a Naval banquet,”
he said one day, “and do you know, the
President paid us each a compliment. He said
the Rear-Admiral was the handsomest man present,
and that I was the most necessary to the
nation. And the Admiral and I confided to
each other later that we would willingly exchange
places.”

“Now, Polly, did you hear what he said to-day?”
Ruth asked in a puzzled tone, after he had
gone. “Who can he be? The most necessary
to the nation.”

Polly shook her head.

“I don’t know, and I don’t care. I like him
just as he is. If he should turn out to be somebody
very, very famous, he wouldn’t seem to
belong to us at all.”

The Orienta Club opened its season with a
“hop” for the Juniors, and a reception for the
older members, and an invitation found its way
to Lost Island.

“Miss Calvert would say we should not go unless
we were chaperoned, Polly,” Kate said,
doubtfully.

“You are our chaperon. You are nearly
nineteen, dignified and responsible. We don’t
need any other.” And Polly went serenely
along with her preparations.

“This is partly a business affair,” she explained.
“In outdoor sports strict rules all
tumble down, I mean social rules. We’re just
the members of one yacht club accepting the hospitality
of another club. Ruth, don’t pull your
hair back so tight. It makes your eyebrows look
like a Japanese girl’s on a fan. Fluff it all out
at the sides. Here, I will.”

And Ruth obediently sat down, while Polly’s
deft fingers took all the primness and straight
lines out of her hair.

Tom had promised to drive them over to the
club house in the Captain’s old-fashioned carry-all.
He came along the shore road about seven,
and sent up a long “Ahoy!” across the sand.

“I wish Nancy could go, too,” Sue exclaimed,
suddenly. “She’d love to.”

“Well, Sue, why couldn’t you have thought of
it before the last minute,” Polly laughed. She
stood still for a minute, and then said in the tone
of decision all the girls had learned to know,
“Why, of course Nancy can go along with us.
She’s a member of our club. Not a resident
member, but nevertheless she is a member, and
our ‘coach’ in all nautical knowledge.”

“Would your mother let her go, Tom?” asked
Kate, practically. Tom grinned happily, and
hitched his one suspender up higher.

“Sure she would,” he answered. “And
Nancy’s got a best dress too. It’s white with
little blue flowers on it, awful pretty.”

Very sweet and fresh Nancy looked in that
blue and white sprigged muslin, when she stood
in the doorway of the Carey cottage and kissed
her mother good-by, while the girls waited
for her. It was her very first real “party,” as
she said, and her cheeks were rosy with excitement,
and her blue eyes shining. Every year
she had gone over to the Orienta with Tom to
stand down on the shore and look at the gayly-lighted
verandas and happy throng, had watched
the other children dancing and playing games,
and had longed to join them.

“I can’t dance though, Polly,” she said now,
as they approached the big white club house with
its verandas all hung with Japanese lanterns and
festoons of real flowers.

“Oh, yes, you can, too,” Polly assured her.
“You can dance a reel. Even a telegraph pole
could dance a reel, Nancy. And we girls will
dance with you. That’s the way we used to do
at Miss Calvert’s.”

Dorothy and Bess were on the lookout for
them, and came down to meet them.

“We’re so glad you’ve come,” they cried, happily.
“Because we’ve got a real guest of honor
from Washington. He’s a friend of papa’s, and
he’s the greatest naturalist in the country. Papa
calls him the citizen of the world, for he loves
all the world, and has been over it ever so many
times. Papa says he holds it right in his hand,
and pats it. Isn’t that funny?”

“The greatest naturalist in America,” Kate
repeated. “From Washington?”

“Smith!” exclaimed Ruth, suddenly, “Smith!”

“Penryhn Smith,” added Polly, while the
Vaughan girls looked at them with curiosity
fairly bubbling out of their lips.

“Why? Do you all know him already?” asked
Bess.

“Yes, we all know him well,” laughed Polly.
“Come and see.”

They hurried up the broad flight of steps leading
to the main floor of the club-house. Ruth
reached over, and squeezed Polly’s hand. She
was fairly treading on air. To think that their
smuggler should have turned out to be Dr. Penryhn
Smith of the Institute at Washington.
Naturalist he was, yes, but more than that, they
knew. Statesman, explorer, and most of all,
perhaps, the Admiral had told them, he was a
lover of all mankind, a lover of life in all its
forms. He was the type of man who could hold
a city audience entranced at a lecture, then turn
and kneel beside a little child to show it the miracle
of being in the wild flower it had just picked.
Polly knew how dearly the Admiral valued his
friendship, how Miss Calvert had taught them
to revere his name, and she felt doubly happy
over this disclosure of the Smuggler’s identity.

The club house seemed to be filled with guests
that night. Juniors, and fathers and mothers of
Juniors, and the people from the hotel and the
summer cottages who had been invited. The
girls were swept into the middle of it all before
they could fairly catch their breath. And it
seemed to them as if everywhere they caught the
murmur, “Doctor Smith!”

“We might have known there was more to it
than Smith,” whispered Sue.

Polly said nothing, but she was doing a lot of
thinking, and finally when she saw Mrs. Vaughan
and the Commodore standing at the head of the
long room, there was the smuggler himself beside
them, clad in white flannels, and his eyes
twinkling merrily, as he caught sight of the
eight white-clad girls with Dorothy and Bess.

Mrs. Vaughan started to present them kindly,
one by one, to the guest of honor, but Dr. Smith
laughed and explained.

“I’m afraid, Mrs. Vaughan, that you are too
late with your kind offices. These young ladies
have been close neighbors of mine, and have been
very good to me.”

“But I don’t think I understand, Doctor,” said
Mrs. Vaughan; “I thought you only arrived from
Pautipaug Beach to-day.”

“I did, I did,” answered the Doctor, happily.
“I came from down the shore in the
Natica
at
five-thirty, to be exact, from the hotel at Pautipaug,
but I stopped off at my secret hiding-place.
You didn’t know I had one, did you,
Mrs. Vaughan? Don’t tell the Commodore, for
he still believes in me. Nobody knows about it
except these young ladies and Captain Carey.”

“Does the Captain know?” exclaimed Polly.

“Yes. It was through him I rented Smugglers’
Island for the summer. I can make the
trip back and forth in the
Natica
and study in
peace there. I tried to keep under cover but
Miss Polly, here, ferreted me out, and has kept
me alive since on orange marmalade.”

“If we had suspected for one minute that you
were famous, we wouldn’t have given you a bit,”
said Polly severely. “I think you owe the whole
club an apology.”

“I am asking it now,” the Doctor returned.
“Mrs. Vaughan, you see how they order me
around? If I had been a pirate or a smuggler,
they would have respected me.”

“Oh, I think they will forgive you, Doctor,”
said Mrs. Vaughan, as she smiled around at the
happy, girlish faces surrounding the Doctor.
“In fact, we shall all have to, for it is a joke
on little Eagle Bay. I was reading only last
week, in a New York paper, that the eminent
naturalist, Dr. Penrhyn Smith, had vanished as
usual, and it was thought he had slipped south
on a trip through the Amazonian wilderness.
And all the while you were right here on Smugglers’
Island.”

“But quite near the Amazonian wilderness
just the same,” the Doctor added, teasingly.
“They are all girl warriors over on the Knob,
Mrs. Vaughan. You don’t know them as I do.”

“Why did you go there to live?” asked Crullers,
in her point-blank way.

“It’s a state secret,” replied the Doctor,
gravely. “I am on the trail of a certain polypus,
and if I told you all about it, you’d hunt after
it yourself, and you might possibly find it, and
take all the credit away from me.”

“What were those queer tracks in the sand
around the mouth of the cave?” asked Kate.
“Like a three-legged crane. We saw them the
day we were at the Cove.”

The Doctor smiled.

“I carry a camera with me,” he said, amusedly.
“Those were the tracks of the tripod, a rare beast
in captivity.”

“And does the cave really go clear through the
island to the castle?” asked Ruth, eagerly.

“It does. If you will come over, you may go
through it. But you won’t find any treasure or
loot there. Plenty of old barrels, and boxes,
but nothing in them. The pirates must have
made a clean sweep that last night.”

“Isn’t he splendid?” exclaimed Kate, as they
gave place to all the people who were waiting
to be presented.

“And his flannels are so becoming,” added
Isabel, thoughtfully. “Do you know, girls, I
have found out something awfully queer. All
of the really ‘great’ people I ever met are much
simpler and pleasanter and more natural, than
the little, everyday people who fuss around,
and snub each other, and just live and grow fat
on trouble. Isn’t that so, Polly?”

“Well, there are ‘deceptions’ to every rule, you
know Aunty Welcome says,” laughed Polly. “I
wouldn’t say positively, but I do think that the
Doctor is a darling.”

CHAPTER XV

THE PEARL FEST

The following day was Sunday, the fourth
they had spent on Lost Island. The nearest
church was two and a half miles around the bay
shore road, at Eastport, but services were held
in the open air stadium in the pine grove back
of the hotel. The cottagers and shore people
attended here, and the girls had been glad to go
also. They tried to persuade Aunty Welcome
to accompany them, but she steadfastly refused
to budge along that bay shore road until she left
for good.

“I’se hyar, and I knows I’se hyar, and I ain’t
a-going to trust myself to any quagmires and
pitfalls along any ole shore road till I has to,”
she declared.

“Let’s stop for the Captain and the rest,”
Polly said, as they came to the quiet cottage at
Fair Havens, but it was locked, so they went on.
The Captain usually took the big carry-all and
drove over to the village church. There he could
sit, and look out of the window beside his pew,
straight into the little graveyard, where rows
and rows of Carey headstones bade him be of
good cheer, for the harbor was sure, and the
Pilot faithful to His promise.

But the girls loved the open air service up in
the pines. The stadium had been erected for
lectures and Chautauqua meetings during the
summer months, and was beautifully situated on
Lookout Hill. On one side it commanded a fine
view over the Sickle, clear out to where the old
Atlantic rolled in in long, dark green combers.
Behind it were climbing aisles of eternal green,
depths of sweet-scented thicket, patches of wild
flowers, and above all the towering pines, with
their incessant murmur as though they were answering
their big brother, the sea.

The stadium was a great wooden amphitheater,
built roughly but strongly, and roofed to
protect its audiences against sudden summer
showers. The second Sunday the girls had
gone, there had been a thunder storm, and it
had seemed so strange to watch the trees lashed
and torn by the tempest, while they sat under
cover safe as could be.

“I never was so near a storm, and yet out of
it,” Sue had declared. “Why, you could have
reached out, and patted the wind on the back,
and it couldn’t have hurt you.”

After service they walked slowly down the
winding, rustic walk that led to the shore.

“It seems to me, girls, that the service sounds
ever so much more solemn here than it does in a
church,” Isabel was saying. “It seems so much
nearer heaven here in the woods.”

“But it’s not, really,” Kate put in, briskly.
“That’s only an idea that people have, and I
think it’s wrong. Supposing God dwelt only
in the high places, what would become of those
who sit in darkness, and the shadow of death?”

Polly was looking out to sea, her brown eyes
thoughtful, and a bit sad. She didn’t know why
she felt sad, but she did, and only the Captain
seemed to understand why. He had said once
over at the island that a barometer probably
had no idea what ailed it, but it ailed just
the same, and Polly’s temperament was just
as volatile.

“The other day,” she said, musingly, “the
Captain said he had been tramping the beach one
awful night in a thunderstorm, when he was first
on coast duty, and he felt troubled about all the
boats that were in peril. Then all at once he
thought of those words, ‘He maketh His angels
spirits, and His ministers a flame of fire.’ And
he felt strengthened all at once, so he wasn’t
afraid any more.”

“How do you do, girls?” called Mrs. Vaughan’s
pleasant voice behind them, and they turned
to find her and the Doctor with Dorothy and
Bess. The Doctor was to take dinner at the
hotel with the Commodore’s family, but they all
walked back through the pine grove together
to the shore road.

“Wasn’t the sermon nice?” asked Bess, happily.
“I love that parable about the merchant
who sought pearls.”

The Doctor nodded his head.

“That simile is one of the finest in the Bible,”
he responded. “I had the good fortune to attend
the pearl harvest at Ceylon twice, and it sets one
thinking, it certainly sets one thinking.”

“Oh, tell us about it, please, Doctor?” pleaded
Polly, slipping her hand on his arm. “I’ve been
wondering about it ever since we left the
stadium. Are there any pearls around here?”

The Doctor was not a Yankee, but he usually
answered one question by asking another, in
Yankee fashion.

“What are you all going to do this afternoon?”

“Rest, and write letters home, and talk.
Crullers and Aunty Welcome will take long
naps. Sue and Ted will get out their book of
class songs, and sing and play all of them over
five times running. Isabel will read a book, and
Ruth and I will write letters.”

“That’s all right; just as long as you had not
planned to go sailing. About four, Dorothy
and Bess and I will come over in the
Natica

and talk to you about pearls. I have some unset
ones I will show you.”

“Is it true that they lose their luster, and people
put them back into the sea to regain it?”
Kate inquired.

“Well, people do it, but I don’t know whether
it helps them any. A pearl merchant will tell
you it is better to peel a pearl, but that is not so
romantic, is it? There was one Empress, you
know, who sent her casket of pearls every year
to be immersed in the sea. Now, don’t ask any
more questions until this afternoon, then we’ll
hold a talk
fest
.”

“No, a pearl
fest
,” Polly suggested. “And
we’ll have a driftwood fire on the beach after
dark, and toast marshmallows, and eat hermits.”

“Will you tell me what hermits are?”

“I had rather leave that to Aunty Welcome,
for she makes them, you know,” laughed Polly.

They caught up with the carry-all on their way
back, and walked beside it on the path next the
road. The Captain looked different without his
uniform, all dressed in a suit of sober black, but
he was as rosy and as twinkly-eyed as ever, and
he looked over the girls with a feeling of pride.

“You’re getting to be a credit to the sou’west
shore,” he told them. “Trig and taut as a fleet
of clipper-built coasters, be’ant they, mother?
But you keep away from the Point, now mind.
There’s a reef out there that at low tide would
rip up a keel like a submarine mine hitting a Russian
man-o’-war. And any sort of a west gale
would blow you straight out on it.”

“But there aren’t any gales,” said Sue.

“Not yet, but wait a bit. We’ll be into
August shortly, and then, I tell you, look out.
There’s some quick fellows come a’racing out of
the sou’west that would take your heads off.”

“I wish we could get out into the open sea,
though, before we go home, Captain Carey,” said
Polly, wistfully. “We’re only shore sailors.
Couldn’t we go out around the Point some fair
day, and reach the open?”

The Captain put his head a bit on one side, and
trailed the tasseled end of the whip between the
colt’s ears. Then he shook his head.

“You’d better not. That’s the safest way. If
you want a good sail outside the harbor, I’ll take
you for one on a top master, forty foot long,
yes, I will. Billy Clewen, the station keeper, has
one, and we’ll sail clear out to Tarker’s Light.
How’s that?”

“Beautiful,” the girls cried, and Polly added,
“Don’t you forget, now.”

“Father never forgets anything,” Mrs. Carey
spoke up, contentedly, “excepting his place in
the hymn-book, and in the Bible reading for each
Sunday.”

Then they all had a good laugh at the Captain,
who was famous for losing his place, and would
be far ahead or far behind when the congregation
were just moving along easily.

“Avast there, where are you bound?” he would
whisper to Nancy, and nudge her to show him
the right place.

“How’s an old fellow to know where they’re
going to bring up next?” he asked, indignantly.
“They never hold true to their course,
and they are tacking before I know it, and off
they go like a herring from a hook.”

“I thought they caught herring in nets,” said
Crullers.

“They do,” agreed the Captain, heartily.
“And that’s why you can’t make one stay on a
hook. They’re the most notional fish I ever saw.
I’ve had one get on a hook, and fairly wink me
in the eye, and wiggle off again.”

“Benjy Carey!” exclaimed Mrs. Carey, “and
you a-coming direct from meeting to tell a yarn
like that!”

But the Captain only laughed until he
coughed, and Nancy had to pat him on the back.

That afternoon the yacht club entertained
in its own, particular fashion. Nancy came over,
but Tom went down to the station with his father.
Some day he meant to go on duty there too. It
was one of the Captain’s boasts that three generations
of Careys had patrolled that strip of
rock-strewn coast, “and there’s another one in
the making,” he always added; so Tom would
square his shoulders and try to look like one of
the crew.

The doctor dined at the hotel that day with
Commodore Vaughan and his family, and it was
late afternoon before the girls caught sight of
the white motor boat cutting its way across the
sparkling waters of the sunlit bay. The broad
veranda looked very cool and restful that afternoon.
Polly and Kate had spread all the available
mats and had carried out the round table
from the sitting-room, dropping new magazines
over it invitingly, with a pitcher of fruit lemonade
and a plate of hermits to nibble on.

“Hermits, do you call these?” asked Bess, as
she bit into her third one. “I never heard of
them, but they’re just dandy.”

“Well, there are hermits and hermits,” Polly
explained. “But Aunty Welcome’s are the best
we’ve ever had, much better than Annie May’s
at the Hall. How do you make them, Aunty?”

Welcome paused in the kitchen doorway, her
hands on her broad hips, her brown eyes fairly
shining with delight at their appreciation of her
cooking.

“I takes some flour, and den I takes some
’lasses, and it has to be good ’lasses. None ob
dis syrupy trash dat just drizzles down. I want
’lasses you can hyar go kerflop when it hits de
dish; yas, I do.” She shook all over with
laughter. “Den I takes some cream, den I takes
some spices, and some brown sugar, and some
eggs, and I mixes ’em up good. Den I jes’ puts
in all de ’vailable fruit I got lying ’round, raisins,
and currants, and citron, and figs, and dates,
and nuts, any ole thing. And den I bakes ’em.”

“And we eat ’em,” concluded Sue, forcibly.

Even the doctor shook with laughter over the
recipe.

“But I’m afraid if we tried to make some,
Aunty, we’d make a failure of it,” he said.
“And they are certainly fine. Please may I
have some marmalade with mine?”

“Now tell about the pearl harvest,” prompted
Ruth, when they were all fairly settled, and the
supply of hermits had diminished somewhat.
“What is it like?”

“How often have you been there?” added Kate.

“Twice. Last year and once when I was a
youngster just out of college, and bent on globe-trotting.
Ceylon, you know, is the great pearl
market of the world, and yet the season of the
catch lasts only six weeks. But during those
six weeks, instead of a long, jungle-fringed
beach, there rise the tents and houses of the pearl
seekers, like a city of magic. Every morning
you can see the long boats go out, hundreds of
them, and each carrying from sixty to seventy
men.”

“Divers?” asked Polly.

“Not all. Some are rowers, and some take
care of the catch as the divers bring it up. They
are all natives, and trained to the work. When
they dive, all they carry down with them is their
basket and a small tortoise shell clip that holds
their nostrils closed.”

“Don’t they have to wear diving suits?” asked
Ted.

“No. They can stay under water longer than
any human beings I have ever seen. And after
the catch of the day is brought in, it is put up at
auction, and then there is excitement enough to
satisfy anyone. I have often wondered why
some artist has never put the scene of the pearl
harvest on canvas;” the doctor’s eyes were half
closed, as if he could recall it perfectly even then.
“I have seen as many as five million oysters piled
there, waiting to be sold, and to the crowd it is
one great lottery. Any shell in the lot may contain
a pearl worth thousands. So they scramble,
and push to get up close to the auctioneer, and
even the children will beg you for pennies so that
they may buy a handful of the shells and have the
fun of opening them. Last year while I stood
there, a little old man in front of me, with a
crutch, turned and begged me to lift him up so
the auctioneer would be sure to see him. He was
a Burmah merchant and told me afterwards he
was sent every year to buy for the native princes.
Behind me was a tall, quiet Persian. They told
me he had found a pearl once years before that
brought him over seventy thousand dollars. It
was a pink one, and flawless. And he had come
every year since and bid on every day’s catch in
the hope of finding its mate.”

“Oh, I’d love to be there,” cried Polly her
eyes sparkling with excitement. “And do they
open them right in front of you so you can see
them find the pearls?”

“Some do. And when a pearl of great price
is found, even to-day the bidding jumps like
magic over that catch the same as in the old days
of the parable. The merchants will still go and
sell all they have to buy the one pearl if they
can get it.”

“I wonder why it is everybody loves pearls so,”
said Ruth thoughtfully. “I do myself, better
than diamonds, or any of the colored stones.
They seem different, almost as if they had life.
Were they ever alive inside the shells, Doctor
Smith?”

“Let me see,” mused the doctor. “Are pearls
alive? I’ve wondered that myself. The scientists
tell us, though, that a pearl is a disease of
the oyster, and others say it is only a grain of
sand that has slipped inside the shell and irritates
the mollusc, so it wraps it about with a secretion
of its own that hardens and, after a while, you
have the pearl. The Chinese open oyster shells
and slip inside tiny images of Buddha, and the
oyster covers them with mother-of-pearl.”

“Oh, Polly, don’t you know how we studied
last year about the Malays, and their pearl
legend?” exclaimed Ted, eagerly. “They say
at the full of the moon the pearl oyster rises to
the surface of the water and opens its shell, and
a dew drop falls into it, and is crystallized. And
they say the pearl is colored by the weather at
the time it was born. If the night is clear, the
pearl is perfect, and if it is cloudy, the pearl will
be opalescent and dim, and if there’s a flash of
lightning, the shell shuts up instantly and the
pearl will be dwarfed.”

“It makes me think of the Polynesian way of
catching pearls,” said the doctor. “They send
out a long boat at sunrise, a canoe, with some old
tribesman playing a weird, plaintive melody on
a sort of flute, to scare away evil spirits. Young
girls are chosen to dive for the shells, generally
the fairest and purest in the village and they
poise themselves in the prow of the canoe and
dive just as the sun rises.”

“I shall try it to-morrow morning,” said Polly
promptly, her eyes dancing with mischief. “Ted
and Sue shall play on their mandolins for me,
and I will dive for pearls.”

“And you dare to call me vain,” teased Isabel.
“I guess if anyone is to dive, I will.”

“Let’s all dive,” suggested Kate, the peacemaker,
laughing. “Tell us some more, please,
doctor, and don’t mind these giddy creatures.”

Ruth leaned forward, reflectively, her eyes
dreamy and full of thought.

“Polly,” she said, “didn’t Mary Stuart love
pearls? Didn’t she always carry a rosary of
pearls with her, and didn’t we read some place
that it was found clasped in her hands after she
was killed?”

“Here, child, stop talking about such gloomy
things,” Ted interposed, briskly, lifting the tall
pitcher of fruit lemonade. “May I pour you
another glass, doctor? It’s delicious. Polly
dissolved some pearl dust in it, and dreamed she
was Cleopatra.”

“I never heard sech talk in all my born days,
doctah, I never did,” exclaimed Aunty Welcome,
putting her head out rebukingly. “Ain’t dey a
lot ob crazy creeturs, sah?”

“Full of the joy of life, Welcome, full of the
springtime,” replied the doctor, happily. “Let
them alone. I can stand it. Give me some
more pearl dust elixir, Miss Edwina.”

“Pearls stand for tears, really and truly,” said
Dorothy, seriously. “I’ve always heard that.
The night before the king was killed, Marguerite
of Valois dreamed all her diamonds had turned
to pearls, our history teacher told us.”

“Stop it,” Ted insisted. “Can’t you see how
melancholius-like Polly and Ruth are looking?
I shall be afraid, pretty soon, to touch a pearl
with a ten-foot pole, even if I find one in my
oyster stew.”

“Don’t mind them, doctor,” said Polly, cheerfully.
“The pearl is my birthstone, and I love
it dearly, and you won’t find me weeping often.
See, it’s past sundown now. We’re going to
set fire to that pile of driftwood down on the
beach, and toast marshmallows around it, while
the glee club holds forth.”

“Just one minute,” called the doctor, as they
rose. “I want you to look at this.”

The girls gathered around his chair, as he drew
a tiny packet from his pocket, wrapped in tissue
paper, and unfolding it disclosed several unset
pearls, large as peas, and rarely beautiful.

“Do you carry them with you like that?” asked
Kate.

“Just like that,” replied the doctor, blithely,
and he let them roll about in the palm of his
hand. “I bought them at the pearl harvest, and
I like to have them close to me. They say that
Napoleon, when he sat and dreamed of the conquest
of the world, loved to feel unset pearls
slip through his fingers. So, why not I?”

“Oh, they are lovely!” Polly touched them
lingeringly. “Isn’t it too bad that such things
should be shut up in a shell at the bottom of the
ocean?”

Ruth was calling to them to hurry, for the
marshmallows were waiting to be cooked, and
the fire was started, and as they walked down to
the beach the doctor quoted:

“‘Full many a gem of purest ray serene, the dark, unfathomed caves of ocean bear,

Full many a flower is born to blush unseen, and waste its sweetness on the desert air.’”

“I think those pearls in your pocket are just
as hidden and wasted, doctor,” said Sue, deliberately,
“as if they were in a dark, unfathomed
cave.”

“Do you? Well, it was kind of you not to
say as if they were cast before swine,” laughed
the doctor.

“One of Sue’s charms is her engaging frankness,”
put in Kate.

“I forgive her, for it’s in a good cause. And
some day, if I find anyone who will love and
cherish them more than I do, I may give up
one.”

“First Batch of Marshmallows Ready!” Called Ruth

“First batch of marshmallows ready,” called
Ruth, and the pearl
fest
was over.

CHAPTER XVI

THE CAPTAIN’S PARTY

“Do you girls realize that it is the first week
in August?”

It was about a week after the doctor’s talk, and
they had just come up to the porch after a dip
in the bay.

“Let’s stay down in the sand, and dry off,”
Ted suggested. “It’s early yet.”

So down they trailed again, and sat on the
sand. One special charm of belonging to this
yacht club was that you could do just what you
wanted when you wanted. As Polly said, it took
all the fun out of anything when you had to wait
for it.

“Poor old King Solomon,” she would say, “I
don’t know what it was he longed for, but I am
sure he never got it, because he said so mournfully,
‘Hope deferred maketh the heart sick.’
And I know just how he felt when he said it.”

“I ought to mend my jacket,” said Sue, easily.
“But there’s plenty of time.”

“That’s what Sue always says,” Kate declared.
“I think her motto and Ted’s should be ‘There’s
plenty of time.’”

“Well, there isn’t,” Polly remarked, as she sat
down on a sand dune, and rested her chin on her
hands, with her hair falling around her like a
meditative mermaid. “The regatta is the fifteenth,
and we’ve got to have our boats all spick
and span for the race.”

“You’re not really going to race for the Junior
cup, are you, Polly?” Isabel’s tone was very
discouraging.

“I am.” Polly smiled at the big white club
house across the bay quite as if she expected it
to nod back at her. “The
Tidy Jane
is just as
fine a catboat as there is on the bay, and so are
all our boats. Nancy’s going to race the
Pirate
,
Tom’s knockabout, and the other afternoon
when we sailed to the inlet and back, I had
the best of her all the way. Of course I
shall race.”

“Is there a prize?” asked Crullers, the practical.
The girls all broke into a peal of laughter,
and Ruth declared that Crullers never could see
anything in empty glory. There had to be a
tangible goal for her to exert herself.

“There’s a silver cup for the big boats to race
for,” Polly replied. “Commodore Vaughan’s
sloop,
Adventure
, has held it for sixty-footers
for three years, they say. And there’s a smaller
cup for twenty-footers and under. We’d come
under that head.”

“What will you use it for, Polly, after you
win it?” asked Sue, innocently, and Polly
promptly threw sand at her, till she cried quarter.

“Whether I win it or not, it’s the sport of the
thing that counts,” she said. “I never saw a race
in all my life that I didn’t wish I was in it, just
for the chance of winning. It isn’t the prize so
much, it’s the honor of the thing, and the sport.”

“I know, Polly, that’s perfectly right,” rejoined
Kate, approvingly. “What if no one
ever entered a race for fear they might not win;
there’d be no racing at all.”

“Well, if you intend entering, I shall too,”
said Sue. “For I know that the
Patsy D.
can
outsail anything on this bay if she once ‘gets
a’going,’ as the Captain says. The trouble is,
she won’t ‘get a’going’ until she has a mind to.
I can’t seem to make her grab hold of a breeze
and pull.”

“You don’t let go your main sheet right,”
Polly told her. “You hoist your sail, and let it
wobble before you let the boom swing about, and
catch the wind into the sail right. Makes me
think of a story the Captain told about one of
the summer cottagers last year, who went out
with Tom and him one day. There was a big
sea on, and when a puff of wind caught her, the
Captain called out, ‘Let go that jib, let go that
jib’. And the guest was really angry and indignant.
‘Who’s touching your old jib, I
should like to know,’ he said, huffily. The Captain
just shook when he told it.”

Ruth sat up suddenly, and put back her hair
from her face.

“I just saw a boat put off from the Orienta
dock,” she said. “It looks like the
Nixie
. Bess
is at the tiller. I wonder what they can want.
They’re making for here.”

It took hardly ten minutes to cross the bay
at its narrow end, with a good wind to help, and
before the girls had time to run up to the cottage
and dress, the
Nixie
was at the landing, with
reefed sails.

“Mamma sent us over,” Dorothy exclaimed, as
soon as she stepped ashore. “The
Portland

brought a consignment of fruit for the club last
night, and papa sends you over a basket of it
with his compliments.”

The girls bore the heavy basket up to the porch
and promptly explored its contents. There was
a large watermelon, some canteloupes, peaches
and pears, and a box of stuffed dates.

“Mamma put those in because she says she
knows what girls like,” said Bess, perching herself
on the porch railing contentedly. “And
what do you think? We’ve teased and begged
to be allowed to come over here with you for
regatta week, and now we may if you will let
us. You can get a better view of the bay from
this porch than you can from the club.”

“Well, young lady, you’ll get your view of
the race from the stern locker of the
Nixie
,”
said Dorothy, firmly. “Polly won’t allow us in
the club unless we agree to race for the glory
of it, will you?”

“No, ma’am,” returned Polly, serenely, as she
knelt down, and spread out several newspapers.

“What are you going to do, Polly?” asked
Isabel, who believed firmly in the fitness of
things. “Oh, don’t cut into the melon out here,
dear. Put it on the ice, and let it cool.”

“Put it on the ice!” Polly repeated, with fine
scorn. “Listen to her, girls. You’d think we
had a whole refrigerator handy. Dorothy, all
the ice we own is wrapped up in Ruth’s old
waterproof cape, in a tub down in the cellar.
It’s about the size of a pincushion, and if I were
to set this watermelon on it, it would just evaporate.
We will eat the melon now to save it.”

“It’s plenty cold,” Dorothy helped lift the
melon down on the papers. “But, Polly, will it
be all right if we come over and stay for regatta
week?”

“It will, and we’ll be ever and ever so glad to
have you. It’s very stylish, Isabel, to entertain
guests during a regatta week. Will you please
bring along your own blankets, as we haven’t
enough to go ’round.”

“Indeed, we will,” Dorothy cried, happily,
“and I’m so pleased. Mamma always is busy
regatta week, and so is papa, and Bess and I just
have to look after ourselves. She’s going on the
Adventure too for the race. Oh, Polly, it’s
splendid to watch them. Last year, at the finish,
the
Adventure
and
Mermaid
were right together,
and we all stood up on chairs, and waved flags
at them, and shouted as they came down the last
stretch with every inch of canvas crowded on.”

Polly was very busy carving the watermelon
in fancy fashion, so that when it fell apart, it
looked like a huge, red-hearted lily.

“Makes it taste better,” she said, judiciously.
“Who won last year, Dorothy?”

“Oh, the
Adventure
, of course. Right at the
very last they crowded on another reef—what do
you call that little bit of a sail way up top on a
sloop, Polly?”

Polly shook her head.

“T’gallant something, isn’t it? That’s what
the Captain calls my eyebrows. Tarry top
lights, and t’gallant eyebrows, so it must mean
something way high up.”

“Probably,” Dorothy agreed. “Anyway,
they let out another reef, and the
Adventure
just
slipped by the
Mermaid
like a bit of down.
Papa’s boat’s a sloop. It seems to me it’s all
sails. It looks like a great gull with outspread
wings when it’s going full tilt out to sea.”

“You must always speak of a ship as she or
her,” corrected Bess. “Papa called you a sandpiper
for that, Dolly.”

“I don’t care,” Dorothy laughed. “I want to
tell the girls about it. There are six staterooms
on it, and when the season closes up here at Eagle
Bay, we sail south to Boston, and then home.
Bess and I go to boarding-school.”

Just then Tom appeared around the west
shore, holding down the
Pirate
, while he called,

“Want anything over to Eastport?”

“Yes. Mail, potatoes and soap,” called back
Polly, with a smile and wave of her hand; then
to Dorothy, as if no interruption had occurred,
“We’re going out with the Captain for a sail
around the Point Light, and down to Tarker’s
Light. He said he’d take us if we behaved for a
week, and we have. Haven’t been out once in a
bad wind, haven’t made any trouble at all, so
now we’re going. Why can’t you and Bess stay
and have dinner with us, though? We won’t
start before two, and Aunty’s making clam pie,
Maryland style, and baked, stuffed tomatoes, and
peach dumplings.”

“Oh, we’ll stay fast enough,” cried Bess, while
Dorothy just smiled. “You do have the best
things to eat over here that I know anything
about. Papa says he’s coming over some day
just to sample them, and find out if it’s really
true. Doctor Smith says it is; so papa can’t
really tell us out and out that we are coloring it
up a little.”

“Tell him we’d be delighted to entertain him
any time, and Mrs. Vaughan, too,” exclaimed
Polly, with true Southern hospitality. “We’ll
have fried sweet potatoes, and fried chicken, and
corn fritters, and corn pone, all from Aunty
Welcome’s special recipes. She’ll be so proud to
get up a dinner and we’d love to have you.”

“Where’s Isabel?” asked Sue suddenly.
“Did she go up to dress?”

“No, I’m up here in the hammock. I don’t
want to get all freckled in that sunlight,” came
Isabel’s tones from the shadiest corner of the
porch.

“Pull her forth, girls,” ordered Polly, gaily.
“She’s too exclusive. She just wants to set herself
up before us as a mirror of style, and we
won’t have it. Pull her forth, and walk her in
the sun till she’s as freckled as a cowslip. What
do you think, Dorothy, this young person wants
to wear a bathing cap with a bow on the front
and a ruffle around it like an old maid’s nightcap,
and she takes a bar of violet scented soap with
her into the deep blue sea when she trips down
to bathe. It once dropped like a stone down to
the bottom, and she never got it.”

“‘Though lost to sight, to memory dear,’”
quoted Sue; she linked arms with Ted and sang
the refrain over and over with variations, until
Isabel put her fingers in her ears and ran for the
house. Suddenly the majestic form of Aunty
Welcome appeared on the porch, and waved a
dish towel at them.

“Ain’t dey nobody at all going to eat clam
pie?” she called. “If you all don’t look like a
mess ob turtles burrowing in de sand, den I miss
my guess. And every one eating watermelon.
Well, for de love ob cats! Miss Polly, don’t you
know you’s going ter be so freckled dat you can’t
find de jining places? You come on up out ob
dat sand now, you hyar me?”

“Yes’m,” said Polly, meekly, and the rest
trailed after her, for Aunty Welcome’s word was
law on Lost Island.

After dinner the Vaughan girls had to return,
but the others dressed and sat out on the steps,
awaiting the Captain’s coming. The everyday
suits of blue duck had been discarded, and they
had dressed in festal array to honor the Captain.
They were all in their best yachting suits of white
duck, trimmed in dark blue, with dark blue reefer
jackets, and caps to match. But before the
trip was over, when the seas had swashed up merrily
over the sloop, as she keeled over to the lee-shore,
they wished they had worn the blue duck.

“What boat will he bring that can carry all
of us?” asked Sue.

“Tom said the sloop,” answered Polly, as she
sat up on the railing, and re-tied Crullers’ hair
bows into a semblance of neatness and taste.
“It belongs to the lighthouse keeper at the Point,
but the Captain can borrow it whenever he wants,
and it’s a sea-going craft.”

“Is it, indeed?” giggled Sue. “Girls, do you
notice how Commodore Polly tosses around
nautical phrases real careless-like nowadays?”

There hove into sight around the Knob, just
then, the Captain and his sloop. Nancy and
Tom were aboard too, and acting as able seamen.

“Polly, I’ll get your soap and potatoes and
mail to-night,” shouted Tom, as they came within
hail. “I saw Billy Clewen over at the Inlet with
his tender, and I hopped in so as to meet father
at the Point, and come on down.”

“That’s all right,” Polly responded. “Oh,
girls, isn’t she handsome,” as they watched the
sloop under the Captain’s handling. Steadily,
easily, without any apparent fuss or bother, he
brought her about, reefed her sails, and left her
standing, as Tom said, quiet as a lamb, without
a halter on.

“Who puts a halter on a lamb anyway, Tom?”
teased Nancy. “Besides, the
Lucy C.
has a
halter on. Didn’t you see me just drop it overboard?
We can’t bring her up to the landing,
Polly. She draws nine feet—”

“Seven,” corrected the Captain, as he smoked
comfortably on his pet pipe, an old briarwood
whose bowl was all charred from long usage.
“And ten-foot beam.”

“How can we get aboard, then?” asked Polly.

“I’m coming after you in the ‘dink,’” Tom
answered.

“Well, my land! If I ever see sech a top-heavy,
lopsided thing,” murmured Aunty Welcome.
“Is you all going to trust your precious
lives out in mid ocean in sech a contrivance?”

“Don’t you fret one bit, not when we’re with
Captain Carey,” Polly laughed as she waved her
hand. The last girl stepped aboard, and the
sails were hoisted. After the little spreads of
canvas on their own boats, it seemed to the girls
as if the sails of the
Lucy C.
were gigantic, but
Tom and his father managed them trimly, and
as the wind filled them, they struck out across
the bay with a tilt to leeward that was delightful.

“Captain, do I walk with the right sort of
roll?” asked Ted, her hands deep in her reefer
pockets, her cap on the back of her red curls, as
she stepped boldly out on the slanting deck.
But the sloop dipped to a wave, and came up
with a lurch, and Ted sat down with startling
suddenness.

“Well, not quite,” the Captain answered from
the wheel, his blue eyes twinkling. “You’d better
get acquainted with her first. Now, you
can’t get up and do a grand march along the
deck of a driving sloop. It’s against all human
nature and boat nature. You’ve got to sit tight,
and mind the sloop, and follow her moods, and
get ahead of them too. A sloop has got more
moods than any boat I know of. A yawl is
sort of divided in her ways, like a widow after
her second husband. She’s got one before, and
one behind, so to speak, and it steadies her a bit,
but a sloop’s sails act in close sympathy, and
when one of them starts acting kittenish, the rest
follow suit.”

“How large is this one, Captain?” asked Ruth,
holding to her cap, as the wind blew freshly
around her.

“About forty foot, more or less. Her
draught’s seven foot.”

“Why here we are to the channel already,”
Polly sang out, as they slipped past Smugglers’
Cove, and could see the view out to sea around
the Point. The doctor was sitting down on the
landing fishing; fishing tranquilly, in his own
way. There were lines hanging all around him,
fastened to the planks with an invention of his
own, by which a little bell rang every time a fish
took the bait. Placidly he sat there, his hat
tilted forward to shield his eyes, and a pile of
magazines beside him betraying his real occupation.
The girls called and called to him; at last
he looked up and waved to them.

As they rounded the Point the wind freshened
considerably. It was glorious to sail with the
sharp bow cutting the water like a knife, and
throwing up great clouds of spray that drenched
the girls like an April shower as the head wind
threw it back on them. Overhead the canvas
tugged until the rigging sang a tune all its own.

Ted and Sue were singing at the tops of their
voices, arms linked closely, backed up against
what Crullers called “the high side of her.” The
others joined in the choruses, except Polly, who
stood beside the Captain at the wheel. There
was a look in her dark eyes that matched his own,
as she half closed them in the face of the wind, a
look out at the open sea they both loved well.
Once the Captain turned his head, and smiled
down at her, as if to let her know he understood
her feelings exactly, and he let her help with the
jib several times, while he and Tom managed
the main sail, and Nancy held her steady on her
course at the little pilot wheel.

“It’s ever so much rougher out here than it is
in the bay, isn’t it?” Isabel called faintly, but the
wind drowned her voice, and she sat huddled up
on a locker with her coat turned up around her
ears, for all the world like a ship’s cat in a storm,
Tom said.

Tarker’s Light was about five miles down the
west shore towards Portland. The seas were
longer and heavier than those on the bay, but the
sloop rode them easily, and only shipped one big
green fellow, as the Captain tacked south of the
Light, and cut across back towards home. It
splashed up over the deck house, and caught
Isabel and the rest fairly, until they shrieked.
Polly and Nancy escaped, for they were with the
Captain, and they rounded the big bell buoy out
in mid channel that clanked a warning note as if
it had a cold in its head, Sue said.

It was after five when they came up to the Life
Saving Station on the Point, and stood by handsomely
while Billy Clewen, the keeper, came out
in a dory and took off the girls.

“I’m thinking that I’ll send you home by the
shore road, with Tom and a lantern,” said the
Captain, as they walked up the beach towards
the low wooden buildings that nestled among the
great hummocks of sand at the Point. “I’m on
the eight to twelve watch to-night, and I can
walk a ways with you myself, but the wind’s
dropped down with the sun, and there’ll hardly
be a puff to carry you back by water.”

“How lonesome it looks out here,” said Polly,
standing on one of the sand dunes, and gazing
around her. The Point of the Sickle came down
to what Tom called a mere “spit of sand.”
There were few rocks out there, except for the
reef that lay east of the channel, towards the
east shore. On the Point there was just a long,
low stretch of sand, with great circling combers
flowing in ceaselessly, breaking one above another
on the long, shallow shingle. Dark green
they were underneath, then lighter, and lighter,
as the sunlight shot them through with rainbow
hues, and last of all the curling plumes of spray
tossed on their crests.

“Isn’t it all pretty,” cried Ruth, her cheeks
turning pink as she ran to Polly’s side. “Don’t
you know some place in Kipling where he tells
about the white horses of the sea? Oh, Polly,
I love it all so. I never saw the real ocean before.
I mean to stand on a shore, and look out
and out and out on just waves, and know that
there’s no land for a thousand miles.”

“Farther than that,” said Polly. “I think it’s
beautiful.”

“So it is, so it is, now,” agreed the Captain,
“but ’tain’t so pretty in the winter, when the ice
piles up, and the sleet beats you half down to
the ground, when you try to fight your way in its
face.”

“Do you have to patrol all night long on the
beach?” Polly asked, in her earnest, compassionate
way.

“Well, no. We take it in watches. One
watch leaves about sunset, and they travel two
miles to the half-way house over yonder, and
they meet the next watch, and so it goes through
the night.”

“What’s the name of that queer light they
carry around their necks?” asked Crullers. “It
explodes, I think.”

“That’s the Coston light,” said the Captain.
“I’ll show you some when we get inside the station.
We don’t use them unless there’s a ship
in danger at night. It’s to let the crew know
they have been seen and help will be sent.
There’s a spring you tap, and a percussion cap
explodes that sets fire to the red light. Last
spring, along the first of April, we got the tail
end of a gale that had traveled all along the
coast, and still had spunk enough to run a
schooner on the reef yonder. We saw her beating
her way down about sunset. Lumber boat
she was, bound for Boston. I says then to Billy
Clewen over at the Light that she’d never get by
the Point. So we was looking out for her, but
the crew were all Gloucester boys, and they
wouldn’t give up till she’d struck fair and
square.”

“Then what?” Polly’s dark, straight brows
drew together anxiously. She looked out at the
reef that showed its teeth about the incoming
tide.

“We lost two of them,” said the Captain.
“They was brothers, poor laddies. They came
ashore two and a half miles below here. But we
took off the rest.”

“Oh, I think it’s terrible, all the wrecks there
are,” exclaimed Ruth, tensely. “Death seems
so useless when it’s an accident.”

“Well, I’m thinking there ain’t anything that
happens under the sun you can call useless,” rejoined
the old sailor, placidly.

Polly began to sing, her voice rising clear and
high on the breeze that blew up from the west,
as the sun went down.

“Three fishers went sailing out into the west,

Out into the west as the sun went down,

Each thought on the woman who loved him the best,

And the children stood watching them out of the town.

For men must work and women must weep,

And there’s little to earn, and many to keep,

Though the harbor bar be moaning.”

“Oh, Polly, don’t, please,” cried Ruth and
Isabel together. “It makes the cold chills run
down your back.”

“Well, now, I never feel that way about it,”
said the Captain, contentedly. “Our times are
in His hands, do you mind? Our times are in
His hands. Don’t you ever forget that. When
I was a youngster like you girls and Tom here,
I used to reason along those lines too, and I’d
be hoping I’d die this way and that way, and I’d
be wishing for a chariot and some angels. Well,
now it rests me to feel that I’m going to tread
the same gangway as the rest, and my Captain
is counting on me to stand faithful to my articles.
I’ve a pretty good notion this dying business
isn’t so troublesome as folks think. I’ve picked
up a good many poor lads along the shore, and
not one of them looked worried. Some were sort
of smiling. It’s real comforting, if you look at
it sensibly.”

The girls remembered that sunset hour all their
lives. There was nothing exciting about the
quiet station, nor the lighthouse out on the Point,
although they did find the keeper, Billy Clewen,
very kind. He was a little old man about seventy-four,
but everybody along the shore called
him Billy Clewen. One thing that he told them
the girls thought very pathetic. He said in bad
weather the sea birds would see the light and
would fly to it, and beat their lives out against
the heavy glass, seeking shelter from a storm.

“Were you ever in danger out here, Mr.
Clewen?” asked Isabel, whose mind always
drifted towards romance.

“Just call me Billy, miss,” answered the old
fellow, happily, as he followed them out into the
neat garden, with its paling fence half buried in
sand. “I can’t just say as I was, and I can’t
just say as I wasn’t, nuther. It’s about ten years
ago, and my wife was alive. Her father used to
be lighthouse tender before I come here, and she
was born in this house. And that winter I come
down sick with pneumony. Pretty bad sick I
was, too, pretty bad sick. Sally, she had to turn
in and trim the lamps and see they was lighted
up on time, and look after me besides, and she
was sorter tangled up herself with sciatic rheumatiz,
and if the ile didn’t give out on top of it
all.”

“The what, Billy?” asked Crullers, innocently.

“Ile, ile, what we put into the lamps. Anyhow,
I remembered it the last thing, and told her
the boys at the station would help her. There
was a nor’wester a-blowing round this Point that
would have picked up an ocean liner, and played
ball with it, and the snow a-banking up around
us like sand dunes. I didn’t think Sally would
weather it, but she started off. The fever had
me tight, but I held my course and when it grew
dark and no Sally, up I gets out of bed, and
crept along on my hands and knees to the passageway
that leads to the tower, and that’s where
the Captain found me when he came to fill the
lamps and light ’em up.”

“How did he know?” asked Polly, eagerly.

“He knew I was sick, and he was bringing me
over some medicine Mis’ Carey fixed up for me,
and he found Sarah in a drift, half-way between
the Station and this here fence, half froze, but
he had the ile, Lord bless your hearts, he had the
ile, and he set the light burning.”

“Avast there, Billy,” shouted the Captain
over his shoulder. “Are you spinning that there
oil yarn to those poor children?”

“I am, Cap, I am,” laughed Billy. “And I’ll
spin it to Saint Peter too, when I stop to rest a
bit by the gates of pearl, if he’ll give me an ear,
just to let him know you’re coming.”

CHAPTER XVII

POLLY PREPARES

It was dark when the girls reached the cottage
on the island that night. They lingered at the
Life Saving Station until the Captain ordered
them home, and then Tom led the way with a
lantern along the shore road. There was no
moon, but the stars shone, and the wind had gone
down, leaving the sea quiet, except for the long,
lazy swells that brushed along the ocean beach
to their left.

Once Tom paused at a rise in the ground and
pointed away off to the south side of the Sickle
where a light twinkled.

“That’s the half-way house,” he told them.
“They have one every two miles along shore; the
men meet there and exchange slips and pass on.
I’ll be glad when I’m old enough to join.”

“Say, Polly,” exclaimed Ruth that night, as
the girls sat around in the living-room, after they
were undressed, combing their hair, and chatting
girl fashion, “isn’t it queer that people who lead
lives of danger never seem to think anything of
it at all?”

Combing Their Hair and Chatting, Girl Fashion

“You’re never afraid of anything you know
all about,” Kate put in. “It’s the unknown
danger that scares you.”

“I mean firemen, and soldiers, and life-savers—”

“And mothers and fathers, and heroes generally,”
put in Polly, as she sat on a sofa
cushion, her long, brown curls falling loosely
around her, and her pink kimono slipped on over
her night gown, for the nights were always cool
on the bay. “I know what you mean, Ruth.
It’s because they have so much else to think about
that they haven’t time to worry. Tom’s all
ready to make a business of being a hero, and
he doesn’t realize it is being a hero. He thinks
it’s lots of fun.”

“Girls,” called out Sue from the table, where
she was tracing strange figures on a sheet of
paper, “does the course cut around this side of
Smugglers’ Cove, or the Inlet side?”

“Inlet,” Polly replied. “It’s a straight line
due northeast, then east by southeast for the
channel.”

“Then we can see it better from our own porch
than from the Orienta.”

“I know we can, but we’re going over to the
Orienta, because grandfather will be there, we
hope, and we want to be all mixed in with the
really, truly yachtsmen.”

“It won’t matter the first day, Polly, because
that’s for the largest boats. They are to sail on
a fifteen-mile course, Dorothy says, out to sea,
then zigzag back to Tarker’s Light, and along
shore home. The second day is for thirty-footers
and forty-footers, and they take the north
shore run for eight miles and back. The third
day is ours, the twenty-footers and under, and
we are to sail right here in Eagle Bay, from the
club to the Point, and across the bay to the mouth
of the Inlet, then back on the two-mile stretch
to Fair Havens.”

“It’s more than two miles from the Inlet to
Fair Havens,” protested Crullers.

“No, it isn’t,” said Polly. “Nancy and I have
sailed it often. It’s a longer stretch from the
club house to the Point by a mile, than it is from
Fair Havens to the Inlet, because the Sickle
runs away out into the sea, don’t you know.”

“How many of us are going to enter for the
Junior Cup?” Kate asked.

Polly looked around her at the assembled
group. Isabel and Crullers preserved a dignified
silence. Ruth hesitated, pondering many
things. Only Sue and Ted and Kate said positively
that they would enter the race for twenty-footers
and under; Sue with the
Patsy D.
, Ted
with the
Hurricane
, and Kate with her skip-jack,
the
Witch Cat
.

“Nancy’s going to enter the
Pirate
,” Polly
said. “And I will sail the
Tidy Jane!
How
about you, Ruth?”

“Polly, I don’t honestly think I had better go
into the race. I can’t manage the
Iris
well
enough to race her, and I’ll be sure to get into
somebody’s way if they don’t succeed in getting
into mine first.”

“No, you won’t, Grandma. Stop your fussing,”
laughed Polly. “You can sail a boat as
well as any of us, and it’s lots of fun. Dorothy
says we will be the only outsiders in that class,
the rest are Juniors from the Orienta.”

“Boys?” Ruth’s tone was ominous.

“I don’t know whether they will be boys or
pollywogs,” said Polly, her eyes full of mischief.
“Who’s afraid, anyway? I’d just as soon race
against boys as girls.”

“No boys in the twenty-footer class,” called
Kate.

“How do you know?”

“I asked Tom. The only boys’ yacht club
around here is the Pautipaug Beach Club, about
five miles east, and they never race, he says. All
they do is fish, and camp out, and slosh around
shore.”

“What’s that?” asked Polly.

“I don’t know. Tom called it that. He says
they hoist a sail, and lash the tiller, and then go
to sleep.”

“Well, that’s only one of Tom’s yarns, but
just the same I think that is all most yacht clubs
do, ‘slosh around shore.’” Polly’s tone was full
of fine, ringing scorn.

“But, Polly, there are five or six girls from
the Orienta Juniors, and we’ll have to race
against them.”

“All the more fun,” responded the Commodore
with true sportsmanlike generosity. “I do hope
that grandfather will come north so he can see
it.”

“And watch us win,” added Sue.

“Oh, you may laugh,” persisted Polly, happily,
“but I can’t see why one of us shouldn’t
win. We can sail our boats every bit as well as
Dorothy and Bess, or any Orienta girl. Nancy
is the only one who can beat us, and I’d just as
soon she did, if it had to be somebody. It would
be for the glory of our club anyway, if she did.
Week after next, children, nine days, to be accurate,
as Fraulein used to say, is the event, and
we must clean up our old hulls, and get in line,
and practise along the course. It means work,
every single day, with our sleeves rolled up.”

“Well, I am not going to race,” Isabel said,
decidedly. “I want to finish my shell portìere
before we go home, and fix up my collection, and
it’s too hard work.”

“I’d like to race, but I’m afraid to,” Crullers
put in, dubiously. “Polly, I just can’t.”

“Well, don’t then,” said Polly, cheerfully.
“You two can be our rocking-chair fleet.
There’s always one in every club. You may sit
up here and enjoy the view with Aunty Welcome.”

The following days were the busiest that Lost
Island had seen that summer. Tom and Nancy
came over every morning, after their own work
was done, advising and assisting. Dorothy and
Bess were enthusiastic over the Junior event.
There were more entries for it than ever before,
Commodore Vaughan said, and they were all
girls. Every afternoon the graceful little “cats”
and knockabouts, yawls and skipjacks, sailed on
the bay, and it looked as if Nancy and Dorothy
had the best showing, for theirs were the largest
boats.

The course was neither difficult nor dangerous
in any way, and providing the weather and wind
held fair, the race was bound to be a spirited one,
for it would be a straight away run.

One day they all went over to the Orienta
Club to look at the trophy the winner of the
Junior event would bear away. It was an exact
reproduction of the large Championship Cup the
Orienta Club had held for several years. The
cup stood about eight inches high, lined with
gold, and shaped like a chalice, the outer side
was of richly chased silver, and engraved.

“I like that very much,” Polly remarked,
critically, as she scrutinized the workmanship on
it. “Don’t you remember, Ruth, the summer
we went down to Old Point Comfort with grandfather
and saw the regatta? I went on the committee
boat that day, and followed the race. But
the cup didn’t look like a cup at all. It looked
more like a silver ice-water pitcher.”

“Maybe it was a flagon,” Kate said meditatively.
“Did it have a beak, and a handle?”

“Two handles,” Polly returned, “and a large
curved beak, and a cover to it like a syrup jug.
And yet they called it a cup.”

“This one has two handles, look, Polly,” said
Ted. “I like it that way.”

“So do I,” said Sue. “I shall enjoy drinking
the
Patsy D.’s
health in it with Aunty Welcome’s
fruit lemonade after the race is won.”

“Listen to her, Polly. As if her old
Patsy

had any chance at all against my
Hurricane
.”

Sue smiled, and slipped her arm through
Ted’s.

“Bide a wee, Edwina,” she laughed. “I’ll let
you drink out of it first of all.”

The day before the regatta was an exciting one
on Eagle Bay. Sometime the night before the

Adventure
dropped anchor, and the first object
the girls beheld the following morning was the
slender, low yacht, with her great uplift of
spars and white-clad sailors running about the
deck.

“She’s won ever so many cups,” Dorothy said,
as they watched her through opera glasses, which
Polly had thought to slip in with her equipment.
“They stand all in a long row on her cabin
sideboard. And she’s worth over fifty thousand
dollars. When I told papa I thought that was
too much to pay for a yacht, he laughed at me
and said some steam yachts cost as much as that
just to keep traveling for a year.”

“There comes another one around the Point,”
called Ted. “That’s a yawl, isn’t it?”

“Auxiliary yawl,” corrected Dorothy. “How
queer her sails look from here, the big mainsail,
and topsail, and the jib, and then that funny
spread down near the end. Makes me think of a
cat and her kitten. But wait till the sloops arrive.
I like them the best. They are so stately
and slender, and when they sail under full canvas
they dip to the wind like gulls.”

Polly had hesitated over putting fresh coats of
paint on the
Tidy Jane
, and the
Iris
. The
other boats were in fairly good order, for Tom
and his father had repainted them early in the
spring for the Holmes boys. But that final
week before the event, Polly painted and caulked
seams, and overhauled with an energy and vim
that made even Tom remonstrate.

“Now you mind what I tell you, it won’t make
them go a bit faster, not a bit,” he grumbled,
when Polly coaxed him to help them fix a dry
dock.

“Oh, but Tom, they’ll look so handsome,”
pleaded Polly. “I’m going to run a beautiful
dark blue belt ribbon of paint around the
Tidy
Jane
, and then, under strained circumstances—”

“Now, see here,” Tom crawled laboriously out
from under the
Jane
, a paint pot in one hand
and a brush in the other, “you can strain all the
circumstances you want, but she won’t go a bit
faster.”

The girls broke into a peal of laughter at him,
but Tom stolidly refused to see anything funny
in the whole proceeding and went on painting
reluctantly.

But it paid, even the Captain said so the last
day, when he came over on a tour of inspection,
and approved of the Polly Page Club’s racers,
clean and trim as paint and polish could make
them.

“Aren’t they handsome?” asked Polly,
proudly, as she stood beside him on the landing,
and surveyed the fleet.

“Fine and dandy,” echoed the Captain, heartily.
“If they act as saucy as they look, there
won’t be a running chance for any other boat on
the bay. You want to look out for the
Jane
,
mind. Don’t give her her head. She’s a smart
one, now, I tell you. I never let her find out she
could get the best of me, but she was always
a-trying. Make her feel your hand steady on
the tiller, every minute, or she’ll bolt like a wild
thing. And when she takes a notion to tilt on
her beam end in a good puff of wind, why, let
her tilt. She can’t do a mite of harm, not a mite.
I’ve had her out when the seas would skip clean
over her, and half fill the cockpit, and she’d tilt
till she’d lift her centerboard out of the water.
Yes, ma’am. And what did I do? Just patted
her down easy, and let her drift off a bit to leeward
till the wind spilled out of her sail, and
when she came about again, she’d right herself
like a lady and walk on.”

Polly nodded comprehendingly.

“I know how she acts,” she said. “And that’s
just the way I feel about her, too, Captain Carey,
as if she were alive, and could almost understand
what I say to her.”

“Well, it’s something plain humans can’t know
about,” the Captain answered, in his slow, restful,
philosophic way. “Every boat on the face
of the waters has got just as much personality
as you or I, and they’ve got dispositions too.
I’ve shipped before now on vessels that you
couldn’t make behave themselves any more’n you
could harness up a porpoise to a plough. Then
I’ve shipped on bashful, nervous creeturs of
boats, that would dance and shiver their timbers
from one beam end to another, for all the world
like some old woman. There was a three-master
out of Martha’s Vineyard when I was a lad.
She carried various articles of trade along the
west coast of Africa, and she was the skeeriest
thing I ever sailed on. She had her favorites
among the crew too, mind you. I’ve seen her
fairly tremble and waver when the pilot for the
day would take hold of her. He was a big, slow
chap from a place called Noank down on the
Connecticut shore. Name was Shad Hardy, and
it suited him. He had the identical expression
of a shad. I was on night duty then at the
wheel, and the minute she’d feel my hand on the
spokes, she was like a lamb. I’d speak to her,
and steady her up a bit, and she’d march along
in the wind, like a grenadier to band music. I
always did say it wa’n’t no use trying to make a
ship like you, when it had made up its mind it
wouldn’t. They’re the notioniest things alive,
’cepting females, and I sometimes think that’s
why some discerning seaman called a boat ‘she’
and set public opinion that way.”

“Oh, Captain, when you know how nice we are,
and how we mind you,” rebuked Polly. “Just
wait till to-morrow.”

“The Junior race won’t come off till the third
day Tom tells me,” the Captain answered.
“And that makes me think.” He dipped into
his jacket pocket, and pulled forth neat rolls
of twine and lines, a pouch of tobacco, and some
keys. “They just gave me a telegram for you
over at the hotel. Here ’tis. No, ’tain’t.
Avast there, maybe it’s down below. Nancy and
mother told me not to give it to you sudden, for
fear it might be bad news.”

“Oh, I don’t think it is,” Polly said, hopefully.
She never went out and opened the gate for
trouble, not Polly.

The Captain drew forth the yellow envelope
gingerly.

“I wouldn’t open it in too big a hurry, anyway,”
he warned. “Better take such matters
pretty easy. I’m suspicious of the pesky things
every time I see one. I never got one yet that
told me any good news. It always plumps you
full of bad surprises, all to once.”

“Well, this is good news,” Polly cried, as she
glanced over the sheet of paper. “It’s from
grandfather, and he’ll be here to-morrow, and
stay for regatta week, then take us home with
him! Let’s see, from the fifteenth to the twenty-second
is the regatta, then allowing four days
down the coast we’ll get to Queen’s Ferry just
in time to rest up before school opens.”

The Captain’s eyes twinkled under their bushy
brows.

“I shall have to hand in a true and faithful
report if the Admiral asks me for one,” he said.

“Oh, but we’ve been good, haven’t we, Captain
Carey?”

“Fair to middlin’, fair to middlin’,” laughed
the old sailor, as he started down the beach, and
Polly ran up to the house to break the news to
the other girls.

CHAPTER XVIII

THE REGATTA

There was an air of excitement and activity
about Eagle Bay the following morning. All
summer long it had been a quiet inlet of the great
Atlantic. When the long breakers would come
surging in on the south shore of the Sickle, half
a mile over on its north shore there would hardly
be a ripple on the bay. Up at the east end of
course, near the Point, the heavy seas would
come racing through the channel, but before they
had gone far, the bay had caught them and
soothed them, and all their fury died away in her
placid arms.

But when the sun rose on the fifteenth of
August, all along the bay there was a holiday
look to things. The weather was splendid, not
too warm nor too windy, but just right, the girls
declared, as they all trouped out on the porch
before breakfast, with various “envelopes”
around them, as Crullers expressed it, to take a
look at the scene. The hotel flaunted flags wherever
a flag could be placed to advantage, and all
along the beach, the cottages had out bunting and
flags too. At the landing at Fair Havens, one
huge flag was unfurled with dignity to the morning
breeze.

“Oh, dear, I wish we had thought to buy a lot
of flags too,” cried Isabel.

“There’s a whole week of it,” Polly answered.
“We can buy them to-day over in the village.
Don’t worry over anything at all, girls. Let’s
be just as happy as we can while it lasts.”

Twelve large yachts they counted, besides several
steam launches, motor boats, and smaller
sailing craft. From the rigging of every one of
them fluttered gay strings of small flags, and
Polly finally ran down to their own flag pole and
raised the blue and gold pennant of which the
girls were so proud.

“Before the week is over, girls,” cried Kate,
waving her towel at it joyously, as she came out
on the porch after her bath, clad in her bathrobe,
“every boat on the bay will know and respect
that flag.”

The Commodore had sent over a cordial invitation
for them to be the guests of the Orienta
whenever they felt like it during regatta week.
Polly hardly knew what to say about it. The
best view of the course could be had from Lost
Island, but the girls wanted to go to the big club
house and “strut,” as Sue said.

“You’re a lot of vain bluejays,” Polly declared
laughingly. “All you want to do is dress
up in your best yachting suits, and go over there
and be petted. I know you all.”

“Oh, Polly, come on. We haven’t been petted
much this summer, have we?” pleaded Ted.
“We’ve stayed right here and worked like able
seamen, you know we have. Mayn’t we tie on
our best hair ribbons now and go and eat ice
cream, please?”

“Please, Commodore,” echoed Kate and Ruth,
laughingly, and the Commodore finally agreed.

“I think we’d better start by half-past eight,
girls,” she said, as she sat in the hammock and deliberately
brushed out her brown curls.

“Say, Polly, suppose somebody over on the
yachts had field glasses, and could see you?”
questioned Isabel.

“See
me
? Look at Kate clad in a bath robe
of bright blue Turkish toweling. Look at Crullers
with a red shawl draped artistically over her
nightgown. I move we all adjourn out of
sight.”

Aunty Welcome’s turbaned head appeared at
the kitchen door, as they all trooped back into the
living-room.

“Has you all been out on dat porch in your
nightgowns?” she asked, ominously. “Well, I
did think I might make a Spanish omelet for
breakfast, but now you don’t get it.”

“Oh, please, darling, precious Aunty—” began
Polly, who loved Spanish omelet, but Welcome
held firmly to her point.

“No, ma’am. It’s de only power I got over
you all, and if you don’t behave, I won’t cook
nice things for you. Oatmeal and boiled eggs
is what you’ll get.”

“Let’s hurry and dress, girls, and maybe she
will.” Polly curled her hair over her finger
quickly, and tied the cluster with a soft satin ribbon.
“Grandfather arrives at Eastport on the
nine forty-five train from Portland, and I want
to be there to meet him. So I think you girls
can all go up on the Orienta veranda and watch
the start, and we can join you there.”

“There won’t be any start before noon,” Kate
answered. “Why can’t we all meet the Admiral
at Eastport and let everybody else know we are
meeting him. It’s an event for a little place like
Eastport to catch a real Rear-Admiral even if he
is on the retired list, and we must let the town
know its honor. Let’s all carry blue and gold
flags, and dress up in our best, and salute him in
state when the train pulls in.”

Polly enjoyed the plan, and they hurried with
their dressing, then walked out sedately into the
little room that served as a dining-room. Welcome’s
face was immobile and unrelenting, but
on the table there were neither boiled eggs nor
oatmeal. Crullers saw, and gave one glad cry.

“Girls, waffles!”

Now waffles are usually merely an adjunct to
a full meal, but not Welcome’s waffles. There
was no room for other food. The girls ate
waffles with butter and sugar on them, and then
waffles with honey on them, then Polly tried some
maple syrup, and Sue hunted up the strawberry
jam jar, and Ruth appeared with some marmalade.

“’Deed, an’ I nevah see sech appetites,” Welcome
declared, her indignation forgotten, as she
stood over the cookstove, and guarded the waffle
iron, her old face smiling broadly. “Dat’s jest
sixty-nine I done cooked dis yere morning for
you all, and I don’t see whar you puts ’em, chillern.”

“It’s your own fault, Aunty,” Polly declared.
“You make them so light and nice, that when we
eat them, they just evaporate.”

“Listen to her get ’round her mammy,” Welcome’s
fat sides shook with laughter, as she ladled
out more. “Hyar goes seventy-one.”

Tom had agreed to drive over after them in
the carry-all. Polly’s orders had gone forth,
and not a single boat was to be taken out on the
bay until the Junior race. She wanted them
spick and span for the event of the regatta, and
even Dorothy and Bess’s boat, the
Nixie
, looked
weather-beaten beside the newly painted challengers
of the Junior Cup.

“Who are the judges, Kate?” asked Ted, as
they drove along the shore road towards town.
It had been a matter for calculation to get seven
girls into the carry-all besides the driver, but
some way it had happened. There was room for
four people, and under pressure, five, but when
they picked up Nancy too, down at Fair Havens,
there were nine aboard, and the colts moderated
their pace. Tom’s special pride in life, next to
his hope of being a life saver, was the colts.
Sorrels they were, and almost a perfect match to
Ted’s red curls. The Captain had owned them
twelve years, and they had grown up with the
children, so they still called them the “colts.”
And they had traveled that shore road so often
during those twelve years that the Captain declared
he shouldn’t be at all surprised to see them
walk out of their stalls, harness each other up,
and start off alone at any time. As the two
trotted along the shore road together, they scattered
a cloud of dust behind, and their short
manes caught the breeze like a t’gallant peak
flag, Tom said.

It was the first time the girls had all been to
Eastport since their arrival at Eagle Bay. It
lay about two miles from the club house on
Orienta Point, and a quarter of a mile up the
Inlet. A big lumber mill off to one end of town
hummed its song lazily. You could tell just
what the saw was doing from the tone, Sue said.
First the sharp hiss as it cut the bark, then a
gradually rising buzz and hum, till there came
the crack as it fell apart. Off to the other side
of the village lay the railroad station. There
were half a dozen buildings around the central
square of green, some low white houses, with
their green blinds tightly closed, and little garden
patches out in front filled with sweet-scented
old-fashioned flowers.

“I was born over yonder,” Tom told them,
pointing his whip at a little house next the white
church that occupied the north end of the green.
“So was Pa, and his Pa too, but now my Aunt
Cynthy Bardwell lives there. She’s got the
finest rose garden in Eastport, and all the summer
folks come down here to buy her roses.
She’s Pa’s only sister, and her husband was a
captain too, sailed a schooner up to the Gulf
every year for over forty years, and fell off the
dock down here one day loading ties.”

“Doing what, Tom?” asked Polly, anxiously,
as they stopped.

“Loading railroad ties from the saw mill yonder,
to carry south. He was just visiting around
the docks and saw a tie slip into the river, and
it knocked off a little chap with it, Dicky Button,
it was, and Uncle Bardwell went in after
him, and just then a boat come along, and her
swell swashed the schooner up against the dock,
and when they got him out he was dead, but
Dicky’s alive.”

The girls listened and made up their minds
they wanted to see the rose garden then and
there. It was only nine, Polly said, and the
train couldn’t possibly get through the village
without everybody knowing it was there. So
Tom tied the colts to the hitching post, and they
went in to call on Mrs. Cynthy Bardwell.

Ruth started to walk up the front path, but
Tom told her they had better go around to the
back door, so they followed him obediently along
the graveled path, bordered neatly with clam
shells turned face downward in the mould.
Then came “old hen and chickens,” as Kate
called them, mignonette, sweet alyssium, marigolds,
and pansies. And in the center of each
bed there rose up stocks, pink and white, and so
fragrant and lovable, that the girls begged for
some at once.

“Well, I do declare!” exclaimed a sweet,
friendly voice so near to them they nearly
jumped. “I’m right here at the buttery window,
girls, and I saw you and Tom coming.
Wait a minute till I change my apron.”

“It gave me quite a turn to see such a lot of
youngsters in my garden so early,” she told
them, when she appeared, tying the strings of
her apron as she talked. “Come and see my
roses.”

It seemed as if nothing but roses grew in that
long back garden, shaded with horse chestnut
trees, excepting the tall lilac bushes along the
fence and the lilies of the valley that grew
thickly on the ground beneath them.

“They’ve gone by long ago,” Mrs. Bardwell
said, “but they’re real sweet in the spring.”

On the white and green trellis work above the
kitchen portico, a crimson rambler climbed sturdily
to the “ell” roof. A sweetbrier hung over
the gate, with little white roses nearly gone.
Then there were bushes of old-fashioned blush
roses, so delicately pink and sweet that Polly declared
all she could think of was her grandmother’s
wedding chest at home, with its flat silk
bags of dried rose leaves, still heavy with fragrance
from roses that had bloomed half a century
ago.

“Yes, they’re sweet, but I have a leaning towards
the white brides,” said Mrs. Bardwell,
moving from bush to bush like a white bride herself,
with her silver white curls, pink cheeks, and
fresh white apron. “And the bees love them
best too. They’re all gone by, now. I can generally
count on them along in June. The crimson
rambler’s real hardy, but it’s beginning now
to shake its petals. I suppose you folks down
south have roses so much you hardly appreciate
them, but we love them. Summer’s kind of
late up here, and I’ve had roses for my table
clear to the end of August. These here were
American Beauties. I never tried them before
this year, but a man come along last fall and
sorter talked me into taking them, and they did
bloom up real sightly, but terrible thorny. This
bush I raised from a slip my mother gave me
the day I was married. It’s a cabbage rose.
’Tain’t a pretty name, but I love the bush, and
the flower too. It looks more like a lot of little
rosebuds all clustered together than just one
flower, don’t it? There’s moss roses down in
that corner by the fence, but they went by last
month too. These here, they call them Gloriana
Wonders. I always feel like shaking them
same as you would a child that won’t behave.
They bloom all to once, and just open up their
whole hearts in a day, and the wind blows them
to Halifax.” She laughed happily, touching
the leaves with tender, lingering fingers as you
would the flushed cheek of a baby. “I suppose
I’m foolish over them, but they’re all I’ve got
to love and care for now. I used to have five
babies of my own, and they’re all lying over
yonder around their father, the Captain, in the
little cemetery across from the lighthouse, on the
east shore.”

“We haven’t been there yet,” Polly said, her
dark eyes full of sympathy, as she held the flowers
that Aunt Cynthy clipped steadily while she
talked.

“Haven’t you? It’s real int’restin’,” answered
the old lady cheerily. “I like it better,
somehow, than the new one down by the church.
That was built recently, thirty years ago, wasn’t
it, Tom? The old one goes back long before
that, and I want to lie there, even if the graves
be half sunken, and some of the stones lopsided.
I guess they sleep the long sleep just as well. I
had father and the children buried sorter opposite
from the way other folks do. I didn’t p’int
them to the east and the sunrise. I p’inted them
due west, so they can look straight out over the
bay from the east shore of the channel. I know
that’s the way they would have liked it best.
These here tea roses are real sweet and friendly,
don’t you think so? and lasting, too.”

“I think the whole garden is lovely,” cried
Polly. “I just wish I could reach out and hug
them all. Seems as if I never saw such a garden
before.”

“Well, flowers are like children and friends.
Give ’em love and care, and plenty of fresh
water, and they’ll love you back a hundred-fold.
Stop in any time, girls. Tom and Nancy are
over every day or so, and they always come to
see me. I was born to mother something, and
as long as the dear Lord saw fit to gather my
babies in his arms, I have to mother the roses,
and all the other babies, little and big, that come
to my garden, don’t you see?”

“Isn’t she a darling?” exclaimed Ruth, when
they finally left the little white cottage, and
started over to the depot. Polly had coaxed
and coaxed until she had prevailed, and Mrs.
Bardwell had promised to go back with them to
watch the races. The carry-all and its capacity
had been argued over, until Polly said the Admiral
could get one of the village teams and take
Kate and Ruth with him.

Polly buried her nose in her bouquet, and just
smiled and sighed all at once.

“I’m too full for utterance, as Crullers says
after dinner,” she laughed. “But there’s one
thing certain. I am coming back to that white
cottage again. Wait till we see Aunty Welcome’s
face when she smells these late roses.
She was saying only yesterday that the only
thing she was homesick for were the roses at
Glenwood. Listen. Oh, girls, there’s the train
whistle!”

She forgot everything except the dear grandfather
who was on that train, and before the rest
could catch up with her, she started on a run towards
the little red station. It was an excursion
train from Portland, one that connected with the
southern expresses and came up to Eastport in
honor of the regatta. Polly stood up on a
wooden box near the express office, and watched
the outpouring of the crowds, men, women, and
children, all bearing lunch boxes, and all dressed
in holiday and outing clothes. But she could
not see the Admiral anywhere. Finally, somebody
put an arm around her very quietly, and
she turned to find the Admiral smiling down on
her.

“Oh, you dear, you precious old dear,” cried
Polly, as she nearly strangled him with her
strong, young embrace. “I never even saw you
leave the train and I watched everyone.”

“Didn’t you see me riding on the engine so
I’d be the first one off?” the Admiral asked, teasingly,
as he pinched her cheek. “I was up forward
in the smoker, mate. Where did you collect
those freckles? Where are all the other
girls?”

“Here we are, sir,” Sue exclaimed, as they
came up, breathlessly. “Polly wouldn’t wait for
us. She wanted to meet you first of all, so we
let her.”

“Let me?” repeated Polly, but the girls
wouldn’t allow her to finish.

“You don’t know how she orders us around,”
Ruth added.

“Does she?” The Admiral leaned back his
head, and laughed in his deep, hearty fashion.
“And I am afraid I cannot do a thing about it.
She’s the Commodore, you understand, and if I
had my choice between a kingship and a commodore’s
berth, for real sovereignty, I’d choose the
berth. Where’s the Doctor?”

The girls caught their breath, and their eyes
fairly shone with interest and subdued excitement.
Polly laid her hands on the Admiral’s
shoulders.

“Grandfather dear,” she exclaimed, solemnly,
“do you know him?”

“Oh, but he’s a smuggler,” added Ted, mischievously.
“He’s just disguised as a doctor of
something.”

“And he’s addicted to orange marmalade
something terrible, Aunty Welcome says,” Kate
put in.

“But he’s got the finest Chili sauce over in the
cave you ever tasted, grandfather,” Polly concluded.

“Now, wait one moment, and let me catch my
breath.” The Admiral put out his hands to defend
himself, as the girls all clustered around
him, each one eager to tell about the mystery of
Smugglers’ Isle. “I mean Penrhyn Parmelee
Smith of Washington, D. C.”

“So do we,” came a united and positive chorus,
“Washington, D. C., and Eagle Bay. He lives
right next door to us in a cave on an island.”

“God bless my heart and soul,” exclaimed the
Admiral, and he took off his glasses to wipe
them, as he always did when he was startled.
“I am sure I have never been surprised but twice
in twenty years. Once when Welcome marched
forcibly into my study and placed this person
with the freckles in my arms, and again to-day.
And yet it may be true. It is quite like Penrhyn
to do such a thing. For a man in his sixty-sixth
year he is the most irresponsible, child-like
creature I ever knew. Polly, did you say orange
marmalade?”

Polly nodded her head emphatically.

“He’s had six jars out of the ten we brought
with us,” she replied, solemnly. “Aunty declares
it can’t hurt him one bit, but we don’t believe
he eats it himself. We think he uses it as
bait to catch—what is it, girls?”

“Polypi,” supplemented Ruth. “Polypi.”

More than one in the holiday crowd turned at
the hearty laugh that broke from the group
around the stately old Admiral. And suddenly
the girls saw a figure approaching, whose white
suit of flannel and white yachting cap, they recognized
at once.

“Admiral,” the Doctor fairly beamed as he
put out his hand. “I salute you.” He smiled
his slow, dry smile that only drew down the corners
of his mouth, and stretched his dimples
more, Polly declared. The Admiral gripped his
hand warmly.

“Polly, my dear, we went to college together,”
he exclaimed. “Didn’t we, Penny? Some day
when you girls meet one another, and have
grandchildren beside you, perhaps you’ll look
back and understand how we two old fellows feel
this minute; eh, Doctor? I think if I took a
deep breath I could give the grand old yell yet.”

“Don’t,” cautioned the Doctor. “It won’t do
in Eastport. Polly would hand us over to the
authorities without a qualm. You don’t know
how she rules us.”

“Oh, yes, I do,” said the Admiral, merrily.
“I’ve heard reports of it already.”

The Doctor’s eyebrows lifted.

“Marmalade?” he queried, as he took Polly by
one arm, and guided her deftly through the
crowd, the rest following. “I have to eat it, to
keep in their good graces.”

“You shall not have another jar after that,”
Polly cried, severely. “Wait till I tell Aunty
Welcome. Where’s Tom with our carry-all?
Oh, I see him, over under the horse chestnuts at
Aunt Cynthy’s.”

“Aunt Cynthy, Polly?” asked the Admiral.
“Who is the lady?”

“She’s the mother of the roses,” Polly told
him, mysteriously, as she raised her bouquet for
him to catch a whiff of its fragrance. “Tom’s
aunt. And she’s going back to the Orienta with
us to watch the races. Now, the carry-all won’t
carry all, at all. It will just about carry seven
people.”

“I have a conveyance here some place,” spoke
up the Doctor. “At least I did have. I can
take two with me. Wait just one minute.”

He disappeared around the corner, and came
back driving a trim top carriage.

“It’s the hotel keeper’s,” he told them. “I
didn’t know these children were coming to meet
you in state, so I plotted to carry you off myself.
Now, I think I had best take Mrs. Bardwell with
me, and the thinnest one of the girls.”

“Thinnest!” exclaimed Sue. “Thinnest!
You won’t find any thin people in this club after
six weeks on Lost Island. Crullers, won’t you
please ride with the Doctor, just as a matter of
revenge?”

And Crullers, whose one strong point was her
weight, agreed willingly to share the seat with
the doctor and Mrs. Bardwell.

It was a gay ride back along the bay shore
road. The Doctor was an old acquaintance of
Aunt Cynthy’s, for he loved flowers and had
often stopped on his way to the post-office to look
at her garden and chat awhile over the white
cross-bar fence.

When they arrived at the club house, the whole
place seemed filled with people. All of the summer
colony had turned out in state to do honor
to the regatta, as well as the visitors. Up in the
balcony that overhung the bay, a band played,
and the view out on the water was one the girls
never forgot all their lives.

After they had greeted the Commodore and
Mrs. Vaughan, they found chairs at a good angle
of vision, and established themselves around
Aunt Cynthy as chaperon, while the Doctor and
Admiral Page went out on the committee boat.

The bay was brilliant in the sparkling morning
sunshine. It was a perfect day. Crullers
said the sky looked higher than usual, and the
clouds drifted lazily up from the southwest.
The great sails were hoisted, and curved out in
great white swells, as the wind filled them.
Orders rang out sharply, as the white-clad sailors
ran here and there, and finally the start was
made at 11:02 sharp. One after another, eight
yachts dipped to the wind, crossed the imaginary
line of starting, and the fifteen-mile race was on.

“Oh, Polly, just think how we shall feel when
we start like that,” exclaimed Sue, excitedly.
“Just look at the spread of canvas on that last
sloop. All I can think of is a sheet tacked to a
shingle, by way of comparison. Polly, Polly,
watch her keel over as she catches the wash from
the others. Oh, isn’t it glorious!”

“Don’t gush so, child,” said Aunt Cynthy,
placidly. “No sailor talks that way at all. But
’tis a sightly lot of sail boats, and no mistake.
What’s the name of that last one?”

Dorothy leaned over her chair, happy and
proud.

“That’s my father’s sloop, the
Adventure
,” she
replied. “Mamma is with him. They are waving
to us, don’t you see?”

“And she’s the only lady in the race,” added
Bess, her eyes full of love and pleasure. “She
loves it the same as we do.”

Polly leaned eagerly forward over the railing.
She had handed the glasses to Kate and Isabel.
Her cap was off, and the breeze blew her curls
back from her forehead. Her lips were half
parted, and her eyes shining like stars as she
watched the stately yachts cross the bay, and
make for the open channel to the sea.

“I don’t see how they can sail with a southerly
wind,” Ted said. “Aren’t they going to tack
south as soon as they strike the ocean?”

“Well, we’re facing more southeast, than
south, aren’t we, Polly?” Ruth asked with one
eye on the sun.

“Girls,” breathed Polly, tensely. “I don’t
care a rap how we’re facing. Watch the race,
and stop your talking.”

“Spoken like a true sailor,” Aunt Cynthy
echoed, warmly, and they all turned to the railing
to watch the yachts as one by one they slipped
through the channel, and the race was really on.

CHAPTER XIX

THE FIRST EVENT

It was late in the afternoon before the first
sails of the returning fleet appeared in the channel.
All day long the girls had been honored
guests of the Orienta Club, and had enjoyed
themselves thoroughly. Although both Mrs.
Vaughan and the Commodore were away on
board the
Adventure
, the other members and
their wives had all heard about the yacht
club over on Lost Island, and were happy
to meet the girls, and see that they had a pleasant
day of it.

“I think,” said Mrs. Allison, the chairman of
the reception committee for regatta week, “I
think it would be nice for you to meet your competitors
in the race, the girls of the Junior Club.
Let me see how it can be best managed? There
are six, no, eight, in your club, and nine in the
Juniors. Dorothy, will you just press that button
behind you, dear?” She smiled around at
the circle of interested faces. “We will call the
club steward, and you may have a luncheon all
by yourselves and get acquainted.”

So it was arranged. Instead of the “girl element,”
as the Doctor laughingly dubbed the
rival clubs, eating luncheon in the large dining-hall
with the other guests and members, they
were given one of the smaller side rooms all to
themselves.

Dorothy and Bess acted as official hostesses,
and there was a great cluster of red and white
carnations in a cut glass bowl for a centerpiece,
as red and white were the Orienta colors. Besides
the Vaughan girls, there were seven others,
all daughters of club members, and a delightful
lot of girls, the rest decided.

“Only five of us are going to race, though,”
said Connie Evans. “This is my first year at the
seashore. We always go up to the Adirondacks.
Father has a lodge up there, and it seems so
strange not to be closed in by the mountains. I
never sailed a yacht until this season, and mine
is just a ‘cat’ with one sail.”

“Most of us have catboats,” replied Polly, reassuringly.
“Mine is a ‘cat,’ too, and it is our
first season with boats, so you need not be afraid
of racing against experts. I think it will be
lots of fun. Can you all swim?”

“No, we can’t, not one,” Bess declared.
“We’ve been sand bathers this summer, mamma
says, and haven’t been in at all above our shoulders.
But I don’t think anything will happen,
do you, Polly?”

“Polly believes that prevention is earth’s first
law,” laughed Kate, as she saw Polly shake her
head doubtfully. “You had best put a lot of
buoys and life preservers in your boats.”

“What time would they have to put them on,”
demanded Sue, “if they just dropped into the
water? I think it would be a good idea if we
wore belts like acrobats when they are training,
with a ring in the back, and a rope fastened to it.
Then if we fell over all we would have to do
would be to hold on to the rope and be hauled in.”

“They say one of the men from the Station is
to be on guard at the pier all day, and they will
watch from the Point too.”

“That’s all right,” Crullers broke in, wistfully,
“but if you fall overboard, you’ll swallow salt
water enough to drown ten cats, before they
have time to get to you; I know from experience.”

“Let’s not even think it may happen,” said
Polly, happily. “Dorothy, couldn’t we have the
Cup on the table just as a reminder?”

Dorothy thought perhaps they might, and
after a consultation with the steward the Junior
Cup was borne in state into the room, and set in
the place of honor at the head of the table between
Dorothy and Polly, the two commodores.

“Day after to-morrow,” said Sue, thoughtfully
regarding it, “I shall go home with that
under my arm.”

“Listen to her, girls,” Kate cried. “And remember
what I prophesy. The
Patsy D.
will
finish fifth, while the
Witch Cat
glides over the
line first.”

Polly said nothing. From her seat beside
Dorothy, she looked at the beautiful silver cup
and thought of the race. She had said she was a
good sportsman, as the Admiral wished her to
be, and she was sure she could see the Cup go to
the best yacht without any feeling of envy, but
she almost wished there might have been nine
consolation prizes, for something seemed to tell
her that the
Pirate
would be the winner. There
was something different about Tom’s big knockabout,
and the daring way that Nancy sailed her,
that left the other boats out in the cold. Nancy
knew the bay well. She was used to every ripple
on it, every turn of the tide, every breath of
wind, every mood and whim that passed over it
like cloud shadows. And she knew, too, the
trim, slender boat as she might some live, tamed
animal that loved her. The Cup would mean a
great deal more to her than to the other girls.
Most of them came from well-to-do families,
and they themselves were happy, normal city-bred
girls, who had had plenty of amusement
and novelty in their lives, while Nancy had spent
all of hers in the little gray cottage that listed to
leeward on Fair Havens’ beach. She had never
even been inside the Orienta until the girls took
her with them, and now that she was there and
had a chance of winning the Cup, she seemed like
another girl. While the rest chatted and laughed,
she sat quietly by, but Polly caught her glance
now and then, and the quick, wistful smile, and
she knew what she was thinking about. Once,
when Dorothy rose to make a little speech, Polly
closed her eyes for a second, in a half-expressed
prayer that if it were right for Nancy to win the
race, she herself might be willing and glad to
have her.

“But you’re not,” she told herself, after the
luncheon, when they all went down to the beach
to walk and pass the time. Her chin was raised,
her brown eyes troubled, but she smiled in the
old bright way, and laughed with the rest, even
while she thought: “You’re not glad, Polly
Page, that Nancy has even a little bit of a
chance against the
Tidy Jane
, and you want the
Cup with all your heart, and you know perfectly
well that if Nancy were not in the race, you could
win it.”

“Polly, you look just like the Winged Victory
with the wind blowing back your hair and dress
that way,” called Ruth.

“I wouldn’t allow such a comparison,” Kate
declared. “Polly, it doesn’t have any head, you
know.”

But Polly smiled and waved her hand at them,
and said nothing. Nancy was walking beside
her, and she wondered whether a true sportsman
ever allows sentimental reasons to outweigh his
sense of fairness, whether it was wrong for her
to hope with all her heart that she might win the
race when Nancy had set all her hopes on it.

“Father says that if I should win the Cup,”
Nancy whispered, happily, as she slipped her
arm through Polly’s, “he’ll build me a knockabout
for next year just like Tom’s. And just
think, if you girls hadn’t let me come into your
club, I couldn’t have raced at all. Aren’t things
queer, Polly?”

“Curious and curiouser,” smiled back Polly,
remembering the expression of one of her favorite
heroines. The Doctor and Mrs. Bardwell
were walking towards them, with several of the
club members, and they all strolled down to the
pier to watch for the incoming yachts. At just
four-thirty-two by the Doctor’s watch, the first
boat hove in sight around the Point. She was
too far away for them to distinguish her identity,
but hardly had she come about and started on the
new stretch than a larger yacht appeared, following
hard in her wake.

“That’s the
Thistle
,” cried Dorothy. “I
know the cut of her sails. Oh, dear, I wonder
if the other is papa’s?”

“The
Thistle’s
crowding on more sail, and
gaining,” Polly exclaimed, watching them
through glasses. “She will win!”

“Perhaps not,” Mrs. Bardwell rejoined cheerily.
“A race is never won till it’s done, you
know, so hope to the finish.”

There were three in sight now, one following
the other as closely and evenly as flying geese,
but still the
Thistle
strove to the fore. That
first mile up the bay, the girls hardly spoke, as
they leaned over the iron chain that was stretched
along the pier for safety. Their eyes were
bright, their lips half-parted as they tried to
watch every swerve, every manœuvre on the part
of the racers. All at once Bess declared she
knew the first vessel was the
Adventure
because
there was a lady on deck, and she had waved to
her.

“Bess Vaughan,” laughed Polly, “you make
me think of the soldier in the fairy tale who was
a sharpshooter and could aim at a fly on the limb
of a tree five miles off. That boat is a mile and
a half from us now.”

“Just you wait and see,” Bess retorted seriously.
“Maybe it wasn’t her handkerchief, but
I know it’s the
Adventure
.”

“Oh, girls,” exclaimed Isabel, excitedly.
“See the big one dip sideways.”

“Sideways, child,” Aunt Cynthy repeated,
merrily. “To leeward, dear heart, to leeward.”

Even at that distance it appeared as if the
larger yacht had the best chance.

“I’m sure they could crowd on more sail,”
Dorothy said, helplessly. “Why don’t they do
it? Tom says there’s always room for another
reef some place on a sloop.”

“That’s just what’s happening this minute,”
Kate said. “The
Thistle
has every inch on she
can carry, and there’s still over a mile to go.”

“Polly, if that old New York boat should win,
I shall lie down on the sand, and simply,
simply—” Isabel hesitated for lack of an apt
expression, but Ted filled it in for her calmly.

“Suspire. And be sure and do it very quietly,
Isabel, so as not to disturb the race.”

Isabel laughed good-humoredly with the rest.
The six weeks’ vacation at Lost Island had helped
her in many ways. She would always be more
precise than the other girls, more attentive to the
formalities of life, as Miss Calvert expressed it,
but the hearty, daily companionship and example
set by the rest had filed down many sharp little
points in her character. At Calvert Hall both
Ted and Sue had loved to tease her, but someway
she did not mind it any more. She could
laugh back at them like Kate or Polly now, and
it was rarely that one of “Isabel’s grumbles” was
heard. “Lady Vanitas” she would always be,
for she dearly loved pretty clothes and dainty
things. Sue had expressed her ideas on dress
aptly one day when she had remarked that Isabel
couldn’t even wear a sweater at basket ball
unless it had a fancy border to it and a stickpin
in front. Even to-day the brim of her white
duck yachting cap was pinned jauntily back with
a class pin, while the other girls had turned
theirs down to keep the sun out of their eyes.
It seemed as if Isabel’s collar never wilted under
the hottest sun, her belt never sagged out of
place, and her shoe strings never came untied.
Polly’s eyes always lingered over this member
of her crew approvingly, for she, too, loved neatness
and good taste.

All of the club verandas were thronged with
onlookers during that final half hour. Both
boats were hesitating under a vagrant puff of
adverse wind, when suddenly the
Adventure

seemed to get under way and slipped steadily
down the course, ahead of her New York rival.
Something white fluttered from her deck, and
all of the girls waved their handkerchiefs wildly
in response. Somewhere back in the crowd on
shore a boy’s voice shouted:

“Come along,
Adventure
, come along there!”

The girls laughed, for they knew it must be
Tom, losing his head at the critical moment.
The little sloop held gallantly to the point she
had gained, and glided finally over the imaginary
line that ended the course, while cheer on cheer
rang out from the club house and the shore away
up to the hotel. The cup would remain with the
Orienta Club for another season.

After the shouts had at last died away, and
the fussy little committee launch had puffed
back and forth among the returning yachts, the
girls took their leave, and started homeward,
with the Admiral and the Vaughan girls in tow.
The Doctor had undertaken to return Mrs.
Bardwell safely to the house of the roses, and
she declared as she kissed each girl that it had
been the first day she had spent in society in
twenty years.

“Bless her,” Polly said tenderly, as she
watched the Doctor tuck the tan lap robe about
her. “She doesn’t know what a nice ‘society’ she
is all by herself.”

“Admiral Page,” interposed Ted, gravely,
“isn’t Polly sentimental?”

“All sailors should be,” rejoined the Admiral,
his eyes twinkling. “Not exactly sentimental,
but full of sentiment, eh, Polly, mate?”

“Aye, aye, sir,” said Polly, but she was thinking
of something else, thinking of Nancy and
the Junior Cup.

Aunty Welcome lived up to her name in the
dinner that she had prepared for her “Marse
Bob.” Polly had declared the dining-room in
the cottage was too small for such a festive occasion,
so dinner was served in state out on the
porch. It was an evening they all remembered
out of a long, happy summer-time. Two small
tables set together made quite a commodious
banquet board. Aunt Cynthy’s bouquets, freshened
up after a good drink of water, made a
pretty centerpiece, with the blue and gold yacht
club pennant waving above it. The Admiral insisted
on Polly taking the head of the table with
Kate, as club chaperon, at the foot.

“I am merely a guest,” he said, “and will sit
at the Commodore’s right hand, if she will permit.”

Long after the sun went down, the little dinner
party went on, until the moon rose, and the
bay lay like a sea of quicksilver and jet below
them. Then they heard the sound of wheels
along the shore road, and Tom’s long cheery
hail, and the Admiral rose to take his leave.

“To-morrow,” he told them, “you had better
stay right here and rest. The day’s event is for
twenty-footers and over, and they have a long
course to cover. I’ll run over in the afternoon
and see how you are. Tom or the Captain will
go over the yachts with me, for I want to be sure
everything is shipshape.”

Dorothy and Bess had returned with the girls,
and as it was their first night at Lost Island,
there were whisperings and smothered laughter
long after the official “taps” had been sounded.

“What’s ‘taps’?” echoed Ted when Bess asked
what they meant. “Just listen.”

Out in the kitchen Aunty Welcome’s steady
footfalls could be heard as she moved around,
locking the door, winding the clock, humming a
sweet old camp-meeting tune under her breath,
and finally stepping to the foot of the stairs, to
blow out the bracket lamp that hung there.

“You all keep still, now, and go to sleep, and
say your prayers, like good chilluns, you hyar
me?” she asked forcibly. There was a dead
silence, supposed to come only from heavy sleepers.
As soon as she had gone to her own room,
Ted’s head rose from the couch, and she whispered:

“That’s ‘taps’.”

CHAPTER XX

THE WINNER OF THE JUNIOR CUP

They took the Admiral’s advice the next day,
and rested. Dorothy and Bess were anxious to
look over the shells and specimens the girls had
found during the summer, and helped arrange
them for the home going the end of the week.
The two shell curtains that Kate and Isabel had
made were completed, and ready to be shipped
by express, with some of the heavier shells.

Crullers had surprised everybody by finding
out a new way to use the small shells in decoration.
She had had quite a taste for drawing and
applied design at school, and now had glued the
shells to heavy cardboard, after first tracing out
a decorative design. The effect was surprisingly
unique and attractive. Ted had looked at
the result with a speculative eye, but she was generous
with her praise, and frank spoken.

“I never thought old Crullers had such a
knack in her fingertips,” she said.

“Didn’t you?” Polly asked, smiling. “I always
knew that she loved beautiful things, and
when you do you’ll generally make something
beautiful yourself to add to it, don’t you know?”

“I know what you mean,” Ted agreed, pushing
back her red curls restlessly. “Fraulein
called it the personal quality in art, the gift of
expression. What was that old painter’s name
who used such a wonderful red in his pictures,
and when he died they found it was his heart’s
blood he had been painting with. I guess that’s
personal expression, isn’t it? I haven’t any,
Miss Calvert says. I haven’t any artistic sense.”

“We all have it,” Polly insisted. “You cannot
help but have it, because it’s the gift of yourself.
What do you like to do more than anything
else in the world?”

Ted meditated, then her face brightened.

“Travel,” she said. “Walk, ride, swim, run,
sail, do anything as long as I’m going some
place.”

Polly laughed heartily.

“That’s what the Captain says about you, that
you won’t stay put,” she said.

The Captain had come down to the island in
the afternoon and gone over the racing boats
carefully with Tom and the Admiral. Finally
they had pronounced everything “fit,” as the
Captain said, and started to go when Polly asked
for an opinion as to which one stood the best
chance of winning the race.

“With a fair wind and tide, anyone of them is
liable to win,” the Captain declared flatly.
“They’re the knowingest lot of boats on the bay,
anyhow. Start them properly, and lash their
tillers, and I’d be surprised if they didn’t start
and race by themselves.”

There were light appetites at breakfast the
next morning.

“Mah sakes alive,” protested Aunty, “how you
spec you going to win any race and old silver
cup an’ saucer, lessen you get good inside linings
so your ribs don’t stick together, honeys?”

But it was no use. Chocolate and toast was
the repast, and then they dressed for the race.
The start was to be at ten from the Orienta.
Bess and Dorothy crossed the bay on the
Tidy
Jane
with Polly, then took their own yacht.
The girls had precious little to say to each other.
Just before the moment of starting, Commodore
Vaughan made them a little speech from the
deck of the committee launch, commending them
highly for their ardor in outdoor sport, and the
spirit of good fellowship that existed among
them all.

“There is a double emulation in all this,” he
remarked. “This is a race between two clubs,
and a race between individuals as well. You
may beat the Juniors, or the Juniors may beat
the Polly Page Club, but besides that you will
win or lose from each other, even as members of
the same club. I wish you a fair wind and all
success.” He glanced at his watch, hesitated,
and just on the touch of the hands at ten, gave
the signal for the start.

Sue was the first to gain. For some reason
Polly and Nancy blundered in the get-away. It
looked as if each had tried to give the other one
the advantage in the start, but as they all slipped
down the bay they looked like a flock of white
winged sea birds, flying low.

South they sailed towards Lost Island and
Aunty Welcome came out on the porch and
waved a tablecloth at them excitedly, so they
would feel encouraged. The committee boat
puffed behind, and picked up two of the Juniors
at the end of the first mile, when they became
confused over tacking around the small islands.
Nancy was ahead now with the
Pirate
, and
Kate’s
Witch Cat
second, with the
Nixie
pushing
her way steadily towards them. When they
passed Smugglers’ Island, the Doctor was waiting
for them in his motor boat, and the
Natica

joined the committee yacht as a sort of marine
rear guard.

To Polly the first five miles seemed like a
dream. She could feel the
Tidy Jane
spring to
the touch of the waves, and her heart seemed to
leap with it. When they neared the Point, she
saw the white-clad crew come down from the station,
and caught the hearty cheer they sent ringing
over the water to the girl sailors.

Nancy hardly stopped long enough to wave
back at them. The turn in the course came at
the end of the Point, and she hardly thought
about it, so intent was she on speed, until all at
once Polly came steadily up behind her, passed
Ted and Sue, Kate, and the others, and made the
tack with hardly any pause.

“That’s Polly’s best trick in yachting,” Ted
thought, with a big throb of admiration. “She
sees it coming, and is ready to let go her main
sheet on the instant, and come about. And
then she goes after the cup a-flying.”

It was true. In that last joyous spurt ahead,
all thought of Nancy left her. There was only
the beautiful stretch of sky, and wind and waves
calling to her. Her cap fell off in the bottom
of the cock pit, and she lost her hair ribbon.
The wind caught her long curls and blew them
about as it pleased, as she leaned forward, keen
eyed, intent on every point that needed watching.
And finally, away down the bay, she
caught the sound of cheers and wondered what
the matter was.

“It must be Nancy catching up with me,”
she thought, but one name on the wind caught
her ear, one name shouted over and over and
over.

“The
Tidy Jane
, the
Tidy Jane
, the
Tidy
Ja-a-ane!
”

How they shouted it, and dwelt on it, and
hung to it, until the echoes flung it back from
the big bluffs above the shore, but all at once
something happened. Polly did not realize it
herself, until she caught sight of Nancy’s face,
brave and sweet, but deadly white.

Not twenty feet away from the
Tidy Jane
,
the prow of the knockabout came about, as
Nancy tried her best to overtake her rival.
Down on the shore they could hear Tom’s voice
shouting,

“Come along, Nance, come along in.”

To Nancy it was the final touch of the spur.
She forgot Polly, forgot everything, except the
fame of the
Pirate
, and the Junior Cup. She
measured the end of the course with a steady,
practiced eye, and her distance from the
Tidy
Jane
. Nobody but Polly saw how she did it,
and even she did not understand the craft
of it. It had been a fragment of the Captain’s
teaching long ago.

“When the wind and the tide’s agin your making
a certain point, jam her down hard into the
teeth of it, and give your tiller two sharp turns,
hard to port then hard to starboard, and she’ll
come up handsomely.”

Straight for the pier the
Pirate
turned, and
then came about, and made for the end of the
course.

The other yachts were strung out behind, Dorothy
beating up closely, Connie Evans and Sue
last of all, and the rest dotting the bay between
the
Pirate
and the
Tidy Jane
.

Polly saw the way Nancy had caught up to
her, and for the minute she held her breath. All
at once she knew that she was going to lose the
race, and the strangest part of it was, she could
see Nancy win, and feel a great wave of joy
over it. As the
Pirate’s
boom passed her, she
slackened her own main sheet, turned her head
and smiled at Nancy, and the first cheer that went
up for the winner of the Junior Cup, was when
Polly stood up, and waved her hand with a clear,

“Hurrah! Hurrah!”

Tom promptly stood on his head, as the shouts
rang out over the bay, and shore. The Admiral
himself helped Nancy out as if she had been a
queen.

“You did handsomely, little girl, handsomely,”
he said.

Polly was hardly a minute behind her, and as
she too reached the Orienta pier, and tossed her
rope up to the willing hands, she threw her arms
around the victor.

“I am
so
glad you’ve won, Nancy,” she said.
“You don’t know how glad.”

“So am I,” answered Nancy, softly, her
glance seeking one face out of all the crowd.
“Where’s father?”

“Here I be, mate!” called the old skipper, joyously,
and right there before the crowd, he swung
Nancy up in his arms, and kissed her proudly.

Just then the Commodore himself appeared,
and he bore the fateful cup. Blushing, and with
downcast lashes, Nancy listened to the presentation
speech. She couldn’t quite catch it all, but
there was one expression that lingered. He
called her a daughter of the old Pine Tree State,
who had borne off a trophy that should remind
her not only of a deserved victory but also of the
friendship and fellowship of the sister club, the
Orienta Juniors.

“Neatly put,” said the old Admiral, as they
journeyed back home, and for the first time he
was a guest on the
Tidy Jane
. “Nancy, you’re
a conquering heroine, my dear, like your namesake,
Nancy Lee, and the Captain, and Polly and
I are proud of you.”

When they reached Lost Island, the Doctor
detained Polly a moment at the landing, while
the others went on to the house. “I have a
trophy for the second in the race, one that is
given jointly by Father Neptune and myself,”
he said, as he reached his hand into his pocket
mysteriously, then held it out to Polly. On the
open palm lay one of the pearls from Ceylon.

“Just in memory of many happy days and
many jars of marmalade,” he smiled, as Polly
took it, speechless and radiant. “And I want
to tell you a secret. You accused me, Miss
Polly, of using marmalade as bait. But I
never did anything of the kind. Don’t laugh,
now. What I did do was to eat it and imbibe
courage and peace and a settled happiness
from the atmosphere of Lost Island, so that I
have triumphed. I am going back to Washington
this week myself. I have found the
polypi!”

Two days remained to the girls, but they were
so taken up in packing, and preparing Aunty
Welcome for the trip back South, that they
passed swiftly. Saturday morning the carry-all
bore them over to Eastport, but it had to make
two trips, and each time it stopped at Fair
Havens, where Mrs. Carey and Nancy said goodbye
to the girls, and the Captain waved them a
salute.

“It has been the best summer I ever had,”
Nancy cried, as she shook hands with them all,
and kissed the girls and Aunty too. “You’ve
been so good to me, and given me such a happy
time, that I just can’t thank you.”

“We’ve got the Junior Cup up on the parlor
mantel,” added Tom proudly, “right under
mother’s framed marriage certificate, and
father’s model of his first schooner. And Nancy
sticks a bouquet of fresh posies in it every morning,
girls.”

Nancy blushed radiantly, and kissed Polly a
second time.

“Sometimes I wonder if you let me win,” she
whispered. “You held up a little I thought,
there at the very last.”

“Did I?” laughed Polly. “It was because I
was so glad and surprised when I saw the old

Pirate
nosing her way past me, that was all.
Goodbye, dear. Don’t forget us.”

“Fair wind and tide to you wherever you sail,
mates,” the Captain called; and there were tears
in the girls’ eyes as they watched the last view
of the little shore cottage, and the two figures
there at the garden gate, the Captain with the
wind blowing back his curly hair, as sturdy, as
tall, and as storm-proof as one of the pines up
on Bald Mountain.

“Girls, it’s been the happiest summer I’ve ever
had,” cried Ruth as she put her head on Polly’s
shoulder, and wept.

But Polly laughed in her old cheery way.

“Cheer up,” she said. “It won’t be the last.
Turn around, like a good fellow, and wave a
salute back at the old flag pole, and to Nancy,
bless her.”

So they all stood up in the old carry-all at that
last turn in the old shore road, and solemnly,
hopefully, lovingly saluted the last glimpse of
Lost Island, and the winner of the Junior Cup.

End of Project Gutenberg's The Polly Page Yacht Club, by Izola L. Forrester

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE POLLY PAGE YACHT CLUB ***

***** This file should be named 56834-h.htm or 56834-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/6/8/3/56834/

Produced by Roger Frank and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from images made available by the HathiTrust
Digital Library.)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.