The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Christiana Riot and The Treason Trials
of 1851, by W. U. Hensel

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Christiana Riot and The Treason Trials of 1851
An Historical Sketch

Author: W. U. Hensel

Release Date: April 22, 2018 [EBook #57021]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHRISTIANA RIOT ***

Produced by David E. Brown and The Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

CASTNER HANWAY.
ELIJAH LEWIS.
JOSEPH SCARLET.

TAKEN SOON AFTER THE TREASON TRIALS.

THE CHRISTIANA RIOT

AND

THE TREASON TRIALS

OF 1851

AN HISTORICAL SKETCH

BY

W. U. HENSEL

Prepared and Published for the Commemoration

of these Events, September 9, 1911

Press of

The New Era Printing Company

Lancaster, Pa.

1911

[Pg iii]

PREFACE.

The preparation of this sketch and contribution to our
local history had been long contemplated by the Editor and
Compiler. Born near the locality where the events occurred
which are its subject, he has been for more than half a century
intimately related with their associations. He has regard
for the integrity of motive which alike animated both
parties to the conflict. It was a miniature of the great
struggle of opposing ideas that culminated in the shock of
Civil War, and was only settled by that stern arbiter. He
rejoices that what seemed to be an irrepressible conflict between
Law and Liberty at last ended in Peace. To help to
perpetuate that condition between long-estranged neighbors
and kin, this offering is made to the work of the Lancaster
County Historical Society.

While it has been written and published for that Society,
no responsibility for anything it contains or for its promulgation
attaches to any one except the author. Where opinions
are expressed—and they have been generally avoided as
far as possible in disputed matters—he alone is responsible.
Where facts are stated, except upon authority expressly
named, he accepts the risk of refutation. In all cases he has
tried to ascertain and to tell the exact truth. He worked in
no other spirit and for no other purpose; and wherein he has
failed his is all the blame.

W. U. H.

“
Bleak House
,”

August 12, 1911.

[Pg iv]

[Pg 1]

THE CHRISTIANA RIOT.

CHAPTER I.

Introductory.

I propose to write the history of the so-called “Christiana
Riot” and “Treason Trials” of 1851, as they occurred—without
partiality, prejudice or apology, for or against any
of those who participated in them. As is inevitable in all
such collisions, there were, on either side of the border
troubles of that period, men of high principle and right
motive and also rowdies and adventurers, disposed to resort
to ruthless violence for purposes of sordid gain. There were
slave-masters who sincerely believed in the righteousness of
an institution of ancient origin, while even the more sagacious
of their class recognized it as at variance with the
divine law and the trend of Christian civilization, and inevitably
doomed to extinction. There were on this side of
the line many who, believing themselves humanitarians, were
mere mischievous agitators, lawless in deed and treasonable
in design, reckless of those rights of property which are as
sacred in regard of the law as the rights of man. There were,
too, in the North wicked slave catchers and kidnappers whose
brutalities aroused the just resentment of the communities
in which they operated, even when they kept within the
limits of strict and technical legal rights.

It was of course impossible, as Mr. Lincoln pointed out,
for the republic to endure forever half slave and half free—to
run a geographical marker through a great and complicated
moral, economic and political issue—especially in
[Pg 2]

view of the far flung border line and the rapidly increasing
development of communication and transmission.

If, however, all the great statesmen, economists and
churchmen who had struggled with the slavery question
since the formation of the Union were unable to solve it,
without the awful carnage of a tremendous and long lasting
civil war, can it be the cause of special wonder that a handful
of Marylanders in lawful search of their escaped property,
and a larger group of free and fugitive negroes, with
the “embattled farmers” who sympathized with them,
should have made the hills of this peaceful Chester Valley
echo with gun shots and stained its soil with blood, when
Man and Master met in final and fatal contest for what each
had been taught was his right?

Numerous attempts have been made to publish reports of
this incident which would serve the purposes of permanent
history; and, while they have all been helpful, none has been
complete. On his return to Maryland after his failure to
convict Hanway and the others of treason, Attorney General
Robert J. Brent, of Maryland, made an elaborate official
report to Governor E. Louis Lowe, who in turn submitted
it, with extended comments of his own, to the General Assembly
of Maryland, January 7, 1852. From the standpoint
of the lawyer and the chief executive of a slave state,
both are able deliverances. Aroused by their version of the
affair, and especially by their comments on the treason trial,
and impatient over the delay in publishing the official report
of it, W. Arthur Jackson, junior counsel for the defendant,
printed a pamphlet review of it, which shows much ability,
has great value and has become very rare. The official phonographic
report of the trial, by James J. Robbins, of the
Philadelphia bar (King & Baird, 1852), is of course a
copious fountain of exact information—as well as an interesting
exhibit of the “reportorial” efficiency of that day.
From all of these I have felt at liberty to draw largely.

[Pg 3]
“A True Story of the Christiana Riot,” by David R.
Forbes, 1898, tinged with sectional prejudice, has much
matter that was well worthy of preservation, and the new
facts it contains, if verified, I have freely used. All of the
general political histories of the period refer to the Christiana
tragedy as having significance in the intense agitation
of the issue raised by the Fugitive Slave Law of 1850. Fred.
Douglass’ stories of his life and time; William Still’s
“Underground Railroad,” and Dr. R. C. Smedley’s “History
of the Underground Railroad” have also been subjects
of my levy for aid. To them, however, have been added
the personal reminiscences of Dr. J. W. Houston, Thomas
Whitson, Esq., Ambrose Pownall, Charles Dingee, Gilbert
Bushong, Peter Woods, William P. Brinton, Cyrus Brinton
and many other residents of the neighborhood in which the
riot occurred and from which the prisoners in the trials for
life were taken. Access has been had to the diaries and
family records of the Pownall, Hanway, Lewis and Gorsuch
families; and many other original sources of information,
including the local and metropolitan newspapers of that day,
whose enterprise and impartiality were somewhat variable.
Some of them published full reports of the trial.

For the first time, however, I think, the subject has been
studied with some care and consideration for the facts as
disclosed and from the point of view occupied at the home of
the Gorsuches. The family of Dr. F. G. Mitchell, whose
wife is a daughter of Dickinson Gorsuch, and who now owns
the property then of her grandfather, Edward Gorsuch,
from which the slaves fled, have been especially gracious and
helpful, withal fair and generous in their attitude toward an
event which brought brutal death to one ancestor and long
suffering to another.

J. Wesley Knight, long resident of the neighborhood of
Monkton and Glencoe, Maryland, and who was under the
roof of the Gorsuch homestead when the slaves escaped, has
[Pg 4]

given me much accurate information as to their previous
condition of servitude.

If their contribution to the history of the encounter and
the events preceding it presents the relation of the Southerners
to it in a far more favorable light than has hitherto
attended its narration, no fair-minded student of history can
object to the whole truth, even at this late day. That the Gorsuch
runaways were not heroic and scarcely even picturesque
characters; and that their owners were humane and
Christian people, and not the brutal slave traders and cruel
taskmasters who figured in much of the anti-slavery fiction,
can no longer be doubted. But if the Lancaster County
Historical Society exists for any purpose it is illustrated in
its apt motto: “History herself as seen in her own workshop.”
Every such shop must show some chips and filings;
and occasionally the more these abound the better will be
the craftsman’s product. I cannot hope—and I certainly
do not desire—this should be the “last word” about the
“Christiana Riot”; but the occasion of its Sixtieth Anniversary
and the Commemoration seemed to call for a historical
review up to date; and the story of its few survivors
had to be caught before it was lost.

It may be confidently predicted that when our long-looked-for
local Stronghand in imaginative literature shall seek for
a theme near at home, he will find it in the dramatic story
of the “Christiana Riot”; or when some gifted Lancaster
County Son of Song shall arise and strike the trembling
harp strings, the scene of his epic will follow the winding
Octoraro and lie along the track of the Fugitive Slave.

[Pg 5]

CHAPTER II.

The Law of the Land.

The Early Compromises of the Constitution—Pennsylvania’s Move
Toward Abolition—The Act of 1826—The Prigg Case—Border
Troubles—The Fugitive Slave Law of 1850—Wrongs of Escaped
Slaves and Rights of Their Owners.

It is entirely unnecessary for the purposes of this particular
story to enlarge upon, or to review at length, the long
debate, the innumerable compromises, the many makeshifts
and the unending controversies which attended the discussion
of the slavery question from the agitation and adoption
of the Federal Constitution to the enactment of the Fugitive
Slave Law of 1850—and which then left it utterly unsettled.
It is, however, important that a few plain landmarks of the
law be kept in sight to guide one who would fitly study the
general history of the times and fairly estimate the significance
of the local events to be narrated.

The Union of the States was only effected by the adoption
of Art. IV; the general purpose of which was to require each
State to give full faith and credit to the public acts and
records of other States. The exact language of its section
3 was:

“No Person held to Service or Labour in one State, under
the Laws thereof, escaping into another, shall, in Consequence
of any Law or Regulation therein, be discharged from
such Service or Labour, but shall be delivered up on Claim
of the Party to whom such Service or Labour may be due.”

No union could have been effected without this agreement.
Whether that federation was a contract from which any
party to it could retire, for a violation of it by other parties
thereto, need not be discussed here. The affirmative of that
[Pg 6]

proposition was not the creed of any particular party or
section. It was originally maintained by New England
Federalists; it was later defended by Southern Democrats;
it was at last decided adversely in battle and by the sword.
While there is now general acquiescence in the result, the
final decision was not the prevailing doctrine of the people
of the United States in 1851.

Under the Constitution the Right to Reclaim the fugitive
slave was no more unmistakable than the Duty to Return
him. The Law of the Land gave to each State the right to
regulate its own domestic institutions; and that right was
expressly recognized and guaranteed even by the Republican
party and by Abraham Lincoln long after the outbreak of
the Civil War. The slavery questions upon which political
parties differed up to 1851 were not disputes as to the rights
of slave owners and slaves in Slave States; nor as to the
rights of slave owners against their escaped slaves in Free
States, but as to the extension of slavery and the status of
the institution in the National territories.

The prevailing popular misapprehension on this subject
may be easily pardoned when it is observed that so eminent
an authority as Oswald Garrison Villard, in his recent excellent
biography of John Brown, says the Fugitive Slave Law
of 1850 “made legal in the North the rendition of negroes
who had found their way to Free States.” That proposition
was recognized by all political parties from 1793 to 1863.

DICKINSON GORSUCH.

DANGEROUSLY WOUNDED IN THE RIOT

The Fugitive Slave Act of 1793 was passed in strict conformity
with the Constitution of the United States; and it
impressed upon the executive authorities of the several States
the duty of arrest, and upon their magistrates the obligation
to hear and commit the fugitives for return. That act
was generally recognized as just in its essence and object.
As late as 1850 even the Free Soil party assented to the
legal principle it involved. In execution, however, its processes
were greatly abused; unlawful seizures, unwarranted
[Pg 7]

reclamations and ruthless kidnappings were common occurrences
in the lower parts of the Border States along the line
of Slavery and Freedom. Pennsylvania, after respectful
hearing of the Maryland Commissioners and due consideration
for their suggestions, enacted the Act of 1826, which
made the State Courts the arbiters of claims to fugitives;
forbade justices to exercise these powers; and, in the line of
Pennsylvania’s movements since 1780 to extinguish slavery
and protect free persons, it made the free-born children of
escaped slaves citizens of Pennsylvania and put them under
its protection.

This legislation accorded with judicial decisions of the
highest court in Pennsylvania. In Commonwealth
v.
Halloway,
2 S. & R., 305 (1816), Mary, a negro slave of James
Course of Maryland, absconded from her master and came
to Philadelphia, where, after she had resided for about two
years, her child Eliza was born. It was held that under the
Act of March 1, 1780, which Pennsylvania passed “for the
gradual abolition of slavery,” this child, born as she was,
was entitled to freedom; that the provision of the Federal
Constitution for the return of a slave from one state “escaping
into another,” did not apply to the free-born child of a
fugitive, and that even under the Constitution of the United
States the child Eliza was born free. Justice Gibson filed
a concurring opinion, at the conclusion of which he said:
“Whether this case is to be considered a hard one or not
will depend much upon the temper with which the mind
may contemplate the positive and artificial rights of the
master over the mother, on the one hand, or on the other the
natural rights of her child.”

After the Act of 1826 the border troubles, especially between
York and Lancaster Counties, Pennsylvania, and
Cecil, Harford and Baltimore Counties, Maryland, were
much intensified. Mason and Dixon line was the imaginary
demarcation between two wholly antagonistic social and political
[Pg 8]

orders. The same person might be a Maryland slave
under Maryland law and a Pennsylvania freeman under
Pennsylvania law. Owners and agents, armed with Maryland
authority to reclaim property, made theirs by Maryland
law, were felonious kidnappers in Pennsylvania. The anomalous
condition of affairs and the legal difficulties arising
out of it are best illustrated by actual facts. A slave woman
escaped from her owner, James S. Mitchell, of Cecil County,
Maryland, in 1845. During her absence, as a fugitive from
his service, she had given birth in New Jersey to an illegitimate
child. Through the instrumentality of agents, residing
in Pennsylvania, Mitchell apprehended the woman, who
together with the child, had been delivered to him at
Elkton, in Cecil County. The woman was taken in Pennsylvania
by George P. Alberti and James Frisby. These
agents, themselves fearing to incur possible responsibilities,
had repeatedly refused to take the child with the mother;
until finally overcome by the entreaties of the mother herself,
they yielded to their feelings of benevolence, and assumed
the risk. They were arrested for kidnapping; evidence
to show their motives in including the child in the
return was excluded, and they were sentenced to long terms
in the penitentiary—for permitting it to accompany the
mother, whose own recapture and return by them were admittedly
lawful. The state of the record of the case was such
that it could not be appealed to the United States Supreme
Court. Mitchell himself, who had not even been in Pennsylvania,
was indicted here for kidnapping the child and was
subject to seven years in the penitentiary. The Governor of
Pennsylvania issued, and the Governor of Maryland declined
to honor, a requisition for him. There were many other
cases of which this was a type.

On the other hand, there were unquestionably well-authenticated
cases of slaves returned in violation of their legal
claims and of free negroes brutally kidnapped and remorselessly
[Pg 9]

sold to slavery without a fair hearing and adjudication
of their rights. The offenders were often protected by legal
technicalities, obstructions or difficulties, and by friendly
jurisdictions North or South.

A case pregnant with great legal and political consequences
finally arose under the conflicting claims of Maryland
and Harford County on one side and Pennsylvania and
York County on the other. It reached the Supreme Court
of the United States and the contest was a momentous battle
in the campaign of pro- and anti-slavery agitation. Lawyers
will find it fully reported in 16 Peters, U. S., 539 (1842):

Edward Prigg, a citizen of Harford County, Maryland,
together with Nathan S. Bemis, Jacob Forward and Stephen
Lewis, Jr., were indicted in York County, Pennsylvania,
O. and T., for kidnapping an alleged free child of Margaret
Morgan, in violation of the Pennsylvania law of 1826, which
made it a felony, punishable with from seven to twenty-one
years imprisonment at hard labor, to carry off, sell or
detain a free negro from Pennsylvania. Prigg was the
agent—and the others his assistants—of Margaret Ashmore,
owner of Margaret Morgan, who escaped from her
and fled to Pennsylvania in 1832. Her children, taken back
to Maryland by Prigg, were born in Pennsylvania—one of
them more than a year after she escaped. Under Pennsylvania
law they were free; under Maryland law and the
common law principle that “the brood follows the dam”
they were slaves.
[A]
To avert the disastrous results that
always follow a conflict of laws between neighbors, Pennsylvania
and Maryland agreed that the facts should be the
subject of a special verdict, so that after Prigg’s conviction
and sentence his case might be heard and the issue it involved
be determined by the highest Federal Court of final
jurisdiction and of last resort.

[Pg 10]
The United States Supreme Court held that the Federal
Constitution self-executed its provisions; that the owner of
a fugitive slave could retake him wherever found; and that
the National government—not the State governments—must
support and enforce this right; that the Fugitive Slave
Law of 1793 recognized this and left nothing on the subject
to State regulation. But the Court doubted whether State
magistrates or officials were bound to perform any duty imposed
upon them in this respect by a Federal law; and the
State statute under which Prigg was indicted was held to
be unconstitutional and void.

In the discussion Meredith and Hambley appeared for
Prigg, and virtually for Maryland. For the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania appeared Attorney General Ovid F. Johnson
(under Governor D. P. Porter); and he frankly stated
that the real and substantial parties to the controversy were
Maryland and Pennsylvania, whose officials came into that
high Court “to terminate disputes and contentions which
were arising and had for years arisen along the border line
between them on this subject of the escape and delivering
up of fugitive slaves. Neither party sought the defeat or
the humiliation of the other. It was for the triumph of
the law they presented themselves before the Court. They
were engaged under an imperative sense of duty in the
work of peace; and he hoped he would be pardoned if he
added of patriotism also.”

Story, of Massachusetts, delivered the Court’s opinion. He
had been appointed by Madison, served a long time on the
bench and was a jurist of high renown; but Taney, C. J.,
while concurring in the judgment, expressly dissented from
the doctrine that the State authorities were “prohibited from
interfering for the purpose of protecting the rights of the
master and aiding him in the recovery of his property.” He
thought the contrary to be not only the right, but the duty
of the State. The Federal Constitution meant this when
[Pg 11]

it declared “the fugitive shall be given up.” He predicted
that if the State officials under the State laws could not
arrest the fugitive, “the territory of the State must soon become
an open pathway for the fugitives escaping from other
States.” Justices Baldwin and Thompson concurred with
Taney; Wayne with Story, and also Daniel, filing opinions.
McLean held that Congress might prescribe the duty of
State officers. All seven Justices expressed separate opinions.

Taney’s forecast was right. Maryland and Pennsylvania—especially
the southeastern counties of this State—soon
became an open pathway for the fugitive slaves. Their
track was lighted from many a window in the households
of the Chester Valley; and two main lines of the Underground
Railroad ran through Lancaster County, close to
where the two lines of the great steam railway which traverses
it from east to west are now located.

Acquiescing in this decision Pennsylvania, in 1847, repealed
the provisions of the Act of 1826 repugnant to the
Federal Constitution; and remanded the whole subject to
Congress. Like legislation in other States left the slaveholders
stripped of the remedies they claimed under the
Constitution. Hence the Fugitive Slave Law of 1850, with
its more drastic processes, manifold deputies marshal, “
posse
comitatus
” of the bystanders, penalties for obstruction of
processes and many other provisions—which if they had
been tolerable under the conditions prevailing long after
1793, had now become odious to the largely increased and
rapidly increasing number of persons who were opposed to
all forms of slavery, regardless of its constitutional protection
or right at law.

For this class Lancaster County’s then representative in
Congress, Thaddeus Stevens, was the boldest and most aggressive
spokesman. When, in 1851, he denounced every form
of human slavery he was so far in advance of his party (Whig
[Pg 12]

then and Republican ten years later) that in 1861 a Republican
Congress, Charles Francis Adams, of Massachusetts, the
first Free Soil Candidate for Vice President, heading the
“Ayes,” by an overwhelming vote declared that all attempts
of the States to override or obstruct the Fugitive Slave Law
were unconstitutional and “dangerous to the peace of the
Union”; that all enactments to that end should be repealed
and there was no authority outside of a State wherein then
existed a right “to interfere with slaves or slavery in such
States, in disregard of the rights of their owners or the peace
of society.”

AN OLD SOUTHERN COOK.

SLAVE AND SERVANT IN THE GORSUCH FAMILY. MORE THAN 100 YEARS OLD.

[Pg 13]

CHAPTER III.

Conditions Along the Border.

On the Different Sides of Mason and Dixon Line—Conflicts of Ideas
and of Citizenship—Lower Lancaster County a Gateway—Terror
of the “Gap Gang”—The Underground Railway—Outrages by
the Slave Catchers and Kidnappers.

Formal legislation and statutory enactments could not
repress the instincts of humanity. Involuntary bondage of
men, women and children was not consistent with either the
spirit of free institutions or the instincts of a progressive
citizenship. As it was impossible to prevent reckless and
degenerate men from abusing the processes of the law by
kidnapping and other forms of crime against the colored
race; and as it was impossible for the most humane and
philanthropic elements of slaveholding citizenship to prevent
constantly recurring barbarities and horrors resulting
logically from the legal recognition of property and traffic
in human flesh and blood, so it was impossible to forbid
thousands of good men and women throughout the North—in
all other respects law-abiding people—to secretly aid
and even to publicly promote the escape of slaves fleeing
from slavery. Nor could those who thus kept their conscience
while they broke the law discriminate between the
worthy and the unworthy in slave or master. There was no
time in the quick trips between the stations of the Underground
Railway to ascertain with precision whether the
passenger was fleeing from just or unjust treatment, whether
he had the character of a criminal escaping deserved punishment,
or of a bondman aspiring to a condition of freedom;
nor to judge and determine the individual merits and the
legal rights of the owner. Behind lay Slavery—beyond
blazed the North Star of Freedom.

[Pg 14]
Lower Lancaster County was at the gateway of this path.
For a comparatively short distance—only about five miles—the
Mason and Dixon line forms its Southern boundary.
Only two of its townships are in contact with Maryland, Fulton
and Little Britain, and the last named barely touched
the edge of the Southland of Slavery. In its citizenship
Lancaster County represented all the principal elements
which enter into our composite commonwealth. The more
numerous and important strain of blood, occupying the wider
and richer upper domain, was composed very largely of the
so-called Pennsylvania German sect and church people, who
had little fellowship with the negro race, little interest in or
sympathy with its cause and very slight personal contact
with its members. In the lower townships the principal
elements were the so-called Scotch-Irish Presbyterian and the
Friends; between them there was considerable friction, if
not antagonism; they had for nearly a century represented
different views of society and government. Their variance
was very distinct in their respective early attitudes toward
“the Indian question.”

It has been made the subject of forcible contrast that the
prevailing Quaker settlement of Fulton and Western Drumore
townships took on the more placid aspect of the Conowingo,
whose smooth meadows and flowery banks characterized
these localities; while the eastern end of Drumore, Colerain
and Little Britain had peculiarly the type illustrated by
the more turbulent flow and rugged hillsides of the Octoraro.
Both streams find their outlet in the Susquehanna, and at
very nearly the same sea level. But in the days of the Fugitive
Slave Law and of local defiance of it the North bound
bondsman generally made his way to the Chester Valley
by Pleasant Grove and Liberty Square, rather than by Kirkwood
and Nine Points.

Of the two “schools” the Hicksite branch of Friends
was not only the more numerous in the Lower End, but its
[Pg 15]

members were the more aggressive in their hostility to
slavery. The Presbyterian works out his humanitarianism
rather more directly through the law than around or under
it; and, while in many households of this faith, colored servants
and farm hands found trusted and long continued
employment, the general attitude of the Scotch-Irish to the
slavery question was different from that of the Quaker;
socially the blood of the negro was more offensive to the more
aggressive race.

There were, of course, far more than enough exceptions to
“prove the rule.” Rev. Lindley C. Rutter, long the beloved
pastor of Chestnut Level Presbyterian Church, was one of
the most fearless and outspoken of the local Abolitionists.
Likewise “Father” William Easton, of the Octoraro United
Presbyterian Church. In the neighborhood of Quarryville,
where the German and Scotch Irish elements seemed to
meet, intermixture of colored and white blood was not infrequent;
and, contrary to the general laws of miscegenation
and degeneration, many of the mulatto, quadroon and octoroon
people sprung from these racial intermarriages were
very respectable, honest and industrious citizens.

On the north side of the Mine Ridge, that range running
westward from Gap across Lancaster County, during the
“fifties” there was a considerable amount of outlawry on
the part of an organized “gang,” whose depredations now
took on the form of kidnapping and again the less illegal,
but by no means more popular, practice of aiding the recapture
and return—regularly or irregularly—of fugitive
slaves. If their raids and robberies were the terror of the
farmers, millers, butchers and storekeepers of the peaceful
Pequea Valley, on the south side of which their strongholds
then lay, their incursions into the homes and haunts of
colored laborers beyond the Octoraro hills were no less cause
for alarm among the free or fugitive colored people than
they were of intense resentment and indignation on the part
[Pg 16]

of the white friends, employers and protectors of the blacks.

While then one trail of the Underground Railroad ran by
Columbia and Bird-in-Hand, whereon friendly hands passed
the fugitive from Stephen Smith to Daniel Gibbons; and a
branch led from Joseph Taylor’s, at Ashville to Penningtonville
and Christiana, another had a continuous line of stations
from the Gilberts and Bushongs around May, in Bart,
or later Eden township, out “the valley” to and past the
scene of what was to be the deepest tragedy which ever
thrilled this little community.

Popular feeling was not wholly unprepared for it. The
conflagration was not a sudden outbreak. Combustibles had
been accumulating. Local incidents, such as escapes, man
hunts, kidnappings and other like events had occurred to an
extent sufficient to excite popular interest; and by rumor
they had been exaggerated enough to further inflame it;
numerous persons supposed or known to be ex-slaves resided
and worked in the neighborhood and were the subjects of a
qualified popular protection. There had been outrages on
one side and some reprisals on the other.

In 1850 it was alleged that an innocent and free colored
hired man named Henry Williams had been seized without
right or legal process and sold into perpetual slavery South.
William Dorsey had been taken from his wife and three
children and lodged in the jail at Lancaster. A gang of
three, who tried to take a maid servant from Moses Whitson’s
across the line in Chester County, were forcibly resisted
by a lot of colored men under the lead of Ben. Whipper.
The girl was rescued and her captors terribly, if not fatally,
beaten on the Gap hill. A negro known as “Tom-up-in-the-barn,”
living near Gap, was said to have been captured
one morning on his way to thresh at Caleb Brinton’s, and
never got back. The barn of Lindley Coates, in Sadsbury
township, was burned in 1850 by miscreants angered at his
denunciation of slave catchers and kidnappers.

“RETREAT FARM.” HOME OF THE GORSUCHES.

[Pg 17]
It was also related that an industrious negro fence-maker
had been violently carried off from his home on John McGowen’s
place in the valley, near Mars Hill, between Christiana
and Quarryville. The narrator of this (Forbes’ “True
Story”) does not tell whether the man was free or a fugitive
slave; and to his outraged neighbors this distinction made
little difference.

The incident of most note occurring in the immediate
neighborhood, the influence of which lasted longest, the feeling
about which was most acute, and which figured largely
in the “Treason Trials” was what was stigmatized as “the
outrage at Chamberlain’s.” Its scene was on the “Buck hill,”
in the northwestern part of Sadsbury township, on what is
now known as the “Todd place,” west of the back road from
Gap to Christiana and in what was a sort of middle ground
between the operations of the “Gap gang” and the refuge
territory of the fugitives. Here in March 1851 a posse,
claimed to be led by a rather notorious member of the “Gap
gang,” entered the Chamberlain house, severely beat a colored
man named John Williams employed there, who made
desperate resistance, terrified the members of the family,
and carried off their bleeding victim in a wagon. It seems
he was an escaped slave; but his captors exhibited no official
warrant of arrest nor made any claim of authority
except to declare they were acting for his master. It was
believed he died from their ill treatment of him.

And there were reprisals! William Parker—of whom
this narrative will have more to say—admitted years
afterwards that he had helped to beat, fatally he believed,
the captors of a colored girl; that he had tried to kill Allen
Williams on suspicion that he had betrayed Henry; that
he recaptured a kidnapped man on the West Chester road,
after shooting at his captors and being himself shot in the
ankle; and that he and his associates went to the home of
a decoy negro, burned it down and watched to shoot him
[Pg 18]

with smooth-bore rifles “heavily charged” if the flames drove
him into the open.

The leading people of this neighborhood were not only
anti-slavery in sentiment, but they resented what seemed to
be lawless invasion of their peaceful community; they were
not afforded means of verifying the authenticity of the claims
made for escaped slaves; the local people engaged in the
business of aiding in slave hunting and slave nabbing were
generally disreputable and sometimes themselves outlaws
and criminals; farmers and mechanics were disturbed in
their domestic service by the frequency with which attacks
were made upon their many and useful colored employees
and by the apprehensions to which they were all constantly
exposed. Withal a sense of protection was felt in the fact
that the most powerful leader of the bar of Lancaster County,
and its representative in Congress Thaddeus Stevens, was
outspoken in his denunciation of the Fugitive Slave Law.
Political discussion and sentiment in this immediate locality,
far more than in any other part of Lancaster County, was
focusing upon open defiance of and even physical resistance
to the enforcement of the Fugitive Slave Law. As early as
October 11, 1850, at a public meeting in Georgetown, Bart
Township, four miles from the later scene of the riot—William
L. Rakestraw presiding and Elwood Cooper Secretary—a
committee consisting of Thomas Whitson, Elwood
Cooper, Cyrus Manahan, Elwood Griest and Joseph McClelland,
reported and published vigorous resolutions denouncing
the fugitive slave bill, and declaring that they
would “harbor, clothe, feed and aid the escape of fugitive
slaves in opposition to the law.”

THE GORSUCH CORN HOUSE.

This was the state of popular feeling and these were the
social and political conditions prevailing in lower Lancaster
County, when the Gorsuch party set out from Maryland to
retake their escaped slaves by due and orderly processes of
law—from which mission the elder Gorsuch returned a
[Pg 19]

mangled corpse and his son with a shot-riddled body; in the
attempt to execute which the officers of the law were put to
flight; out of which grew the arrest of two score men and
the indictment of more persons for treason than were ever
before or since tried for that crime in the United States;
the acrimonious relations of two neighboring commonwealths
for years; the open exultation of many persons over
the killing and wounding of citizens engaged in a lawful
undertaking, and the chagrin of many other orderly and law-abiding
people that the law of the land had been violated
in bloodshed and its officers successfully resisted.

[Pg 20]

CHAPTER IV.

The Escape and Pursuit of the Slaves.

The Gorsuch Homestead and Its Proprietor—An Old and Prominent
Maryland Family—The Runaways Absent for Nearly Two Years
Before They were Pursued—The Warrants and Attempted Execution.

In Baltimore County, Maryland, on the west side of the
York and Baltimore turnpike, south of Monkton, and north
of Glencoe, stations of the North Central Railroad, stand
today the farm buildings of the Gorsuch homestead, where
and as they stood in 1849 and for a long time before.
Their earlier owner, John Gorsuch, devised this estate to
his nephew, Edward, with several hundred acres of land
and a number of slaves. It was a provision of his will that
certain of them should be free when they reached a fixed
age. In 1849 one of them at least attained this condition.
Jarret Wallace had during the period of his bondage so
served his master and was so appreciated by him that after
he became free Mr. Gorsuch retained him in his employ as
his “market man” to sell his products in Baltimore. In
November, 1849, he was building Wallace a tenant house,
and John Wesley Knight (who now lives in York, aged 83)
and Joshua Pitt, carpenters, were working for him at the
time. He had also millwrights, boarding and sleeping there
and then they were building him a saw mill on Piney Creek,
which ran through his extensive farm. Four of his slaves
were Noah Buley and Joshua Hammond—whose time was
nearly up—and two younger, about twenty-one years old,
named Nelson Ford and George Hammond who had six or
seven years to serve. The man Ford was a rather delicate
young fellow, and Mr. Gorsuch spared him heavy work.
[Pg 21]

He was the teamster of the place, but was always accompanied
by help when he needed it. Buley is described as a
copper colored mulatto and of treacherous disposition.

Mr. Gorsuch was a man of much prominence. He was a
Whig in politics, a class leader in the Methodist church, a
dignified and courtly gentleman in his manners, a just and
accurate man in his business dealings, a kind hearted master
and employer and a man of forceful and determined temperament.
He was born April 17, 1795, and was, therefore,
in his fifty-fifth year when his slaves escaped and in his
fifty-seventh when he was killed. He was living with his
second wife, and had five children of his first wife, two
daughters and three sons, of whom the eldest, John S., was a
Methodist clergyman, then residing in Washington, D. C.
There is no portrait extant of the elder Gorsuch, but his son
Dickinson resembled him.

In the fall of 1849 Mr. Gorsuch had his wheat stored in
the corn house, a building which stood between the house
and barn. The main barn fronts and adjoins the turnpike;
the mansion house is some distance back of the road, reached
by a shady lane and surrounded by lawn, orchards and out-buildings.
In accordance with his habit Mr. Gorsuch kept
careful account of his wheat in store and of the quantities
withdrawn from time to time, as he made his grain all into
flour at his own mill and retailed it in Baltimore. Having
missed considerable of his stock, he made inquiry of a
neighbor miller, Elias Matthews, who reported a lot of wheat
sold to him by one Abe Johnson, a ne’er-do-well free negro
living two miles north of Gorsuch’s, who had no land to
raise wheat nor credit to buy it. Gorsuch got out a warrant
for his arrest, and it was put into the hands of Constable
Bond for execution. He was laggard and “Bill” Foster
who was something of a local terror to wrong-doers, was
entrusted with the job. But Johnson got over into Pennsylvania,
and Governor Johnston subsequently refused to honor
a requisition for his extradition.

[Pg 22]
While the carpenters were building the tenant house and
the millwrights were putting up the saw mill, in November,
1849, the negroes were cutting and topping the corn, hauling
in the unshucked ears with ox-carts to the barn floor
where, by aid of lanterns, the whole household, mechanics
and slaves engaged nightly in husking bee merriment. Meantime
news of Bill Foster’s search for Abe Johnson were rife;
likewise suspicious that the colored “boys” had helped him
to raid the cornhouse and shared his spoils. One day they
exhibited unwonted unrest and clustered into whispering
groups; one expressed to the white workmen special anxiety
to know “if the Boss is going to husk corn tonight,” and
another declared his purpose to set a rabbit trap, for it was
“going to be a very dark night.”

It was. There was no corn husking; and Knight, the carpenter,
was aroused early by the call of Dickinson Gorsuch
from down stairs that “the boys are all gone.” They escaped
through a skylight in the back building and made their way
down a ladder and up the York turnpike. When the Gorsuches
next saw any of them it was in the flash and fire of
the Christiana Riot, in the early dawn of September 11,
1851, at Parker’s cabin.

During the interval, however, reports reached the Gorsuches
from time to time of their whereabouts; messages
came from the runaways soliciting food supplies and other
aid, which were sent upon assurances of their return. Mr.
Gorsuch had such confidence in his benevolence as their
master that he always believed if he could meet or communicate
directly with them he could get them back. They soon
found their way into the vicinity of Christiana where they
“worked around” and were known by various aliases; after
nearly two years sojourn thereabouts their ownership became
known to those who made gain of such information.

The personal narrative of Peter Woods, survivor, leaves
little room for doubt as to their identity and their residence
[Pg 23]

around Christiana. He says: “They lived here among us
adjoining me. One lived with Joseph Pownall. His name
was John Beard. He was a little brown-skinned fellow—a
pleasant chap. The other three were known to us as Thomas
Wilson, Alexander Scott and Edward Thompson; Scott
was a tall yellow-colored fellow, with straight hair. The
colored fellows met at Parker’s nearly every Sunday. A good
many got their washing done there. He had an apple-butter
party about the time of the riot. We knew that these new
colored fellows were escaped slaves. They were about the
Riot House and in our neighborhood a couple of years before
the riot. We colored fellows were all sworn in to keep secret
what we knew and when these fellows came there they were
sworn in too. Scott told how they four happened to run
away. He said he brought them with him in a big wagon
to Baltimore, or he said he had come with a big load of grain
for his master. He put them on the cars at Baltimore, then
sent his master’s team back and took the next train too, and
that way they come up among the Quakers in this country
which they knew was a good point on the underground railway.
The people who owned these slaves or some of them
sent men up into this country some time before. One man
came to me one day while I was cradling wheat and said,
‘You are a little man to cradle wheat, I am trying to find
three or four big colored men to cut wheat for me. Can you
tell me if there are any here that I can get?’ I knew what
he was after, that he was looking for escaped negroes, and I
did not give him much satisfaction.” The “John Beard”
whom Woods knew was Gorsuch’s boy Nelson Ford—so he
told Cyrus Brinton.

From Penningtonville (now Atglen, near Christiana),
August 29, 1851, there was mailed to “Mr. Edward Gorsuch,
Hereford P. O., Balt. Co., M. D.,” a letter which was
found upon and taken from his body after he was killed; the
following is a copy:

[Pg 24]

Lancaster, Co.
28 August 1851.

Respected friend, I have the required

Information of four men that is within

Two miles of each other. now the best

Way is for you to come as A hunter

Disguised about two days ahead of your son and let him come

By way of Philadelphia and get the deputy marshal John

Nagle I think is his name. tell him the situation

And he can get force of the right kind it will take

About twelve so that they can divide and take them

All within half an hour, now if you can come on the 2d or 3d

of September come on & I will

Meet you at the gap when you get their

Inquire for Benjamin Clay’s tavern let

Your son and the marshal get out

Kinyer’s
[B]
hotel now if you cannot come

At the time spoken of write very soon

And let me know when you can

I wish you to come as soon as you possibly can

Very respectfully thy friend

William M. P.

(In pencil)
Wm M Padgett
.

About the same time there had come into Gorsuch’s locality
a man (whose name is not known), purporting to be from
lower Lancaster County, who claimed to be able to locate
a number of slaves escaped from Baltimore County, among
them one of Dr. Pearce, who had escaped the same night as
Gorsuch’s. Dr. Pearce was a son of the elder Gorsuch’s married
sister Belinda.

Acting upon these reports and under the authority of the
new Fugitive Slave Law of 1850, Edward Gorsuch, his son,
Dickinson, his nephew, Dr. Thomas Pearce, Nicholas Hutchings
and Nathan Nelson, neighbors and friends, came to
Pennsylvania to recover the slaves. Under date of September
9, 1851, the owner procured from Edward D. Ingraham,
United States Commissioner at Philadelphia, four warrants
directed to Henry H. Kline, Deputy United States Marshal,
to apprehend the fugitives. About the attempt and failure
[Pg 25]

to execute those warrants, or any of them, circle the Christiana
Riot and the Treason Trials of 1851.

According to Dickinson Gorsuch’s diary his father left
for Philadelphia “on the express train,” Monday, September
8, 1851, and the others followed next day. The warrants
had meantime issued and the Maryland party met at
Parkesburg on Wednesday, September 10. By arrangement
Constables John Agan and “Sheriff’s Officer” Thompson
Tully of Philadelphia had come on to Parkesburg; Deputy
Marshal Kline went separately by rail to West Chester, took
a vehicle to Gallagherville, and started thence for Penningtonville
[now Atglen]. His wagon broke down; he and his
man Gallagher hired another vehicle and reached Penningtonville
about midnight; his delay caused the party to disconnect.
Agan and Tully and the Gorsuches stayed at Parkesburg.
Meantime a light young colored man, named Samuel
Williams, of Seventh Street, below Lombard, Philadelphia,
recognized Kline at Penningtonville; he likely scented his
real errand, and when Kline represented that he was after
two horse thieves, Williams told him they had left. When
Kline started for Gap he was followed by some one whom he
suspected to be Williams, and Williams no doubt sounded
a general alarm as to Kline’s errand. He had been dispatched
for that purpose from Philadelphia, where a Vigilant
Committee was on the lookout to protect fugitives. It was
also told by John Criley on information from Henry Murr,
blacksmith, that Joseph Scarlet, from a business trip to
Philadelphia early in the week, had brought like tidings
into the neighborhood.

Kline and his associate slept at Houston’s hotel, Gap, on
Wednesday night and returned early next morning to Parkesburg,
where they found Agan and Tully; the Gorsuch people
had gone over to Sadsbury on the old Philadelphia turnpike
and Kline rejoined them: Gorsuch went to Parkesburg
to detain the Philadelphia officers, and Kline went to
[Pg 26]

Downingtown and thence to Gallagherville, where the entire
searching party met, except Tully and Agan, who returned
finally to Philadelphia. About eleven o’clock at night the
party went from Gallagherville to Downingtown, took the
cars there after midnight, came through to Gap, where they
got off the train and went down the railroad track. About
2 A.M. they met Padgett (his name was not mentioned at
the trial). Presumably they joined him and left the railroad
at the grade crossing of a public road to Smyrna,
formerly known as the “Brown House,” which stood at the
northeast corner of the intersection. Padgett was a farm
hand at Murray’s, the stone house at the top of the hill,
between Gap and Christiana on the Brown farm. The Murrays
had lived in Baltimore County, Md. There their local
guide led them, likely by or at least toward Smyrna and
through cornfields to the Valley Road, where the “long lane”
led southward through Levi Pownall’s farm to the Noble
Road, across the Valley and near to Pownall’s tenant house
on the southern slope, where William Parker and his brother-in-law
Pinckney lived.

[Pg 27]

CHAPTER V.

The Defense and Defenders.

William Parker and His Home—A Leader of His Race and Class—The
Hero of the Fugitive Slaves and the Champion of Their Resistance
to Recapture—The Night Before the Fight.

To those who sympathized with resistance to the execution
of the warrants, and rejoiced in the results of the battle
to the death made by the refugees, the hero of the event
was William Parker. His home was “where the battle
was fought,” and he was then and had been long before a
leader of his race and the most resolute defender of the
runaway slaves in that section. He was a man of force and
had strong though untutored intellectual qualities. After
the war for the Union, in which he served, he inspired some
articles for the
Atlantic Monthly
, in 1866, from which this
story will later be amplified, and upon the occasion of a revisit
nearly forty years ago to Christiana he gave some
account of himself to old friends thereabouts.

He was born opposite Queen Anne, in Anne Arundel
County, Maryland. His mother was Louisa Simms, who died
when he was young, and his only parental care was from his
grandmother. His mother was one of the seventy field hands
of Major William Brogdon, of “Rodown” plantation; and
six years after the old master died, when his sons David
and William divided his plantation and slaves, William
Parker fell to David and to his estate “Nearo.” There he
had kind treatment, until slave traders came and a slave
sale occurred, followed by others with their cruel and
pathetic separation of families. Then he realized the bitterness
of slavery and the blessings of freedom. He set out for
the North by Baltimore, with his brother as a companion.
[Pg 28]

They reached York and Wrightsville, crossed the river to
Columbia in a boat and he settled down to farm work near
Lancaster at $3 per month; while his brother moved on to
the eastern part of the County. Later William got employment
with Dr. Obadiah Dingee, a warm sympathizer, who
lived near Georgetown and was the father of the venerable
Charles Dingee, of West Grove nursery and rose culture
fame. While there Parker had access to anti-slavery periodicals
and he heard William Lloyd Garrison and Frederick
Douglass speak; he caught inspiration from them to organize
his fellows, fugitive and free, in that community to resist
recapture and repel assaults upon their race.

It has been already told, upon his own testimony, how they
operated. Parker was involved in many other affrays. In
a rescue riot on the streets of Lancaster on one occasion he
proved himself a man of great strength and valor; he was
recognized by whites and blacks as a towering figure. Daniel
Gibbons sent Eliza Ann Howard, another refugee, to Dr.
Dingee’s and she became Parker’s wife; her sister followed
and married his associate Alex. Pinckney. They all lived
together, and at the time the Gorsuch party came for their
slaves Parker and Pinckney were running a horse-power
threshing machine for Joseph Scarlet and George Whitson.
Their families lived together in the tenant house, just to
the east of the “long lane” on the Levi Pownall farm, later
owned by Marion Griest, and now by Mrs. Agnes Lantz. It
was a place for frequent foregatherings of the colored people
in that day. No trace of the little old stone house is left,
but sketches of it were made before the obliteration. The
news spread by Sam Williams of Kline’s visit reached Parker’s
house the evening before the officers. Besides Pinckney,
Josh Kite, Samuel Thompson and Abraham Johnson were
there. Sam Hopkins, who died recently, always related that
there was an apple-butter boiling at Parker’s that night, and
the merrymakers danced around the kettle and fire singing
a song the refrain of which was

[Pg 29]

“Take me back to Canada,

Where de’ cullud people’s free.”

The men named and the Parker and Pinckney sisters were
there all night at least. That the negroes were armed not
only appears from subsequent events, but it might be inferred
from Parker’s own account of his habit. He was
long reticent as to the details of the final encounter; but
there is ample proof that of the Gorsuch slaves Noah Buley
was there very early on the day of the affray, and at least
two others of the Gorsuch slaves were on the ground soon
after. The names taken by fugitives were so uncertain
that the “Abraham Johnson” of this occasion may or may
not have been the Baltimore County freeman of that name
who fled from Gorsuch’s warrant in 1849. Some of the
Gorsuch party so identified him. It is beyond doubt that the
concourse of colored men already gathered at Parker’s house
when the Kline-Gorsuch squad arrived were assembled by
design, upon some call or signal; that their leaders knew the
objective point was the arrest then and there of the Baltimore
County runaways; and they soon had added force large
enough and brave enough to resist, defeat and either kill,
wound or drive off the officers and owners.

[Pg 30]

CHAPTER VI.

The Fight.

The Challenge to Surrender and the Defiance—A Long Parley—The
Prompt Response to a Call for Aid—The Firing Begins—Flight of
Kline and his Deputies—Gorsuch is Killed and his Son Terribly
Wounded.

Padgett, guide and informer, led the Southern and Federal
forces to within about a quarter mile of the Parker house,
where they stopped at a little stream crossing the long lane,
ate some crackers and cheese and “fixed their ammunition.”
It was then just about daybreak; it was a heavy, foggy
morning; and Padgett found it was his time to withdraw.
As the party drew near to the short lane which led into the
house and little garden-orchard around it they were seen by
Nelson Ford and Joshua Hammond, two of the Gorsuch slaves
who had evidently been picketed. They retreated to the
house; Gorsuch and Kline followed and the Marshal officially
announced their errand. Some inmate of the house answered
that the men called for were not there; and when Kline, as
he testified, went to go up the stairs, followed by the elder
Gorsuch, a five-pronged fish “gig” was thrown at him; next
came a flying axe. Neither missile hit him; he and Mr.
Gorsuch withdrew, and he says a shot was fired at them from
the house and he returned the fire. Then Kline made a feint
of sending off for a hundred men “to scare the negroes.”
His bluff had that temporary effect and a parley ensued.
During this it was made manifest that a considerable number
of armed men were in Parker’s house.

Meantime, on their way, the officers had heard a bugle
blown; conjectures differed whether it was a signal from the
Parker house or a summons for the laborers on the railroad
[Pg 31]

to go to work. The evidence on this point was not positive,
but the besieged soon sounded their horn from the upper
story. Parker is quoted as saying that Kline threatened to
burn the house, and he defied him to do it; that Mrs. Parker
sounded a horn which brought their allies; and the deputies
fired at her as she sounded it, without causing her to
desist; that Pinckney counselled surrender, but Parker was
for fight. Parker’s own accounts show no lack of self-assertion
nor absence of self-confidence. That may or may not
enhance their credibility.

Some early summons called a mixed mob together, for
while the brief events already described were occurring,
Castner Hanway, who lived a full mile away, rode up on a
bald-faced sorrel horse; Elijah Lewis came on foot in his
shirt sleeves and a straw hat; Zeke Thompson, the Indian
negro, arrived with a scythe in one hand and a revolver in
the other; Noah Buley rode in on a handsome gray horse and
carrying a gun; Harvey Scott was there, weaponless; and a
half score of others armed with guns, scythes and clubs, were
assembled—far more than the upstairs of that little cabin
could have held, even without the women. Other white
men came trooping along, who in Parker’s imagination were
Gap gangsters enrolled by Kline as “special constables”;
but there is no satisfactory proof that these were anybody
but residents of the vicinage attracted to the place by the
commotion.

The excitement and confusion that subsequently ensued,
the quick succession of tragic events, the prompt retreat of
the officers and the almost immediate flight from the vicinity
of their guiltiest assailants, and the fact that none of them
remained or ever returned to tell the whole story, combine to
make it difficult even now to aver with certainty what next
actually happened. It is, however, reasonably sure that
Hanway and Lewis were called upon to interfere and aid in
executing the warrants and they declined to do so; but they
[Pg 32]

neither advised nor inspired any violence; nor does it appear
that they arrived on the scene by any pre-arrangement or
otherwise than from hearing that an attempt was being
made by some one to take negroes from the Parker house.

Parker says Dickinson Gorsuch opened the next stage of
the battle by firing at him in resentment of a supposed insult
to his father, and that he knocked the pistol out of Young
Gorsuch’s hand before “fighting commenced in earnest,” and
the outside negroes then shot both Gorsuches. Deputy Kline,
who made himself somewhat ridiculous on the witness stand,
remembered most vividly how he himself went “over the
fence and out” through the cornfield and did not very clearly
account for the fatal renewal of hostilities. Joshua Gorsuch
testified that as Edward Gorsuch started to the house in
answer to Kline’s call to him to come on and get his property,
his uncle was murderously assaulted with clubs and he
fired a revolver to save his kinsman, but his cap burst and
the weapon did not go off; he was severely beaten and ran for
his life, the infuriated crowd pursuing him; a thick felt hat
saved his life and he rode off from the battlefield behind some
one on a horse, supposing Edward and Dickinson Gorsuch
were already killed; his retreat ended only at York; but it
was months before he recovered from his wounds.

Whoever else ran or stayed, the Gorsuches, father and son,
stood their ground and took the enemy’s fire. Dickinson
warned the elder that they would be overpowered; but when
the parent declined to retreat the son stayed by him until he
was himself clubbed and shot down, as he went to the rescue
of his assaulted father. Eighty shot penetrated Dickinson’s
arms, thigh and body—and many of them stayed there; so
that when he died in 1882—thirty-one years after he was
shot—his body prepared for burial was “pitted like a
sponge” with the marks of the “Christiana Riot.” When
he was supposed to be dying Dickinson Gorsuch was taken
into the shade of a big oak tree, about fifty yards from where
the small lane then entered the “long lane.”

THE OLD RIOT HOUSE. WILLIAM PARKER’S HOME.

THE PLACE WHERE THE BATTLE WAS FOUGHT.

[Pg 33]
Dr. Pearce was hit with a missile from an upper window;
Nathan Nelson knew and recognized Buley, one of the runaways,
and while, at the outset, only fifteen or twenty negroes
were lined in the lane with guns, scythes, clubs and corn
cutters, Nelson saw from seventy-five to a hundred before the
smoke of battle had entirely cleared. Sam Hopkins and his
historic corn cutter were among the later arrivals.

One of the dramatic features of the engagement was the
appearance on the field of old Isaiah Clarkson. He summoned
fifteen or twenty infuriated and raging negroes into
the cornfield and “called them to order” three times before
he could quiet them, and withhold them from violence.
Meantime old Clarkson had seen the body of Edward Gorsuch
lying alone where he fell dead, clubbed, cut and pierced
with gun shots, his son desperately wounded; his kinsmen
beaten and driven off; the United States deputies marshal
in full retreat—infuriated women, forgetful of all humane
instincts, revenging on a humane Christian gentleman’s lifeless
body the wrongs their race had suffered from masters
of altogether different mould, rushed from the house and
with corn cutters and scythe blades hacked the bleeding and
lifeless body as it lay in the garden walk. At the first hearing
Scott, the witness who afterwards swore differently on
the trial, testified that he lived with John Kerr and had
stayed at Parker’s out of doors in the road all that night,
having been persuaded to go there by John Morgan and
Henry Simms, who were armed; that he saw them both
shoot and Henry Simms shot Gorsuch; that John Morgan
cut him in the head with a corn cutter after he fell. Dr.
Pearce stated under oath that he saw Noah Buhly running
past Gorsuch, but he could not say that Buhly did the shooting.
At the time Edward Gorsuch was shot he was standing
still calling his nephew Joshua and had no weapon in his
hand.

It will never be known whose shot or how many killed
[Pg 34]

Edward Gorsuch. More than one weapon was directed at
him and doubtless several were guilty of his blood. It was
not long until a consciousness of this fell upon the mob and
they scattered as rapidly as they had assembled. If the
Federal deputies had dispersed in fear and flight and the
local authorities were slow to move, neither were the
guilty laggard in flight. By nightfall every man inmate of
Parker’s house and every runaway from Baltimore County
were on their way to Canada. Hay mows and straw stacks
weltered above the throbbing presence of trembling fugitives;
and all the local agencies of rapid news and transportation
which were at command of the anti-slavery people were set
in motion to get and keep the accused in advance of the warrants.
Somebody tarried long enough on the Parker premises
to despoil Gorsuch’s body of $300 or $400 in money, which
was on his person when he fell and which was missing at the
coroner’s inquest. According to Tamsy Brown it was taken
from his body by a black man, who divided it among the
colored women and Abe Johnson. On a blank leaf of the
Padgett letter, heretofore printed, were found some memoranda
made by Mr. Gorsuch himself of the railroad schedules
and names of persons in the neighborhood of the scene
of the affray, with whom it was supposed colored men resided,
together with the following:

Robert M. Lee

John Agen Henry H. Cline

Depatised

Marshal Kline

Lawyer Lee

and Benit

Commissioner

Ingraham

O. Riley’s Telegraph

avoid Halzel

Councelman

Cpt. Shutt

J. R. Henson.

[Pg 35]
The significance of these entries will be recognized. No
weapons were found on the body. This of course does not
prove that Mr. Gorsuch was unarmed, as he easily might
have lost or have been despoiled of his arms. Fred Douglass
boasted that Gorsuch’s pistol had been presented to him. His
family believe, and from his habits of life and temperament
it may be presumed, the elder Gorsuch was unarmed. He
depended mainly on the force of the law’s warrant and, perhaps
too confidently, on the nerve of the Federal deputies
marshal.

Dickinson Gorsuch was soon removed to friendly shelter
and tender ministrations under the hospitable roof of Levi
Pownall’s homestead. There he learned to know that the
Quaker families of the valley, while they were considerate
of the slave, could be no less kind to the master in distress.
The daily entries of his diary attest his gratitude and appreciation,
and these he substantially manifested throughout
his lifetime. His contemporaneous portrait herein published
was taken from a daguerreotype sent to the Pownall
family. Dr. Asher Pusey Patterson, who attended him, was
then practicing at Smyrna. He was of the Lower End families
whose names he bore. Dr. John L. Atlee, Sr., of Lancaster,
was called into consultation.

During Dickinson Gorsuch’s stay in the Pownall household
he was visited in his convalescence by many of his Baltimore
County friends and relatives. Among them were his
brother John S.; his uncle Talbott Gorsuch; his sister
Mary (afterwards Mrs. Morrison); his cousin George and
others. It was ten days before he could eat and nearly three
weeks before he could sit up. By October 1 he could take a
short drive and was entertained next day at Ambrose Pownall’s.
When he returned home in charge of some of his
family on October 4, Dr. Patterson accompanied them as far
as Columbia. During his recovery he had no more popular
visitor than his friend Alex. Morrison, who subsequently
[Pg 36]

married his sister. Morrison is described by the older inhabitants
as one who “made friends everywhere.” He kept up
his acquaintance with people about Christiana until his death
and visited there as late as 1903. He rejoiced in the establishment
of good relations between those who had been on opposite
sides of the conflict of 1851. Dickinson Gorsuch was 56 years
old when he died, August 2, 1882.

Exactly when and how Parker, Pinckney and the fugitive
slaves got away from the neighborhood is difficult to tell with
absolute certainty; but a surviving neighbor throws light on
their movements immediately after the affray. George
Steele, now living in Chester County (who subsequently
married Elizabeth, daughter of Levi W. Pownall), was making
charcoal iron at the Sadsbury forges in 1851. He lived
near by the Parker place and recalls the events with great
distinctness. He met some negroes coming from the scene
exultant over its results and he warned them of their serious
danger. He says Parker first came to Pownall’s to arrange
for Dickinson Gorsuch’s removal there, but another neighbor
was already on the way with the wounded man. Both Parker
and Pownall remained hidden all day; the news of young
Gorsuch’s serious condition brought many visitors to the
Pownall house; later in the evening Parker and Pinckney
themselves called and for the first time seemed to realize their
position. Some of the women members of the household
warned them; and, while Mrs. Pownall was nursing the
wounded man to life, she was sparing of her pantry supplies
to fill a “pillow case” with food for the fugitives; and her
husband, under whose roof Gorsuch was receiving every kind
attention, loaned of his clothing to their disguise—all being
carried to them by George Pownall, then a boy, who was
directed to find them at a certain apple tree on the farther
side of the orchard.

A SOUTHERN VISITOR.

COL. ALEXANDER MORRISON, FRIEND AND KINSMAN OF THE GORSUCHES, WHO KEPT UP FRIENDLY

RELATIONS WITH THE POWNALL FAMILY.

At the “Riot House” the Pownalls found both Pinckney’s
and Parker’s loaded guns; and they prudently burned a lot of
[Pg 37]

letters found there, which would have incriminated some of
their neighbors in violation of the Fugitive Slave Law.
The Pownalls later received anonymous information that
Parker had reached Canada. Gorsuch himself is said to have
expressed kindly feeling for Parker, which bears out the
theory that Parker tried to stem the riot after it attained a
deadly stage.

Even they who were guiltless of their neighbor’s blood were
not unmindful of the responsibility imposed upon their community
by the violent killing of Gorsuch and the escape of
his slayers. His dead body was taken to Christiana and lay
at Fred Zercher’s hotel, where Harrar’s store now is and
nearly opposite the Commemoration Monument. There a
coroner’s inquest was held before noon. The main facts of
the riot were related by Kline, “Harvey” Scott (who later
recanted), and others. John Bodley and Jake Woods testified
that Elijah Lewis passed them in the early morning,
when they were working at James Cooper’s, and that Lewis
said “William Parker’s house was surrounded by kidnappers
and it was no time to take out potatoes.”

The coroner’s jury, summoned by Joseph D. Pownall,
Esq., consisted of George Whitson, John Rowland, E. Osborne
Dare, Hiram Kinnard, Samuel Miller, Lewis Cooper,
George Firth, William Knott, John Hillis, William H.
Millhouse, Joseph Richwine and Miller Knott. Their finding
was:

“That on the morning of the 11th inst., the neighborhood
was thrown into an excitement by the above deceased, and
some five or six persons in company with him, making an
attack upon a family of colored persons, living in said Township,
near the Brick Mill, about 4 o’clock in the morning,
for the purpose of arresting some fugitive slaves as they
alleged, many of the colored people of the neighborhood collected,
and there was considerable firing of guns and other
fire-arms by both parties, upon the arrival of some of the
[Pg 38]

neighbors at the place, after the riot had subsided, found the
above deceased, lying upon his back or right side dead. Upon
a post mortem examination upon the body of the said deceased,
made by Drs. Patterson and Martin, in our presence,
we believe he came to his death by gun shot wounds that he
received in the above mentioned riot, caused by some person
or persons to us unknown.”

Dr. John Martin and Dr. A. P. Patterson reported officially
that Gorsuch came to his death by a gun shot wound
made by slug or heavy shot, occupying the upper part of the
right breast, and that there was an incision found near the
frontal bone, produced by a light sharp instrument, and a
fracture of the left humerus by some blunt weapon.

It must be conceded, even at this distance in time, the
jury’s thermometer of popular indignation at the crime
scarcely registered above the mark of “cold neutrality.”

Scharf’s history of Baltimore County states that on September
13th and 15th meetings of citizens of Baltimore
County were held to take action in the premises. Wm. H.
Freeman, John Wethered, Samuel Worthington, Wm. Matthews,
Wm. Taggart, John B. Pearce, Samuel H. Taggart,
Wm. Fell Johnson, Wm. H. Hoffman, Edward S. Myers,
John Merryman, and Henry Carroll were appointed a committee
to collect all the facts in the case and transmit them to
Governor Lowe, in order that he might lay them before the
President of the United States. Another committee, consisting
of John B. Holmes, Levi K. Bowen, Dr. Nicholas
Hutchins, J. M. McComas, and E. Parsons, was appointed to
confer with the gentlemen who had accompanied Mr. Gorsuch
into Pennsylvania. A meeting at Slader’s tavern, on
September 15th, passed resolutions calling upon the people
of each district of the county to elect delegates to meet at
Cockeysville on October 4th for the purpose of forming a
county association, and recommending the formation of district
associations “for the protection of the people in their
[Pg 39]

slave and other property.” An indignation meeting of six
thousand persons was held at Monument Square, Baltimore
City, on September 15th, at which Hon. John H. T. Jerome
presided, and addresses were made by Z. Collins Lee, Coleman
Yellott, Francis Gallagher, Samuel H. Taggart, and
Col. George W. Hughes.

[Pg 40]

CHAPTER VII.

The “Pursuit” and Arrests.

Federal and State Authorities in Conflict—“Rough Riding” the
Valley—Numerous and Indiscriminate Arrests—Hearings in Lancaster
and Committals to Philadelphia.

Whatever anybody was doing in the way of vindicating
whatever law or laws had been violated, the perpetrators of
the killing were being allowed to escape. There were no
daily newspapers in Lancaster then and the Philadelphia
journals of Friday, September 12th, had very meagre accounts
of the affair. But meantime the Federal officials in
Philadelphia and the Commonwealth authorities in Lancaster
County “got busy.” Constable William Proudfoot, of Sadsbury,
acted under the direction of ’Squire Pownall and District
Attorney John L. Thompson. In Philadelphia John
M. Ashmead was United States Attorney, and Anthony E.
Roberts was Marshal. When District Attorney Thompson
made his second visit to the scene on Saturday following the
riot, accompanied by a “strong party of armed men,” he
found there the United States Marshal, District Attorney and
Commissioner “with a strong force of U. S. Marines and a
detachment of the Philadelphia police.” A controversy arose
between the local District Attorney Thompson and the United
States Attorney Ashmead as to whether the prisoners should
be held for murder in Lancaster County, or for treason
against the United States. Commissioner Ingraham sustained
the latter charge. The difficulty was adjusted by an
agreement that each party should make its own arrests.
Some forty-five United States Marines who went to Christiana
were in command of Lieutenants Watson and Jones.
United States Marshal A. E. Roberts had a civil posse of
[Pg 41]

fifty. There were county constables and deputies sheriff on
the scene. With these three detachments landed in a little
country village and scouring the surrounding farms, of whose
inhabitants half the many blacks had fled the State and the
other half were in hiding, and the whites mostly suspected of
sympathy with the fugitives, a local reign of terror ensued;
“the valley” was in a state worse than subjection to martial
law. The tendency of a “little brief authority” is toward
abuse of it; and the class of persons easily secured for the
service then required of temporary officers of the law was
not such as to insure delicacy of treatment or tender consideration
for the objects against whom their summary processes
were directed. Whites and blacks, bond and free, were
rather roughly handled; few households in the region searched
were safe from rude intrusion; many suffered terrifying
scenes and sounds.

CASTNER HANWAY.

TRIED FOR TREASON AND ACQUITTED.

Peter Woods, sole surviving sufferer and prisoner of the
occasion, was working for Joseph Scarlet when he and his
employer were arrested. He tells his story thus to the author
of this history:

“The day the fight happened I was up very early. We
were to have ‘a kissing party’ that night for Henry Roberts;
and as I wanted to get off early I asked my boss, Joe Scarlet,
if he would plough if I got up ahead and spread the manure.
I started at it at two o’clock. The morning was foggy and dull.
About daylight Elijah Lewis’s son came running to me while
I was getting my work done, and said the kidnappers were
here. They came to Ellis Irvin’s farm, and then to Milt
Cooper’s which is known as the Leaman farm. The morning
of the riot I got there about seven or eight o’clock. I
met some of them coming out of the lane, and others were on
a run from the house. I met Hanway on a bald-faced sorrel
horse coming down the long lane, and his party with him.
The other party, the marshal and his people, took to the
sprouts, licking out for all they could, and then took the
[Pg 42]

Noble road. There were about sixty of our fellows chasing
them. The strange party got away. I got hurt by being
kicked by a blind colt on the hip. The shooting was all
over. Gorsuch had been killed before I got there. The
Gorsuch party was riding away as fast as they could. I
guess I am the last man living of our party.

“When Scarlet was arrested they were rough in arresting
him. They took him by the throat, and pointed bayonets
at him all around him. I said to myself if you arrest a white
man like that, I wonder what you will do to a black boy?
The arrests were made a day or two after the riot. I was
plowing or working the ground, and when I saw the officers
come to make the arrests, I quickly got unhitched and went
towards Bushong’s, and soon there was six of us together
and we went to Dr. Dingee’s graveyard and hid. We heard a
racket of horses coming and then we jumped into the graveyard.
This was two days after the riot. We hung around
Rakestraw’s too; and he said we could have something to
eat, but we couldn’t stay around there. Then they got us.
They asked George Boone and James Noble who we are.
The man with the mace, the marshal I guess, said ‘I got a
warrant for Peter Woods.’ They pointed me out and then
he struck me and then they tried to throw me. They arrested
me and took me up a flight of stairs, and then they tied
me. Then they started away with me and tried to get me
over a fence. They had me tied around my legs and around
my breast, and they put me in a buggy and took me to
Christiana. From there they took me to Lancaster, and put
me first in the old jail and then in the new prison.”

The accuracy of Woods’ narrative is attested by the historical
record that at that very time the new Lancaster County
prison was just ready for occupancy. The first prisoners
were transferred to it on the day immediately following the
riot—September 12, 1851.

Woods’ further story of what occurred at Christiana has
[Pg 43]

all the marks of verity: “There at Christiana was [David]
Paul Brown and Thad. Stevens and Mr. Black. They had
quarters in ‘Old Harry’s’ store. We did not know who they
were counsel for, and we thought they were threatening us,
and trying to make us give away ourselves. Thad. Stevens
or some one said to me: ‘Who do you live with?’ They
had just brought me down from the Harry garret, and Fred
Zercher was there. Mr. Brown then asked me again how I
got up there into that garret, who put me there? I made
up my mind not to talk, and Brown said, ‘If you don’t tell
we will send you to jail.’ Then a mutiny broke out there.
George Boone and Proudfoot and others got in it. George
commenced striking and I got knocked over. Boone was
taking my part.”

Arrests were numerous and somewhat indiscriminate and
the charges varied, some relating to State and others to
Federal laws, and many of them involving capital crimes and
death penalties. All of them called for appearances and
preliminary hearings before J. Franklin Reigart, Esq., an
alderman of Lancaster City. He was a cousin of the late
Emanuel C. Reigart, Esq., and mingled the pursuits of letters
and law. His handsome picture in lithograph is the
frontispiece of his somewhat bizarre biography of Robert
Fulton, now something of a curio, once the ornament of
many centre tables in Lancaster County.

Alderman Reigart was kept busy for some time issuing
warrants and having hearings that attracted great attention,
numerous and distinguished lawyers and ever increasing
popular interest. Among those taken into custody were
Elijah Lewis, storekeeper at Cooperville; Joseph Scarlet,
farmer and dealer; Castner Hanway, miller at the “Red
Mill”; James Jackson, farmer; Samuel Kendig, all white;
and a large number of colored men and women, among them,
William Brown and William Brown, 2d, Ezekiel Thompson,
Daniel Caulsberry, Emanuel Smith, John Dobbins, Lewis
[Pg 44]

James Christman, Elijah Clark, Benjamin Pendegress,
Jonathan Black, Samuel Hanson, Mifflin Flanders, Wilson
Jones, Francis Hawkins, Benjamin Thompson, John Halliday,
Elizabeth Mosey, John Morgan, boy, Joseph Benn,
John Norton, Lewis Smith, George Washington, Harvey
Scott, Susan Clark, Tamsy Brown, Eliza Parker, Hannah
Pinckney, Robert Johnston, Miller Thompson, Isaiah Clarkson
and Jonathan Black. The officers claimed to have captured
on the persons or premises of some of them heavily
charged guns, dirks and clubs.

The examination of the persons charged before Alderman
Reigart for complicity in the affair began in the old Lancaster
County Court House, in Centre Square, on Tuesday, September
23, at 11 o’clock A.M. The appearances at this hearing
for the prosecution were Attorney General R. T. Brent, of
Maryland, John M. Ashmead, United States Attorney, District
Attorney John L. Thompson, Colonel William B. Fordney
and Attorney General Thomas E. Franklin. For the defense,
Thaddeus Stevens, George Ford, O. J. Dickey and
George M. Kline appeared.

The testimony of Dr. Pearce, Milton Knott and Deputy
Marshal Kline was relied upon to make out a prima facie
case. It was at this hearing George Washington Harvey
Scott, a colored man (who subsequently changed his testimony
in Philadelphia, and swore he was not even at Parker’s),
testified that he saw Henry Simms shoot Edward Gorsuch,
and that John Morgan afterwards cut him on the head
with a corn cutter. Lewis Cooper testified that John Long,
colored, was on his premises the evening before the occurrence
“giving notice.” He was with Henry Reynolds.
Long was described as a dark mulatto, five and one-half feet
high, and of slender make. The District Attorney argued that
the offense was treason, and asked that the persons be committed
to answer at the Circuit Court of the United States.
Mr. Stevens made the opening speech before the Alderman,
[Pg 45]

claiming that the defendant prisoners, especially Lewis and
Hanway, had not been identified as criminals or offenders;
he dwelt upon the local kidnappings that had occurred in the
night time, and charged William Bear and Perry Marsh
with participation in these offenses; he produced many witnesses
to the affair and to prove an alibi for some of the
colored men, especially John Morgan, and nothing worse
than inaction by Hanway and Lewis.

The women were all discharged; and some of the men.
The names of those who were remanded to Philadelphia to
await trial in the Federal Courts for treason, together with
some others subsequently held, and some indicted in their
absence and never apprehended, will be found in the report
of the trial later in this history. James Jackson, father of
William Jackson, now of Christiana was so well known to
Marshal Roberts that he was released “on parole,” though
subsequently indicted for treason. Mrs. Parker and Mrs.
Pinckney left the vicinity and made their way to their husbands
in Canada.

[Pg 46]

CHAPTER VIII.

The Political Aftermath.

Partisans Quick to Make Capital out of the Occurrence—The Democrats
Aggressive—The “Silver Grays” Apologetic, and the “Woolly
Heads” on the Defensive—Effect of the Christiana Incident on the
October Elections.

Thaddeus Stevens in September, 1851, was serving his
second term as Representative of the Lancaster County district.
As an antagonist of Southern ideas relating to
slavery, he “strode down the aisles” of the House with a good
deal more erectness of bearing than Ingersoll in his famous
nominating speech ascribed to the “Plumed Knight” from
Maine; and he struck the shield of his adversaries with a
much louder ring than was given out at the impact of Mr.
Blaine’s lance. To his individual and official view—law or
no law, constitution or no constitution—slavery was “a
violation of the rights of man as a man”—freedom was the
law of nature. Like Mirabeau, “he swallowed all formulas.”
But he was a lawyer, as well as a politician and moralist, and
while he announced his “unchangeable hostility to slavery
in every form in every place,” he also avowed his “determination
to stand by all the compromises of the constitution
and carry them into faithful effect”—much as he disliked
some of them, they were not “now open for consideration,”
nor would he disturb them. This again was practically an
admission of the abstract legal right of the master to reclaim
the fugitive.

Mr. Stevens was first elected to Congress in 1848, when
Gen. Zachariah Taylor was elected President, and when he
died (July 9, 1850), and Fillmore, Vice President and a
Northern Whig, succeeded him, Stevens had been elected to
a second term, which lasted until March 4, 1853.

[Pg 47]
In those “good old days” a Congressman had some influence
in the matter of Federal appointments. The United
States Marshal, who executed warrants and picked jurors in
Eastern Pennsylvania, was Stevens’ personal and political
friend, Anthony E. Roberts. Mr. Roberts, who was a native
of Chester County, was then 48 years of age and long a prominent
citizen of New Holland. He had been sheriff of Lancaster
County elected in 1839 as an avowed anti-Masonic
candidate, favored by Stevens. He was with him an active
anti-Mason and was a candidate for Congress in 1843, but
was beaten by Jeremiah Brown. President Taylor appointed
him Marshal in 1849, and he filled the office until
the incoming of Pierce’s administration.

The
Intelligencer and Journal
, then edited by George
Sanderson, was the regular organ of the Democratic party
in Lancaster County. It was a weekly publication, and at
that time a vigorous and exciting campaign for the State
election in October was in progress. Col. William Bigler of
Clearfield County was the Democratic nominee for Governor;
General Seth Clover of Clarion County for Canal Commissioner,
and for Judges of the Supreme Court the first ticket
presented by the Democratic party under the new elective system
bore the illustrious names of Jeremiah S. Black, Somerset;
James Campbell, Philadelphia; Ellis Lewis, Lancaster;
John B. Gibson, Cumberland, and Walter H. Lowrie,
Allegheny.

The Whig County organ was the
Lancaster Examiner and
Herald
, published and edited by Edward C. Darlington, who
was a conspicuous leader of what was then known as the
“Silver Gray” faction of his party—being opposed by the
more aggressive anti-slavery men, of whom Thaddeus Stevens
was the leader, and whose followers were derisively styled
“Woolly Heads.” The candidates of the Whig party on
the State ticket were: for Governor, William F. Johnston,
Armstrong County (a candidate for re-election); for Canal
[Pg 48]

Commissioner, John Strohm, of Lancaster County, and for
Judges of the Supreme Court, Richard Coulter, Westmoreland;
Joshua W. Comly, Montour; George Chambers,
Franklin; William M. Meredith, Philadelphia, and William
Jessup, Susquehanna.

The fact that the entire Supreme Court membership, then
numbering five, was to be elected, greatly increased popular
interest in the result. Pennsylvania was an October State.
The Darlington faction of the Whig party was in the ascendancy
and Darlington himself was on the ticket for Senator.
Moses Pownall, of Sadsbury Township, was one of the Whig
candidates for the Assembly. The regular Democratic County
ticket had not yet been nominated, but the opponents of
Mr. Buchanan, who were stigmatized as disorganizers and
“Frazer Ponies,” had named a County ticket.

The first local publications of the tragic occurrences in the
Chester Valley appeared respectively in the
Intelligencer
of
September 16 and the
Examiner
of September 17, and their
local reports of the affair are illustrative not only of the laggard
journalistic enterprise of that day, but of the intense
partisanship which characterized newspaper management,
colored the reports of news occurrences and generally pervaded
all journalistic work. The
Intelligencer’s
account of
the affair was printed under a Columbia correspondent’s
“Particulars of the Horrible Negro Riot and Murder,” and
the editorial additions to this report commented on the disgraceful
conduct of the “Abolition Whig Governor, absenting
himself from the seat of government” on an electioneering
tour, while riots and bloodshed prevailed throughout the
Commonwealth, and citizens of an adjoining State were
“murdered in our midst.” All these outrages, it charged,
could be traced to the Executive of the Commonwealth—Governor
Johnston was then serving his first regular term—“roaming
about in quest of votes, instead of being at his
post to enforce the utmost rigor of the law against the white
and black murderers.”

“AFTER THE WAR.”

“MAMMY KELLY” WITH THE YOUNGEST GREAT GRANDCHILD OF EDWARD GORSUCH.

[Pg 49]
Further down the same column the editor rejoiced that
Hanway and Lewis and nine negro accessories had been arrested
and were in prison awaiting trial for murder. District
Attorney John L. Thompson and Alderman J. Franklin
Reigart were warmly praised for “ferreting out and
arresting the guilty ones,” while the deposition of Deputy
Marshal H. H. Kline was presented as a most satisfactory
account of the “whole transaction.”

The
Examiner
promptly declared it to be a “dreadful
tragedy” and “one of the most horrid murders ever perpetrated
in this County or State.” Manifestly with one eye
upon the political consequences to the State and local Whig
ticket, and the other toward the Abolition faction of the
Whig party, to which Editor Darlington was opposed, his
newspaper frankly admitted that an awful responsibility
rested somewhere, and the
Examiner
believed it to be “our
duty to speak loudly and distinctly to those individuals who
evidently have urged the blacks to this horrid measure.” It
deprecated all attempts “to make political capital out of the
Sadsbury treason and murder by connecting Governor Johnston’s
name with that melancholy affair. Intelligent readers
will regard such efforts with feelings of disgust and contempt.”
But for the white persons under arrest and charged with
murder and treason, it had no condonation. “Their passions
had been inflamed by Abolition harangues and incendiary
speeches franked by members of Congress until they had
come to look upon treason to the laws of their country as a
moral duty, and upon murder as not a crime.” It declared
that this was especially perceptible and prevailing in Sadsbury
and the eastern end of Bart; it recalled with special
disapprobation the public meeting held at Georgetown, when
the Griest resolutions were passed.

Much indignation was expressed by his political opponents
that Governor Johnston, passing through Christiana on his
[Pg 50]

way from Harrisburg to Philadelphia, on a campaign tour,
the morning of the affair, did not get off his train at Christiana
where lay the dead body of the Marylander, slain on
Pennsylvania soil; though many other passengers did so and
the train stopped almost at the place where the inquest was
to be held.

Democratic campaign meetings held throughout the County
were quick to turn their sails to catch the currents of popular
opinion and at an assemblage in Columbia, on September
13th, N. B. Wolfe, M.D., later a famous citizen of Cincinnati,
Ohio, principal speaker, denounced “the horrid murder
of Gorsuch” “by a band of desperate negroes excited and
influenced by murderous Abolitionists whose reeking hands
are still smoking with the warm life’s blood of a fellow
citizen.”

A committee of conspicuous Democrats in Philadelphia,
including Hon. John Cadwalader, James Page, John W.
Forney, A. L. Roumfort, Charles Ingersoll, Joseph Swift
and others, in an “open letter,” loudly demanded of the
Governor that he act for the vindication of the Commonwealth
and called a public indignation meeting of citizens
in Independence Square. The Governor responded with a
rather tart letter and offered $1,000 reward for the arrest of
the murderers.

The
Intelligencer
continued to comment on the tragedy
as “the legitimate fruit of the policies pursued by Governor
Johnston and Thaddeus Stevens.” It criticized Johnston
very severely for having passed Christiana without instituting
any “measures to bring the murderers to justice” before
proceeding on his way; for making political speeches “instead
of seeing that the perpetrators of treason against the
government and the most bloody murder ever committed in
this State were brought to justice.” Governor Johnston was
at Ephrata and New Holland on the following Saturday,
he came to Lancaster on Saturday night, left at midnight
[Pg 51]

for Philadelphia, and arrived there about five o’clock A.M.

Meantime Rev. J. S. Gorsuch, son of Edward Gorsuch and
brother of Dickinson, wrote to the Baltimore
Sun
an account
of the tragedy, which was copied into the
Intelligencer
and
other Northern papers as an accurate statement.

Subsequently he published an open letter to Governor
Johnston, arraigning him for a lack of official promptness
which resulted in the slaves and murderers of his father
escaping. He recalled that Johnston had refused to honor
a requisition from the Governor of Maryland for the free
negro, Abe Johnson, who had received the stolen wheat, and
he declares that that same Johnson whose return was refused
by the Governor, was present at the riot. He proceeded to
contrast Johnston’s tardiness with “the decision, energy and
promptness of the Lancaster County officers,” who, he said,
“had to collect a posse of men from iron works and diggings
on the railroad” to enforce the processes of the law.

The newspapers report that Alderman Reigart was “receiving
much commendation in the Southern press for the
ability and firmness with which he discharged his duties as
the committing magistrate.” In the Baltimore
Sun
of October
8, Rev. J. S. Gorsuch had another open letter, this time
to Attorney General Franklin. Gorsuch had undertaken to
criticise Governor Johnston without in any way condemning
his Attorney General. Mr. Franklin had vindicated his chief,
by declaring that he had done his full duty, and as his legal
adviser the Attorney General accepted all the responsibility
for the Governor’s conduct.

The general tendency of the agitation undoubtedly was to
depress the campaign prospects of the Whigs. Even Philadelphia
was extremely conservative and desperately anxious
to not lose the trade of the South. Bigler carried the State,
receiving 186,499 votes to 178,034 for Johnston. More than
that slender majority could be accounted for by the Christiana
riot. In Lancaster County the vote on Governor was:
[Pg 52]

Democrat, 6,226, Whig, 11,064. What might have happened
had Mr. Stevens been a candidate for Congress cannot now be
calculated. He had been re-elected in 1850, receiving 9,565
votes, to 5,464 for Shaeffer. In 1852 he was not a candidate.
The late Hon. Isaac E. Hiester was nominated by the “Silver
Gray Whigs,” and received 8,840 votes, to 6,456 for Sample,
the candidate of the Democratic opposition. In 1854 Stevens
was not a candidate, but revenged himself on Hiester by
running Anthony E. Roberts, the same who had been U. S.
marshal during the Christiana riots. There was a three-cornered
fight during that year. Pollock, Whig candidate
for Governor, had the support of the Know Nothings, and
defeated Bigler by 37,000 majority. Lefevre was the third
candidate for Congress in Lancaster County, and divided
both the Roberts and Hiester vote, with the result that
Roberts received 6,561, Hiester 5,371 and Lefevre 4,266.
By this time the new Republican party was organized; the
Silver Gray Whigs went out of the fight; Roberts, Whig, and
Hiester, Opposition, were again the candidates, and, although
Buchanan carried Lancaster County by a plurality of over
2,000 above Fremont and more than 4,000 above Fillmore,
Roberts was elected to Congress, receiving 10,001 votes to
Hiester’s 8,320. In 1858 Stevens again became a candidate
for the 36th Congress, and was elected over James M. Hopkins,
by the following vote: Stevens, 9,513; Hopkins, 6,341.
The latter had been one of the jury in “the treason trial”
and had some support from Stevens’ Whig opponents.
Stevens, however, got some Democratic aid. Thenceforth the
power of Darlington and “the Silver Grays” was broken;
Republicanism was in the local ascendancy with Stevens as
its leader; he never lost his control until his death—his last
nomination being conferred upon him by popular vote when
his body was encoffined, the ballots having been printed before
he died.

[Pg 53]
If the effect of the agitation elected Bigler, it strengthened
the Buchanan wing of the Democratic party, whose choice
the Governor-elect was. If it was not able to control the
National convention of 1852, it succeeded in defeating Cass,
who was Buchanan’s chief rival, and thus was helped the
nomination of the Lancaster County candidate for Presidency
in 1856. Though Bigler was defeated for a second
Gubernatorial term, he was elected United States Senator in
1855. The election of four Democratic Supreme Court
Judges in Pennsylvania in 1851 was one of the results of the
Christiana riot. James Campbell, alone of the Democratic
nominees was defeated. He was a Catholic and the Know
Nothing opposition to him centred upon Coulter, and elected
him; he had been on the bench 1846-7. Campbell became
Postmaster General under Pierce.

Meantime the dead body of Edward Gorsuch was taken by
rail to Columbia, and via York on the Northern Central
Railroad, to Monkton, where a throng of mourning neighbors
met it and great local excitement prevailed. There being
no convenient hearse and the distance too long for pall-bearers,
it was carried by the four-horse team of Eliphalet
Parsons to Mr. Gorsuch’s home. There, after a brief service
by Rev. Vinton, it was committed to a family burying ground,
where the body has rested undisturbed for sixty years. This
private graveyard on the Gorsuch farm is located on an
eminence in the midst of a fine orchard of apple trees, and
overlooking the wide expanse of country to the southwest
and traversed by Piney Run, a tributary to the Gunpowder.
The graveyard is about twenty-five by thirty-five feet, surrounded
by a massive stone wall, without any gate or entrance.
The former opening to it was walled up by direction
of and with a legacy left for that purpose by a son
Thomas. There remain three low gravestones, of uniform
pattern, the central one of which has the initials “E. G.”
The occupants of the other two graves are unknown, and
[Pg 54]

there is nothing to indicate who they were. Rev. John S.
Gorsuch, son of Edward and who was very conspicuous in
the agitation over his killing, was formerly buried in this
graveyard, but his remains have been removed therefrom.
He died at 32 of typhoid fever the March after his father, and
while attending a M.E. conference. The little graveyard
is overgrown with myrtle. Human hands have not desecrated
it in any way, but there is evidence that the gnawing teeth of
rodent vandals have been at work on the graves.

THE GRAVE OF EDWARD GORSUCH.

[Pg 55]

CHAPTER IX.

Before the Trial.

Popular Discussion Precedes the Arraignment—Legal Questions Raised
by Eminent Lawyers—Judge Kane takes High Ground Against
Treason—The Selection of the Jury—A Representative Panel.

Pending the arraignment of the prisoners in the United
States Court for treason, the affair was made the subject of
extended popular discussion. Fiery Southern journals and
orators reflected the views that had been early expressed by
Governor Lowe to President Fillmore, for his own State of
Maryland, that if slave owners could not without incurring
the risk of death pursue their property North and reclaim it,
Secession and Disunion were inevitable. Quite as fierce and
fiery champions of Abolitionism retorted with equal fervor
and contempt for a league with iniquity and a covenant with
slavery, and for a “flaunting lie” that flung the banner of
freedom over a human race in chains. The great mass of
conservative citizens stood for both law and liberty; and
heard with sympathetic ears Webster’s great and eloquent
pleas for “Liberty and Union—one and inseparable.”

Joshua R. Giddings, in a speech at Worcester, in the early
part of November, before the trial, publicly rejoiced in the
killing of Gorsuch and that the fugitives “stood up manfully
in defense of their God-given rights and shot down the
miscreants, who had come with the desperate purpose of
taking them again to the land of slavery.”

It is a notable coincidence that just at this time the

National Era
, an Abolition paper in Washington, D. C.,
edited by Gamaliel Bailey, was beginning to publish as a
weekly serial the first and copyrighted edition of “Uncle
Tom’s Cabin.” Neither the authoress nor the general reading
[Pg 56]

public then appreciated the power and interest of the work,
nor until it appeared later in book form.

The rashness of the Gorsuches in incurring danger and
inviting death by venturing into an unfriendly country for
an unpopular cause, was cited in mitigation of the indictment
against a whole community for lawlessness. The
blunders of the Deputy Marshal in giving his official errand
the aspect of a warlike incursion was urged as a reasonable
explanation for what was charged as popular indifference in
the locality toward a dark crime.

Withal lawyers and laymen found subject for protracted
discussion in the vexed question as to whether it was “treason”;
and what degree of opposition or what extent of resistance
to law constituted this high crime of such infrequent
occurrence.

The cases of the Whiskey Insurrectionists in western Pennsylvania,
and Aaron Burr’s trial at Richmond, Virginia, had
almost faded from popular memory. But there were those
in eastern Pennsylvania who recalled some of the echoes of
the Fries treason case; and its analogies with the impending
trial of nearly forty Lancaster County people were curiously
scanned by legal pundits on the Court House benches and by
local sages on the country store boxes.

The case of United States
vs
. John Fries arose out of the
opposition of the Pennsylvania Germans in Bucks, Northampton
and Berks Counties to the collection of a direct
Federal tax known as “The House Tax.” Assessors had to
measure houses to levy the tax. Hostile public meetings were
held at which John Fries threatened and encouraged armed
resistance to the tax. Armed and with martial music he and
his followers paraded the public highways, intimidating
tax officials, denouncing Congress and the government as
“damned rogues,” etc. Fries had two trials, in both of
which he was found guilty of treason and sentenced to be
hanged. He was subsequently pardoned by President John
[Pg 57]

Adams. He was originally tried and convicted before Judges
Iredell and Peters, in 1799; and his case is reported in 3
Dallas (Fed. Court Rep.), 515.

THADDEUS STEVENS.

IN THE DAYS OF HIS CONGRESSIONAL LEADERSHIP.

As early as November 18, 1850, Hon. John K. Kane,
United States District Judge at Philadelphia, had charged
the Grand Jury at some length—and not without considerable
personal feeling in relation to the State of Pennsylvania
statutes—on the subject of the Fugitive Slave Law. Judge
Kane had been District Attorney and he was Attorney General
of Pennsylvania under Governor Shunk from Jan. 21,
1845, to June 23, 1846. His appointment as Attorney General
was offensive to Mr. Buchanan.

Notwithstanding the Supreme Court of the United States
in the Prigg case had intimated that legislation of this character
was for the Federal Government and not for the State,
Judge Kane severely reprehended the Pennsylvania Act of
1847, which repealed the Acts of 1826 and 1827, delegating
to State authorities the right to issue warrants for fugitives;
he declared the new Fugitive Slave Law of Congress to be
little different from the Pennsylvania statute of 1826, and
he depicted the results of the Pennsylvania law in these
rather lurid terms: “Fanatics of civil discord have, meanwhile,
exulted in the fresh powers of harm with which this
state of things invested them; and the country has been
convulsed in its length and breadth, as if about to be rent
asunder, and tossed in fragments, by the outbursting of a
volcano.”

He went on to say that the new Federal law must be
obeyed, and the penalties for violating it were to be enforced
without fear, favor or affection. He referred to his district
as a community which had suffered in reputation and repose
“from crimes of excitement, turbulence and force,” and inveighed
against disobedience to a statute, obstructing officers
of the law and deeds of violent resistance against them.

The language of this charge, and his well-known views on
[Pg 58]

the legal and political aspects of the question, did not afford a
very encouraging outlook for those who were to be tried before
him or in his court. These very natural apprehensions
were increased, when his charge to the grand jury followed on
September 29, 1851. He briefly reviewed the reported facts
of the Christiana affair, and though he avowed entire freedom
from any impressions of the guilt or innocence of the
accused, he pointed to the charges made against them as sufficient
to establish the crime of treason if they were duly
proved. He also pointed out that as the offence of treason
was not triable in his Court, and though the grand jury then
empanelled could not take cognizance of the indictments,
his learned brother of the Supreme Court, the Hon. Robert
C. Grier, who presided in this circuit, would sit on the trial
of the cause. Justice Grier was a Pennsylvanian, appointed
by President Tyler in 1844, to succeed Henry R. Baldwin,
deceased.

The result of the submission to the Grand Inquest for
the United States inquiring for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania
to the August Term, 1851, was that they found true
bills for treason against the following persons, which indictments
were, on October 6, 1851, remitted from the District
Court to the Circuit Court:

1. Castner Hanway.
20. Collister Wilson.

2. Joseph Scarlet.
21. John Jackson.

3. Elijah Lewis.
22. William Brown.

4. James Jackson.
23. Isaiah Clarkson.

5. George Williams.
24. Henry Simms.

6. Jacob Moore.
25. Charles Hunter.

7. George Reed.
26. Lewis Gates.

8. Benjamin Johnson.
27. Peter Woods.

9. Daniel Caulsberry.
28. Lewis Clarkson.

10. Alson Pernsley.
29. Nelson Carter.

11. William Brown, 2nd.
30. William Parker.

12. Henry Green.
31. John Berry.
[Pg 59]

13. Elijah Clark.
32. William Berry.

14. John Holliday.
33. Samuel Williams.

15. William Williams.
34. Josh Hammond.

16. Benjamin Pindergast.
35. Henry Curtis.

17. John Morgan.
36. Washington Williams.

18. Ezekiel Thompson.
37. William Thomas.

19. Thomas Butler.
38. Nelson Ford.

The District Attorney then moved for a venire to issue
to the marshal, who was commanded to return 108 jurors, of
whom 12 were to be summoned and returned from Lancaster
County, where the offenses charged were perpetrated.

The selection of jurors for this trial, under all the conditions
we have tried to sketch impartially, was a delicate and
difficult task for Marshal Roberts—in view of his well-known
political opinions and of his personal and partisan
affiliations with Thaddeus Stevens, chief counsel for the defense
from start to finish. The character and associations of
the members of the panel may be gathered to some extent
even now from the attitude assumed toward them by counsel
on either side. In a subsequent chapter will be briefly epitomized
the disposition made of those whose names were called.
Keeping it in mind, the author, from a large historical acquaintance
with the leading men of that period in the counties
of the State from which this panel was chosen, does not
hesitate to say that it was high above the average in intelligence
and all other requisites for important jury service;
that it was eminently representative and an altogether fit and
fair enrollment. This opinion is not only now justified, but
it is fairly demanded by reason of the criticism Attorney
General Brent made in his report to Maryland’s Governor
upon the disadvantage to which the prosecution was subjected
in the personnel of the venire.

During their stay in Moyamensing the prisoners suffered
for a time from lack of heat and ventilation until conditions
were remedied. Some of them were confined in the Debtors’
[Pg 60]

Apartments. Witnesses deemed necessary to hold were detained
by the Government under pay of $1.25 per day to
them. Peter Woods relates that Ezekiel Thompson and
Henry Simms engaged so frequently in loud prayer that outsiders
were attracted to the prison walls to listen to them
from the adjoining sidewalks. By November 15th it transpired
that two witnesses, Peter Washington and John Clark,
detained in the Debtors’ Apartments, had escaped. David
Paul Brown said one of them was important for his client
Joseph Scarlet, while the United States was insistent that it
needed them also. Mr. Brent finds cause for suspicion and
complaint in the allegation that they got out without breaking
a lock through inside treachery, of which he “cheerfully”
acquits Marshal Roberts; but neither throughout nor after
the trial does Mr. Brent present himself as an altogether
cheerful person.

[Pg 61]

CHAPTER X.

“
The Treason Trials.
”

Differences of Opinion Among Counsel for the Government—A Brilliant
Array of Lawyers—Selecting Twelve Men, “Good and True,”
from a Large Venire—The Prisoners Arraigned and Pleas Entered.

In the so-called official report of the Castner Hanway
trial, which involved the final disposition of all the treason
cases, it is fitly stated by the author and editor that “the
ability which marked the trial throughout, the patient attention
of the judges, the eloquence and learning of the Counsel,
and the full examination of every matter of fact and law in
any manner involved, gave to the trial a deep and abiding
importance, such as will make its perusal interesting to the
general reader, and of indispensable use to the Legal Profession.”
It is not to be expected, however, that a detailed
report of these proceedings or a presentation of their technical
aspect falls within the scope or prescribed limits of this
sketch. Those desirous of perusing them can get access to
Mr. Robbins’ report in many libraries; lawyers will find the
case reported for their special benefit in Vol. II of Wallace’s
Report of Circuit Court Cases for the Third District, pp.
134-208. The report of Attorney General Brent and the
message of Governor Lowe, in the Maryland State Documents,
1852, constitute an interesting history of the facts
and valuable discussion of the law; and Mr. Jackson’s reply
undoubtedly corrects and modifies some of the impressions
that the complaints of the Marylanders would tend to create.

Even outside of these quasi-official documents there remain
signs that there was some division of counsel, if not conflict
of opinion, among those engaged in the prosecution as to the
most expedient course to take and the more effective remedy
[Pg 62]

to apply to the broken law. Whatever the private opinion of
U. S. District Attorney Ashmead may have been, his presentation
of the case and his entire part in the trial evinced no
lack of preparation or ability and no want of sincerity in the
Government’s cause. He shrank from no responsibility that
his position imposed. He was, moreover, the direct representative
of the Law Department of the Fillmore administration.
His chief was Attorney General John J. Crittenden
and Daniel Webster was the premier of that Cabinet. There
was at that time no “Department of Justice” as now organized;
there was simply the office of the Attorney General,
and an investigation of the archives of the Department fails
to disclose anything whatever with respect to the affray or
the trials. There is, however, authority for the statement
that the final determination to prosecute for treason was made
by Webster and Crittenden, who concluded and advised “that
even if a conviction were not obtained, the effect of the trial
would be salutary in checking Northern opposition to the
enforcement of the Fugitive Slave Act.”

Some question of professional etiquette arose between
counsel who appeared for the State of Maryland and those
who represented the United States by direct employment for
the Government. Mr. Brent reports that this was “satisfactorily
adjusted in a personal interview” with Mr. Ashmead.
He further says:

“This gentleman, in the presence of the Hon. James
Cooper, tendered to me the position of leading counsel in
these trials, which I promptly declined, on the ground that I
never had claimed such precedence for myself, as well as on
grounds of policy and expediency for the prosecution.

“It was then agreed that the Hon. James Cooper, of Pennsylvania
(the distinguished colleague associated with me for
the State of Maryland), should occupy the position of leading
counsel, which he did with fidelity and signal ability. I
will here take occasion to remark that, however unfortunate
[Pg 63]

the preliminary difficulty between Mr. Ashmead and myself,
and however prejudicial it may have been to the development
of the evidence, by preventing that early interchange of views
and information, which was necessary to a thorough preparation
of these important cases, yet I received during the
trial every social and professional courtesy at the hands of
that gentleman, and he was at all times prompt to act upon
any suggestion which might be made by either Mr. Cooper
or myself.”

JOHN W. ASHMEAD.

U. S. ATTORNEY WHO CONDUCTED THE PROSECUTION.

Whatever may have been the nature of their difficulties
or the character of their settlement, there was a good deal of
“girding” during the trial from the defense at the relations
of the various opposing counsel; and there was some recrimination
after the Government’s defeat over the responsibility
for what its representatives thought was a miscarriage of
justice. When the lawyers were finally lined up the record
showed these appearances: J. W. Ashmead, D. A. U. S.,
G. L. Ashmead and J. R. Ludlow represented the United
States: R. J. Brent, Attorney General of Maryland, James
Cooper, a Senator of the United States for Pennsylvania,
and R. M. Lee, of Philadelphia, appeared as special counsel;
Mr. Brent by order of the Governor of Maryland, of which
State Mr. Gorsuch was a citizen; Mr. Cooper and Lee also
private counsel of Mr. Gorsuch’s relatives: For the prisoner,
J. J. Lewis, of West Chester, Th. Stevens, of Lancaster, John
M. Read, T. A. Cuyler and W. A. Jackson, of Philadelphia.

David Paul Brown also sat at the prisoners’ counsel table;
he appeared for Joseph Scarlet, whose case, with that of
others, depended on the result of Hanway’s trial.

Most of these names will be remembered by the general
reader as already eminent or soon to so become. The Ashmeads
were notably able lawyers; Mr. Brent had high professional
position; James Cooper was then United States Senator,
from Pennsylvania; Ludlow later became a member of
the Philadelphia judiciary; Lewis of West Chester and Stevens
[Pg 64]

of Lancaster were leaders of their respective county
bars. John M. Read was later to be a member of the Supreme
Court of Pennsylvania. Theo. A. Cuyler was long
one of the foremost of Philadelphia’s lawyers. Mr. Jackson,
junior counsel and historian of the defense, died Jan. 10,
1857, aged 29, and after less than six years his promising
career ended.

The trial was held in the second story room of old Independence
Hall and sentimentalists speculated as to whether
the cause of Law or Liberty would prevail in a historic
building consecrated to both these vital principles of organized
society. It had been refitted for the occasion with new
gas fixtures and special ventilating devices. The opening day
did not attract the concourse that thronged the chamber
and corridors as the trial progressed, but the seating capacity
of the room was fully occupied.

Court opened at 11 A.M. Monday, November 24, 1851.
Seventy-eight jurors answered; and Judge Grier ordered a
call of the defaulters under promise of a $100 fine to those
who were in default until next morning. Jurors called and
some missing with one accord then began to make excuse.
Before the session adjourned eighty-one answered and it appeared
that nineteen had been previously excused. Arrangements
were made for reporting the proceedings; there was
some discussion over the impanelling of the jurors, but
nobody was disposed to quash or continue; the prisoner, Castner
Hanway, was arraigned and pleaded. The questions
to jurors were framed upon the replies to which challenges
were to be based, and the first juror, David George, was
called on the second day of the trial.

Thence the selection of jurors proceeded until twelve men
were secured satisfactory to both sides. This occupied the
Court until Wednesday evening. Next day being Thanksgiving
the trial was adjourned until Friday morning, the
jury selected being accommodated and lodged at the American
Hotel, opposite the old State House.

[Pg 65]
An essential part of this narrative, in its political and
popular interest, is the personnel of the entire venire of
jurors. It is here given with brief memoranda abstracted
from the official report, indicating what disposition was
made of each person called. Where there are no comments
the juror was not called; and the twelve finally sworn are
each marked with a *.

1. Adams, Peter, Farmer, Mohnsville P. O., Berks County.

2. Baldwin, Matthias W., Machinist, 335 Spruce St.,
Philadelphia. Founder of Baldwin’s Locomotive Works.
Stood aside.

3. Barclay, Andrew C., Gentleman, 147 Arch St., Philadelphia.
Challenged by defendant; had an opinion.

4. Bazley, John T., Gentleman, Doylestown, Bucks
County. Challenged by prisoner.

5. Beck, John, Professor, Lititz, Lancaster Co. Principal
of famous Boys’ School; Excused at Mr. Stevens’ instance
because “the school could not get on without him;” grandfather
of Hon. Jas. M. Beck.

6. Bell, Samuel, Gentleman, Reading, Berks County.
Associate (lay) judge and excused.

7. Brady, Patrick, Merchant, 397 Arch St., Philadelphia.
Challenged by prisoner for opinion.

8. Breck, Samuel, Gentleman, Arch St., west of Broad,
Philadelphia. Prominent citizen; aged 81 and deaf; Excused.

9. Brinton, Ferree, Merchant, Belmont P. O., Lancaster
Co. Later associate judge; father-in-law of Judge Wiltbank,
of Philadelphia. Stood aside.

10. Broadhead, Albert G., Farmer, Delaware P. O., Pike
Co. Deficient hearing and frequent headaches; Excused.

11. Brown, John A., Merchant, S.E. Cor. 12th and Chestnut
Sts., Phila. Challenged by prisoner.

12. Brown, Joseph D., Gentleman, 167 Arch St., Philadelphia.

[Pg 66]
13. Brush, George G., Merchant, Washington, Lancaster
Co. A prominent citizen and Democrat. Challenged by
prisoner.

14. Butler, Robert, Clerk, Mauch Chunk, Carbon Co.

15. Cadwalader, George, Gentleman, 299 Chestnut St.,
Philadelphia. Excused temporarily. Prominent Philadelphia
Democrat. Subsequently called and challenged by
prisoner.

16. Cameron, Simon, Gentleman, Middletown, Dauphin
Co. Ex U. S. Senator. Unwell and temporarily excused.

17. Campbell, Hugh, Merchant, 33 Girard Street, Philadelphia.

18. Clendenin, John, Gentleman, Hoagstown, Cumberland
Co. Challenged by defendant.

19. Cockley, David, Machinist, Lancaster City. Challenged
by U. S. for opinion.

20. Cook, Jonathan, Gentleman, Allentown, Lehigh Co.
Challenged for opinion by defendant.

21. Coolbaugh, Moses W., Farmer, Coolbaugh P. O., Monroe
County. Challenged by prisoner.

22. *Connelly, Thomas, Carpenter, Beaver Meadow, Carbon
Co. Accepted and sworn (3).

23. Cope, Caleb, Merchant, Walnut & Quince Sts., Philadelphia.
Applied for excuse; refused as he was “not over
60.” Recalled and not answering, fined. Subsequently remitted
on account of ill health.

24. *Cowden, James, Merchant, Columbia, Lancaster Co.
Stood aside at first, finally accepted (12).

25. Culbertson, Joseph, Gentleman, Chambersburg, Franklin
Co. “Excused for age, hardness of hearing and vertigo.”

26. Darby, John, Gentleman, Fayetteville, Franklin Co.
Enfeebled; deaf; excused.

27. Davies, Edward, Gentleman, Churchtown, Lancaster
Co. Stood aside.

28. Deshong, John O., Gentleman, Chester, Delaware Co.
Stood aside.

[Pg 67]
29. Diller, Solomon, Farmer, New Holland, Lancaster
Co. Stood aside.

30. Elder, Joshua, Farmer, Harrisburg, Dauphin Co.
Stood aside.

31. Dillinger, Jacob, Gentleman, Allentown, Lehigh Co.
Excused because of “kidney trouble.” Conspicuous Democrat.

32. *Elliot, Robert, Farmer, Ickesburg, Perry Co. Accepted
and sworn (2).

33. Ewing, Robert, Merchant, 446 Walnut St., Philadelphia.
Challenged by defendant.

34. *Fenton, Ephraim, Farmer, Upper Dublin P. O.,
Montgomery Co. Stood aside. Subsequently recalled and
accepted (11).

35. Fraley, Frederick, Gentleman, 365 Race St., Philadelphia.
President of Schuylkill Navigation Company; Excused
temporarily. Conspicuous citizen. Treasurer Centennial
Company in 1876.

36. George, David, Gentleman, Blockley, West Phila. P.
O., Philadelphia Co. Stood aside. Recalled and challenged
by U. S.

37. Gowen, James, Gentleman, Germantown, Philadelphia
Co. Father of P. & R. President F. B. Gowen. Challenged
by prisoner. Democrat.

38. Grosh, Jacob, Gentleman, Marietta, Lancaster Co.
Political friend of Stevens. Associate (lay) judge, 1842-47.
Stood aside.

39. Hammer, Jacob, Merchant, Orwigsburg, Schuylkill
Co. Associate (lay) judge; Excused on account of his wife’s
illness.

40. Harper, James, Gentleman, Walnut & Schuylkill
Fifth Sts., Phila. Challenged by prisoner.

41. Hazard, Erskine, Gentleman, Ninth & Chestnut Sts.,
Philadelphia. Father-in-law of Samuel Dickson, later one
of the leaders of the Philadelphia bar. Challenged by the
prisoner. Democrat; merchant; iron master.

[Pg 68]
42. Hipple, Frederick, Farmer, Bainbridge, Lancaster
Co. Stood aside.

43. Hitner, Daniel O., Farmer, Whitemarsh, Montgomery
Co. Challenged by prisoner.

44. *Hopkins, James M., Farmer, Bucks P. O., Drumore
Twp., Lancaster Co. Ironmaster, Conowingo furnace.
Fusion Candidate for Congress against Stevens in 1858.
Accepted (7).

45. Horn, John, Gentleman, 16 Broad St., Philadelphia.
Biased in favor of defendant and challenged for cause by
U. S.

46. Hummel, Valentine, Merchant, Harrisburg, Dauphin
Co.

47. Jenks, Michael H., Gentleman, Newton, Bucks Co.

48. *Junkin, John, Farmer, Landisburg, Perry Co. Accepted
(8).

49. Keim, William H., Merchant, Reading, Berks Co.
Stood aside.

50. Keyser, Elhanan W., Merchant, 144 North Ninth St.,
Philadelphia.

51. Kichline, Jacob, Farmer, Lower Saucon P. O., Northampton
Co. Challenged by prisoner.

52. Kinnard, John H., Farmer, West Whiteland P. O.,
Chester Co. Stood aside.

53. Krause, John, Clerk, Lebanon, Lebanon Co. Stood
aside; had conscientious scruples against death penalty.

54. Kuhn, Hartman, Gentleman, 314 Chestnut St., Philadelphia.
Conspicuous citizen; descendant of old Lancaster
family; Challenged by U. S. for opinion.

55. Ladley, George, Farmer, Oxford P. O., Chester Co.
Stood aside.

56. Leiper, George G., Farmer, Leiperville, Delaware Co.
Associate (lay) judge; excused. Prominent Democrat and
intimate friend of James Buchanan, to his latest day.

57. Lewis, Lawrence, Gentleman, 345 Chestnut St., Philadelphia.
[Pg 69]

President Mutual Insurance Company; very busy.
Excused for a fortnight.

58. Luther, Diller, Gentleman, Reading, Berks Co. Challenged
by prisoner.

59. Lyons, David, Farmer, Haverford P. O., Delaware Co.
Challenged by prisoner.

60. McConkey, James, Merchant, Peachbottom P. O.,
York Co. Deaf and deputy postmaster; excused. Of old
Democratic family.

61. McIlvaine, Abraham R., Farmer, Wallace P. O.,
Chester County.

62. McKean, Thomas, Gentleman, 356 Spruce St., Philadelphia.
Excused on account of illness. Leading citizen
and member of distinguished family.

63. Madeira, George A., Gentleman, Chambersburg,
Franklin Co. Stood aside.

64. Mark, George, Gentleman, Lebanon, Lebanon Co.
Stood aside.

65. *Martin, Peter, Surveyor, Ephrata P. O., Lancaster
Co. Anti-Buchanan Democrat; later associate judge and
prothonotary; “was under the impression offense might be
treason.” Accepted (4).

66. Massey, Charles, Merchant, 170 Arch St. Philadelphia.
Excused on account of ill health.

67. Mather, Isaac, Farmer, Jenkintown, Montgomery Co.
Stood aside.

68. Merkle, Levi, Farmer, Shiremanstown, Cumberland
Co. Stood aside.

69. Michler, Peter S., Merchant, Easton, Northampton
Co.

70. Miller, John, Gentleman, Reading, Berks Co. Challenged
by the prisoner. Excused.

71. Moore, Marmaduke, Merchant, 153 North Thirteenth
St., Philadelphia. A prominent Democrat. Challenged by
prisoner.

[Pg 70]
72. Morton, Sketchley, Farmer, Gibbon’s Tavern P. O.,
Delaware Co. Stood aside.

73. Myers, Isaac, Merchant, Port Carbon, Schuylkill Co.

74. Neff, John R., Merchant, 124 Spruce St., Philadelphia.
Excused for absence from the State.

75. Newcomer, Martin, Innkeeper, Chambersburg, Franklin
Co. Challenged by U. S. for opinion.

76. *Newman, Solomon, Smith, Milford, Pike Co. First
juror drawn. Stood aside. Subsequently accepted (9).

77. Palmer, Strange N., Editor, Pottsville, Schuylkill Co.
Stood aside.

78. Patterson, Robert, Merchant, S. W. cor. Thirteenth
and Locust Sts. Had decided opinions. Challenged by
prisoner.

79. Penny, James, Farmer, Liberty Square P. O., Drumore
Twp., Lancaster County. Stood aside. Neighbor to
Quaker Abolitionists.

80. Platt, William, Merchant, 343 Chestnut St. Philadelphia.
Excused because of ill health.

81. Preston, Paul S., Merchant, Stockport, Wayne Co.
Stood aside.

82. Reynolds, John, Gentleman, Lancaster City. Father
of Gen. John F. Reynolds and Admiral Wm. Reynolds and
former proprietor of a Democratic newspaper in Lancaster.
Examined at length; showed disfavor to defendants and was
challenged peremptorily by Stevens.

83. Rich, Josiah, Farmer, Danboro P. O., Bucks Co.
Stood aside.

84. Richards, Matthias, Gentleman, Reading, Berks Co.
Challenged by prisoner.

85. Richardson, John, Gentleman, Spruce St., west of
Broad, Philadelphia. President of Bank of North America.
Excused temporarily for bronchial affection.

86. Rogers, Evan, Gentleman, Locust St. and Washington
Square. Challenged for cause by defendant.

[Pg 71]
87. Ross, Hugh, Farmer, Lower Chanceford Co., York
Co. Challenged for cause by defendant. Scotch Irish,
Presbyterian, Democrat.

88. Rupp, John, Farmer, Mechanicksburg P. O., Hempden
Twp., Cumberland Co. Associate judge; excused temporarily.
Recalled and challenged by U. S. because he was
opposed to death penalty.

89. Rutherford, John B., Farmer, Harrisburg, Dauphin
Co. Stood aside.

90. *Saddler, William R., York Sulphur Springs P. O.,
Adams Co. Accepted (6).

91. Saylor, Charles, Merchant, Saylorsburg, Monroe Co.
Postmaster. Excused.

92. Schroeder, John S., Clerk, Reading, Berks Co.
Challenged by prisoner.

93. Small, Samuel, Merchant, York, York Co. Prominent
citizen and representative of notable family. Stood aside.

94. Smith, George, Farmer, Upper Darby P. O., Delaware
Co. Stood aside.

95. Smith, John, Smith, Jenkintown, Montgomery Co.
Challenged by defendant; extended discussion; challenge
sustained.

96. *Smith, Robert, Gentleman, Gettysburg, Adams Co.
Accepted (5).

97. Smyser, Philip, Gentleman, York, York Co. Challenged
for cause.

98. Starbird, Franklin, Farmer, Stroudsburg, Monroe
Co. Stood aside.

99. Stavely, William, Farmer, Lahasha P. O., Bucks Co.
Challenged by prisoner.

100. Stevens, William, Merchant, Whitehallville, Bucks
Co. Challenged by prisoner.

101. Stokes, Samuel E., Merchant, 39 Arch St., Philadelphia.

102. Taylor, Caleb N., Farmer, Newportville, Bucks Co.
[Pg 72]

Suffering from what Judge Grier called “Epidemic of deafness.”
Excused.

103. Toland, George W., Gentleman, 178 Arch St.,
Philadelphia.

104. Trexler, Lesher, Gentleman, Allentown, Lehigh Co.
Stood aside.

105. *Wainwright, Jonathan, Merchant, Beach, below
Hanover St., Philadelphia. Stood aside. Subsequently recalled
and accepted (10).

106. Walsh, Robert F., Merchant, 5 Girard St., Philadelphia.
“Thought the offense treason.” Challenged by the
Court.

107. Watmough, John G., Gentleman, Germantown,
Philadelphia County. “Strongly against the whole business.”
Challenged by U. S.

108. Watson, William, Farmer, Mechanicsville, Bucks Co.
Stood aside.

109. West, David, Farmer, Kimberton, Chester Co.
Stood aside.

110. White, Thomas H., Gentleman, N. W. Cor. Ninth &
Spruce Sts., Philadelphia. Challenged for opinion by U. S.

111. Whitehall, James, Gentleman, Lancaster City. Challenged
by prisoner.

112. Witman, Andrew K., Farmer, Center Valley P. O.,
Lehigh Co. From neighborhood of Fries rebellion. Challenged
by U. S. for opinion, after long discussion.

113. Williamson, William, Gentleman, West Chester,
Chester Co. Challenged by prisoner.

114. *Wilson, James, Gentleman, Fairfield P. O., Adams
Co. Accepted and sworn (3). From neighborhood of
Stevens’ iron works.

115. Vanzant, Franklin, Farmer, Attleboro P. O., Bucks
Co. Two children sick. Excused temporarily.

116. Yohe, Samuel, Gentleman, Easton, Northampton Co.
Stood aside.

[Pg 73]
As finally selected the trial jury consisted of the following
persons:

1.
Robert Elliott
, farmer, Ickesburg, Perry County,
aged 69.

2.
James Wilson
, gentleman, Fairfield postoffice, Adams
County, aged 73.

3.
Thomas Connelly
, carpenter, Beaver Meadow, Carbon
County, aged 54.

4.
Peter Martin
, surveyor, Ephrata postoffice, Lancaster
County, aged 46.

5.
Robert Smith
, gentleman, Gettysburg, Adams County,
aged 57.

6.
William R. Saddler
, farmer, York Sulphur Springs
postoffice, Adams County, aged 41.

7.
James M. Hopkins
, farmer, Bucks postoffice, Drumore
Township, Lancaster County, aged 50.

8.
John Junkin
, farmer, Landisburg, Perry County,
aged 56.

9.
Solomon Newman
, smith, Milford, Pike County,
aged 48.

10.
Jonathan Wainwright
, Merchant, Philadelphia,
aged 66.

11.
Ephraim Fenton
, farmer, Upper Dublin postoffice,
Montgomery County, aged 52.

12.
James Cowden
, merchant, Columbia, Lancaster
County, aged 36.

Average age of jurors: 53.

In opening for the prosecution District Attorney Ashmead
defined the act of treason, as it had been laid down in previous
judicial deliverances, and he relied on the proof that
there had been an armed and organized resistance to the execution
of the laws of Congress, in which the prisoner not
only participated, but of which he was a leader. After he
had concluded, Z. Collins Lee, of Baltimore, United States
District Attorney, appeared also for the prosecution. Witnesses
[Pg 74]

were excluded while other witnesses were testifying.
Mr. G. L. Ashmead, who was a cousin of the United States
Attorney, conducted the examination of the witnesses. The
scene was located; Deputy Kline told his story in detail,
substantially as the incident has been related; he insisted
that he asked Hanway and Lewis to aid him in enforcing
his writs and they refused; Hanway sat on his horse during
the affray and Joshua Gorsuch, pretty badly hurt, got behind
the horse for protection. Kline was the special target
of severe and sarcastic cross-examination by Mr. Stevens, as
he was the Atlas of the Government’s case. To break him
down on the identity of those who were present at the riot,
Mr. Stevens insisted on the Court allowing the presence in
Court of all the prisoners; and when he accomplished this
dramatic purpose he turned Kline over to Mr. Lewis for
further and protracted cross-examination on the skirmishing
movements of the arresting party before the riot. Mr. Read
also took a hand in his cross-examination, which was not
concluded until the Saturday of the first week. His last
answer at this session was to the effect that he did not see
Joseph Scarlet at the “action.”

Dr. Pearce testified at some length corroborating Kline;
and averring very distinctly that he saw a shot fired from
the window of the house at Gorsuch, the elder. He was
severely cross-examined by Mr. Stevens, who intimated
repeatedly that the witness had charged Kline with cowardice.
Dickinson Gorsuch followed him and testified to the main
facts. Neither he nor his cousin, Joshua, was subjected to
any cross-examination; and both of them were less direct
in their accusations against Hanway and Lewis than Kline,
at the most declaring that Hanway’s arrival seemed to give
the colored men inspiration and encouragement. The son established
his father’s determination not to be driven or intimidated
from the premises, and described the killing of
him and the wounding of himself. These circumstances,
[Pg 75]

creditable to the valor of the Gorsuches, did not materially
prejudice the case of the defendant on the trial. Dickinson
recognized Scarlet as one who at first refused to help him, but
subsequently got him water. Nicholas Hutchins was also
examined as to the affray and corroborated the other witnesses;
likewise Nathan Nelson, the other of the Maryland
party. These witnesses were positive in their recognition of
Noah Buley and Joshua Hammond, the elder two of the
runaways.

The first week of the trial closed with Miller Knott on the
stand. He was a citizen of the neighborhood, who was not
charged with any complicity, but who had given aid to the
wounded. He had seen a man on horseback, in his shirt
sleeves—presumably Hanway—riding northward, with a
band of negroes following him; and a half score or more attacking
Dickinson Gorsuch, while others followed Isaiah
Clarkson into the corn field. He saw Gorsuch the father
lying alone not yet dead; and Joseph Scarlet, on horseback, at
“the mouth of the long lane”; he subsequently returned with
the colored men toward Parker’s house. From this witness
it appeared that it was a mile from Hanway’s mill to Parker’s
house, that Joseph Scarlet would have to travel two miles
and his horse was “sweaty,” that Elijah Lewis lived from
a mile and a half to two miles away. Mr. Knott was not
subjected to cross-examination. His son, John, had preceded
him to Parker’s by ten minutes and saw the riot from a point
about thirty yards from the junction of the long lane and the
house lane. He saw from fifty to sixty negroes come out from
the house, shouting and shooting, disperse up the little lane
and run toward the creek. He saw horses hitched on the fence
in the long lane; he saw Dickinson Gorsuch bleeding and gave
him water. Again the defense desisted from cross-examination
of either of the Knotts. Alderman Reigart testified to
an exciting conversation between Kline and Hanway and
Lewis at Christiana, after their arrest, when Kline had
[Pg 76]

denounced them savagely and they disclaimed having incited
the negroes. It was manifest the defendants would centre
their attack upon Kline and Mr. Read brought out the fact
that while he wore formidable whiskers and mustaches at the
time of the affray, he had since shaved them off. It was
shown that though he publicly denounced the prisoners
as “white livered scoundrels” who had ordered the blacks
to fire, his statements under oath were very much milder.

A long discussion ensued over the admission of Charles
Smith’s evidence, but he was finally permitted to testify
that Samuel Williams—the colored man from Philadelphia
who had trailed Kline—had brought and circulated news
of the intended raid for the arrest of the Gorsuch runaways.
It was disclosed by Dr. Cain’s testimony that Washington
and Clark, colored witnesses who had escaped from Moyamensing,
had been circulating a paper on September 10th, which
had the character of a warning to the Maryland refugees.
Shortly after the affray Dr. Cain, at his own tenant house,
treated two colored men, Henry C. Hopkins and John Long,
who had been shot, one in the arm and one in the thigh.
Hopkins was the doctor’s tenant. John Roberts, a colored
witness, who had been detained as such, for more than ten
weeks, in Moyamensing, proved that Joseph Scarlet told
him “about sun up” that kidnappers were at Parker’s, and
witness got a loaded gun from Jacob Townsend and went
to the scene. Other witnesses of the same kind, and detained
the same way, elicited little material matter, as they arrived
on the scene after the battle. In support of the Government’s
theory of a treasonable conspiracy, some evidence was introduced
of meetings at West Chester in opposition to the Fugitive
Slave Law, but the participation of the accused was not
shown.

The scenes attending the trial are described by the newspapers
of the day as highly interesting and sometimes sensational.
Popular interest grew as it progressed, and it
[Pg 77]

centered upon the prisoner who was a stranger in Philadelphia.
One newspaper account describes Hanway as displaying
the greatest self-possession during the selection of
jurors. “He is apparently about 35 years of age, tall but
spare in form, and inclined to stoop a little. There is a
becoming seriousness in his countenance, but nothing like
alarm or trepidation is visible. When called upon to look
at the juror summoned to try him, he does so with a firm
and inquiring look, but never determines upon his admission
or rejection until he has consulted his counsel, Thaddeus
Stevens, who sits immediately by his side.”

Before the defense was formally opened its course and
character had been anticipated by the cross-examination of
Mr. Stevens; in this quality of a trial lawyer he was an
acknowledged master. The opening speech of Mr. Cuyler
referred to the division among the counsel for the prosecution;
it praised the fairness of Mr. Ashmead, who, it declared,
had been remanded to the background, because Maryland
distrusted the justice of Pennsylvania. This was an
effective appeal to the State pride of the jury. He vigorously
assailed Kline, who had been the Government’s most zealous
witness. He traced the course of Pennsylvania’s legislation
on slavery and insisted that this Commonwealth was
“ever true to her plighted constitutional good faith”; he
extolled Hanway’s civic virtues, and dwelt with emphasis
upon the local agitation over the “lawless and diabolical
outrages” of the kidnappers; and finally ridiculed the idea
of treason in the allegation that “three harmless, non-resisting
Quakers, and eight-and-thirty wretched, miserable, penniless
negroes, armed with corn-cutters, clubs, and a few
muskets, and headed by a miller, in a felt hat, without a
coat, without arms, and mounted on a sorrel nag, levied
war against the United States.”

When Mr. Stevens began the production of testimony for
the defense with offers to prove the recent kidnapping outrages
[Pg 78]

in the neighborhood of Gap, the legal storm center of
the trial was at hand. The prosecution saw and feared the
influence of this line of evidence as keenly as the defense
recognized its force and value. Judges Grier and Kane both
discerned the vital issue at once and long before the argument
concluded, pointed out that as the accusation was treason—a
position founded upon some previous conspiracy—the defense
must be allowed the same latitude to disprove intent
as had been allowed to the prosecution to establish it. This
opened the way for Thomas Pennington to tell the story
of what had occurred at the home of his son-in-law, William
Marsh Chamberlain, the preceding January—it was the
same night, by the way, that “James Ray fell dead as he entered
the door of his own house.” As has been heretofore related,
in the absence at Ray’s of the head of the Chamberlain
household, the black man in employ was beaten and dragged
out and carried off by intruders without legal process and
led by local abettors of the capture.

The fact that it was not shown the man taken was a free
man, or that he may have been reclaimed by the authority of
his owner, made little difference in the popular feeling about
the affair or in the effectiveness of the incident for trial
purposes. If such ruthlessness might be technically legal
it made the slave law none the less odious!

Henry Ray went further than Pennington and identified
both Perry Marsh and William Bear as associates of
the band who carried off Chamberlain’s man; and Mrs. Chamberlain—who
saw the incident through a pipe hole from
upstairs, where the affrighted family had retreated—and
her brother, Miller Pennington, described it in a manner
that heightened its effect. With this recital the defense made
a distinct advance.

When the next witness, Elijah Lewis, was called, a question
was raised as to his competency. Although not himself
on trial, he was under indictment for the same offense as
[Pg 79]

the prisoner. Mr. Brent cited “5th Espinasse,” but the
Government’s objection was not urged with much confidence
and was not sustained by the Court. Interest centered in
the witness as he was probably the most conspicuous of all
the defendants and a recognized leader of local sentiment.
He supported the case of the defendants as their counsel had
outlined it; and his intelligence, direct manner and forceful
expression gave added weight to his testimony. Isaiah
Clarkson had summoned him to the scene by the report that
Parker’s house was surrounded and had been broken into
by kidnappers; he started on foot and called Hanway, who
was not very well and got his horse; Kline showed them a
paper which he assumed was a warrant; the negroes were excited
and Hanway begged them not to shoot; witness had
turned south toward the wood, Kline following and Hanway
to the north when the shooting began. He contradicted Kline’s
story of him or Hanway expressing defiance of the law
and declared Kline was “in the woods” when the firing
began; he and Hanway were not arrested; they gave themselves
up. Cross-examination strengthened his statement.

Other witnesses testified to Kline’s declarations after the
event to the effect that he had wanted to withdraw, but was
overruled; that Dr. Pearce admitted the Gorsuches were
rash and Kline timid, and that he himself owed his life to
Hanway’s protection.

The defense then opened its batteries against Kline’s reputation.
Hon. William D. Kelly—later a Common Pleas
Judge and long time a leading member of Congress from
Philadelphia—headed a long list of witnesses who testified
that Kline’s reputation was bad and that he was unworthy
of belief. There were nearly a score in all and many of
them were most emphatic; it was also shown that in some
accounts of the affray Kline had denounced “the damned
Quaker abolitionists.”

To open the way for the recanting witness, Harvey Scott,
[Pg 80]

to recall his former stories and repudiate their statements,
witnesses were called to testify that he was not at the riot at
all, but was “buttoned up” in John Carr’s garret until daylight
and from that time on was at the place, blowing and
striking in his employer’s blacksmith shop; that when he
heard of the affair he congratulated himself with the remark,
“I’m a nigger out of that scrape.”

Lewis Cooper, who was a son-in-law of Elijah Lewis, had,
with Joseph Scarlet’s assistance, taken Dickinson Gorsuch
to the Pownall house; he had heard Dr. Pearce tell of his
uncle’s rashness and that one of his own slaves, “a bright
yellow negro,” shot him; and also that he had been saved by
holding on to Hanway’s saddle skirt.

Many witnesses were called to prove Hanway’s character
“as a peaceable, good, loyal and orderly citizen.” It was
brought out that Hanway, contrary to the general popular
impression, was not a member of the Society of Friends.
Having been born in Delaware and lived in Chester as well
as Lancaster County, and having been at one time absent
from the State, the witnesses in his behalf represented different
sections of the country.

The rebuttal on the part of the prosecution consisted largely
of an attempt to rehabilitate Kline’s reputation; a great
number of respectable citizens of Philadelphia, who had
known him from his youth up, were called to testify that
his character was good and that he was entitled to belief.
The opening in rebuttal also covered proposed proof of alleged
outrages and reprisals by the sympathizers with fugitive
slaves, in that armed and organized bands of negroes
paraded the streets of Lancaster “on the hunt for slave hunters
and avowing the determination, if they caught them,
they would kill them”; that in April, 1851, Samuel Worthington,
of Maryland, went into the neighborhood of Christiana
to reclaim his fugitive slave and was resisted by armed
force; that bells were rung and horns blown to arouse the
[Pg 81]

neighborhood and the master was obliged to flee for his life.
It was also promised that Harvey Scott would corroborate his
former statement and disprove the alibi that had been made
out for him. In the number of witnesses who were called to
prove the general character of Kline for truth and veracity,
the Government far exceeded his assailants. The proposed
testimony as to previous occurrences in the neighborhood,
showing popular feeling against the resistance to the reclaiming
of fugitive slaves, was ruled out by the Court; the trial
judges concurred that if it was any part of the Government’s
case it should have been offered originally, and Judge
Grier jocularly observed, “We may draw a figure from the
game of whist—it would be renigging and keeping your
trump back to the last trick.”

When the recanting witness, Harvey Scott, was called
by the Government to prove that the alibi made for him was
not correct, and Mr. Ashmead confidently offered him to
prove that he was at the riot, Scott startled the prosecution
and satisfied the defense by testifying as follows: “I gave
my evidence that I was there once. I was frightened at
the time I was taken up, and I said I was there, but I was
not; I was proved to be there, but I was not there; they
took me to Christiana, and I was frightened, and I didn’t
know what to say, and I said what they told me.” He repeated
this, whereupon Mr. Ashmead declared that he had
been entrapped and asked that Scott might be committed to
take his trial for perjury, when the following colloquy occurred:

“
Judge Grier.
Poor devil, it is not worth while for the
United States to do it. Let him go, and if you owe him
any thing, pay him, that he may not be tempted to steal.

”
Mr. Stevens.
The truth is, that he is not right in his
mind.

“
Mr. J. W. Ashmead.
With that explanation I am perfectly
willing he should depart.”

[Pg 82]
At the resumption of the trial on the next day there was a
good deal of discussion as to what should be done about the
variation in the testimony of the witness Scott. The Government
had manifestly suffered from his wobbling, and
intimated that he had been tampered with; all of which
was resented by the defense, who declared that he was only
a “poor miserable negro,” shallow-minded and uncertain,
and that the United States having fed and clothed him for
the purpose of the trial, no one representing the defense had
had any access to him and the whole effect of his testimony
was a matter for the jury. After again calling Dickinson
Gorsuch to prove that two of his father’s slaves—Noah
Buley and Joshua Hammond—were present at the shooting,
the testimony closed, and it was agreed there should be
not more than three speeches on either side.

The summing up began on Friday, December 5, Mr. Ludlow
opening for the prosecution and discussing at length and
elaborately the law of the case, and then proceeding to consider
the strength of the Government’s testimony and the
improbabilities of what had been proved on the part of the
defense. Being himself a member of the Philadelphia bar,
he undertook the defense of Kline, and declared that no
man of bad character could have produced in his behalf the
array of witnesses whom the Government had called to sustain
its deputy marshal. On Saturday morning, December
6, Mr. Lewis, of West Chester, commenced to sum up for
the defense. He made an exceptionally able argument both
on the facts and the law of the case and reviewed the history
of the two leading cases of treason which had occurred in
Pennsylvania arising out of the so-called Whiskey Insurrection
and the Fries rebellion. He was followed by Attorney
General Brent, for the prosecution, and his speech was not
concluded when Court adjourned on Saturday afternoon to
meet the following Monday. It was at this session of the
Court the colored prisoners were brought in clad in the uniform
[Pg 83]

dress which had been furnished them by sympathizing
friends, and the scene that was presented is thus described
by a contemporary newspaper reporter:

“On Saturday morning, December 6, when Mr. Lewis was
to speak first for the prisoners and was to be followed by the
Attorney General of Maryland there was a great throng present
at the trial. The room was overcrowded with women, and
Marshal Roberts was greatly embarrassed at his inability
to find or to make a place for them. The special attention
of the spectators was attracted to a row of colored men, seated
on the north side of the room. They were cleanly in their
appearance, and their heads and faces presented strong presumptive
evidence that they had just escaped from the hands
of the barber. These were the colored prisoners alleged to
have been engaged in the treason at Christiana, and numbered
twenty-four. They were all similarly attired wearing around
their necks ‘red, white and blue scarfs.’ Lucretia Mott was
at their head. This, we believe, is her first appearance in
court since the trials have commenced. Her dignified and
benevolent countenance ever attracts attention. Under that
calm exterior there glows a fire, kindled by charity, which
is as universal as it is ardent and enduring. She sat knitting
during the entire session of the court, apparently unconscious
of what was going on around her, except when some point
in the testimony seemed to bear strongly against the prisoner.
Then her eyes were lifted from her work, and sparkled for
a moment with admiration; but speedily relapsed into their
intelligent, yet quiet and peaceful aspect. One of the colored
persons, whose name is Collister Wilson, was too unwell to
be brought from prison on Saturday morning. It is but just
to say, that these colored men, taken together, will compare
in personal appearance with an equal number of the same
race taken indiscriminately from any part of the world.
The two white men, Lewis and Scarlet, were also brought
from prison, but occupied the rear or east end of the court
[Pg 84]

room. These two appeared to be between thirty and forty
years of age, and judging from their garb, do not belong to the
Society of Friends, as has been generally supposed. On inquiring
how it happened that the colored prisoners were all
dressed alike, we were informed that they had been clothed
by a committee of ladies belonging to the Abolition Society,
who have been very attentive to them since they have been
in prison.”

Subsequent reports of the trial indicate increased attendance,
especially of “ladies dressed in Quaker garb.”

Continuing his speech on the following Monday the
Attorney General waxed eloquent over the glories of the
Union and the perils to national peace that lay in resistance
to law and in the refusal of any one section to accord to another
its legal rights. He read from Webster’s speeches and
Washington’s farewell address and from Judge Iredell’s
charge on the trial of the Fries cases. He referred to the
presence in Court by Hanway’s side of his devoted and affectionate
wife, who it seems had sat with him during the
trial. While the gallantry of the Maryland lawyer constrained
him to express his admiration and respect for “the afflicted
lady of this prisoner,” he warned the jury against being controlled
by “the spell of that female influence which is more
potent than the eloquence of counsel,” and contrasted the
situation of Mrs. Hanway with that of Gorsuch’s wife “who,
as a widow, is now mourning the loss and lover of her youth
and the prop of her declining years.” He played upon the
color of Scarlet’s name; he denounced the coroner’s inquest,
lauded the chivalrous courage of Edward Gorsuch, pictured
with skillful hands the combat at the Parker house and the
“diabolical malice” of those who mangled the victim of
that occasion after they had killed him. He insisted that
both Lewis and Hanway had been guilty of treason and that
they had incited the blacks to make armed resistance to the
law of the land.

[Pg 85]
To Mr. Read was assigned the responsible duty of replying
immediately to Brent, which he did in a speech occupying
nearly three days in the delivery and, as the reporter observes,
“marked throughout by eloquence and profound
learning, being a thorough and complete dissertation on the
law of treason, and which riveted the attention not only of
the Court and jury, but of a crowded auditory.”

It was expected that Thaddeus Stevens would follow him,
and the public interest which attached to his speaking was
probably greater than that attending any of the other counsel;
but for some reason he declined speaking in the cause, and
Mr. Read was followed by Senator Cooper, who represented
not only the State of Maryland, but the Gorsuch family. He
expounded with the ability of a profound lawyer the constitutional
definition of treason and applied it to the facts of the
case, which he insisted fully, amply and distinctly proved the
overt act of treason. In the cases of contradiction between
Lewis and Kline he declared that Kline was supported by
the testimony of all the Maryland party, while Lewis stood
alone, and Lewis was an interested and therefore discredited
witness. His peroration was an earnest plea for the Union
and against anything that would affect its stability or endanger
its peace. In Websterian strain he closed as follows:
“The eyes of the world are upon the constellation in its banner.
Its stars are the beacons of liberty. Let us then, for
our sakes, and for the sake of liberty in other lands, guard
it as the Ark of the Covenant was guarded of old. Let no
hand deface it. Let the day never come when it shall be
rent in twain; when one cluster of its stars, separated from
the other and beaming in different banners, shall be borne
over adverse and conflicting hosts; but let it remain as it now
is, ‘the Flag of the Union,’ still waving over the heads of
united freemen, obedient to the same laws—laws supported
by all, sustained by all, vindicated by all, in every section of
the country.”

[Pg 86]
The argument of the case closed with Senator Cooper’s
speech and he was immediately followed by Justice Grier’s
charge to the jury. After the judge had made a general exposition
of the law, he paid a high tribute to the manner in
which the case had been conducted on both sides by counsel.
He framed the issues to be determined by the jury as two-fold,
involving first the question as to whether Hanway participated
in the offenses proved to have been committed, and,
secondly, if he did so, was his offence treason? In undertaking
to vindicate the reputation of the people of Pennsylvania
he left no doubt as to his own individual views upon
the subject of the anti-slavery agitation then prevailing, and
the following extracts from his charge, which were savagely
resented at the time of their utterance even by those who
were satisfied with his legal conclusion, are reported to have
been uttered in a shrill and piping voice, which added to the
intensity of their expression:

“With the exception of a few individuals of perverted intellect,
some small districts or neighborhoods whose moral
atmosphere has been tainted and poisoned, by male and female
vagrant lecturers and conventions, no party in politics,
no sect of religion, nor any respectable numbers or character
can be found within our borders who have viewed with approbation
or looked with any other than feelings of abhorrence
upon this disgraceful tragedy.

“It is not in this Hall of Independence, that meetings of
infuriated fanatics and unprincipled demagogues have been
held to counsel a bloody resistance to the laws of the land.
It is not in this
city
that conventions are held denouncing
the Constitution, the laws, and the Bible. It is not
here

that the pulpit has been desecrated by seditious exhortations,
teaching that theft is meritorious, murder excusable and
treason a virtue.

“The guilt of this foul murder rests not alone on the
deluded individuals who were its immediate perpetrators, but
[Pg 87]

the blood taints with even deeper dye the skirts of those who
promulgated doctrines subversive of all morality and all
government.”

He practically disposed, however, of the whole case and
took its further consideration from the jury by his announced
legal conclusion that the offense did not arise to that of
treason. His summing up on this branch of the subject practically
concluded all of the cases. It was as follows:

“Without desiring to invade the prerogatives of the jury
in judging the facts of this case, the Court feel bound to say,
that they do not think the transaction with which the prisoner
is charged with being connected, rises to the dignity of
treason or levying war. Not because the numbers or force
was insufficient. But 1st, For want of any proof of previous
conspiracy to make a
general and public resistance to any
law
of the United States. 2ndly, Because there is no evidence
that any person concerned in the transaction knew there
were such acts of Congress, as those with which they were
charged with conspiring to resist by force and arms, or had
any other intention than to protect one another from what
they termed kidnappers (by which slang term they probably
included not only actual kidnappers, but all masters and
owners seeking to recapture their slaves, and the officers and
agents assisting therein).

“The testimony of the prosecution shows that notice had
been given that certain fugitives were pursued; the riot,
insurrection, tumult, or whatever you may call it, was but a
sudden ‘conclamatio’ or running together, to prevent the
capture of certain of their friends or companions, or to rescue
them if arrested. Previous to this transaction, so far
as we are informed, no attempt had been made to arrest
fugitives in the neighborhood under the new act of Congress
by a public officer. Heretofore arrests had been made by
the owner in person, or his agent properly authorized, or by
an officer of the law. Individuals without any authority, but
[Pg 88]

incited by cupidity, and the hope of obtaining the reward
offered for the return of a fugitive, had heretofore undertaken
to seize them by force and violence, to invade the
sanctity of private dwellings at night, and insult the feelings
and prejudices of the people. It is not to be wondered at
that a people subject to such inroads, should consider odious
the perpetrators of such deeds and denominate them kidnappers—and
that the subjects of this treatment should
have been encouraged in resisting such aggressions, where
the rightful claimant could not be distinguished from the
odious kidnapper, or the fact be ascertained whether the
person seized, deported or stolen in this manner, was a free
man or a slave. But the existence of such feelings is no
evidence of a determination or conspiracy by the people to
publicly resist any legislation of Congress, or levy war
against the United States. That in consequence of such
excitement, such an outrage should have been committed, is
deeply to be deplored. That the persons engaged in it are
guilty of aggravated riot and murder cannot be denied. But
riot and murder are offences against the State Government.
It would be a dangerous precedent for the Court and jury
in this case to extend the crime of treason by construction to
doubtful cases.”

Having thus practically disposed of the case Mr. Justice
Grier praised the U. S. Attorney and the counsel for
Maryland for their zeal and ability, and intimated that the
duty of punishing “the perpetrators of this outrage” might
be transferred to the courts of Lancaster County, where the
activity and zeal of its law officers gave assurance that their
duty would be performed with all fidelity.

After the Judge’s charge the jury retired to deliberate at
the American House where they were lodged. They returned
in fifteen minutes and rendered a verdict of “Not
Guilty,” which announcement was received by the large
audience present “in a becoming manner”; the propriety of
[Pg 89]

their conduct is ascribed to the fact that the Judge’s charge
forecast the verdict.

John M. Read afterwards said some of the jurymen informed
him they were ready to acquit before the defense
opened.

On motion of District Attorney Ashmead, and in consideration
of the ordeal through which Castner Hanway had
just passed, four other bills against him for misdemeanor were
non prossed and he was discharged from custody and from all
further prosecution in the Federal Courts. The charge of
treason against Elijah Lewis was withdrawn, and he and
Samuel Williams were admitted to bail in $2,000 on four
other indictments pending against them. Hanway and Lewis
were brought to Lancaster on Friday afternoon, December
12th, and held by Associate Judge Vondersmith in $1,000
bail each, “to answer any charge that might be brought
against them.”

There was a later proceeding in which all the other bills
for treason were non prossed; and the proposed transfer of
the prisoners to Lancaster County was announced by the
District Attorney. Mr. Read brought to the attention of
the Court the subject of the United States paying the expenses
of the Hanway witnesses; for which there was a precedent
in Aaron Burr’s case. The subject was fully argued
December 19th; and Judge Kane filed an opinion refusing
to tax these costs against the Government and dismissing
Hanway’s petition.

Subsequently a petition to Congress, of which the following
is a copy, was circulated and signed by the defendants, but it
availed nothing:

“TO THE SENATE AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF THE UNITED STATES:

“The Petition of

Citizens
of the State of Penna., respectfully represents;
That Whereas in the month of September 1851 a Riot occurred in
the vicinity of the residence of your petitioners, generally known as the
[Pg 90]

‘Christiana Riot,’ and your petitioners repairing to the scene of
disturbance without any evil intentions, but to prevent violence, were
arrested by persons acting for the United States, and charged with the
highest crimes known to our Laws, and thrown into prison, where they
were detained many months and subjected to great expense in making
preparations to meet those charges, whereby their estates were wasted,
their minds harassed to the verge of insanity, and their health impaired,
till premature decrepitude is the consequence, after which they were
discharged without a hearing, thereby tacitly admitting the charges were
groundless, having incurred an expense of many thousand dollars.

“Your petitioners therefore pray you the honorable representatives
of the most magnanimous nation of the earth, to grant us some relief
from our embarrassments, and we will ever pray, etc.”

Thus ended the Treason Trials of 1851.

[Pg 91]

CHAPTER XI.

The Later Trials.

Legal Proceedings in Lancaster County—Prisoners Remanded to Local
Jurisdiction—President Fillmore’s Message—Attorney General
Brent’s Report—Final Disposition of the Cases in the Lancaster
County Court—“Sam” Williams Tried in Philadelphia and
Acquitted.

There was, however, a very considerable political and
legal aftermath to the proceedings at Philadelphia. The
intimation of so eminent an authority as a justice of the
Supreme Court of the United States to the effect that some
official duty devolved upon the Lancaster County authorities
could not be ignored. Accordingly District Attorney John
L. Thompson, who was in his day one of the leaders of the
Lancaster County Bar, framed bills of indictment to the
January Sessions 1852 against many of those who had been
arraigned for treason in Philadelphia. On Wednesday,
December 31, Marshal Roberts brought to the Lancaster
County prison from Philadelphia the following persons:
Alson Pernsley, Lewis Gales, Lewis Clarkson, Charles Hunter,
Nelson Carter, Thomas Butler, Henry Green, Collister
Wilson and George Williams,—all these were on the same
evening discharged by the District Attorney, as he deemed
the evidence insufficient to warrant their detention.

On the same evening George Williams was arrested as a
fugitive slave and taken to Penningtonville, where he took
advantage of the sleepiness of his captors and walked off, and
“straight was seen no more,” to the great chagrin of Henry
H. Kline, the officer who made the arrest, and of the owner
of the slave, who was asleep on the floor.

Saturday, January 3, 1852, Marshal Roberts brought to
[Pg 92]

Lancaster as prisoners John Morgan, Jacob Moore, Ezekiel
Thompson, Isaiah Clarkson, John Williams, John Jackson,
Benjamin Johnson, George Read, Daniel Caulsberry, Benjamin
Pendergrass, William Williams, John Holliday, William
Brown, Elijah Clark, William Brown, Jr., and Henry
Sims, as prisoners, and five colored persons as witnesses. The
witnesses were discharged on their recognizance to appear at
Court to testify.

Public and political interest in the Riot and the Trials
was not allowed to flag from inattention to the issues they
involved by those high in authority. From “the seats of
the mighty” deliverances were heard against what was interpreted
in some quarters as successful offensive resistance
to law. In his early message to Congress in December, 1851,
President Fillmore had these paragraphs, relating to the
events at Christiana.

“It is deeply to be regretted that in several instances
officers of the Government, in attempting to execute the law
for the return of fugitives from labor, have been openly resisted
and their efforts frustrated and defeated by lawless and
violent mobs: that in one case such resistance resulted in the
death of an estimable citizen, and in others serious injury
ensued to those officers and to individuals who were using
their endeavors to sustain the laws. Prosecutions have been
instituted against the alleged offenders so far as they could
be identified, and are still pending. I have regarded it as my
duty in these cases to give all aid legally in my power to the
enforcement of the laws, and I shall continue to do so wherever
and whenever their execution may be resisted.”

“Some objections have been urged against the details of
the act for the return of fugitives from labor, but it is worthy
of remark that the main opposition is aimed against the
Constitution itself, and proceeds from persons and classes of
persons many of whom declare their wish to see that Constitution
overturned. They avow their hostility to any law
[Pg 93]

which shall give full and practical effect to this requirement
of the Constitution. Fortunately the number of these persons
is comparatively small, and is believed to be daily diminishing;
but the issue which they present is one which
involves the supremacy and even the existence of the
Constitution.”

At an anti-slavery meeting, in Philadelphia, held on December
18, 1851, Joshua R. Giddings and Lucretia Mott were
speakers. The large audience grew tumultuously enthusiastic
over the presentation on the platform of Castner Hanway
and Elijah Lewis.

After the trial William H. Seward sent the following
Christmas greeting to District Attorney Ashmead, whose
son, Henry G. Ashmead, historian of Delaware County and
resident of Chester, cherishes the manuscript; Mr. Seward
was then in his first term as United States Senator, but had
already distinguished himself as an anti-slavery leader:

Washington
December 25, 1857

My Dear Sir
,

I thank you for the kind remembrance manifested by you sending me
a copy of your opening Argument on the late Trial for Treason. While
I cannot but rejoice in the result of that trial as a new assurance of the
security of Popular Liberty, I am not unable to appreciate the ability
with which you have maintained the untenable position which the Government
was made to assume. The argument is highly logical and eloquent,
and I cannot better manifest my good wishes for you and for the Country
than by expressing a hope that it may be the good fortune of the cause
of truth and justice hereafter to enlist you on their side.

I am, my dear Sir,

Very respectfully & truly

Your friend,

William H. Seward
.

John W. Ashmead Esq.,

District Attorney of the United States

Philadelphia.

In his message to the General Assembly of Maryland at the
following January Session, Governor Lowe referred at length
[Pg 94]

to the Gorsuch tragedy. Despite the assurances of the Federal
administration through Secretary of State Daniel Webster,
that all the energies of the law would be exerted to bring
the offenders to justice, Maryland had felt constrained to
actively participate in the prosecution. “The blood of a
Marylander,” he declared, “cried out from the earth; whilst
the Genius of the Union called aloud for a vindication of
outraged laws.” Otherwise “the flame of excitement would
spread from the hills of Maryland to the savannahs of the
extreme South, until every Southern State would unite in
one common feeling of horror and indignation.” Senator
Cooper had been retained by him; and despite the high ability
and signal service of both him and Maryland’s Attorney General,
there had been a gross miscarriage of justice. With a
fervor of rhetoric that was more common then in State papers
than it is now, he declared: “Shall domestic feuds destroy
our power, when the eyes of all nations are turned to the
star of our empire, as the harbinger of their deliverance?
Shall Kossuth blast Hungary with the breath of our discord?
Shall O’Brien, in his lonely exile, see the hope of Ireland
pass down the horizon, with the western sun? May so incalculable
a calamity be spared to the nations of the earth.
And yet, when American blood is made to flow upon
American soil, as a grateful libation to American fanaticism;
when whole communities stand listlessly by, and a prostituted
press and venal politicians are found, in the open day,
to glory in the human sacrifice; when the Law proclaims
its own weakness from the Bench, and Treason stalks unpunished,
through the halls of justice; the Nations can judge
of the probable remoteness of that calamity.”

The official report of his Attorney General justified the
Governor in becoming somewhat heated over the outcome at
Philadelphia. Mr. Brent had suffered not only some personal
irritation over his position there, but a keen professional
disappointment in his failure to convict. The blame
[Pg 95]

for this he distributed very generally among the people of the
North who sympathized with resistance to the Fugitive Slave
Law; the partisan character of the jury panel; the partiality
of the daily press reports; the sympathy of the spectators;
the treachery of the prison officials; the bribery of Scott, the
government’s witnesses; and egregious errors of law committed
by Judge Grier. Even the amiable Marshal did not
escape criticism, as evinced by this paragraph:

“I brought to the attention of the court, the fact stated
in the ‘Pennsylvania Freeman,’ that the Marshal (Mr.
Roberts) had actually dined with the prisoners, or some of
them, during the trial, on Thanksgiving day, and when I was
about to read the article from the paper I was stopped by his
Honor, Judge Grier, who in behalf of the Marshal, denied the
truth of the statement that he had so dined; but unfortunately
for the Judge’s interposition, the Marshal immediately afterwards
made his own explanation, and admitted that he had
not only assisted at the dinner, ‘but had set down and partaken
sparingly’ of the Thanksgiving dinner, with the white
prisoners. I cannot but consider such conduct as highly unbecoming
that officer from whom, next to the Judge, we had
a right to expect impartiality and a due regard for decorum.”

It is only fair to all concerned to say that the Attorney
General’s indignation was not taken very seriously. Attorney
Jackson’s history of the case corrects some of his exaggerations,
and especially points out that all of Mr. Brent’s colleagues
exculpated Marshal Roberts from any misconduct.
Judge Kane’s own son, was known to have extended various
kindnesses and courtesies to the prisoners.

Mr. Brent’s complaint on this score seems almost ridiculous
when one reads the full particulars of the affair, as published
in the Philadelphia Freeman of December 4, 1851. That
newspaper says:

“It affords us great pleasure to state, that the Christiana
prisoners were not wholly forgotten on Thursday last in the
[Pg 96]

distribution of the good things pertaining to Thanksgiving.
Thomas L. Kane, Esq. (son of the Judge), sent to the prison
for their use six superior turkeys, two of them extra size,
together with a pound cake, weighing 16 pounds. The turkeys
were cooked with appropriate fixings, by order of Mr.
Freed, the Superintendent, in the prison kitchen, by a female
prisoner detached for the purpose. The dinner for the white
prisoners, Messrs. Hanway, Lewis and Scarlet, was served in
appropriate style in the room of Mr. Morrison, one of the
keepers. The U. S. Marshal, A. E. Roberts, Esq., several of
the keepers and Mr. Hawes, one of the prison officers, dined
with the prisoners as their guests. Mayor Gilpin coming in,
accepted an invitation to test the quality of the pound cake,
Mrs. Martha Hanway who has the honor to be the wife of the
‘traitor’ of that name, and who has spent most of her time
with her husband since his incarceration, served each of the
27 colored ‘traitors’ with a plate of turkey, potatoes, pound
cake, &c., and the supply not being exhausted, all the prisoners
on the same corridor were similarly supplied.

“Who will stand best with posterity—the father who prostitutes
his powers as a judge to procure the conviction of peaceable
citizens as traitors for refusing to aid in the capture of
fugitive slaves, or the son who ministered to the wants of those
citizens while incarcerated in a loathsome prison? Need we
answer the question?”

The Maryland witnesses do not appear to have had as
cheery a Thanksgiving as the prisoners. Dickinson Gorsuch’s
diary had this entry:

“
Thursday, Nov. 27.
Thanksgiving Day. This has been a great
holiday here; there was no court today. We went to Mr. Ashmead’s
office and stayed awhile. John Bacon went home after the clothes I wore
when I was shot.”

During their imprisonment the colored people and their
families were largely supported by outside friends and
sympathizers; and many an item such as this, recorded in the
[Pg 97]

cash book of B. L. Wood (father of Mrs. David W. Jackson),
is set down to the credit of sympathetic friends:

10th mo. 8, 1851. Dr. 1 pair of pants and 1 shirt given to Elijah Clark
in Moyamensing; also sent his wife qr. middlings.

In another respect the official complaints of Maryland’s
Governor and Attorney General against Pennsylvania justice
call for correction at even this late day. Both aver that “the
murder” of Kennedy, a slave owner, at Carlisle, killed in
resistance of the fugitive slave law, went utterly unpunished:
The facts are that in that offense the rioters and rescuers
were led by John Clellans and he and thirty-six others were
indicted. Besides Clellans twelve of the accused were convicted
of riot and of riotously rescuing fugitive slaves from
the lawful custody of their owners. Judge Hepburn sentenced
them to solitary confinement at labor in the Eastern
Penitentiary for three years. Charles Gibbons represented
them on an appeal to the Supreme Court; and Deputy Attorney
General (District Attorney) Bonham for the Commonwealth,
argued before that tribunal that Pennsylvania
followed the law of England, which upon conviction for riot
authorized fine, imprisonment and the pillory, and therefore
sentence to the penitentiary was lawful. Justice Burnside
delivering the opinion of the Supreme Court, declared “it
was an aggravated case of riot”; but that as Pennsylvania
had adopted the English common law, the imprisonment must
be in the county jail, and the final judgment of the court was
that as the prisoners had been confined in the Eastern Penitentiary
about three-fourths of a year, “we deem this as
severe a punishment as if they had been confined in the county
jail, where they legitimately should have been sent, for two
years.” (Clellans
vs.
Com. 8 Barr. 223.)

Meantime the friends of Hanway, Lewis and others, incensed
at the continued prosecutions in Lancaster county,
assumed the aggressive.

[Pg 98]
They procured the indictment to the January Sessions,
1852, No. 38, in Lancaster County, of Deputy Marshal
Henry H. Kline, for perjury. It was laid in this indictment
that he had sworn falsely at the hearing before Alderman
Reigart, wherein he averred that he had shown his warrant
to Hanway, asked him and Lewis to spare his men, that they
defied the warrant and encouraged the rioters and in various
other particulars. Upon this bill of indictment appeared the
names of a large number of witnesses, and Kline was held
in $1,000 bail before Charles G. Freeman, alderman of Philadelphia,
to answer at the Lancaster Court.

It appears from the subsequent history of the case that all
parties involved were by this time willing to have “somebody
help them to let go”; and accordingly at the January Sessions,
Joseph McClure, of Bart township, being foreman of
the jury, this bill against Kline for perjury, being No. 38,
was ignored, and also the following, indictments all to the
same sessions and for Riot: No. 57, William Brown; No. 58,
Wm. Williams; No. 59, Henry Green; No. 60, William
Brown, Jr.; No. 61, Benjamin Johnson; No. 63, Daniel
Caulsberry; No. 64, George Wells; No. 65, George Williams;
No. 66, Alson Pernsley; No. 67, Lewis Gales; No. 68,
Lewis Clarkson; No. 69, Chas. Hunter; No. 70, Nelson
Carter; No. 71, Jacob Woods, a brother of Peter Woods; No.
72, Peter Woods; No. 73, Israel Clarkson; No. 74, John
Williams; No. 75, John Jackson; No. 76, Castner Hanway;
No. 77, Elijah Lewis; No. 78, John Morgan; No. 81, Benjamin
Pendergrass; No. 82, John Holliday; No. 83, Thomas
Butler; No. 84, Elijah Clark; No. 85, Collister Wilson.

With this termination of the cases in the local courts all
prosecutions were finally ended except that of Samuel Williams,
in the United States District Court at Philadelphia.
He was there charged with interfering with the execution of
warrants for the arrest of Noah Buley and Joshua Hammond,
runaway slaves. His case was first called for trial on
[Pg 99]

January 5, and continued until January 12. Mr. Ashmead
and Messrs. Ludlow appeared for the prosecution, and R. P.
Kane, W. S. Pierce and David Paul Brown for the defense.
The following jury was empanelled to try his case; the last
name on the list will be recognized as that of an estimable
citizen of Lancaster County:

Pratt Roberts, Chester County; Thomas Vaughan, Philadelphia;
Henry McMahen, Philadelphia; Patrick McBride,
Philadelphia; Michael Keenan, Philadelphia; Fredk. Boley,
Sr., Philadelphia; Joseph Dowden, Chester County; Samuel
Culp, Germantown; Minshall Painter, Delaware County;
Joseph Thornton, Philadelphia; Francis Parker, Chester
County; Peter McConomy, Lancaster.

Kline was the principal witness on this trial, and his testimony
was practically a repetition of what he had sworn to in
the Hanway case. The trial judge fell ill during the progress
of the case and it was continued the third time and resumed
on February 2, argued to the jury on February 3, and, on
February 4, a verdict of “not guilty” was rendered.

This closes the record of all judicial proceedings arising
out of the Christiana Riot.

[Pg 100]

CHAPTER XII.

Parker’s Own Story.

The Leader of the Defenders Tells his Story of what Occurred at “the
Riot”—The Author Gives Reasons why He takes the Narrative with
Some Allowance—A Valuable Historical Contribution.

I deem it entirely fair and proper at this stage of the
narrative to republish entire William Parker’s own account
of what took place at his house during “the Riot.” It is
reproduced in the assurance that each reader may—as he,
and especially she, will—give it such credibility as the
circumstances may command for it. It is fit that it be presented
with certain qualifications to the general reader and to
the increasing number who may peruse this history in the
spirit in which it is written, viz., one of purely historic
inquiry.

The
Atlantic Monthly
(Boston), for February, 1866,
published the first part of what is entitled “The Freedman’s
Story,” introduced by one who signed himself “E. K.,” and
said he was asked to revise it for publication “or weave its
facts into a story which would show the fitness of the
Southern black for the right of suffrage.” The editor evades
the natural inquiry whether the text is wholly Parker’s or
partially his own; but it is printed as that of a freedman
or ex-slave and as evidence “of the manhood of his race to
that impartial grand-jury, the American people.”

Of course it cannot be unreservedly accepted for the purpose
for which it was offered, that is: to prove the fitness of
the Southern freedman for suffrage; for it is not the narrative
of a man who was suddenly freed and enfranchised by
the circumstances of war, but of one who became a fugitive
slave many years earlier and had the advantage of Northern
life and Canadian experience in the intervening period.

[Pg 101]
But it is of very decided value to this attempted impartial
and impersonal history, because it purports to tell the story
of the Riot as the man most responsible for it and most conspicuous
in it saw and heard its incidents; and, because he
never had an opportunity to tell it under the restraints of a
judicial examination or the obligations of an oath. It must
be taken as his voluntary testimony, when he had no hopes
of reward or fear of punishment to incite or restrain him.

The earlier part of his life’s story has been already abstracted,
so far as it has any importance to this history. It
leaves no room for doubt that he was a heroic and a desperate
man; that he was instigated by ideas of personal liberty for
himself and others, without regard to law; and that both
offensively and defensively he was “enlisted for the war”
to the death against all and every attempt to execute the
Fugitive Slave Law.

Whether he is accurate in his statement of what occurred
on the day of “the Riot,” each reader must determine for
himself or herself. For myself, individually, I doubt the
literal truth of parts of his narration, while I concede that
in the main it is true and it certainly throws more illumination
on the actual occurrences than the testimony of any
other single witness.

I detect a note of braggadocio through all Parker’s narrative,
which slightly discounts its truthfulness. His defiance
of “all United States”; his admitted attempts to deceive
Gorsuch as to the presence of his slaves on the premises;
and his avowed purpose to shoot Gorsuch influence my judgment.
Such considerations might not have weight with those
who believe a man may be a good citizen who violates and
defies a bad law. The literary style of “The Freedman’s
Story” leaves little room for doubt that his manuscript was
edited by some one with a purpose other than strictly
historical.

On the other hand, no other person was in so favorable a
[Pg 102]

position as Parker to tell the actual story of the Riot, if he
saw fit to do so, and when this version was published Parker
had nothing to gain or lose from telling the truth, but the
zeal of his editor to exalt “the freedman” may have tinctured
the story. That he could remember its details so exactly
as to verbally reproduce the many conversations in the

Atlantic
fifteen years later, is more than doubtful—it is
impossible; and his pretense to do so discounts the attempt.
In many respects the narration accords with the testimony
of other eye-witnesses and it is not out of harmony in the
main with the evidence produced on the trial. While it
ascribes language to Mr. Gorsuch that likely he did not use,
and may put into his hands weapons that he did not carry,
Parker’s story certainly gives the Gorsuches, father and son,
due credit for valor; and it makes some of their allies scarcely
more timid than the trial disclosed them to have been.

Howbeit, the story told by Parker is an essential part of
the history of the case and it is here reprinted out of fairness
to all parties so far as it relates to the Riot and events
immediately preceding it.

William Parker’s Story.

The
Atlantic Monthly
article, Part II, March, 1866, to
which attention has been given, presupposes a previous account
of Parker’s early life, the escape of the Gorsuch slaves,
the warrants for their recapture, the departure of Deputy
Marshal Kline to execute them and “Sam Williams’s” mission
to Lancaster County to warn them and their friends of
the impending raid upon them, substantially as they have
been told already. Parker then proceeds:

The information brought by Mr. Williams spread through
the vicinity like a fire in the prairies; and when I went
home from my work in the evening, I found Pinckney (whom
I should have said before was my brother-in-law), Abraham
Johnson, Samuel Thompson and Joshua Kite at my
[Pg 103]

house, all of them excited about the rumor. I laughed at
them, and said it was all talk. This was the 10th of September,
1851. They stopped for the night with us, and we
went to bed as usual. Before daylight, Joshua Kite rose,
and started for his home. Directly, he ran back to the
house, burst open the door, crying, “O William! kidnappers!
kidnappers!”

He said that, when he was just beyond the yard, two men
crossed before him, as if to stop him, and others came up on
either side. As he said this, they had reached the door.
Joshua ran up stairs (we slept up stairs), and they followed
him; but I met them at the landing, and asked, “Who
are you?”

The leader, Kline, replied, “I am the United States
Marshal.”

I then told him to take another step and I would break his
neck.

He again said, “I am the United States Marshal.”

I told him I did not care for him nor the United States.
At that he turned and went down stairs.

Pinckney said, as he turned to go down,—“Where is the
use in fighting? They will take us.”

Kline heard him, and said, “Yes, give up, for we can and
will take you anyhow.”

I told them all not to be afraid, nor to give up to any
slaveholder, but to fight until death.

“Yes,” said Kline, “I have heard many a negro talk as
big as you, and then have taken him; and I’ll take you.”

“You have not taken me yet,” I replied; “and if you
undertake it you will have your name recorded in history for
this day’s work.”

Mr. Gorsuch then spoke, and said,—“Come, Mr. Kline,
let’s go up stairs and take them. We
can
take them. Come,
follow me. I’ll go up and get my property. What’s in the
[Pg 104]

way? The law is in my favor, and the people are in my
favor.”

At that he began to ascend the stair; but I said to him,—“See
here, old man, you can come up, but you can’t go down
again. Once up here, you are mine.”

Kline then said—“Stop, Mr. Gorsuch. I will read the
warrant, and then, I think, they will give up.”

He then read the warrant, and said,—“Now, you see, we
are commanded to take you, dead or alive; so you may as
well give up at once.”

“Go up, Mr. Kline,” then said Gorsuch, “you are the
Marshal.”

Kline started, and when a little way up said, “I am
coming.”

I said, “Well, come on.”

But he was too cowardly to show his face. He went down
again and said,—“You had better give up without any more
fuss, for we are bound to take you anyhow. I told you before
that I was the United States Marshal, yet you will not give
up. I’ll not trouble the slaves. I will take you and make you
pay for all.”

“Well,” I answered, “take me and make me pay for all.
I’ll pay for all.”

Mr. Gorsuch then said, “You have my property.”

To which I replied,—“Go in the room down there, and
see if there is anything there belonging to you. There are
beds and a bureau, chairs, and other things. Then go out to
the barn; there you will find a cow and some hogs. See if
any of them are yours.”

He said,—“They are not mine; I want my men. They
are here, and I am bound to have them.”

Thus we parleyed for a time, all because of the pusillanimity
of the Marshal, when he, at last, said,—“I am tired
waiting on you; I see you are not going to give up. Go to the
[Pg 105]

barn and fetch some straw,” said he to one of his men. “I
will set the house on fire, and burn them up.”

“Burn us up and welcome,” said I. “None but a coward
would say the like. You can burn us, but you can’t take us;
before I give up, you will see my ashes scattered on the earth.”

By this time day had begun to dawn; and then my wife
came to me and asked if she should blow the horn, to bring
friends to our assistance. I assented, and she went to the
garret for the purpose. When the horn sounded from the
garret window, one of the ruffians asked the others what it
meant; and Kline said to me, “What do you mean by blowing
that horn?”

I did not answer. It was a custom with us, when a horn
was blown at an unusual hour, to proceed to the spot promptly
to see what was the matter. Kline ordered his men to shoot
any one they saw blowing the horn. There was a peach-tree
at that end of the house. Up it two of the men climbed; and
when my wife went a second time to the window, they fired
as soon as they heard the blast, but missed their aim. My
wife then went down on her knees, and, drawing her head and
body below the range of the window, the horn resting on the
sill, blew blast after blast, while the shots poured thick and
fast around her. They must have fired ten or twelve times.
The house was of stone, and the windows were deep, which
alone preserved her life.

They were evidently disconcerted by the blowing of the
horn. Gorsuch said again, “I want my property, and I will
have it.”

“Old man,” said I, “you look as if you belonged to some
persuasion.”

“Never mind,” he answered, “what persuasion I belong
to; I want my property.”

While I was leaning out of the window, Kline fired a pistol
at me, but the shot went too high; the ball broke the glass
just above my head. I was talking to Gorsuch at the time.
[Pg 106]

I seized a gun and aimed it at Gorsuch’s breast, for he evidently
had instigated Kline to fire; but Pinckney caught my
arm and said, “Don’t shoot.” The gun went off, just grazing
Gorsuch’s shoulder. Another conversation then ensued between
Gorsuch, Kline, and myself, when another one of the
party fired at me but missed. Dickinson Gorsuch, I then
saw, was preparing to shoot; and I told him if he missed, I
would show him where shooting first came from.

I asked them to consider what they would have done, had
they been in our position. “I know you want to kill us,” I
said, “for you have shot at us time and again. We have only
fired twice, although we have guns and ammunition, and
could kill you all if we would, but we do not want to shed
blood.”

“If you do not shoot any more,” then said Kline, “I will
stop my men from firing.”

They then ceased for a time. This was about sunrise.

Mr. Gorsuch now said,—“Give up and let me have my
property. Hear what the Marshal says; the Marshal is your
friend. He advises you to give up without more fuss, for my
property I will have.”

I denied that I had his property when he replied, “You
have my men.”

“Am I your man?” I asked.

“No.”

I then called Pinckney forward.

“Is that your man?”

“No.”

Abraham Johnson I called next, but Gorsuch said he was
not his man.

The only plan left was to call both Pinckney and Johnson
again; for had I called the others, he would have recognized
them, for they were his slaves.

Abraham Johnson said, “Does such a shrivelled up old
[Pg 107]

slaveholder as you own such a nice, genteel young man as
I am?”

At this Gorsuch took offence, and charged me with dictating
his language. I then told him there were but five of us,
which he denied, and still insisted that I had his property.
One of the party then attacked the Abolitionists, affirming
that, although they declared there could not be property in
man, the Bible was conclusive authority in favor of property
in human flesh.

“Yes,” said Gorsuch, “does not the Bible say, ‘Servants,
obey your masters’?”

I said that it did, but the same Bible said, “Give unto
your servants that which is just and equal.”

At this stage of the proceedings, we went into a mutual
Scripture inquiry, and bandied views in the manner of garrulous
old wives.

When I spoke of duty to servants, Gorsuch said, “Do you
know that?”

“Where,” I asked, “do you see it in Scripture that a man
should traffic in his brother’s blood?”

“Do you call a nigger my brother?” said Gorsuch.

“Yes,” said I.

“William,” said Samuel Thompson, “he has been a class-leader.”

When Gorsuch heard that, he hung his head, but said nothing.
We then all joined in singing,—

“Leader, what do you say

About the judgment day?

I will die on the field of battle,

Die on the field of battle,

With glory in my soul.”

Then we all began to shout, singing meantime, and
shouted for a long while. Gorsuch, who was standing head
bowed, said “What are you doing now?”

Samuel Thompson replied, “Preaching a sinner’s funeral
sermon.”

[Pg 108]
“You had better give up, and come down.”

I then said to Gorsuch,—“‘If a brother see a sword coming,
and he warn not his brother, then the brother’s blood
is required at his hands; but if the brother see the sword
coming, and warn his brother, and his brother flee not, then
his brother’s blood is required at his own hand.’ I see the
sword coming, and, old man, I warn you to flee; if you flee
not, your blood be upon your own hand.”

It was now about seven o’clock.

“You had better give up,” said old Mr. Gorsuch, after
another while, “and come down, for I have come a long way
this morning, and want my breakfast; for my property I will
have, or I’ll breakfast in hell. I will go up and get it.”

He then started up stairs, and came far enough to see
us all plainly. We were just about to fire upon him, when
Dickinson Gorsuch, who was standing on the old oven, before
the door, and could see into the upstairs room through the
window, jumped down and caught his father, saying,—“O
father, do come down! do come down! They have guns,
swords, and all kinds of weapons! They’ll kill you! Do
come down!”

The old man turned and left. When down with him,
young Gorsuch could scarce draw breath, and the father
looked more like a dead than a living man, so frightened
were they at their supposed danger. The old man stood some
time without saying anything; at last he said, as if soliloquizing,
“I want my property, and I will have it.”

Kline broke forth, “If you don’t give up by fair means,
you will have to by foul.”

I told him we would not surrender on any conditions.

Young Gorsuch then said,—“Don’t ask them to give up,—
make

them do it. We have money, and can call men to
take them. What is it that money won’t buy?”

Then said Kline,—“I am getting tired waiting on you;
I see you are not going to give up.”

[Pg 109]
He then wrote a note and handed it to Joshua Gorsuch,
saying at the same time,—“Take it, and bring a hundred
men from Lancaster.”

As he started, I said,—“See here! When you go to
Lancaster, don’t bring a hundred men,—bring five hundred.
It will take all the men in Lancaster to change our purpose or
take us alive.”

He stopped to confer with Kline, when Pinckney said,
“We had better give up.”

“You are getting afraid,” said I.

“Yes,” said Kline, “give up like men. The rest would
give up if it were not for you.”

“I am not afraid,” said Pinckney; “but where is the
sense in fighting against so many men, and only five of us?”

The whites, at this time, were coming from all quarters,
and Kline was enrolling them as fast as they came. Their
numbers alarmed Pinckney, and I told him to go and sit
down; but he said, “No, I will go down stairs.”

I told him, if he attempted it, I should be compelled to
blow out his brains. “Don’t believe that any living man can
take you,” I said. “Don’t give up to any slaveholder.”

To Abraham Johnson, who was near me, I then turned.
He declared he was not afraid. “I will fight till I die,” he
said.

At this time, Hannah, Pinckney’s wife, had become impatient
of our persistent course; and my wife, who brought
me her message urging us to surrender, seized a corn-cutter,
and declared she would cut off the head of the first one who
should attempt to give up.

Another one of Gorsuch’s slaves was coming along the high-road
at this time, and I beckoned to him to go around. Pinckney
saw him, and soon became more inspired. Elijah Lewis,
a Quaker, also came along about this time: I beckoned to him,
likewise; but he came straight on, and was met by Kline, who
ordered him to assist him. Lewis asked for his authority,
[Pg 110]

and Kline handed him the warrant. While Lewis was reading,
Castner Hanway came up, and Lewis handed the warrant
to him. Lewis asked Kline what Parker said.

Kline replied, “He won’t give up.”

Then Lewis and Hanway both said to the Marshal,—“If
Parker says they will not give up, you had better let them
alone, for he will kill some of you. We are not going to risk
our lives”—and they turned to go away.

While they were talking, I came down and stood in the
doorway, my men following behind.

Old Mr. Gorsuch said, when I appeared, “They’ll come
out, and get away!” and he came back to the gate.

I then said to him,—“You said you could and would take
us. Now you have the chance.”

They were a cowardly-looking set of men.

Mr. Gorsuch said, “You can’t come out here.”

“Why?” said I. “This is my place. I pay rent for it.
I’ll let you see if I can’t come out.”

“I don’t care if you do pay rent for it,” said he. “If you
come out, I will give you the contents of these”—presenting,
at the same time, two revolvers, one in each hand.

I said, “Old man, if you don’t go away, I will break your
neck.”

I then walked up to where he stood his arms resting on the
gate, trembling as if afflicted with palsy, and laid my hand
on his shoulder, saying, “I have seen pistols before today.”
Kline now came running up, and entreated Gorsuch to come
away.

“No,” said the latter, “I will have my property, or go to
hell.”

“What do you intend to do?” said Kline to me.

“I intend to fight,” said I. “I intend to try your
strength.”

“If you will withdraw your men,” he replied, “I will withdraw
mine.”

[Pg 111]
I told him it was too late. “You would not withdraw
when you had the chance,—you shall not now.”

Kline then went back to Hanway and Lewis. Gorsuch
made a signal to his men, and they all fell into line. I followed
his example as well as I could; but as we were not more
than ten paces apart, it was difficult to do so. At this time
we numbered but ten, while there were between thirty and
forty of the white men.

While I was talking to Gorsuch, his son said, “Father,
will you take all this from a nigger?”

I answered him by saying that I respected old age; but
that, if he would repeat that, I should knock his teeth down
his throat. At this he fired upon me, and I ran up to him
and knocked the pistol out of his hand, when he let the other
one fall and ran in the field.

My brother-in-law, who was standing near, then said, “I
can stop him”—and with his double-barrel gun he fired.

Young Gorsuch fell, but rose and ran on again. Pinckney
fired a second time and again Gorsuch fell, but was soon up
again and, running into the cornfield, lay down in the
fence corner.

I returned to my men, and found Samuel Thompson talking
to old Mr. Gorsuch, his master. They were both angry.

“Old man, you had better go home to Maryland,” said
Samuel.

“You had better give up, and come home with me,” said
the old man.

Thompson took Pinckney’s gun from him, struck Gorsuch,
and brought him to his knees. Gorsuch rose and signalled
to his men. Thompson then knocked him down again,
and he again rose. At this time all the white men opened
fire, and we rushed upon them; when they turned, threw
down their guns and ran away. We, being closely engaged,
clubbed our rifles. We were too closely pressed to fire, but
we found a good deal could be done with empty guns.

[Pg 112]
Old Mr. Gorsuch was the bravest of his party; he held on
to his pistols until the last, while all the others threw away
their weapons. I saw as many as three at a time fighting with
him. Sometimes he was on his knees, then on his back, and
again his feet would be where his head should be. He was a
fine soldier and a brave man. Whenever he saw the least
opportunity, he would take aim. While in close quarters
with the whites, we could load and fire but two or three
times. Our guns got bent and out of order. So damaged did
they become, that we could shoot with but two or three of
them. Samuel Thompson bent his gun on old Mr. Gorsuch so
badly, that it was of no use to us.

When the white men ran, they scattered. I ran after
Nathan Nelson, but could not catch him. I never saw a man
run faster. Returning, I saw Joshua Gorsuch coming, and
Pinckney behind him. I reminded him that he would like
“to take hold of a nigger,” told him that now was his
“chance,” and struck him a blow on the side of the head,
which stopped him. Pinckney came up behind, and gave
him a blow which brought him to the ground; as the others
passed, they gave him a kick or jumped upon him, until
the blood oozed out at his ears.

Nicholas Hutchings and Nathan Nelson of Baltimore
County, Maryland, could outrun any men I ever saw. They
and Kline were not brave, like the Gorsuches. Could our
men have got them, they would have been satisfied.

One of our men ran after Dr. Pierce, as he richly deserved
attention; but Pierce caught up with Castner Hanway, who
rode between the fugitive and the Doctor, to shield him
and some others. Hanway was told to get out of the way,
or he would forfeit his life; he went aside quickly, and the
man fired at the Marylander, but missed him,—he was too
far off. I do not know whether he was wounded or not; but
I do know that, if it had not been for Hanway, he would
have been killed.

[Pg 113]
Having driven the slavocrats off in every direction, our
party now turned towards their several homes. Some of us,
however, went back to my house, where we found several
of the neighbors.

The scene at the house beggars description. Old Mr. Gorsuch
was lying in the yard in a pool of blood, and confusion
reigned both inside and outside of the house.

Levi Pownall said to me, “The weather is so hot and the
flies are so bad, will you give me a sheet to put over the
corpse?”

In reply, I gave him permission to get anything he
needed from the house.

“Dickinson Gorsuch is lying in the fence-corner, and I
believe he is dying. Give me something for him to drink,”
said Pownall, who seemed to be acting the part of the Good
Samaritan.

When he returned from ministering to Dickinson, he told
me he could not live.

The riot, so called, was now entirely ended. The elder
Gorsuch was dead; his son and nephew were both wounded,
and I have reason to believe others were,—how many, it
would be difficult to say. Of our party, only two were wounded.
One received a ball in his hand, near the wrist; but it only
entered the skin, and he pushed it out with his thumb. Another
received a ball in the fleshy part of his thigh, which
had to be extracted; but neither of them were sick or crippled
by the wounds. When young Gorsuch fired at me in the
early part of the battle, both balls passed through my hat,
cutting off my hair close to the skin, but they drew no blood.
The marks were not more than an inch apart.

A story was afterwards circulated that Mr. Gorsuch shot
his own slave, and in retaliation his slave shot him; but it
was without foundation. His slave struck him the first and
second blows; then three or four sprang upon him, and, when
he became helpless, left him to pursue others.
The women
[Pg 114]

put an end to him.
His slaves, so far from meeting death
at his hands, are all still living.

After the fight, my wife was obliged to secrete herself,
leaving the children in care of her mother, and to the charities
of our neighbors. I was questioned by my friends as
to what I should do, as they were looking for officers to arrest
me. I determined not to be taken alive, and told them so;
but, thinking advice as to our future course necessary, went
to see some old friends and consult about it. Their advice
was to leave, as, were we captured and imprisoned, they
could not foresee the result. Acting upon this hint, we set out
for home, when we met some female friends, who told us
that forty or fifty armed men were at my house, looking for
me, and that we had better stay away from the place, if
we did not want to be taken. Abraham Johnson and Pinckney
hereupon halted, to agree upon the best course, while I
turned around and went another way.

Before setting out on my long journey northward, I determined
to have an interview with my family, if possible,
and to that end changed my course. As we went along the
road to where I found them, we met men in companies of
three and four, who had been drawn together by the excitement.
On one occasion, we met ten or twelve together. They
all left the road, and climbed over the fences into fields to
let us pass; and then after we had passed, turned, and
looked after us as far as they could see. Had we been
carrying destruction to all human kind, they could not
have acted more absurdly. We went to a friend’s house
and stayed for the rest of the day, and until nine o’clock that
night when we set out for Canada.

The great trial now was to leave my wife and family. Uncertain
as to the result of the journey, I felt I would rather
die than be separated from them. It had to be done, however;
and we went forth with heavy hearts, outcasts for
the sake of liberty. When we had walked as far as Christiana,
[Pg 115]

we saw a large crowd, late as it was, to some of whom,
at least, I must have been known, as we heard distinctly,
“A’n’t that Parker?”

“Yes,” was answered, “that’s Parker.”

Kline was called for, and he, with some nine or ten more,
followed after. We stopped, and then they stopped. One
said to his comrades, “Go on,—that’s him.” And another
replied, “You go.” So they contended for a time who should
come to us. At last they went back. I was sorry to see
them go back, for I wanted to meet Kline and end the day’s
transactions.

We went on unmolested to Penningtonville; and, in consequence
of the excitement, thought best to continue on to
Parkesburg. Nothing worth mention occurred for a time.
We proceeded to Downingtown, and thence six miles beyond,
to the house of a friend. We stopped with him on
Saturday night, and on the evening of the 14th went fifteen
miles farther. Here I learned from a preacher, directly
from the city, that the excitement in Philadelphia was too
great for us to risk our safety by going there. Another man
present advised us to go to Norristown.

At Norristown we rested a day. The friends gave us ten
dollars, and sent us in a vehicle to Quakertown. Our driver,
being partly intoxicated, set us down at the wrong place,
which obliged us to stay out all night. At eleven o’clock the
next day we got to Quakertown. We had gone about six
miles out of the way, and had to go directly across the
country. We rested the 16th, and set out in the evening
for Friendsville.

A friend piloted us some distance, and we travelled until
we became very tired, when we went to bed under a haystack.
On the 17th, we took breakfast at an inn. We passed a small
village, and asked a man whom we met with a dearborn, what
would be his charge to Windgap. “One dollar and fifty
[Pg 116]

cents,” was the ready answer. So in we got, and rode to that
place.

As we wanted to make some inquiries when we struck the
north and south road, I went into the postoffice, and asked for
a letter for John Thomas, which of course I did not get. The
postmaster scrutinized us closely,—more so, indeed, than
any one had done on the Blue Mountains,—but informed us
that Friendsville was between forty and fifty miles away.
After going about nine miles, we stopped in the evening of the
18th at an inn, got supper, were politely served, and had an
excellent night’s rest. On the next day we set out for Tannersville,
hiring a conveyance for twenty-two miles of the
way. We had no further difficulty on the entire road to
Rochester,—more than five hundred miles by the route we
travelled.

Some amusing incidents occurred, however, which it may
be well to relate in this connection. The next morning, after
stopping at the tavern, we took the cars and rode to Homerville,
where, after waiting an hour, as our landlord of the
night previous had directed us, we took stage. Being the first
applicants for tickets, we secured inside seats, and, from the
number of us, we took up all of the places inside; but, another
traveller coming, I tendered him mine, and rode with the
driver. The passenger thanked me; but the driver, a churl,
and the most prejudiced person I ever came in contact with,
would never wait after a stop until I could get on, but would
drive away, and leave me to swing, climb, or cling on to the
stage as best I could. Our traveller, at last noticing his behavior,
told him promptly not to be so fast, but let all passengers
get on, which had the effect to restrain him a little.

At Big Eddy we took the cars. Directly opposite me sat a
gentleman, who, on learning that I was for Rochester, said he
was going there too, and afterwards proved an agreeable travelling
companion.

A newsboy came in with papers, some of which the passengers
[Pg 117]

bought. Upon opening them, they read of the fight at
Christiana.

“O, see here!” said my neighbor; “great excitement at
Christiana; a—a statesman killed, and his son and nephew
badly wounded.”

After reading, the passengers began to exchange opinions
on the case. Some said they would like to catch Parker, and
get the thousand dollars reward offered by the State; but the
man opposite to me said, “Parker must be a powerful man.”

I thought to myself, “If you could tell what I can, you
could judge about that.”

Pinckney and Johnson became alarmed, and wanted to
leave the cars at the next stopping-place; but I told them there
was no danger. I then asked particularly about Christiana,
where it was, on what railroad, and other questions, to all of
which I received correct replies. One of the men became so
much attached to me, that, when we would go to an eating-saloon,
he would pay for both. At Jefferson we thought of
leaving the cars, and taking the boat; but they told us to keep
on the cars, and we would get to Rochester by nine o’clock the
next night.

We left Jefferson about four o’clock in the morning, and
arrived at Rochester at nine the same morning. Just before
reaching Rochester, when in conversation with my travelling
friend, I ventured to ask what would be done with Parker,
should he be taken.

“I do not know,” he replied; “but the laws of Pennsylvania
would not hang him,—they might imprison him. But
it would be different, very different, should they get him into
Maryland. The people in all the Slave States are so prejudiced
against colored people, that they never give them justice.
But I don’t believe they will get Parker. I think he is
in Canada by this time; at least, I hope so,—for I believe
[Pg 118]

he did right and, had I been in his place, I would have done
as he did. Any good citizen will say the same. I believe
Parker to be a brave man; and all you colored people should
look at it as we white people look at our brave men, and do
as we do. You see Parker was not fighting for a country, nor
for praise. He was fighting for freedom: he only wanted
liberty, as other men do. You colored people should protect
him, and remember him as long as you live. We are coming
near our parting-place, and I do not know if we shall ever
meet again. I shall be in Rochester some two or three days
before I return home; and I would like to have your company
back.”

I told him it would be some time before we returned.

The cars then stopped, when he bade me good by. As
strange as it may appear, he did not ask me my name; and
I was afraid to inquire his, from fear he would.

On leaving the cars, after walking two or three squares,
we overtook a colored man, who conducted us to the house
of a friend of mine. He welcomed me at once, as we were
acquainted before, took me up stairs to wash and comb, and
prepare, as he said, for company.

As I was combing, a lady came up and said, “Which of
you is Mr. Parker?”

“I am,” said I,—“what there is left of me.”

She gave me her hand, and said, “And this is William
Parker!”

She appeared to be so excited that she could not say what
she wished to. We were told we would not get much rest,
and we did not; for visitors were constantly coming. One
gentleman was surprised that we got away from the cars, as
spies were all about, and there were two thousand dollars reward
for the party.

We left at eight o’clock that evening, in a carriage, for
the boat, bound for Kingston in Canada. As we went on
board, the bell was ringing. After walking about a little, a
friend pointed out to me the officers on the “hunt” for us;
and just as the boat pushed off from the wharf, some of our
[Pg 119]

friends on shore called me by name. Our pursuers looked
very much like fools, as they were. I told one of the gentlemen
on shore to write to Kline that I was in Canada. Ten
dollars were generously contributed by the Rochester friends
for our expenses; and altogether their kindness was heartfelt,
and was most gratefully appreciated by us.

Once on the boat, and fairly out at sea towards the land of
liberty, my mind became calm, and my spirits very much
depressed at thought of my wife and children. Before, I had
little time to think much about them, my mind being on my
journey. Now I became silent and abstracted. Although
fond of company, no one was company for me now.

We landed at Kingston on the 21st of September, at six
o’clock in the morning, and walked around for a long time,
without meeting any one we had ever known. At last, however,
I saw a colored man I knew in Maryland. He at first
pretended to have no knowledge of me, but finally recognized
me. I made known our distressed condition when he said he
was not going home then, but, if we would have breakfast, he
would pay for it. How different the treatment received from
this man—himself an exile for the sake of liberty, and in its
full enjoyment on free soil—and the self-sacrificing spirit of
our Rochester colored brother, who made haste to welcome us
to his ample home,—the well-earned reward of his faithful
labors!

On Monday evening, the 23d, we started for Toronto,
where we arrived safely the next day. Directly after landing,
we heard that Governor Johnston, of Pennsylvania, had
made a demand on the Governor of Canada for me, under the
Extradition Treaty. Pinckney and Johnson advised me to
go to the country, and remain where I should not be known;
but I refused. I intended to see what they would do with
me. Going at once to the Government House, I entered the
first office I came to. The official requested me to be seated.
The following is the substance of the conversation between us,
[Pg 120]

as near as I can remember. I told him I had heard that
Governor Johnston, of Pennsylvania, had requested his government
to send me back. At this he came forward, held
forth his hand, and said, “Is this William Parker?”

I took his hand, and assured him I was the man. When he
started to come, I thought he was intending to seize me, and
I prepared myself to knock him down. His genial sympathetic
manner it was that convinced me he meant well.

He made me sit down, and said—“Yes, they want you
back again. Will you go?”

“I will not be taken back alive,” said I. “I ran away
from my master to be free,—I have run from the United
States to be free. I am now going to stop running.”

“Are you a fugitive from labor?” he asked.

I told him I was.

“Why,” he answered, “they say you are a fugitive from
justice.” He then asked me where my master lived.

I told him, “In Anne Arundel County, Maryland.”

“Is there such a county in Maryland?” he asked.

“There is,” I answered.

He took down a map, examined it, and said, “You are
right.”

I then told him the name of the farm, and my master’s
name. Further questions bearing upon the country towns
near, the nearest river, etc., followed, all of which I answered
to his satisfaction.

“How does it happen,” he then asked, “that you lived
in Pennsylvania so long, and no person knew you were a
fugitive from labor?”

“I do not get other people to keep my secrets, sir,” I
replied. “My brother and family only knew that I had
been a slave.”

He then assured me that I would not, in his opinion, have
to go back. Many coming in at this time on business, I was
told to call again at three o’clock, which I did. The person
[Pg 121]

in the office, a clerk, told me to take no further trouble
about it, until that day four weeks. “But you are as free a
man as I am,” said he. When I told the news to Pinckney
and Johnson, they were greatly relieved in mind.

I ate breakfast with the greatest relish, got a letter written
to a friend in Chester County for my wife, and set about
arrangements to settle at or near Toronto.

We tried hard to get work, but the task was difficult. I
think three weeks elapsed before we got work that could be
called work. Sometimes we would secure a small job, worth
two or three shillings, and sometimes a smaller one, worth
not more than one shilling; and these not oftener than once
or twice in a week. We became greatly discouraged; and,
to add to my misery, I was constantly hearing some alarming
report about my wife and children. Sometimes they
had carried her back into slavery,—sometimes the children,
and sometimes the entire party. Then there would come a
contradiction. I was soon so completely worn down by my
fears for them, that I thought my heart would break. To
add to my disquietude, no answer came to my letters, although
I went to the office regularly every day. At last I got a letter
with the glad news that my wife and children were safe, and
would be sent to Canada. I told the person reading for me
to stop, and tell them to send her “right now,”—I could
not wait to hear the rest of the letter.

Two months from the day I landed in Toronto, my wife
arrived, but without the children. She had had a very bad
time. Twice they had her in custody; and, a third time,
her young master came after her, which obliged her to flee
before day, so that the children had to remain behind for the
time. I was so glad to see her that I forgot about the
children.

The day my wife came, I had nothing but the clothes on
my back, and was in debt for my board, without any work
to depend upon. My situation was truly distressing. I took
[Pg 122]

the resolution, and went to a store where I made known my
circumstances to the proprietor, offering to work for him to
pay for some necessaries. He readily consented, and I supplied
myself with bedding, meal and flour. As I had selected
a place before, we went that evening about two miles into the
country, and settled ourselves for the winter.

When in Kingston, I had heard of the Buxton settlement,
and of the Revds. Dr. Willis and Mr. King, the agents. My
informant, after stating all the particulars, induced me to
think it was a desirable place; and having quite a little sum
of money due to me in the States, I wrote for it, and waited
until May. It not being sent, I called upon Dr. Willis,
who treated me kindly. I proposed to settle in Elgin, if he
would loan means for the first instalment. He said he
would see about it, and I should call again. On my second
visit, he agreed to assist me, and proposed that I should get
another man to go on a lot with me.

Abraham Johnson and I arranged to settle together, and,
with Dr. Willis’s letter to Mr. King on our behalf, I embarked
with my family on a schooner for the West. After
five days’ sailing, we reached Windsor. Not having the
means to take us to Chatham, I called upon Henry Bibb, and
laid my case before him. He took us in, treated us with
great politeness, and afterwards took me with him to Detroit,
where, after an introduction to some friends, a purse of five
dollars was made up. I divided the money among my companions,
and started them for Chatham, but was obliged to
stay at Windsor and Detroit two days longer.

While stopping at Windsor, I went again to Detroit, with
two or three friends, when, at one of the steamboats just
landed, some officers arrested three fugitives, on pretence of
being horse thieves. I was satisfied they were slaves, and
said so, when Henry Bibb went to the telegraph office and
learned through a message that they were. In the crowd
and excitement, the sheriff threatened to imprison me for
[Pg 123]

my interference. I felt indignant, and told him to do so,
whereupon he opened the door. About this time there was
more excitement, and then a man slipped into the jail, unseen
by the officers, opened the gate, and the three prisoners went
out, and made their escape to Windsor. I stopped through
that night in Detroit, and started the next day for Chatham,
where I found my family snugly provided for at a boarding-house
kept by Mr. Younge.

Chatham was a thriving town at that time, and the genuine
liberty enjoyed by its numerous colored residents pleased me
greatly; but our destination was Buxton, and thither we
went on the following day. We arrived there in the evening,
and I called immediately upon Mr. King, and presented Dr.
Willis’s letter. He received me very politely, and said that,
after I should feel rested, I could go out and select a lot. He
also kindly offered to give me meal and pork for my family,
until I could get work.

In due time, Johnson and I each chose a fifty-acre lot for
although when in Toronto we agreed with Dr. Willis to take
one lot between us, when we saw the land we thought we
could pay for two lots. I got the money in a little time,
and paid the Doctor back. I built a house, and we moved
into it that same fall, and in it I live yet. (1866.)

When I first settled in Buxton, the white settlers in the
vicinity were much opposed to colored people. Their prejudices
were very strong; but the spread of intelligence and
religion in the community has wrought a great change in
them. Prejudice is fast being uprooted; indeed, they do not
appear like the same people that they were. In a short time
I hope the foul spirit will depart entirely.

I have now to bring my narrative to a close; and in so
doing I would return thanks to Almighty God for the many
mercies and favors he has bestowed upon me, and especially
for delivering me out of the hands of slaveholders, and placing
me in a land of liberty, where I can worship God under
[Pg 124]

my own vine and fig-tree, with none to molest or make me
afraid. I am also particularly thankful to my old friends and
neighbors in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania,—to the
friends in Norristown, Quakertown, Rochester, and Detroit,
and to Dr. Willis of Toronto, for their disinterested benevolence
and kindness to me and my family. When hunted,
they sheltered me; when hungry and naked, they clothed
and fed me; and when a stranger in a strange land, they
aided and encouraged me. May the Lord in his great
mercy remember and bless them, as they remembered and
blessed me.

[Pg 125]

CHAPTER XIII.

After the War.

Peter Woods the Sole Survivor—Castner Hanway’s Later Days—The
Descendants and Relatives of the Principal Actors in the Drama—Concluding
Reflections on the Affair.

The sole survivor of those who were directly involved in
the events that have been narrated is Peter Woods, a very
respectable colored man, who does not know his own age, but
who likely is an octogenarian and was twenty years old when
the riot occurred. He lives on his little farm of fifty-eight
acres, in Colerain Township, just south of Bartville, with his
good wife, and the youngest of his thirteen living children,
the family being much esteemed by those who know its members.
He was a soldier in the Union Army, having served
nearly three years in the Third Regiment, Colored U. S.
Infantry. During the war he met Alex. Pinckney, at
Charleston, S. C., who was also a soldier in one of the Northern
regiments. Recently his pension was increased through
the influence of Congressman W. W. Griest, of the Lancaster
district—who is a son of Major Ellwood Griest, author of
the vigorous Bart resolutions of 1850. In the absence of
precise proof that Peter Woods was above seventy-five years
of age, the United States Government assumed that it would
not have indicted a boy of fifteen for treason.

The descendants of Edward Gorsuch maintain the high
social station of their family in Maryland. They were
Methodists in religion and Whigs in politics, and are now
Republicans; during the civil war they zealously supported
the Union cause.

Edward Gorsuch’s immediate descendants are Mrs. W.
W. Campbell and children, of Orwig’s Mills, Md.; Mrs. T. B.
[Pg 126]

Todd, Jr., of Fort Howard, Md., who is a daughter of Alex.
Morrison; Mrs. E. D. Duncan, of Govans, Md.; Mrs. Fannie
Thomas, Wilmer Black and Anna Black, the last four being
children of Melinda Gorsuch, intermarried with Robert
Black; and Mrs. R. F. Mitchell, wife of Dr. F. G. Mitchell,
of Glencoe, Md. (who was the daughter of Dickinson Gorsuch),
her son and two daughters, the youngest of whom, as
an infant, appears in the arms of “Mammy” Kelly, one of
the illustrations of this volume.

Joseph Scarlet died July 8, 1882; his descendants are as
follows:

I. Children—Joseph Scarlett, 5313 Master Street, Philadelphia;
Annie V. Scarlett, Mary E. Scarlett, 1413 Peach
Street, Philadelphia; William Scarlett, 5444 Girard Avenue,
Philadelphia; Mrs. Ella A. Jackson, 304 North Franklin
Street, West Chester, Pa.

II. Grandchildren—J. Ralph Scarlett, Inda Scarlett
Conrow, Elsie J. Scarlett, Edwin W. Scarlett, Anne Scarlett
Custer, Dr. Charles J. Morell, Florence M. Christ, T. Harold
Jackson, William Scarlett, Leslie Scarlett, Richard Scarlett.

III. Great-grandchildren—Lavinia Scarlett, Helen Scarlett,
John S. Custer, Charles J. Morell, Jr.

Elijah Lewis died Oct. 18, 1884, aged 86; his descendants
are as follows:

I. Children—Mrs. Martha A. Cooper, Palmyra, N. J.

II. Grandchildren—Samuel Brinton, farmer, West Chester,
Pa., R. F. D.; Henry Brinton, 2408 Bryn Mawr Avenue,
West Philadelphia; Edwin Brinton, 5584 Hunter Avenue,
West Philadelphia; Mrs. Emma B. Maule, R. F. D., Cochranville,
Pa.; Alfred Brinton, Christiana, Pa.; Mrs. Clara
B. Maule, Gum Tree, Chester County, Pa.; Harry P. Cooper,
14 Ruby Street, Lancaster, Pa.; Mrs. D. W. Miller, Linfield,
Montgomery County, Pa.; Mrs. Anna Cooper, Santa Barbara,
California; Mrs. George Paschall, Jr., Port Kennedy,
Pa., and Miss Mary Cooper, 2408 Bryn Mawr Avenue, West
Philadelphia, Pa. (W. L. Cooper, superintendent of the
[Pg 127]

Bedford division P. R. R., who recently met tragic death by
drowning in the Susquehanna river, was a grandson.)

III. Great Grandchildren—Roy Cooper, Fairmount, W.
Va.; Herbert Cooper, Parkesburg, Pa.; Helen Cooper, Santa
Barbara, Cal.; Clement S. Brinton, 213 Euclid Avenue, Haddonfield,
N. J.; Francis D. Brinton, West Chester, Pa.;
Willard C. Brinton, 70 West 46th Street, New York; Ellen
S. Brinton, R. F. D., West Chester, Pa.; Robert F. Brinton,
R. F. D., West Chester, Pa.; Wilfred Cooper, Bedford, Pa.;
C. Burleigh Cooper, Christiana, Pa.; Harry Brinton, 2408
Bryn Mawr Avenue, Philadelphia, Pa.; Lewis Brinton,
Octoraro, Lancaster Co., Pa.; Thomas Brinton, minister, Octoraro,
Pa.; Mrs. Jesse Webster, Mrs. John Dochter, Christiana,
Pa., and Evan J. Lewis, George School, Bucks Co., Pa.

Castner Hanway suffered most in expense and anxiety
from the trial. He resided for years after it ended in Chester
and Lancaster Counties, but in 1878 removed to Wilber,
Nebraska. His first wife, Martha, daughter of Jesse and
Letitia Lamborn, who was with him during his trial, died
August 20, 1855. Later he married Hannah, daughter of
Moses and Mary Pennock, who died January 1, 1864. Later
he married a Miss Johnston, a relative of Governor Johnston,
who was the Chief Executive of Pennsylvania in 1851. She
is still living. Castner Hanway himself died May 26,
1893; his remains were brought East and buried in the cemetery
at the famous Longwood meeting house of the Progressive
Friends, in Chester County, made memorable by
anti-slavery meetings addressed by Whittier, Lucretia Mott
and others eminent in literature; and in which quiet graveyard
are the chaste tombs of Bayard Taylor, poet, novelist,
traveler, journalist and diplomat, and of his brother, Colonel
Frank Taylor, one of the heroes and martyrs of Gettysburg.

The Longwood Yearly Meeting soon after Hanway’s death
adopted a memorial prepared by Patience W. Kent, which
said of him:

“One week ago the earthly form of Castner Hanway was
[Pg 128]

laid in yonder cemetery. A quiet, unobtrusive man, he gave
no token that his name was one to conjure newspaper notoriety,
or stir the wrathful vengeance of the baffled slave power,
as it did at one time. Yet in him, was the stuff of which
heroes are made. ‘He stood by his colors’ when that was all
he could do. During the ninety-seven days that he was in
prison he never once complained. He wrote to his wife from
there, ‘I do not regret my course; I have simply done my
duty.’ With a nature capable of asserting such a beautiful
sentiment in the face of so great mental and financial agony,
surely the reward in the Eternal Kingdom would be: ‘Well
done, thou good and faithful servant; thou hast been faithful
over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things;
enter thou into the joys of thy Lord.’”

Hanway left no descendants. His collateral relatives, so
far as known, were:

Jackson Hanway, deceased, a brother, whose children are:
Ida Hanway Whiteside, Christiana, Pa.; Ella Hanway Skelton,
1725 Lindenwood Street, Philadelphia; Wilmer Everett
Hanway, 1716 North 55th Street, Philadelphia.

John Hanway, deceased, a brother, leaving a son, Joseph
Hanway, Hamorton, Chester County, Pa.

Ellis Hanway, deceased, a brother, whose children are:
Mrs. Louisa Booth, Gap, Lancaster County, Pa., and William
Hanway, 1038 Lowell Street, New York City, N. Y.

Washington Hanway, deceased, a brother, leaving one
child, Mrs. Clara Hanway Pierce, 317 South Queen Street,
York, Pa.

Phoebe H. Gray, deceased, a sister, whose son is Albert
Gray.

Hannah Ellis H. Fairlamb, deceased, a sister, who left
children: Elizabeth Barnes, West Chester, Pa.; and Robert
Fairlamb.

Rebecca H. McDade, deceased, a sister, late of Norristown,
Pa.

[Pg 129]
“After Life’s fitful fever” they who fought and suffered
and died all “sleep well.” “There is no work, nor device, nor
knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave.” While governments
shall endure and organized society of human order shall continue,
the ceaseless contest will go on between Law and Liberty.
As the temperaments of men vary they will differ
as to which side of that struggle they should or will espouse;
and Human Wisdom will forever be insufficient to avert
occasional conflict. From it, however, will emerge Peace;
and as the parties to the struggle and their children’s children
look back upon the contention that once raged, they will come
more and more clearly to see that it was inevitable; and they
will look with kindlier judgment upon the motives which inspired
antagonistic forces. They will also see in the outcome
and settlement a Final Cause, shaping events and determining
results, one that could not be recognized in the smoke and
dust of the immediate battle; but which the clear, cold light of
History makes visible to all who would see the Truth. In
his matchless lyric of the Civil War, the most sublime note
that has been sounded from all the literature inspired by that
great National Crisis, Will M. Thompson, in his “High Tide
at Gettysburg,” attains this lofty strain:

But who shall break the guards that wait

Before the awful face of fate?

The tattered standards of the South

Were shriveled at the cannon’s mouth,

And all her hopes were desolate.

In vain the Tennessean set

His breast against the bayonet;

In vain Virginia charged and raged,

A tigress in her wrath uncaged,

Till all the hill was red and wet!

Above the bayonets mixed and crossed

Men saw a gray, gigantic ghost

Receding through the battle cloud,

And heard across the tempest loud

The death cry of a nation lost!

The brave went down! Without disgrace
[Pg 130]

They leaped to ruin’s red embrace;

They only heard fame’s thunder wake,

And saw the dazzling sunburst break

In smiles on Glory’s bloody face!

They fell who lifted up a hand!

And bade the sun in heaven to stand;

They smote and fell who set the bars

Against the progress of the stars,

And stayed the march of Motherland!

They stood who saw the future come

On through the fight’s delirium;

They smote and stood who held the hope

Of nations on that slippery slope,

Amid the cheers of Christendom!

God lives! He forged the iron will,

That clutched and held that trembling hill!

God lives and reigns! He built and lent

The heights for Freedom’s battlement,

Where floats her flag in triumph still!

Fold up the banners! Smelt the guns!

Love rules. Her gentler purpose runs,

A mighty mother turns in tears

The pages of her battle years,

Lamenting all her fallen sons!

[Pg 131]

ADDENDA.

Note A.

On page
14
it is stated that there was little fellowship between the
negro and the Pennsylvania-German elements of our local citizenship.
I believe this is a continuing condition. It is not inconsistent with the
historical fact that the Mennonites of Germantown were the first
American Abolitionists; and that their deliverance of February 18,
1868, antedated like action by the Friends. Professor Wilkinson in his
so-called “Vindication of Daniel Webster,” recently published, is
authority for the statement that Charles Sumner’s social aversion to
the colored race was as pronounced as his political sympathy with it.

Note B.

On page
27
it is stated upon information that William Parker was a
soldier in the war for the Union. I have not been able to absolutely
verify this statement. It is therefore qualified.

Note C.

On page
59
it is noticed that the venire issued to the marshal commanding
him to return 108 jurors for the term of the treason trial
included a provision that twelve were to be summoned and returned
from Lancaster County. This was in conformity with the Act of September
24, 1789, known as the Federal Judicial Procedure Act, to the
effect that “in cases punishable with death, the trial shall be had in
the county where the offense was committed, or where that cannot be
done without great inconvenience, twelve petit jurors at least shall be
summoned from thence.”

In a recent notable address before the American Bar Association at
Boston on August 30, 1911, Ex-Justice of the United States Supreme
Court Henry E. Brown called attention to the fact that the provision of
this act which required the trial for a capital offense to be held in the
county where it occurred had never been observed. It seems to have
escaped his notice that the statutory direction as to the venue was not
unqualifiedly imperative and that this act had been the subject of
repeated judicial construction,
e. g.
, in the following cases:

“The Circuit Courts are bound to try all crimes committed within the
district, but not to try them in the County where committed; that is a
matter of which they must judge in the exercise of their discretion.”
U. S.
v.
Wilson, Bald. 117; U. S.
v.
Cornell 2 Mason 95-8; U. S.
v.

Insurgents (Fries), 3 Dall. (Pa.) 513. In U. S.
v.
Cornell the Court
[Pg 132]

holds that the third Section of the Act of March, 1793, Chapter 22,
operates as a material modification of the Act of 1789 and leaves the
place of the trial in the district to the sound discretion of the judge.
The Act of 1793, Chapter 22, directs that special sessions for the trial
of criminal cases shall be held at any convenient place within the
district nearer to the place where the offenses may be said to be committed,
than the place appointed by the law for ordinary sessions.

Note D.

I have adopted the spelling of Sims’s and Scarlet’s name with a
single terminal letter instead of the local and family usage—Simms and
Scarlett—because they were thus formally indicted.

Note E.

The best information I have as to the date of William Parker’s revisit
to Christiana is that it was during the presidential campaign of 1872.
Peter Woods says he took back with him to Canada the widow of Henry
Sims—one of the defendants in the treason case; presumably he was
then a widower and Mrs. Sims became his second wife.

Note F.

On pages
6
and
12
I have recalled the indisputable fact that Abraham
Lincoln and his party distinctly recognized the legal obligation of the
Fugitive Slave Law even after the war had begun. Striking confirmation
of what heedless readers may be disposed to doubt is found in General
William T. Sherman’s “Causes of the War,” cited in the
Atlantic
Monthly
, for September, 1911, where Sherman says: “Mr. Lincoln after
election and installation, asserted repeatedly that slavery was safe in
his hands, that he was sworn to enforce even the Fugitive Slave Law
and soon Congress declared it had no intention to interfere with slavery
in the States.”

Note G.

A second and revised edition of this History, substantially bound and
more copiously illustrated, will be put to press shortly. The author will
appreciate the correction of any errors observed in this edition—hurriedly
put to press—as well as any additions to its statements of facts.
Communications to this effect or orders for copies of the revised edition
may be sent to Box 34, Lancaster, Pa.

[Pg 133]

IN PRISON FOR TREASON.

[One of the finest stanzas in American poetry was inspired by the
imprisonment of Hanway and others for treason. While they were in
Moyamensing, John G. Whittier wrote and published his “Lines” to
them. Horace E. Scudder, in his excellent and complete “Cambridge
edition” of Whittier, classes the following with three other poems,
“called out by the popular movement of Free State men to occupy the
territory of Kansas.” In this he is mistaken. This poem, now entitled
“For Righteousness’ Sake,” was originally “inscribed to Friends under
arrest for treason against the slave power,” and was directed especially
to Hanway, Lewis and Scarlet. The concluding stanza is deeply imbedded
in popular appreciation of the best in our national literature.]

The age is dull and mean. Men creep,

Not walk; with blood too pale and tame

To pay the debt they owe to shame;

Buy cheap, sell dear; eat, drink, and sleep

Down-pillowed, deaf to moaning want;

Pay tithes for soul-insurance; keep

Six days to Mammon, one to Cant.

In such a time, give thanks to God,

That somewhat of the holy rage

With which the prophets in their age

On all its decent seemings trod,

Has set your feet upon the lie,

That man and ox and soul and clod

Are market stock to sell and buy!

The hot words from your lips, my own,

To caution trained, might not repeat;

But if some tares among the wheat

Of generous thought and deed were sown,

No common wrong provoked your zeal;

The silken gauntlet that is thrown

In such a quarrel rings like steel.

The brave old strife the fathers saw

For Freedom calls for men again

Like those who battled not in vain

For England’s Charter, Alfred’s law;

And right of speech and trial just
[Pg 134]

Wage in your name their ancient war

With venal courts and perjured trust.

God’s ways seem dark, but soon or late,

They touch the shining hills of day;

The evil cannot brook delay,

The good can well afford to wait.

Give ermined knaves their hour of crime;

Ye have the future grand and great,

The safe appeal of Truth to Time!

[The End]

FOOTNOTES:

[A]
The rule of the civil law
partus sequitur ventrem
, formerly prevailed
in re domestic slavery.—
1 Dall. 167.

[B]
Kinzey’s.

TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:

Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.

End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Christiana Riot and The Treason
Trials of 1851, by W. U. Hensel

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHRISTIANA RIOT ***

***** This file should be named 57021-h.htm or 57021-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/7/0/2/57021/

Produced by David E. Brown and The Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.