The Project Gutenberg EBook of Guide to Historic Plymouth, by A. S. Burbank

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Guide to Historic Plymouth
Localities and Objects of Interest

Author: A. S. Burbank

Release Date: May 11, 2018 [EBook #57135]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GUIDE TO HISTORIC PLYMOUTH ***

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

GUIDE

TO

Historical Plymouth

Localities and Objects of Interest

ILLUSTRATED

PLYMOUTH, MASS.

Copyrighted, and Published By

A. S. BURBANK

Copyright, 1920, by A. S. Burbank.

Printed by the Memorial Press.

3

Contents.

Beach Point

64

Burial Hill

49

Church of the First Parish

48

Church of the Pilgrimage

47

Clark’s Island

80

Cole’s Hill

39

Compact

82

Court House

25

Gov. Bradford’s House in 1621

46

Gurnet

37

Harbor

64

Industries

77

Landing of the Pilgrims

36

Leyden Street

41

Manomet Bluffs

60

Members of the Mayflower Company

83

Morton Park

67

National Monument

Frontispiece
and
page 8

North Street

33

Old Fort and First Meeting House, 1621

59

Old Houses

70

Pilgrim Antiquities

16
-
25

Pilgrim Hall

13

Plymouth as a Summer Resort

79

Plymouth High School

73

Plymouth in 1627

45

Plymouth Rock

31

Post Office

44

Prison

30

Public Library

74

Registry Building

27

The Town

73

Town Brook

69

Town Square

46

Voyage of the Mayflower Shallop

65

Watch Tower

61

Watson’s Hill

61

4

NATIONAL MONUMENT TO THE FOREFATHERS.

5

Historic Plymouth

“The Pilgrim Fathers—where are they?

The waves that brought them o’er

Still roll in the bay, and throw their spray,

As they break along the shore.”

The introduction of visitors to Plymouth as
they come by rail, is at Seaside, a station in
the extreme north part of the town, at the
dividing line between Kingston and Plymouth.
As the cars slow up passengers see the
beautiful panorama of Plymouth Harbor spread out before
their eyes. At the near left, across the bay appears Captain’s
Hill, so called from its being the home of Capt. Myles
Standish, and on its crest is a monument in honor of the
Pilgrim warrior, surmounted by his statue fourteen feet in
height. Farther along is seen Rouse’s Hummock, the American
terminus of the French Atlantic cable. The next prominent
object is Clark’s Island, where the Pilgrims spent
their first Sabbath in Plymouth. Next to this is the headland
of Saquish, and beyond is the Garnet with its twin
lighthouses. Opposite these the bold bluff of Manomet
thrusts itself out into the bay, while nearer inland the long,
thin ribbon of Plymouth Beach runs across the harbor, like
an artificial breakwater, to arrest the waves of the ocean.

PLYMOUTH ROCK.

6

STANDISH HOUSE, BUILT BY SON OF MYLES STANDISH, 1666.

CAPTAIN’S HILL, DUXBURY.

Few scenes can surpass this in loveliness, if the visitor is
fortunate enough to arrive when the tide is in. Although by
the configuration of the land Plymouth Harbor seems to
have been designed for a perfect haven against every wind
that blows, unfortunately it is dependent upon a full sea for
depth enough of water to float vessels of large draft to the
wharves. With the assistance of the State of Massachusetts
a channel 150 feet wide with eighteen feet depth at mean

7

low water, was opened in 1913 from Beach Point to the fine
new stone pier of the Plymouth Cordage Co., and by it that
great industrial plant now brings its fibre, for manufacture,
direct from Mexico to its mills in steamships of 3500 tons
measurement. In 1876 the United States Government dug
a small channel from Broad channel to the wharves, where
none had existed. In 1914-15 the Government and State
co-operated in improving the old “Mayflower channel,” from
deep water at Beach Point along the inside of the Beach
and up Broad channel to the town wharves, so that for the
entire distance there is a width of 200 feet and depth of 18
feet at mean low water. This allows steamers and light
draft vessels to land at any time of tide, while at high water
barges and heavy freight carriers drawing 25 feet or more
can have easy access to the piers. These harbor improvements
accommodate any vessels that can pass through the
Cape Cod Canal which opens into the bay 16 miles below
Plymouth and are of great advantage to the Pilgrim port.
Other important changes of the water front and harbor may
develop previous to the tercentenary celebration of “the
Landing,” to take place in 1920-21, plans and details for
which are in charge of a special State Commission.

Immediately upon leaving the station of the New York,
New Haven & Hartford Railroad, on arrival in Plymouth,
and while traversing Old Colony park to Court street, the
main street of the town, the Samoset House is in full view
in the front. Looking towards the Samoset House on the
way through the park the first street on its right leading
from Court street is Cushman street; and the walk continued
up Cushman street and little northward along Allerton
street, will shortly bring the visitor to the National Monument
to the Forefathers.

8

The National Monument to the Forefathers

The corner stone of the National Monument
was laid Aug. 2, 1859, and the work entrusted
to Hammatt Billings who drew the design
for the Monument in all its details. The
main pedestal was put in position in 1876,
and in the following summer the statue of Faith was erected.
The monument was completed in October, 1888, and dedicated
with appropriate ceremonies August 1, 1889. It is
built entirely of granite, the statues all coming from the
quarries of the Hallowell Granite Company of Maine. (See
frontispiece.)

The idea of building the monument to the memory of the
Pilgrim Fathers was early entertained in the town, and was
formed into a definite object by the incorporation of the
Pilgrim Society in January, 1820; which object was kept
steadily in view and prosecuted to successful conclusion.

The plan of the principal pedestal is octagonal, with four
small and four large faces; from the small faces project
four buttresses or wing pedestals. On the main pedestal
stands the figure of Faith. One foot rests upon Forefathers’
Rock; in her left hand she holds a Bible; with the right
uplifted she points to heaven. Looking downward, as to
those she is addressing, she seems to call to them to trust in a
higher power.

9

THE FIRST TREATY WITH THE INDIANS.

Alto Relief on National Monument.

10

MORALITY.

On each of the four buttresses or wing pedestals
is a seated figure; they are emblematic of the principles
upon which the Pilgrims proposed to found their commonwealth.
The first is Morality, holding the Decalogue in her
left, and the scroll of Revelation in her right hand; her look
is upward toward the impersonation of the Spirit of Religion
above; in a niche, on one side of her throne, is a prophet,
and in the other, one of the Evangelists. The second of these
figures is Law: on one side Justice; on the other Mercy.
The third is Education: on one side Wisdom, ripe with
years; on the other Youth, led by Experience. The fourth
figure is Freedom: on one side Peace rests under its Protection;
on the other Tyranny is overthrown by its powers.
Below these seated figures are marble alto-reliefs, representing
scenes from the history of the Pilgrims:—the Departure
from Delft Haven; the first Treaty with the Indians;
Signing of the Social Compact; and the Landing at Plymouth.

11

On each of the four faces of the main pedestal is a
large panel for records. That in front contains the general
inscription of the monument, viz., “National Monument to
the Forefathers. Erected by a grateful people in remembrance
of their labors, sacrifices and sufferings for the cause of civil
and religious liberty.” The right and left panel contain the
names of those who came over in the “Mayflower.” The rear
panel is plain, to have an inscription at some future day.

LAW.

The total height of the Monument is eighty-one feet, from
the ground to the top of the head of the statue of Faith.

12

The following are some of the dimensions of this great
piece of work, said, on good authority, to be the largest
and finest piece of granite statuary in the world: the height
of the base is forty-five feet; height of statue, thirty-six
feet. The outstretched arm measures from shoulder to
elbow, ten feet one and one-half inches; from elbow to the
tip of finger, nine feet nine inches; total length of arm,
nineteen feet ten and one-half inches. The head measures
around the forehead thirteen feet seven inches. The points
of the star, in the wreath around the head are just one
foot across. The arm, just below the short sleeve, measures
six feet ten inches around; below the elbow, six feet
two inches. The wrist is four feet around. The length of
the finger pointing upwards is two feet one inch, and is
one foot eight and one-half inches around. The thumb
measures one foot eight and one-half inches around. The
circumference of the neck is nine feet two inches and the
nose is one foot four inches long. From centre to centre of
the eyes is one foot six inches. The figure is two hundred
and sixteen times life size and its weight one hundred and
eighty tons. A bolt of lightning ran down the arm and figure
Aug. 23, 1912, splitting and displacing two blocks of
the central section. They were restored to position, without
taking down the monument, by Mr. George W. Bradford, a
Plymouth contractor, a feat which reflected much credit
upon his engineering skill.

The statue of Faith was the gift of the late Oliver Ames,
a native of Plymouth, and its cost was $31,300. The total
cost of the Monument was $150,000, contributed by more
than 11,000 people of the United States and other countries.

13

Pilgrim Hall

PILGRIM HALL, BUILT IN 1824.

Returning to Court street (the main
street) from the Monument grounds, and
passing the head of Old Colony park, we soon
see on our left a building with a Doric portico,
standing a little way from the street.
This is Pilgrim Hall, erected in 1824 by the Pilgrim Society
as a monumental hall to the memory of the Pilgrims.
In 1880, without taking down the walls, it was re-roofed and
refloored with steel beams and terra cotta blocks at a cost of
over $15,000 by Joseph Henry Stickney, Esq., a wealthy
Baltimore merchant of Boston nativity, who on a casual
visit to Plymouth became so impressed of preserving with
the greatest care the interesting relics of the Pilgrims there
deposited, that he most liberally made this large expenditure
to secure these precious memorials from loss by fire.
At the same time he provided for better classification and
exhibition of the articles, those immediately connected with

14

the Pilgrims being deposited, mostly in glass cases, in the
main hall, while an interesting museum of antique curiosities
was arranged in the room below. Exteriorly, marked
improvement was made by raising the Doric porch to the
height of the main building, and repainting and sanding the
whole front in imitation of stone. Quite a change was made
at the same time in the front area by the removal back to
the Landing-place of the portion of Plymouth Rock, which
for forty-six years had here been a prominent object.

The hall is kept open daily (including Sundays in the summer
season), at regular hours, for the accommodation of
visitors, a fee of twenty-five cents being charged. These fees
are the only income of the Pilgrim Society, the fund so
accumulated being devoted to the care of the Pilgrim relics,
the monuments, grounds, and historic points of the Pilgrim
locality in Plymouth.

To the improvements made by Mr. Stickney, very important
and extensive ones were carried out by the Society in
the periods from February to May 1911, and from December
1911 to March 1912, the hall being closed to the public during
the work. Everything of wood, from the basement to
the roof was removed from the ante-rooms, and also from
the main hall and the one beneath. With steel beams, terra
cotta blocks, cement and marble, thorough work was done in
fireproofing the whole structure, so that the Doric entrance
portico, which is separated from the building by a thick
brick wall, now remains as the only combustible part. The
cost of these radical improvements, which seem to sufficiently
insure the protection of the priceless collection of Pilgrim
relics, was about $15,000, paid from the visitors fee fund.
It is in contemplation, and plans have been prepared, for
changing the Doric portico from wood to granite, with monolithic
columns. About $20,000 will be needed for this
much desired object, which will make Pilgrim Hall, in its

15

entirety, a complete and harmonious memorial of the Forefathers;
but this laudable project will have to await the slow
accumulation of an annual income from visitors fees, or the
possible generous gift of a descendant or admirer of our
Pilgrim ancestors.

The interior, with marble floors and wainscots, and walls
freshly colored in neutral tints which set off the pictures to
much advantage, now presents a very neat and attractive
appearance.

LANDING OF THE PILGRIMS.

In the marble vestibule hangs a large picture of the
“Landing,” done in distemper, which was presented to the
Society by Robert G. Shaw of Boston. At the right is the
curator’s room, on the walls of which hang a portrait of
King James I., together with a number of maps and local
views of Plymouth, illustrative of changes which have
taken place. Over the entrance to the main hall is a large
gilded copy of the seal of the Colony, reproduced from the

16

“Book of Laws,” printed in 1685. The original seal was
adopted probably in 1625. It was taken away during the
administration of the infamous Governor Andros, and never
recovered, as far as is known. This copy is supposed to have
been the gift of Samuel Nicholson, of the Boston Common
Council, a native of Plymouth. At the left of the entrance
is the stairway to the lower hall, and the sanitary conveniences
of the building.

The main hall is forty-six by thirty-nine feet, with walls
twenty-two feet high, and is lighted entirely from the roof.
At the east end is the large picture of the “Landing,” thirteen
by sixteen feet, painted by Henry Sargent, of Boston,
an amateur artist, and presented by him to the Society in
1834. Its estimated value was $3,000, and the massive
frame cost about $400. At the left is a portrait of the venerable
Dr. James Thacher, the first secretary of the Pilgrim
Society. He was the author of Thacher’s Military Journal
and a History of Plymouth, which has been considered one
of the best ever published. The picture upon the right is
a fine painting and most excellent likeness of the gentleman
who in 1880 so disinterestedly and generously remodeled
and beautified Pilgrim Hall,—Joseph Henry Stickney,
Esq., of Baltimore. The portrait was painted by D. G.
Pope, a Baltimore artist, and in subject and execution is
worthy of its place in this Pilgrim temple. Beneath the
picture the Society has placed a bronze memorial tablet in
grateful remembrance of Mr. Stickney’s benefactions.

In the middle of the south wall is hung the large copy of
Weir’s Embarkation from Delft Haven, from the large
painting in the rotunda of the Capitol at Washington, done
for the Society by Edgar Parker. It is flanked by several
large portraits designated in the catalogue, including one of
Hon. Daniel Webster.

In the centre of the west side hangs the noble gift of

17

ex-Gov. Alexander H. Rice, of Massachusetts, Charles Lucy’s
large painting of the Departure from Delft Haven. It
is of great value, and at a prize exhibition in England won
the first premium of a thousand guineas. It is altogether
different in color and tone from either of the others, and
will bear close sturdy. On its right and left are portraits of
Washington and Edward Everett, with pictures of the
house at Austerfield, England, where Governor Bradford was
born, and the only copy extant of the earliest map of New
England territory, made by William Hack about 1663.

On the north wall at the left of the entrance to the library
the fine historical painting of the Mayflower in Plymouth
Harbor by W. F. Halsall occupies a prominent position, and
grouped around it are the portraits of the Winslow family.
These consist of Edward Winslow, of the Mayflower company
who was Governor of Plymouth Colony in 1633-1636
and 1644. This portrait, and that of Josiah Winslow, who
was born in Plymouth in 1628, son of Governor Edward, and
who became the first native governor of the Colony 1673 to
1680, were probably painted in London by Robert Walker
in 1651, the first is therefore regarded as undoubtedly a
life-like portrait of a Mayflower Pilgrim. Others of the
group are Penelope, (wife of Gov. Josiah Winslow) and Gen.
John Winslow, great grandson of Gov. Edward Winslow.
The general is depicted in the scarlet uniform of the British
Army. He was second in command in the expedition which
removed the Acadians from Nova Scotia in 1755. The house
in which he lived, built in 1730, is still standing in Plymouth,
on the corner of Main and North streets. It was also
the home of James Warren, president of the Provincial Congress.

At the right of the library entrance hangs the original of
Robert W. Weir’s Embarkation of the Pilgrims from Delft
Haven, purchased by the Society in 1914. From this study,

18

Weir produced the larger painting for the Capitol rotunda
at Washington. Above it is an engraving of the Sailing
of the Mayflower, from Cope’s original painting, which
hangs in the House of Lords in London. There are also
engravings of the Signing of the Compact, and the Landing
by different artists, and a colored lithograph by Allebe of a
picture representing the First Religious service held by the
Pilgrims, painted in 1859 by Schwarz of Amsterdam. The
vessel bringing the painting to the United States was
burned at sea by a Confederate privateer during the Civil
War. Over the library door is The Royal Arms, which
before the Revolution hung over the judges bench in
the Plymouth Colonial Court House, now our old Town
House, and was carried to Shelburne, Nova Scotia, by Captain
Gideon White, a royal refugee of those times.

Across the head of the hall, under the Sargent picture,
are important historical articles, as the Patent of Plymouth
Colony, the chairs of Elder Brewster and Gov. Carver, which
were brought by them in the Mayflower, the Peregrine White
cradle and the Fuller cradle, a chest which belonged to Myles
Standish, a carved pew back from the ancient parish church
at Scrooby, a chair once owned by Gov. Winslow, and the
keystone from an arch in Scrooby Manor. Just inside the
door from the curator’s office is a small steel safe containing
Gov. William Bradford’s bible, printed at Geneva in 1592.
During visiting hours the sacred volume may be seen.

Arranged about the hall on handsome steel tables are
exhibition cases of the finest plate glass in America, and in
these are displayed and numbered conveniently for recognition
by catalogue, very many authentic relics and personal
belongings of the Pilgrims and their households. The first
at the right on entering contains articles of the White
family, among them a cabinet brought in the Mayflower by
William White, father of Peregrine, a cane and a candlestick,

19

which he once owned, also a bond written and signed
by Peregrine White, who was born on the Mayflower in Cape
Cod harbor in 1620, and died in Marshfield, 1704. Next
is the Alden case and in it is seen John Alden’s bible dated
1661, a halberd found in a house he once occupied in Duxbury,
a deed signed by this fond lover of Priscilla, a christening
bowl which belonged to Elder William Brewster, etc.
The Standish case is next, and most interesting, for the
reason that there is deposited the famous Damascus sword of
the military Chieftain of the Pilgrims, together with a large
pewter platter and iron pot which he brought in the Mayflower.
There are fragments of a quilt which belonged to
Rose, his wife, and a specimen of embroidery or “sampler”
worked by Lorea, his daughter in 1653, with this verse:

SWORD, POT AND PLATTER OF MYLES STANDISH.

Lorea Standish is my name,

Lord, guide my hart that I may doe Thy will:

Also fill my hands with such convenient skill

As will conduce to virtu void of shame,

And I will give the glory to thy name.

20

The baby cap and bib worked for her little daughter Lorea
by Barbara Standish has lately been added to the collection.
The sword of Myles Standish is one of the most valuable
articles in Pilgrim Hall. General Grant on his visit to
Plymouth, October 14, 1880, was much interested in this
ancient weapon, and handled it with evident satisfaction. The
Arabic inscriptions on the blade have always been a puzzle,
and, notwithstanding many attempts, remained undeciphered
until the visit to the town, June 7, 1881, of Prof. James
Rosedale, of Jerusalem, with a troupe of Arabs from Palestine.
Mr. Rosedale being an excellent linguist, was shown
the sword, and pronounced the inscriptions to be of different
dates; one of them in Cufic, very old, and the other in
mediæval Arabic of a later period, but still very ancient.
To the last he readily gave the following translation:—

“
With peace God ruled His slaves (creatures) and with
the judgment of His arm He troubled the mighty of the
wicked.
”

He had no doubt that the weapon dated back two or three
centuries before the Christian era, and might be much older.
It was captured from the Persians at Jerusalem in 637 by
the Saracens, and it is probable that this famous blade came
down to Capt. Standish from the Crusaders, and possessed
an interesting history in his day.

The next case contains numerous valuable books and
literary works of ancient date, the most precious being a
copy of John Eliot’s Indian bible 1685, of which but four
copies are now known to be extant. A Dutch bible and a
“Breeches” bible 1599, an Indian vocabulary by Josiah
Cotton, New England’s Memorial by Nathaniel Morton, and
the original records of the Old Colony Club from 1769 to
1773, are also interesting.

The Winslow Case at the right of the Library entrance
displays many belongings of that illustrious family, notably,

21

a part of a chest, a mortar and pewter plate, brought by
Edward Winslow in the Mayflower, a gold ring and ancient
trencher which belonged to Governor Edward Winslow,
General John Winslow’s sword, a dressing case once owned
by Penelope, wife of Governor Josiah Winslow, and bead
purse wrought by that gentle lady, a pair of stiff little
shoes worn by Governor Josiah Winslow when an infant,
a slipper and cape once owned by Mrs. Susannah White,
widow of William White, and second wife of Governor
Edward Winslow, and other articles which the catalogues
will identify.

WINSLOW RELICS, PILGRIM HALL.

The case at the left of the Library contains many papers
and documents of much interest, but of especial note are
swords of Gov. John Carver, Elder William Brewster and

22

Capt. Myles Standish, loaned by the Massachusetts Historical
Society. A novel reminder of the days of slavery in
Massachusetts is a bill of sale of a negro boy in Plymouth in
1753.

The next case has valuable autographs, note books, and a
service of ancient silver tankards and goblets not now in
use, but belonging to the First Church of Christ in Plymouth.
There are also the first volume of the ancient records
of the First Church in Plymouth, and the works of Pastor
John Robinson, of Leyden.

The north ante-room is worthy attention of visitors, and
contains, with other things, an old sofa formerly owned by
Gov. Hancock, upon which he probably sat and plotted treason
with Samuel Adams against the English crown. There
are pictures of Plymouth, England, and other places in that
country, of Pilgrim interest, together with various commissions,
etchings, views, etc; and a case containing seven
swords of notable personages, which are described in the
catalogues.

A fire-proof annex for the valuable library of the Pilgrim
Society was built on the northerly side of the hall in 1904,
and on the steel shelves behind substantial metal lattices,
found necessary to protect the books from persons of predatory
inclinations, some 3000 volumes are arranged in
handsome cabinets. Some of these books are very rare
indeed, and if lost or destroyed could not be replaced. The
oldest volume bears the imprint 1559.

Above the bookcases are portraits; among them those of
Hon. Joshua Thomas, the first president of the Pilgrim
Society; Hon. John Davis, editor of Morton’s New England
Memorial, and former president of the Massachusetts Historical
Society; and Ephraim Spooner, who was for thirty-four
years deacon of the First Church, in Plymouth, and a
very prominent citizen of the town. He was chairman of

23

the Selectmen through the Revolutionary War, in which
capacity he rendered the country efficient service, and was
likewise for fifty-one years town clerk of Plymouth. A very
quaint painting is the portrait of Elizabeth Wensley, hanging
over the fireplace. She was daughter of William Paddy,
and was born in Plymouth 1641. Her daughter, Sarah,
was the wife of Dr. Isaac Winslow, whose portrait appears
in the Winslow group in the main hall. The great centre
table in the library was owned by Gov. Edward Winslow,
and stood in the Council Chamber when he governed the
Colony. On top of one of the book cases is a model of a
ship of the “Mayflower” period, illustrative of the naval
architecture and rig of her time.

One of the cases at the foot of the Hall between the ante-rooms
holds the gun barrel with which King Philip was
killed, also the original manuscript of Mrs. Felicia Hemans’
celebrated ode, “The breaking waves dashed high,” and
William Cullen Bryant’s poem, “Wild was the day, the wintry
sea,” both presented by the late James T. Fields of Boston.
A piece of a mulberry tree, planted in the garden of
the Manor house at Scrooby by Cardinal Wolsey, and the
trowel used in laying the corner stone of the National Monument
to the Pilgrims, August 2, 1859, are seen in this case
among other articles. In the other there is a book given to
Gov. Bradford by Pastor John Robinson, brought over in
the “Mayflower” by Bradford and afterwards given by him
to the church. A book printed by Elder Brewster and a
copy of Seneca’s works owned by Brewster likewise find
place in this case, together with a copy of the first edition
of “Mourt’s Relation,” written in Plymouth in 1621 and
published in London in 1622.

A special case at the head of the Hall contains the oldest
state document in New England, and probably in the United
States. This is the first patent granted to the Plymouth

24

Colonists by the Northern Virginia Company. A patent
was granted by the Virginia Company in the name of John
Wincob, but never used. About the time of the departure
of the Forefathers from England for this country a new
company was created by a royal charter, within the limits of
which Plymouth was included, and this patent dated June
1, 1621 was granted to John Pierce by the Northern Virginia
Company and sent over in the “Fortune,” arriving
here in November of that year. This patent was found in
the land office in Boston, among a mass of old papers, by
William Smith, Esq., one of the land committee. The Hon.
John Davis, then editing a new edition of Morton’s New
England Memorials, obtained it for his use in that book, and
from him it came into the possession of the late Nathaniel
Morton Davis, Esq., in whose family it remained until
deposited in the hall by Mrs. William H. Whitman. It
bears the seals and signatures of the Duke of Lenox, the
Marquis of Hamilton, the Earl of Warwick, Lord Sheffield,
and Sir Ferdinando Gorges, with the exception that the
seal of Hamilton is missing. A sixth signature, probably
that of John Peirce, the party of the second part, is broken
out of the parchment, leaving but a trace of the letter J.
The seal to this signature is also torn away.

From the curator’s office a flight of stairs conducts to
the basement, where all desired conveniences for visitors
will be found. In the lower hall is an interesting museum
of articles which have been separated from the Pilgrim collection,
and as pertaining to ancient days in many instances
or as curiosities will well repay examination. Among them
is the frame of the “Sparrowhawk,” wrecked on Cape Cod,
at Orleans, in 1626, her company finding refuge and assistance
at Plymouth. Her history is remarkable, as being the
first known vessel stranded on the Cape, which since that
time has been the grave yard of fully 2,000 sea-going craft,

25

with a loss of hundreds of lives. A large placard attached
to the old wreck gives the story. To see these remains of a
vessel as old as the Mayflower, though much smaller, is very
suggestive of the perils of an ocean passage in the days of
the Pilgrims.

The bones of the Indian Chief Iyanough are preserved in
a special case in the lower hall, together with a large brass
kettle and other implements found with the skeleton which
was discovered at Hyannis in Barnstable in May, 1861.

The Court House

“Though justice be thy plea, consider this,—

That in the course of justice none of us should see salvation.”

At our right hand, soon after leaving Pilgrim
Hall, we see a large building with a handsome
brick facade, standing a little back
from the street, and fronted by a small park.
This is the County Court House, erected in
1820, and remodeled in 1857. It is one of the finest buildings
of the kind in the State, and the judges of the different
courts give it precedence in point of beauty, convenience,
etc., over all they visit. It has two entrances. The
northerly one leads to a marble corridor, from which is the
stairway to the large court room above, admittance to witness
rooms and the Third District Court. The southerly
entrance is to a corridor paved with Vermont marble, and
from which leads a flight of stairs for the court, the bar,
officers and jurymen, main court room, district attorney’s
office, and grand jury room. On the left, below, is the room
of the Clerk of Courts, with the room of the County Treasurer
opposite; beyond are rooms for various uses together

26

with that of the County Commissioners, and the Law
Library. The Library opens from the Commissioner’s room,
and also connects by a stairway with the upper corridor.

PRISCILLA.

27

The New Registry Building

Opposite the Court House, on Russell street,
in 1904, the County erected a very fine and
conveniently appointed fireproof building
for the Probate Court and Registry of Deeds.
The latter is on the lower floor, with a large
hall for the records and necessary desks and tables to facilitate
the examination of the books. There are also commodious
rooms for the Register and his assistants and the
corps of recorders.

THE NEW REGISTRY BUILDING.

In the Registry of Deeds are the earliest records of Plymouth
Colony, in the handwriting of the men who are now
held in reverence the world over for their courage in braving
the perils of an unknown sea and an equally unknown shore,
to face the dangers of savage men and savage beasts, in their

28

constancy to what they believed to be their duty, and for
planting on this spot the great principles of a government
by the people,—

“A church without a bishop,

A state without a king.”

Here is their writing, some of it quaint and crabbed, some
fair and legible. Here, on these very pages, rested the
hands fresh from handling the sword and the musket or the
peaceful implements of husbandry, of Bradford and Brewster
and Standish and others of that heroic band. Here is the
original laying-out of the first street,—Leyden street. Here
is the plan of the plots of ground first assigned for yearly
use, which they called, in the tinge of the Dutch tongue
they had acquired in their long residence in Holland, “meersteads.”
Here are the simple and yet wise rules—laws they
can hardly be called—laid down for the government of the
infant colony.

Here is the order establishing jury trial in Governor
Bradford’s writing, the order for the first custom laws,
the division of cattle into lots, one cow being divided
into thirteen lots. It was four years after the Landing
before any domestic cattle were brought over, and in order
to equalize them they were divided into lots, each family
having one. It must have been a pretty nice affair to
divide the milk of one cow among thirteen parties, to satisfy
all.

Here also is the second patent to the company from the
Earl of Warwick, granted in 1629, with its great wax seal
engraved for the purpose, and the original box in which it
came from England. Here are signatures, also, of nearly
as much interest as those of the Pilgrims themselves,—the
marks of the original proprietors of all these broad fields
and forests, whose names are represented by signs of bows
and tortoises, of reptiles and animals.

29

Here are also ancient deeds written in the Indian language,
as put in form by Eliot and Mayo. The record clerk must
have had his patience severely taxed when they were copied.

The Registry of Probate is on the second floor, where with
the several offices there is a beautiful court room for the
Probate sessions. The filing and registry room is a model
for convenience in safe keeping and reference to papers concerning
estates.

Opposite Court Square is the Memorial Methodist
Episcopal Church, a fine building erected in 1885-86, which
is an ornamental and prominent feature of the locality.

The building at the right of the church is the Old Colony
Club, instituted in 1769. Next beyond is Russell Building,
in which is located the Pilgrim Bookstore, where will be
found a large and varied collection of souvenirs, views of
interesting localities, books of Pilgrim story and history,
post cards and mementos of a visit to “Pilgrim Land.”

PILGRIM MEERSTEADS.

30

The Prison

“I stood in Venice, on the Bridge of Sighs—

A palace and a prison on each hand.”

In the rear of the Court House stands the
former County Prison, a substantial brick
building, with granite trimmings. It is now
used for temporary detention of prisoners at
trial, and by agreement with the Commissioners
the town of Plymouth leases a portion of the building
for a police station.

COUNTY PRISON.

In May, 1908, the County purchased a large farm at the
south part of the town, and erected suitable buildings of
cement concrete, and prisoners convicted of minor offences
are there kept at work with the design of making the penal
institution self-supporting, as well as contributing to the
health and general welfare of offenders detained for short

31

terms. The new prison is light, commodious and airy, and
has 140 cells for men, and 12 for women. The number of
prisoners averages about 120, about half of them being
“trusties,” who perform the farm labor cheerfully, with but
little oversight other than that necessary for direction. The
prisoners were transferred from the old jail in the middle
of July, 1911. Sheriff Earl P. Blake rules humanely but
firmly, and is as popular with his criminal household as he
is throughout the county. This rational employment of
prison labor for self support, is working splendidly, and the
farm, the first of the kind in this country to be established
on such a basis, is visited with much interest by officials
connected with the criminal institutions of this and other
states for the purpose of learning the methods of administration.

The Rock

“A rock in the wilderness welcomed our sires

From bondage far over the dark rolling sea;

On that holy altar they kindled the fires,

Jehovah, which glow in our bosoms for thee.”

Continuing our way along Court Street a
little farther, we come to North Street, at
which point the name of the main thoroughfare
changes to Main Street, the business
section of the town. Turning down North
Street, leading to the water, in a little distance we come to
the brow of the hill. On the left, Winslow Street winds
northward, and on it we see an old mansion, partially hidden
by two noble old linden trees. This house was built by
Edward Winslow, brother to Gen. John Winslow in 1754.
He had the frame got out in England and brought over for

32

this purpose. The trees in front were planted by his daughter
about 1760. Additions were made to the house in 1898,
which is now owned and occupied by Mrs. C. L. Willoughby.

WINSLOW HOUSE, BUILT IN 1734.

Descending the hill to the harbor front at our right a short
distance we see a beautiful and artistic structure of granite
in the shape of a canopy, supported on four columns, and
under this is the Rock, now world-famous. (At this writing
in 1919, the comprehensive plans of the Tercentenary
Commission contemplate displacing commercial structures
and improving the harbor front in the vicinage of the
Rock.) The upper portion of the renowned boulder, nearly
all of that which is now in sight, was for one hundred and
six years separated from the original Rock, and during this
long period occupied localities remote from the Landing-place.
In 1774, during the series of events leading to the
Revolution, an attempt to raise the Rock for transportation
to Town Square disclosed the fact that the upper portion
had become separated from the lower, probably through
action of frost. It was taken to the Square where it was
deposited at the foot of a liberty pole from which waved a
flag bearing the motto, “Liberty or death.”

33

NORTH STREET.

34

CANOPY OVER PLYMOUTH ROCK—COLE’S HILL.

It remained
there until 1834, when at a celebration of the Fourth of
July it was carried in procession to Pilgrim Hall, deposited
in the front area, and inclosed by an iron fence. Here the
separated part of the Rock remained forty-six years, its
incongruous position away from the water not being understood
by visitors without lengthy explanation. Mr. Stickney,
the gentleman by whose liberality the alterations in Pilgrim
Hall were being made in the summer of 1880, recognized
the impropriety of this condition, and proposed reuniting the
parts at the original Landing-place. The Pilgrim Society
readily acceded to this proposition, and accordingly on Monday,
Sept. 27, 1880, without ceremony, this part of the Rock
was placed beneath the Monumental Canopy at the waterside,
the reunited pieces, after a separation of one hundred
and six years, probably now presenting much the same
appearance as when the Pilgrim shallop grazed its side. As
to the identity of this Rock, and the certainty of its being
the very one consecrated by the first touch of Pilgrim feet on

35

this shore, there is not the slightest loophole for a doubt.
Ancient records, now accessible, refer to it as an object of
prominence on the shore, before the building of the wharf
about it in the year 1741. Thomas Faunce, the elder of the
church, who was born in 1647 and died in 1746, at the age of
99, was the son of John Faunce, who came over in the “Ann”
in 1623. At the age of ninety-five years hearing that the
Rock, which from youth he had venerated was to be disturbed,
he visited the locality, related the history of the Rock as told
him by his father and contemporary Pilgrims, and in the
presence of many witnesses declared it to be that upon which
the Forefathers landed in 1620. Thus it has been pointed
out and identified from one generation to another, and from
the days of the first comers to the present time. Not a
shadow of distrust rests upon it as being the identical spot
where the first landing was effected on the shore of Plymouth.

About a century and three-fourths have elapsed since
Elder Faunce gave his personal testimony, and the lives of
two or three elderly people cover that period, so the evidence
is of positive rather than traditional character.

The Rock was originally a solid boulder of about seven
tons, and undoubtedly a glacial deposit. It is greenish
syenite, very hard, and bears high polish when its fragments
are worked for various purposes.

36

The Landing

Let us picture to ourselves the scene on that
Monday morning, when, after the rest on
Clark’s Island they came in their shallop to
inspect the new country that they had providentially
found. The wharves and buildings
and every trace of civilization vanish. All is wild and
unknown. Across the harbor comes the boat and every eye
anxiously and keenly scanning the strange
shore to discover the presence of human
beings, who will be sure to
be enemies. They coast
along the shore by cliff and
lowland, hand on weapon,
every sense alert for the
expected warwhoop
and attack, a steep
and sandy cliff,
(Cole’s Hill) the base
of which is washed by
the water meets their
eyes; at its foot a great
boulder, brought from some
far-away coast by a glacier, in some long-gone age. Oval in
form, with a flat top, it seems the very place to bring the
great clumsy boat up to, as from its crest they can spring to
the shore, dry-shod, a matter which, after their previous wading
in the ice-cold water at the Cape, is of no small moment.
The shallop is steered to its side; the company steps upon the
Rock, and the
Landing of the Forefathers
, now so
reverently commemorated, is completed. Look along the
shore at this day, north or south, and you may see cliffs as

37

Cole’s Hill was then, with the mouth of Town Brook near
by the Rock, which later made a safe little harbor for their
boats in the rear of the dwellings which they erected on the
south side of Leyden Street. Divested of romance thrown
around it by time, it should be remembered that the “Landing,”
Dec. 21, 1620, was that of the exploring party which
had coasted around the bay, the “Mayflower” then being in
Cape Cod Harbor.

THE GURNET.

This party was made up of “ten of their principal men,”
according to Bradford, whose names, as given in “Mourt’s
Relation,” were Captain Standish, Governor Carver, William
Bradford, Edward Winslow, John Tilley, Edward Tilley,
John Howland, from Leyden; with Richard Warren, Stephen
Hopkins and Edward Dotey from London, and also two of
the Pilgrim’s seamen, John Allerton and Thomas English.
In addition to these, Captain Jones of the “Mayflower” sent
three of his seamen, with his two mates and pilots named
Clarke and Coppin. The master gunner of the ship by
importunity also got leave to accompany them. Thus the
shallop contained eighteen men, twelve of the “Mayflower”
company and six of Jones’ men.

According to “Mourt’s Relation,” the exploring party,
having landed from the Rock, “marched also into the land

38

and found divers cornfields and little running brooks, a
place very good for situation. So we returned to our Ship
again with good news to the rest of the people, which did
much comfort their hearts.”

The “Mayflower” weighs her anchor, Dec. 26, 1620, and
spreading sail moves across the bay. Feeling carefully their
way, they pass the Gurnet and navigate along the channel
inside the beach, until in the wide bend towards the town
just above the present Beach wharf, as is believed by those
who have studied the situation, the anchor is dropped, not
to be again disturbed until the following spring. But the
location is not yet settled. Some, with the alarm of the
recent encounters vividly impressed upon them, think the
Island, surrounded by water and easily defended, would be
a good place. Jones river, sending its unimpeded waters to
meet the waves of the bay, attracts the attention of others.
“So in the morning, after we had called on God for direction,
we came to this resolution, to go presently ashore
again, and to take a better view of two places which we
thought most fitting for us; for we could not now take time
for further search or consideration, our vituals being much
spent, especially our beer, and it being now the 19th of
December (old style). After our landing and visiting the
places, so well as we could, we came to a conclusion, by most
voices, to set on a high ground, where there is a great deal
of land cleared, and hath been planted with corn three or
four years ago; and there is a very sweet brook runs under
the hillside, and many delicate springs of as good water as
can be drunk, and where we may harbor our shallops and
boats exceedingly well; and in this brook fish in their season;
on the further side of the river also much corn ground
cleared. In one field is a great hill on which we point to
make a platform, and plant our ordance, which will command
all around about. From thence we may see into the

39

bay, and far into the sea; and we may see thence Cape Cod.
Our greatest labor will be the fetching of our wood, which
is half a quarter of an English mile; but there is enough so
far off. What people inhabit here we yet know not, for as yet
we have seen none. So there we made our rendezvous, and a
place for some of our people, about twenty, resolving in the
morning to come all ashore and to build houses.”

Cole’s Hill

“Not Winter’s sullen face,

Not the fierce, tawny race

In arms arrayed,

Not hunger shook their faith;

Not sickness’ baleful breath,

Not Carver’s early death,

Their souls dismayed.”

Ascending the broad flight of steps leading
to the brow of the hill, and turning to the
left, we tread upon sacred, hallowed ground.
Here were buried, in that dark, sad winter in
which they landed, half of their little band.
The terrible tale is told concisely by the narrator already
quoted. “This month (March) thirteen of our number die.
And in three months past dies half our company—the
greatest part in the depth of winter, wanting houses and
other comforts, being afflicted with the scurvy and other
diseases which their long voyage and unaccommodate condition
brought upon them, so as there die sometimes two or
three a day. Of a hundred persons scarce fifty remaining;
the living scarce able to bury the dead; the well not sufficient
to tend the sick, there being in their time of greatest distress,
but six or seven, who spare no pains to help them.” They
buried them on this hill, and levelled the graves, and in the
spring following planted grain above them, that the Indians
might not know the extent of their great loss.

40

PILGRIM EXILES.

At four different
times the remains have been discovered. In 1735, in
a great rain, the water, rushing down Middle Street to the
harbor, caused a deep gully there, exposing human remains
and washing them into the sea. In 1855, workmen engaged
in digging trenches for the water works found parts of
five skeletons. The graves were in the roadway, about five
rods south of the foot of Middle Street. One of the skulls
was sent to a competent anatomist in Boston, and was pronounced
to be of the Caucasian race. The remains were
carefully gathered and placed in a metallic box, properly
inscribed, and interred on Burial Hill, subsequently being
deposited in the chamber of the canopy over the Rock, at its
completion in the year 1867. Again, on the 8th of October,
1883, during grading on the hill, other remains were found
which were carefully removed, and afterwards, on the 20th
of November, enclosed in a lead box and re-interred on the
precise spot of their original burial. Directly over the grave
a granite slab has been placed by order of the town, bearing
an appropriate inscription. On the 27th of November, 1883,

41

others still were found which lie undisturbed near the last,
and their exact resting-place is designated on the memorial
slab above mentioned. Cole’s Hill has other histories, also.
From the first days its position above and commanding the
harbor led to its being selected as a place of defence. In
1742 the General Court granted a sum of money to the town
to erect a battery here. In 1775, the old defence having
gone to decay, a new one was built and manned, and continued
to be kept up during the war. In 1814 still another fort
was thrown up here, and placed in charge of companies of
soldiers stationed in the town. In 1915-16 the brow of the
hill southeast of Middle Street was filled off, continuing
the esplanade from North to Leyden Street, much improving
former conditions. (Extensive changes are about to be
made on the level of the hill, and the Pilgrim graves recovered
from the highway and properly marked.)

Leyden Street

(Originally named First Street, afterwards in the Records called Great and Broad Street; named Leyden Street in 1823.)

“There first was heard the welcome strain

Of axe and hammer, saw and plane.”

Walking around the brow of the hill
through Carver Street, we pass the handsome
vestry of the Baptist church, built in 1915,
and next the Universalist church, erected in
1826 on the spot where stood the ancient
Allyne House, one of the last of its architecture to disappear
in the colony. Standing on this elevation, we can see the
reason for the selection of this place for the settlement.
There below us, are the waters of “the very sweet brook,”
into which the “many delicate springs” still continue to run.

42

How sweet they must have tasted to the palates of those poor
stormtossed wayfarers, who for months had been drinking the
ship’s stale water! Sweet and pure they are now as they were
then. Then the brook came to the sea in its natural wildness,
unfettered by bridge or dam. Where it met the waters of
the ocean was quite a wide estuary, so that before the lower
bridge was built schooners of considerable size were wintered
here nearly up to the second bridge. Beyond it is the land
where there was “much corn land cleared.” Just below the
junction of Carver and Leyden streets they built their first
building, a “common house.” In 1801, in digging a cellar at
that place, several tools and a plate of iron were found, which
without doubt were in this “common house.” This house was
about twenty feet square, and thatched. It took fire in the
roof Jan. 14, 1621, and the thatch was burnt. It was a
common log house, such as built now by Western pioneers,
and probably was not used many years. These articles found
were probably left in it unnoticed when vacated and only
came to light when the little colony to whom they were so
useful had expanded into a great nation. A sign and bronze
tablet now mark this spot.

“Mourt’s Relation” furnishes us an interesting record:—

“Thursday, the 28th (old style) of December, so many as
could went to work on the hill, where we proposed to build
our platform for our ordnance, and which doth command all
the plain and the bay, and from whence we may see far into
the sea, and might be easier impaled, having two rows of
houses and a fair street. So in the afternoon we went to
measure out the grounds; and first we took notice how many
families there were, willing all single men that had no wives
to join with some family, as they thought fit, so that we
might build fewer houses; which done, and we reduced them
to nineteen families.

“To greater families we alloted larger plots; to every

43

person half a pole in breadth and three in length, and so
lots were cast where every man should lie; which was done
and staked out,” and this was laying out of Leyden Street,
so named in 1823. An unfinished plan of this street is to
be seen on the old records of the Colony, at the Registry of
Deeds. The full plot of the little settlement was about as
shown in the annexed line drawing.

Burial Hill.

The Brook

Edw Winslow.

Town Square.

Gov. Bradford.

Francis Cooke.

Mr. Isaac Allerton.

John Billington.

A Highway leading to Town Brook.

King St. now Main St.

Mr. William Brewster.

First Street—now Leyden St.

Stephen Hopkins.

John Goodman.

John Howland.

Peter Brown.

Samuel Fuller.

Common House.

Cole’s Hill
First Burial Place.

The Harbor

44

POST OFFICE AND CUSTOM HOUSE.

Continuing up Leyden street to Main street, we pass on
our left the U. S. Government post office and custom house
building, a handsome Colonial edifice completed in 1915.
This site is peculiarly and historically appropriate for the
Federal building, as it is the lot assigned to William Brewster,
Dec. 28, 1620, (old style), in the laying out just
described. He was the elder or spiritual teacher of the Pilgrims,
so on his homestead where he taught religious liberty
which distinguishes our country, the Nation places its representative
cornerstone—a most happy coincidence of the
marking of Colonial and National beginnings. The public
fountain at the corner gives invitation to “freely drink and
quench your thirst” from the Pilgrim Spring on the Brewster
meerstead, the water of which is sent by electric power
from the cool, copiously gushing source near the bank of
Town Brook, 200 feet away.

45

Plymouth in 1627

In 1627, Isaac DeRaiseres, an officer from the
Dutch Colony of New Netherland, now New
York, visited Plymouth, and in a letter to
Holland sends the following description of
appearance of the place:—

“New Plymouth lies on the slope of a hill stretching east
toward the sea coast, with a broad street about a cannon shot
of eight hundred (yards) long, leading down the hill, with a
(street) crossing in the middle northwards to the rivulet and
southwards to the land.
[1]
The houses
are constructed of hewn planks, with
gardens also enclosed behind and at the
sides with hewn planks, so that their
houses and court-yards are arranged in
very good order, with a stockade
against a sudden attack; and at the
ends of the street are three
wooden gates. In the centre, on
the cross street, stands the Governor’s
house, before which is a
square enclosure, upon which
four patereros (steen-stucken) are mounted, so as to flank
along the streets. Upon the hill they have a large square
house, with a flat roof, made of thick sawn planks, stayed
with oak beams, upon the top of which they have six cannons,
which shoot iron balls of four and five pounds, and
command the surrounding country.”

[1]
An error in statement of the points of the compass is here evident. It should
be “southwards to the rivulet and northwards to the land.”

46

Town Square

Above Main and Market streets we enter
Town Square, shaded by its noble elms,
planted in 1784. On the corner of Main
Street, a large building was built in 1875 by
Mayflower Lodge I. O. O. F., covering the
spot on which stood the house of William Bradford, so
many years, the Pilgrim governor. It was burned January
10, 1904, and the “Governor Bradford Building,” a handsome
brick structure with stores and offices took its place.
A bronze tablet calls attention to the locality.

GOV. BRADFORD’S HOUSE IN 1621.

Above this is the Congregational Church, known as the
“Church of the Pilgrimage.”

The present building was erected in 1840, and stands very
near the site of the First Meeting-house in Plymouth, built
in 1638. A tablet on the front of the church bears the following
inscription:—

47

This tablet is inscribed in grateful memory of the Pilgrims and of
their successors who, at the time of the Unitarian controversy in
1801, adhered to the belief of the Fathers, and on the basis of the
original creed and covenant perpetuated, at great sacrifice, in the
Church of the Pilgrimage, the evangelical faith and fellowship of
the Church of Scrooby, Leyden, and the “Mayflower,” organized in
England in 1606.

CHURCH OF THE PILGRIMAGE.

Opposite is an old building, now the Town House, on
which is a historical bronze tablet. It was built in 1749 as
a court house, the town contributing a part of the cost for
the privilege of using it. When the new court house was
built, in 1820, this old colonial building was purchased by
the town and in it most of the town officers are located, also
public sanitary conveniences. At the head of the square is
the First Parish Church, the original church of the Pilgrims.

The first “Meeting-house,” as the Pilgrims called church
edifices, to distinguish them from houses of worship of the

48

established church, has been proved, by the investigations
of Mr. W. T. Davis, to have stood on the north side of the
square, near the spot occupied by the present Governor
Bradford building. Of this we know but little, except that
it was erected in 1638, (the Forefathers before that time
worshipping in the fort on the hill), and had a bell. In
1683 a new building was erected, not on the same lot, but
farther out at the head of the square. This was forty-five
by forty feet, sixteen feet in the walls, had a Gothic roof,
diamond window glass and a bell.

In 1744, still another church was built on or near the
same site. This remained until 1830, when a Gothic edifice
was erected. This stood farther up the hill than the previous
one, and was destroyed by fire Nov. 22, 1892. The
present stone building was completed and dedicated on
December 21, 1899, and has on its front, tablets designating
it as the first church. Its entrance portal is a fine reproduction
of the arched doorway of the old church at Austerfield,
England, in which Gov. Bradford was christened.

CHURCH OF THE FIRST PARISH.

49

Burial Hill

“The Pilgrim Fathers are at rest;

When Summer’s throned on high,

And the world’s warm breast is in verdure dressed,

Go, stand on the hill where they lie.”

Beyond and above Town Square stretches
the verdant slope consecrated from the earliest
years of the colony as a place of sepulture.
Here repose the ashes of those who
survived the first winter. “In one field a
great hill, on which we point to make a platform and plant
our ordnance, which will command all round about. From
thence we may see into the bay and far into the sea.”
Marble tablets mark the location of the Old Fort and Watch
Tower, while numerous stones and monuments, which can
easily be deciphered, point out resting places of Pilgrims
and descendants.

GOV. BRADFORD’S MONUMENT, BURIAL HILL.

The marble obelisk in memory of Gov. William Bradford,
the second governor, with its Hebrew text, now difficult to

50

decipher, but translated by good authority to read: “Let the
right hand of the Lord awake,” together with a Latin
inscription, freely rendered: “Do not basely relinquish what
the Fathers with difficulty attained,” erected in 1825, is
near to us, and around it are numerous stones, marking the
graves of his descendants. On the south side of the Governor’s
obelisk is inscribed:

H I William Bradford of Austerfield Yorkshire England. Was
the son of William and Alice Bradford, He was Governor of Plymouth
Colony from 1621 to 1633 1635 1637 1639 to 1643 1645 to 1657

GRAVE OF THOMAS CLARK, 1697.

On the north side:

Under this stone rest the ashes of William Bradford a zealous
Puritan & sincere Christian Gov. of Ply. Col. from 1621 to 1657,
(the year he died) aged 69, except 5 yrs, which he declined.

A little back, on a path to the rear entrance to the hill is
the oldest stone in the cemetery. It must be remembered

51

that for many years the colonists had far other cares, and
many other uses for their little savings, than to provide
stones to mark their graves. These had to be imported from
England at much cost, and consequently it was some years
before any were able to afford the expense. The oldest stone
is that to the memory of Edward Gray, 1681. Mr. Gray
was a merchant, and one of the wealthiest men in the colony.
Near the head of this path is a stone to William
Crowe, 1683-84. Near by is one to Thomas Clark, 1697,
erroneously reputed to have been the mate of the “Mayflower,”
but who came in the “Ann,” in 1623. Clark’s
Island received its name from John Clark, now known to
have been the mate of the “Mayflower.” Beside the grave
of Thomas Clark is that of his son, Nathaniel, who was one
of the councillors of Sir Edward Andros, Governor of New
England. Other old stones are those of Mrs. Hannah
Clark, 1697; and John Cotton, 1699. These are all the
original stones bearing dates in the seventeenth century.
There are some with dates of that century which have been
erected since, by descendants, including the monument to
Governor Bradford, before alluded to: the fine granite shaft
to Robert Cushman; and the stone over the remains of John
Howland. The inscription on the latter stone reads as follows:—

Here ended the Pilgrimage of JOHN HOWLAND who died February
23, 167 2-3, aged above 80 years. He married Elizabeth
daughter of JOHN TILLEY who came with him in the Mayflower
Dec. 1620. From them are descended a numerous posterity.

“Hee was a godly man and an ancient professor in the wayes of
Christ. Hee was one of the first comers into this land and was the
last man that was left of those that came over in the Shipp called
the Mayflower that lived in Plymouth.”—(Plymouth Records.)

Near the Bradford monument are the graves of his family.
The face of the stone at the grave of his son, Major
William Bradford, shelled off in 1876-77, but the inscription

52

has since been retraced. The cut following is reproduced
from a view taken of the original, and is an exact

facsimile
—

Here lyes ye body of ye honourable Major William Bradford, who
expired Feb’ ye 20th, 1703-4, aged 79 years.

He lived long, but still was doing good,

And in his country’s service lost much blood,

And a life well spent, he’s now at rest,

His very name and memory is blest.

GRAVE OF MAJOR WILLIAM BRADFORD.

At the grave of another son the headstone reads as follows:

Here lyes interred ye body of Mr. Joseph Bradford, son of the
late Honorable William Bradford, Esq., Governor of Plymouth,
Colony, who departed this life July the 10th, 1715 in the eighty-fifth
year of his age.

53

The following are some of the inscriptions of the older
stones:

Here lyes ye body of Mrs. Hannah Sturtevant, aged about sixty-four
years. Dec. in March, 1708-9.

Here lyes buried the body of Mr. Thomas Faunce, ruling elder of
the First Church of Christ in Plymouth. Deceased Feb’y, 27, 1745,
in the ninety-ninth year of his age.

The fathers—where are they?

Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord.

GRAVE OF DR. FRANCIS LEBARON.

“THE NAMELESS NOBLEMAN.”

(Elder Faunce was the last who held the office of ruling
elder in the church. He was contemporary with many of
the first comers, and from him comes much of the information
we possess about the localities now venerated.)

The epitaphs in old graveyards possess much interest to
the lovers of the quaint and curious, and this first cemetery

54

of New England is not without its attraction of that kind.
The following are some of the most interesting:—

This stone is erected to the memory of that unbiased judge, faithful
officer, sincere friend, and honest man, Col. Isaac Lothrop who
resigned his life on the 26th day of April, 1750, in the forty-third
year of his age.

Had Virtue’s charms the power to save

Its faithful votaries from the grave,

This stone had ne’er possessed the fame

Of being marked with Lothrop’s name.

A row of stones on the top of the hill, near the marble
tablet marking the locality of the Watch Tower, is raised to
the memory of the ministers of the First Parish. Back of
these is the Judson lot, where the sculptor’s chisel has perpetuated
the remembrance of Rev. Adoniram Judson, the
celebrated missionary to Burmah, whose body was committed
to the keeping of Old Ocean. On the westerly side of the
hill is a monument erected by Stephen Gale of Portland,
Me:—

To the memory of seventy-two seamen, who perished in Plymouth
Harbor, on the 26th and 27th days of December, 1778, on board the
private armed brig, General Arnold, of twenty guns, James Magee,
of Boston, Commander; sixty of whom were buried in this spot.

About midway on the easterly slope a little to the north
of the main path up the hill, on the stone to a child aged
one month:—

He glanced into our world to see

A sample of our miserie.

On a stone a little farther north, to the memory of four
children, aged respectively thirty-six, twenty-one, seventeen
and two years:—

Stop traveller and shed a tear

Upon the fate of children dear.

On the path towards the schoolhouse on a stone to a
woman with an infant child by her side:—

55

Come view the seen, ’twill fill you with surprise,

Behold the loveliest form in nature dies;

At noon she flourished, blooming, fair and gay;

At evening an extended corpse she lay.

Near the entrance to this path is the grave of a Revolutionary
soldier, Capt. Jacob Taylor, died 1788:—

Through life he braved her foe, if great or small,

And marched out foremust at his country’s call.

On this path is the grave of Joseph Bartlett, who died in
1703:—

Thousands of years after blest Abel’s fall,

’Twas said of him, being dead he speaketh yet;

From silent grave methinks I hear a call:—

Pray, fellow mortals, don’t your death forget.

You that your eyes cast on this grave,

Know you a dying time must have.

Near the same place is a curious stone, to the memory of
John Cotton:—

Here lyes interred three children, viz., three sons of Rev. Mr. John

Cotton, who died in the work of the gospel ministry at

Charlestown, South Carolina, Sept.

ye 18th, 1869, where he had great success, and seven sons of

Josiah Cotton, Esq., who died in their infancy.

On the southerly slope of the hill, near a pine grove, is
a stone to a child:—

The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children’s teeth are
set on edge.

On the stone to the memory of Thomas Jackson, died in
1794:—

The spider’s most attenuated thread

Is cord, is cable, to man’s tender tie.

MARTHA COTTON, 1796.

Many years I lived

Many painful scenes I passed,

Till God at last

Called me home.

56

In a long lot enclosed with an iron fence:—

F. W. Jackson. obit M. C. H. 23, 1797, 1 yr. 7 dys,

Heav’n knows what man

He might have made. But we

He died a most rare boy.

FANNIE CROMBIE.

As young as beautiful; and soft as young,

And gay as soft; and innocent as gay.

57

A little farther on in this path is the stone to Tabitha
Plasket, 1807, the epitaphs, on which, written supposedly
by herself, breaths such a spirit of defiance that it attracts
much attention:—

Adieu, vain world, I’ve seen enough of thee;

And I am careless what thou say’st of me;

Thy smiles I wish not,

Nor thy frowns I fear,

I am now at rest, my head lies quiet here,

Mrs. Plasket, in her widowhood, taught a private school
for small children, at the same time, as was the custom of
her day, doing her spinning. Her mode of punishment was
to pass skeins of yarn under the arms of the little culprits,
and hang them upon pegs. A suspended row was a ludicrous
sight.

Mr. Joseph Plasket (husband of Tabitha) died in 1794,
at the age of forty-eight years. The widow wrote his epitaph
as follows:—

All you that doth behold my stone,

Consider how soon I was gone.

Death does not always warning give,

Therefore be careful how you live.

Repent in time, no time delay,

I in my prime was called away.

Nearly opposite this is one on a very young child:—

The babe that’s caught from womb and breast,

Claim right to sing above the rest,

Because they found the happy shore

They never saw or sought below.

As this path comes out on the brow of the hill, near a
white fence, is a stone to Elizabeth Savery, 1831:—

Remember me as you pass by,

As you are now, so once was I;

As I am now, so you will be,

Therefore prepare to follow me.

58

On the path by the fence in the rear of the hill:—

The father and the children dead,

We hope to Heaven their souls have fled.

The widow now alone is left,

Of all her family bereft.

May she now put her trust in God,

To heal the wound made by His rod.

On a stone raised to the memory of a child:—

He listened for a while to hear

Our mortal griefs; then turned his ear

To angel harps and songs, and cried

To join their notes celestial, sigh’d and died.

GRAVE OF NATHANIEL GOODWIN.

59

A little from the path up Burial Hill to the left, just
below the tall Cushman monument, a marble tablet designates
the spot where the fort of the little colony was situated,
quite a portion of its outline still being distinct, particularly
at the easterly corner. We can see at once with what
sagacity the site was chosen, undoubtedly by Standish. It
commanded Leyden Street, and the approaches from the
brook over which the Indians came.

THE OLD FORT AND FIRST MEETING HOUSE, 1621.

Standing here, we have a view of the southern part of
the town. The blue heights of Manomet Hills shut in the
horizon. Beyond them lies the little hamlet of South Plymouth,
a rural village with summer hotels, the Ardmore Inn
and Idlewild hotels of considerable celebrity, especially
among sportsmen, to which the very spacious and beautiful
Mayflower Inn has been added in 1917. On this side is the
village of Chiltonville, with its churches and factories. Far
down to the shore, near the head of the Beach, is the Hotel
Pilgrim. Just south of the hotel are the beautiful level
lawns and attractive cozy club-house of the Plymouth Country

60

Club, the golf links being situated on the opposite side
of Warren avenue, running over high, clear, breezy fields and
commanding a splendid view of ocean and of land. Near lies
the southerly portion of the main part of the town, divided
by the brook. Across the stream, or pond, just beyond
Main Street extension with its bridge built in 1907-8, is the
public common, laid out very early as a “Training Green,”
the name it bears today. It is an attractive square surrounded
with large elm trees, and in its centre stands the
monument erected in 1869 to the memory of the Soldiers
and Sailors of Plymouth, who gave their lives for the country
in the Civil War. Before the Pilgrims came the Green
was an Indian cornfield.

MANOMET BLUFFS.

61

Watson’s Hill

Above the Green is Watson’s Hill, now covered
with houses. This was the “
Cantauganteest
”
of the Indians, one of their favorite
resorts where they had their summer
camps, and on the level below planted their
corn. It is famous as the opening scene of the treaty with
Massasoit, made April 1, 1621. Gov. Bradford had a tract
of land assigned him here on which to raise corn, and to
this day portions of the hill remain in the Bradford name
and others of direct descent from him.

WATSON’S HILL.

The Watch Tower

A little to the north of the site of the old fort another
tablet marks the place of the brick watch tower erected in
1643. The locality of this tower is indicated by four stone
posts set in the ground to mark its corners. The brick

62

foundations are still there, about a foot below the surface,
and the old hearthstone on which the Pilgrims built their
watch fires still lies where they placed it, on the southerly
side of the enclosure. The location of the tower was discovered
many years ago in digging a grave, when the sexton
came upon the foundation. The town records of Sept. 23,
1643, have the following entry in regard to it: “It is agreed
upon the whole that there shall be a watch house forthwith,
built of brick, and that Mr. Grimes will sell us the
brick at eleven shillings a thousand.”

SITE OF THE WATCH TOWER, 1643.

Back of this is seen the lot of Rev. Adoniram Judson, the famous missionary to Burmah.

This is the first mention of brick in the records of the
colony, and it is to be presumed that this marks about the
time of the first brickyards. The cause of the tower being
built was probably the threatenings of the Indians, which
resulted in the Narragansett war.

63

ALONG THE WHARVES.

Still later, in 1676, another fortification was erected on
the hill, presumably covering the same area, enclosing a
hundred feet square, “with palisadoes ten and one half feet
high, and three pieces of ordnance planted on it.” The town
agreed with Nathaniel Southworth to build a watch house,
“which is to be sixteen feet in length, twelve feet in breadth,
and eight feet stud, to be walled with boards, and to have
two floors, the upper floor to be six feet above the tower, to
batten the walls and make a small pair of stairs in it, the
roof to be covered with shingles, and a chimney to be built
in it. For the said work he is to have eight pounds, either
in money or other pay equivalent.” This being only thirty-two
years after the building of the brick tower, it would
seem as if the latter could hardly have fallen or been taken
down, and it is possible if not probable, that the wooden
watch tower was built upon the old brick one; but of this
we can only conjecture. This was in the period of King
Philip’s war in 1675. From here might have been seen the
blaze of the houses of Eel River (now Chiltonville), and
the terrible warwhoop almost heard as the savages burst

64

upon the little hamlet near Bramhall’s corner on that peaceful
Sabbath in March, 1676, when they left eleven dead
bodies of women and children and smoking ruins to mark
their savage onslaught.

The Harbor

OFF BEACH POINT.

We have, from the easterly brow of Burial Hill,
a beautiful picture of the harbor and its surroundings.
Below us the ground slopes to
the water, cut into terrace below terrace,
with the buildings upon them. At its foot
are the wharves and harbor, and below it the Beach near
which the “Mayflower” swung at her anchors. Manomet is
the range of misty blue hills stretching into the bay on the
right. Kingston and Duxbury, with Captain’s Hill are on
the left, and far out Clark’s Island, Saquish, and the Gurnet,
with the thin, sandy strip of beach joining the latter headlands.
On the Gurnet is Fort Andrew, and at Saquish is
Fort Standish, both earthworks, built by the Government
during the Civil war of 1861-65, but now dismantled and

65

unused. These sites are the property of the United States.
The Gurnet, it is said, takes its name from a somewhat
similar promontory in the English channel, near Plymouth,
England. On it are located a United States life-saving
station, twin lighthouses and a Dabol trumpet fog signal.
A whistling buoy at the entrance of the harbor, opposite
the Gurnet, gives warning in thick weather, of the dangerous
Brown’s Island shoal. Saquish is an Indian word signifying
an abundance of clams. Clark’s Island was named
from the mate of the “Mayflower,” who commanded the
shallop on the expedition when the island was discovered.

The following statistics were furnished by Capt. A. M.
Harrison from the United States Survey of 1853-57: From
the shore end of Long Wharf, in a straight line, to Gurnet
Light, the distance is four and seven-sixteenths statute miles,
or, three and seven-eighths nautical miles. The length of
Plymouth Beach, from the foot of Manomet Hills to the
beacon on extreme point, is three and five-sixteenths statute
miles, or two and seven-eights nautical miles. The length
of the Beach from its junction with the mainland to the
beacon, is two and five-eighths statute miles, or two and one-fourth
nautical miles.

Voyage of the Mayflower Shallop

From Burial Hill we can overlook the whole
course of that boat expedition which started on
its voyage of discovery from the “Mayflower”
in Provincetown Harbor, directly opposite us
across the bay. Coasting along the inside of
Cape Cod at the right, its sandy shore hidden by distance
from our sight, some of the exploring party on foot, forcing
their way through the tangled wilderness, sometimes wading

66

in half frozen water through the surf or across brooks,
they slowly make their way. Constantly on the alert, and
two or three times attacked and beating off their assailants,
the shallop now with all the party aboard nears Manomet
point. It begins to snow and rain and the wind to blow
and the seas to rise. Now the hinge of the rudder breaks,
and oars are got out to steer with. Master Coppin, the
pilot, bids them to be of good cheer, for he sees the harbor
which he had promised them.

THE MAYFLOWER IN PLYMOUTH HARBOR.

Across the bay they drive,
keeping on a press of sail to make the desired harbor before
nightfall when crash goes the mast, broken into three pieces,
and the shallop is near being wrecked. Now the flood-tide
takes them and bears them in past the Gurnet nose, and
Master Coppin, finding himself in a strange place that he
had never seen before, throws up his hands and exclaims:
“The Lord be merciful to us, I never saw this place before,”
and in his terror would have run the boat on shore, “in a
cove full of breakers,” between the Gurnet and Saquish;
“but a lusty seaman which steered bade those that rowed,
if they were men, about with her, or else they were all cast
away.” The short twilight of the winter day had faded

67

into darkness, as the storm-tossed and dispirited company
found themselves “under the lee of a small island.” There
it is before us, the third highland to the left—the first
being the Gurnet and the second Saquish. They landed,
and kept their watch that night in a rain. Gov. Bradford,
in his history, gives us a few more particulars: “In the
morning they find the place to be a small island secure from
Indians. And this being the last day of the week, they here
dry their stuff, fix their pieces, rest themselves, return God
thanks for their many deliverances and here the next day
keep their Christian Sabbath.” Tradition says that from a
large rock with a flat top that is there now, bearing the
inscription, “On the Sabbath day we rested,” the first prayer
ascended on this shore; and there, for the first time in New
England, praise and thanks were given to that watchful
Providence that had guided and guarded them. The next
day, Monday, they sailed up to the shore below us, and,
stepping on Plymouth Rock, made the exploration which
ultimately determined them to fix upon this place for their
plantation.

Morton Park

One of the most attractive spots in old Plymouth
and one that the casual visitor does not
always see, is Morton Park. Lying a little
more than a mile from the town centre it
makes a convenient pleasure-ground for
Plymouth people, and the beauty of the place is such as to
attract all lovers of woodland scenery. Nature has done her
most to make the park charming, and man has very wisely
made little attempt to improve it. Nearly 200 acres there
are, consisting of deep woods and open country, hills and
valleys, brooks and ponds.

68

ENTRANCE TO MORTON PARK.

The park nearly surrounds Little Pond, consisting of forty
acres, and borders for a mile on the historic Billington Sea,
which has 308 acres. Roads and paths have been laid out in
romantic situations, and some trees planted, but otherwise
the wild woodland cleared of underbrush remains in its
natural state. In 1889 the land was given to the town by
several public-spirited citizens, and the park was named
for Nathaniel Morton, Esq., one of its principal donors,
who during his life made it his special pride, and gave his
money generously for its improvement.

69

Town Brook

“And there is a very sweet brooke runnes under the hillside, and
many delicate springs of as good water as can be drunke.”

GOV. BRADFORD.

At the foot of Burial Hill, on the south side,
the Town Brook flows through the centre of
the town, “vexed in all its seaward course by
bridges, dams and mills.” Along the banks
the Pilgrims erected their first dwelling-houses
and brought water from “the very sweet brooke”
below, into which the “many delicate springs” still continue
to run.

OUTLET OF BILLINGTON SEA.

It is a favorite resort for artists who delight in
sketching the picturesque scenery and ancient architecture.
One of these springs of deliciously clear cold water, is
forced up from near the brook by electric power, and runs
out in a fountain at the corner of Leyden and Main Streets,
on land once owned by Elder Brewster as previously noted.

70

During the summer many thousands are here refreshed,
and while citizens much enjoy the cooling draughts, visitors
highly commend the public provision which enables them
to partake of the waters of a spring, from which the Pilgrims
themselves daily obtained their supply “of as good
water as can be drunke.”

The stream proceeds from Billington Sea about two
miles distant from the town. It furnishes a valuable water
power at the present, and in the days of the Pilgrims, and
for nearly two centuries after, it abounded with alewives
almost at their doors, affording an important resource for
the supply of their wants. The tide flowed for some distance
up this stream and formed a convenient basin for the
reception and safe shelter of the shallops and other vessels
employed in their earlier enterprises of fishing and traffic.
Under authority of a Legislative act the Town of Plymouth
purchased this estuary in 1909 that the area and surrounding
may be subject to public improvements. From Watson’s
Hill, over this brook, where Market Street crosses it, came
the great sachem Massasoit, with twenty of his braves, on
a visit to the Pilgrims, when was concluded that treaty
April 1, 1621, which during nearly fifty-five years conduced
so effectually to the safety and permanence of the colony.

Old Houses

Plymouth contains many old buildings antedating
the Revolution, but they have been
repaired and modernized so that they do not
have that appearance at present, and visitors
are often disappointed in not finding the
antique structures which they expected. Old people, now living,
can remember when several of these buildings had
“Dutch ovens” and chimneys built on the outside.

71

Old houses still remaining are the Kendall Holmes house
on Winter street, built in 1666; the Leach house, on Summer
Street, built in 1679; the Howland house, 1666; the
Shurtleff house, 1698; the Crowe house, 1664; and the William
Harlow house, built in 1677, partly of the material of
the old fort on Burial Hill. The Howland descendants
recently purchased the old homestead on Sandwich street,
and in the spring of 1913, put it in complete repair, designing
it as a place of annual meeting, and for public visitation
in the summer season. The Cole blacksmith shop, 1684,
which composed part of a building at the corner of Leyden
and Main streets, and was regarded with much interest by
visitors, was badly damaged by fire April 16, 1913, and has
been replaced by a very handsome store building. It is a
coincidence that this old smithy which the Pilgrims knew
on the first Pilgrim street, should have burned on the anniversary
of the day the “Mayflower” sailed on her return
voyage, after passing the winter here in Plymouth harbor.

WM. CROWE HOUSE, 1664.

The Winslow house on North Street is a good example of

72

the colonial style of architecture. It was built about 1754
by Edward Winslow, who was a great-grandson of Gov.
Winslow, of the colony. He purchased the land from Consider,
a grandson of John Howland, who was one of the
“Mayflower” passengers. Additions have recently been made
to the house which is now owned and occupied by Mrs. C.
L. Willoughby. In this house then owned by her father,
Charles Jackson, Miss Lydia Jackson was married to the
famed scholar and philosopher, Ralph Waldo Emerson.

WILLIAM HARLOW HOUSE, 1677.

The Sergeant William Harlow House was built in 1677
of timbers from the fort on Burial Hill, which was taken
down at the close of the King Phillip War. It has recently
been purchased by the Plymouth Antiquarian Society and
is now open to the public.

On the corner of Main and North Streets, built in 1730,
still stands the house of General John Winslow, who removed
the Acadians from Nova Scotia. This was also the home
of James Warren, President of the Provincial Congress.

73

The Town

By the State census of 1920 the population of
Plymouth was 13,032. The total valuation in
1920 was $20,854,025, of which $15,573,175
was real estate, and $5,280,850 personal. The
number of polls assessed was 3,523 and the
acres of land assessed 50,269. Tax rate, $22.80 on $1,000.
The funded debt January 1, 1920, was $188,533 of which
amount $42,933 was water debt, leaving but $145,600 funded
for other purposes. This is extremely moderate in comparison
with the value of the town’s municipal property and
assets, which are net aggregated.

PLYMOUTH HIGH SCHOOL.

Few towns are better provided with city conveniences. A
system of public works, introduced in 1855, supplies the
inhabitants with pure water from the great ponds that lie in
the woods a few miles south of the town. Excellent drainage

74

is secured by an extensive system of sewers, the main
outlets discharging in deep water of the harbor 1500 feet
from the shore. The main thoroughfares are lighted by
electricity, and both electricity and gas are in use for illuminants
in public buildings, stores, factories and dwellings.
Court Street and Main Street, from the N. Y., N. H. & H.
railroad station to the head of Water Street, comprise the
“Great Whiteway” system of arc lighting from underground
wires, with very satisfactory results. These lights were
turned on in the evening of March 1st, 1916, the occasion
having been made an impromptu celebration, in which
several thousands of citizens of Plymouth and neighboring
towns took part. Electric street railways furnish connection
with the adjacent towns, and are a source of much
pleasure in summer for trolley trips to the beaches, hotels,
and suburbs.

PLYMOUTH PUBLIC LIBRARY.

The town has a public library incorporated in 1880, containing

75

nearly 16,000 volumes and a valuable collection of
4,000 large photographs from the finest art subjects in European
galleries. Its schools rank among the best in the State,
and its high-school building, erected in 1891 at a cost of
forty thousand dollars, and enlarged in 1914 at a cost of
more than thirty thousand dollars, has accommodation for
over three hundred pupils. In its religious denominations
holding regular services are represented the Unitarian, Congregational,
Baptist, Universalist, Methodist, Catholic, Episcopal,
Advent, German Lutheran, Christian Scientist, Spiritualist,
Latter Day Saints and Jewish faiths.

Plymouth has good streets, her principal thoroughfares
being macadamized. The sidewalks throughout the centre of
the town are concreted. Her stores are kept abreast of the
times, and a weekly newspaper, the Old Colony Memorial
established May, 1822, chronicles the happenings of local
and neighborhood interest.

The town contains five banking institutions,—Old Colony
and the Plymouth National banks; the Plymouth, the Plymouth
Five Cents and the Plymouth Co-operative savings
banks, occupying two fine brick buildings on Main Street.
There are six excellent hotels within the town limits, four
of them well known as summer resorts. To the credit of
the town be it said, that its citizens are so law abiding that
only a small but very effective uniformed police force is
required, and there is seldom occasion of arrest for any
serious offense.

The fire department has a first-class alarm and motor
system, and is run in regular city style. The town voted in
March, 1916, to reorganize the department under a single
Commissioner, and appropriated about $17,000 for new
motor apparatus. Of the four “auto” pieces, going into
commission in 1917, two are combined chemical and hose;
one a powerful three stream pump, hose and ladder combination;

76

and one a first-class ladder truck. This modern outfit,
in charge of a chief and permanent force at the Central
station, is so quickly effective as to meet emergencies; but
two steamers, one ladder truck and a hose wagon of the old
department, are kept available in case of need.

ARMORY.

The military establishment consists of a fine State armory
which cost $30,000 in which the “Standish Guards,” chartered
in 1818, have their quarters. The “Guards” were one
of the best companies in the dandy Fifth Regiment, and
their past history in the Civil and Spanish wars is highly
creditable. They were “Minute Men of 1861,” responding
under Capt. Charles C. Doten on the first call for troops the
morning of April 16, 1861, and with their regiment, then
the Third Massachusetts, were the very first of any troops of
the war, either National or Volunteer, to go within the rebel
lines as they did when on the gunboat “Pawnee” they ran
the rebel batteries and destroyed the Norfolk navy yard,
and rescued the frigate “Cumberland” on the night of April

77

20, 1861. In the Spanish war, commanded by Capt. W. C.
Butler, they were in camp in the South, but the regiment,
the Fifth, was not sent to Cuba, while all the while in
instant readiness for active service. Again, June 21, 1916,
as company D of the Fifth, they at once responded to the
call for state troops to defend the Mexican border, and
splendidly maintained their patriotic record, under the
command of Capt. Charles H. Robbins,—the Lieut. Col. of
the regiment being their former commander, Capt. W. C.
Butler. The company returned Oct. 21, 1916 and received a
hearty welcome from the townspeople. As part of the
National Guard, the company was mustered into the United
States service for the European war, Aug. 8, 1917, under
command of Capt. A. J. Carr, and with 141 men went into
camp at Framingham, Aug. 17, where the 5th and 9th regiments
were consolidated and became the 101st U. S. N. G.
Infantry, in the 26th Division, embarking for service in
Europe, Sept. 7, 1917.

Its Industries

The character of Plymouth’s industrial life has
entirely changed within a half century. Within
the memory of men now living, the time
was when the town boasted a fleet of seventy-five
fishermen, and enjoyed prestige as a fishing
port. In common with other seaport towns of New
England, this industry has departed, but thriving manufactories
have risen in its place and coal barges and steamships
are doing business at the port, superseding the old fishing
schooners which once crowded the wharves or whitened the
harbor with their sails.

Plymouth’s manufacturing industries show great diversity
of character, and are exceedingly prosperous. The yearly

78

value of their total product is not far from fifteen million
dollars. The great cordage works at North Plymouth are
the very largest concern of the kind in the world, employing
above 2,000 hands, and have built up a flourishing corporation
hamlet in that quarter of the town. Their manufacturing
product is over $10,000,000 a year, and their big steamships
bringing from Yucatan directly to Plymouth great
cargoes of fibre as raw material, give the port, as one of
foreign import, rank in Massachusetts over all other ports of
the state directly next to Boston. There are three large
mills engaged in the production of woolen and worsted cloths,
one busy concern making rugs and mats, while three extensive
factories keep many of Plymouth’s inhabitants employed
in the manufacture of tacks, nails, and rivets. An iron
foundry does a large business in stovemaking, and at Chiltonville
there is a big branch plant of the Boston Woven Hose
and Rubber Company, under Plymouth management which
supports quite a village of its own. Besides these are the
manufactories of insulated wire for electrical purposes, zinc
and copper, saw gummers and swages, barrels, boxes, kegs and
kits, and numerous smaller enterprises. The Plymouth
Electric Light and Power Company furnishes current to
several of these establishments, besides sending current to
Kingston, Duxbury and Marshfield, Middleboro and Carver
for domestic and street lighting. It also lights Plymouth,
having in its circuits of the several towns, nearly 40 miles
of wire. The Cape Cod Canal, on both sides for its entire
length, is illuminated by the P. E. L. Co., through a special
system of heavy aerial conductors comprising a circuit of
about 30 miles.

Plymouth’s manufactured products bear an excellent name
in the markets of the world, her cordage and woolen goods
being particularly well known as of the very best character.

In 1912 the town granted to Andrew Kerr a large area of

79

the sand flats in the harbor for propagation of clams, proving
a good enterprise for the town. The herring fishery,
employing many small boats each autumn at the mouth of
the harbor, is also a productive industry of many thousands
of dollars a season.

Of late years many Plymouth residents have engaged in
cranberry culture on an extensive scale, and their ventures
have been exceedingly profitable, amounting to about
$400,000 yearly. Together with the adjoining town of Carver,
which is still more extensively engaged in cranberry
raising, the two towns produce more than one-fourth of the
cranberries grown in the entire United States. An industry,
which is of large proportions, is the raising of brook trout
and spawn for the markets.

The recent harbor improvements, and the railroad facilities
which will necessarily be increased in 1920, together
with the attention being centered on Plymouth in its connection
with the approaching Tercentenary Celebration will
be likely to attract other manufacturing and business interests
to the town, while its residential advantages are so
apparent, that its eligible locations are now rapidly being
appropriated.

As a Summer Resort

Viewed simply as the landing-place of the Pilgrims, Plymouth
has an interest which attaches to no other spot in America.
The number of visitors from all parts of the country
increases with each year, as historic sentiment becomes more
widespread and facilities for travel are multiplied. It is
estimated that over 125,000 strangers visit the town in a
year. It is not alone on account of its history that Plymouth
is attractive to the visitor. The beauty of its scenery,
the unusual healthfulness of its air, the purity of its water,

80

the variety of its drives, the number of ponds within its
limits, and its unbounded resources for the sportsman and
pleasure-seeker, have been more widely recognized with each
recurring season. It combines the most interesting features
of town and country, and has direct connection with Boston
by the Old Colony Railroad built in 1845, and now leased
by the New York, New Haven and Hartford R. R. Co., also
directly with Providence and New York, by the Fall River
Line, and the Plymouth & Middleboro Railroad, built by
the towns in 1892 and sold to the N. Y., N. H. & H. corporation
in 1911. The distance from Boston is thirty-seven
miles by rail, with frequent trains; and during the summer
months a daily steamer capable of carrying 2,000 passengers
is on the route between the two places, the sail being
a delightful one.

CLARK’S ISLAND.

As a summer resort for health and pleasure, Plymouth
has great attractions. Plymouth and the adjoining towns of
Kingston and Duxbury nearly encircle a harbor of almost
unrivalled beauty, a source of endless pleasure to the summer

81

visitor. There are good sand beaches for surf and
smooth-water sea bathing, bath houses being provided by
the town. In the bay are opportunities for fine sport in
the mackerel season, and a haul of sea-perch, tautog, cod or
haddock is always to be had. Plymouth extends over a
territory about eighteen miles long, and from five to nine
miles wide, and beyond the settled parts of the town is a
succession of wooded hills. This large tract is interspersed
with hundreds of large and small ponds (or lakes) stocked
with fish, furnishing limitless fields for the lover of nature
or seeker of pleasure, in walking, riding, fishing, or hunting.
Wealthy residents of other places have fine summer seats at
the town overlooking the harbor and bay.

ALONG SHORE FROM STEPHENS’ POINT.

82

The Compact

Signed in the Cabin of the “Mayflower,” Nov. 11th, Old Style, Nov. 21st, New Style, 1620.

“In the name of God, amen, we whose names are underwritten,
the loyal subjects of our dread soveraigne Lord,
King James, by the grace of God, of Great Britain, Franc
and Ireland king, defender of the faith, etc., having undertaken,
for the glorie of God, and advancemente of the
Christian faith, and honor of our king and countrie, a voyage
to plant the first colonie in the Northerne parts of Virginia,
doe by these presents solemnly and mutually in the
presence of God, and one of another, covenant and combine
ourselves together into a civill body politick, for our better
ordering and preservation and furtherence of the ends aforesaid;
and by virtue hereof to enacte, constitute and frame
such just and equall laws, ordenances, acts, constitutions
and offices, from time to time, as shall be thought most
meete and convenient for the general good of the colonie,
unto which we promise all due submission and obedience.
In witness whereof we have hereunto subscribed our names
at Cap-Codd the 11 of November, in the year of the raigne
of our soveraigne lord, King James of England, Franc and
Ireland, the eighteenth, and of Scotland the fifty-fourth,
ANO DOM 1620.”

83

Members of the Mayflower Company

8
John Carver.

Katherine Carver, his wife.

Desire Minter.

John Howland.

Roger Wilder.

William Latham.

Maid Servant.

Jasper More.

6
William Brewster.

Mary Brewster, his wife.

Love Brewster.

Wrestling Brewster.

Richard More.

His Brother.

5
Edward Winslow.

Elizabeth Winslow, his wife.

George Soule.

Elias Story.

Ellen More.

2
William Bradford.

Dorothy Bradford, his wife.

6
Isaac Allerton.

Mary Allerton, his wife.

Bartholomew Allerton.

Remember Allerton.

Mary Allerton.

John Hooke.

1
Richard Warren.

4
John Billington.

Eleanor Billington, his wife.

John Billington.

Francis Billington.

4
Edward Tilley.

Ann Tilley, his wife.

Henry Sampson.

Humility Cooper.

3
John Tilley.

His wife.

Elizabeth Tilley.

2
Francis Cooke.

John Cooke.

2
Thomas Rogers.

Joseph Rogers.

3
Thomas Tinker.

His wife.

His son.

2
John Rigdale.

Alice Rigdale, his wife.

3
James Chilton.

His wife.

Mary Chilton.

1
Samuel Fuller.

2
John Crackston.

John Crackston, Jr.

2
Miles Standish.

Rose Standish, his Wife.

4
Christopher Martin.

His wife.

Solomon Power.

John Langemore.

5
William Mullins.

Alice Mullins, his wife.

Joseph Mullins.

Robert Carter.

Priscilla Mullins.

6
William White.

Susanna White, his wife.

Resolved White.

Peregrine White.

William Holbeck.

Edward Thompson.

8
Stephen Hopkins.

Elizabeth Hopkins, his wife.

Giles Hopkins.

Constance Hopkins.

Damarius Hopkins.

Oceanus Hopkins.

Edward Doty.

Edward Leister.

3
Edward Fuller.

His wife.

Samuel Fuller.

3
John Turner

His son.

Another son.

3
Francis Eaton.

Sarah Eaton, his wife.

Samuel Eaton.

1
Moses Fletcher.

1
Thomas Williams.

1
Digory Priest.

1
John Goodman.

1
Edmund Margeson.

1
Richard Britteridge.

1
Richard Clarke.

1
Richard Gardner.

1
Gilbert Winslow.

1
Peter Browne.

1
John Alden.

1
Thomas English.

1
John Allerton.

1
William Trevore.

1
—— Ely.

1
William Butten, who died at sea.

84

A. S. Burbank

Pilgrim Book and Art Shop
Plymouth

POST CARDS, PHOTOGRAPHS, SLIDES

Photographs, 6×8, 35c each, $3.50 dozen.

Post Cards, 2 for 5c, 30c dozen.

Lantern Slides, 50c, $6.00 dozen.

Plymouth Rock.

The Canopy over the Rock.

The Canopy and Harbor from Cole’s Hill.

The Canopy and Cole’s Hill, first burial-place of the Pilgrims.

Plymouth Harbor as seen from Cole’s Hill.

Leyden Street, first street in New England.

Site of the Common House, Leyden Street, first house erected by the Pilgrims.

Leyden Street in 1622, showing first or Common House, Gov. Bradford’s House, and the buildings assigned to Brown, Goodman, Brewster, Billington, Allerton, Cooke, and Winslow.

Town Square, showing Church of the First Parish; Town House, formerly the Old Colonial Court House, built in 1749; site of Gov. Bradford’s House.

Old Burial Hill, Entrance.

Site of the Watch Tower, Burial Hill, erected in 1643. View also shows the lot of Rev. Adoniram Judson the celebrated missionary to Burmah.

Site of the Old Fort, Burial Hill, built in 1621 as a defense against the Indians, and also used as a place of worship.

The Old Fort and First Meeting-house, 1621.

Gov. Bradford’s Monument, Burial Hill, showing also the graves of his family.

Grave of Edward Gray, 1681.

Grave of John Howland, 1672.

85

Grave of Thomas Clarke. 1697.

Cushman Monument.

Grave of Elder Thomas Cushman.

Grave of Dr. Francis LeBaron, “The Nameless Nobleman.”

Pilgrim Hall.

Interior of Pilgrim Hall, showing Charles Lucy’s famous painting of the Departure from Delft Haven, also smaller pictures and relics.

Gov. Carver’s chair; Ancient Spinning Wheel.

Interior of Pilgrim Hall, showing Sargent’s painting of the Landing, and Weir’s Embarkation, and relics and portraits.

Landing of the Pilgrims, painting by Sargent.

The Departure from Delft Haven, painting by Charles Lucy.

Embarkation of the Pilgrims, painting by Weir.

Landing of the Pilgrims, painting by Charles Lucy.

Landing of the Pilgrims, painting by Gisbert.

86

Elder Brewster’s Chair; Cradle of Peregrine White, the first Pilgrim baby.

Sword of Myles Standish; Iron Pot and Pewter Platter, brought by Standish in the “Mayflower.”

The “Mayflower” in Plymouth Harbor, from painting by W. F. Hallsall, Pilgrim Hall.

Group of Winslow Relics, Pilgrim Hall.

Group of White Relics, Pilgrim Hall.

National Monument to the Forefathers.

Statue of Freedom, National Monument.

Statue of Law, National Monument.

Statue of Education, National Monument.

Statue of Morality, National Monument.

Treaty with Massasoit, alto-relief on National Monument.

Landing of the Pilgrims, alto-relief on National Monument.

Clark’s Island, where the Pilgrims spent their first Sabbath in Plymouth.

Pulpit Rock, Clark’s Island, from which the first sermon was preached.

The Gurnet, headland at entrance of harbor.

Along Shore from Atwood’s Wharf.

Duxbury Pier Light.

Gurnet Lights and Keeper’s residence.

Diagram of streets and Historic Points.

North Street.

County Court House and Registry Building.

New County Prison.

Town Brook.

Pilgrim Meersteads along Town Brook.

A Bit of the Upper Town Brook.

View along the Wharves from Stephen’s Point.

Outlet, Billington Sea.

87

Pilgrim Wharf and Along Shore.

Boot Pond.

Morton Park, Entrance.

Manomet Bluffs.

Rocky Shore, Manomet.

Bathing Beach, Manomet.

Mayflower Inn.

Hotel Pilgrim.

Samoset House.

Plymouth Rock House.

Main Street.

Plymouth Country Club.

Main Street Bridge over Town Brook.

Daniel Webster House, Marshfield.

Plymouth in 1622,—a combination picture, showing Leyden Street, the Old Fort, Landing from the Shallop, Plymouth Rock and the ship “Mayflower.”

Gov. Bradford’s House, Plymouth.

Font in Austerfield Church where Gov. Wm. Bradford was baptized.

Austerfield Church.

Birthplace of Gov. William Bradford, Austerfield.

Page of the Register, Austerfield Church, showing record of the baptism of Gov. William Bradford.

Scrooby Church.

Interior of Scrooby Church.

Scrooby Manor House. Elder William Brewster’s Residence.

Bawtry Church.

High Street, Bawtry.

Site of John Robinson’s House at Leyden.

Church at Leyden where John Robinson was buried.

Memorial Tablet to John Robinson on Church at Leyden.

88

Old Church at Delft Haven, where the Pilgrims held their last service before the embarkation.

The Pilgrim Fathers holding their first meeting for public worship in North America.

“The March of Myles Standish.”

Grave of Myles Standish, Duxbury.

Peregrine White House, Marshfield.

Old Oaken Bucket House, Scituate.

Crow House, built by William Crow, 1664.

Howland House, built by Jacob Mitchell, 1666.

William Harlow House, built of timber from the Old Burial Hill Fort, by William Harlow, 1677.

Homestead of Gen. John Winslow, 1726.

The Town House, formerly the Old Colonial Court House, built in 1749.

89

The Winslow House, built in 1754, by Edward Winslow. Colonial architecture.

Cole’s Blacksmith Shop, 1684.

Statue of Myles Standish.

Myles Standish Monument.

Standish House, Duxbury, built by son of Myles Standish, 1666.

Captain’s Hill, Duxbury, the Home of Myles Standish, showing Standish House and Monument.

Winslow House, Marshfield, built about 1700.

John Alden House, Duxbury, 1653.

Bradford House, Kingston, 1675.

John Hancock Sofa, Pilgrim Hall.

Memorial Tablet, Gov. William Bradford Estate, Kingston.

Departure from Delft Haven.

Priscilla and John Alden. From painting by George H. Boughton.

“Why don’t you Speak for Yourself, John?”

The Courtship. John Alden and Priscilla. From painting by George H. Boughton.

Departure of the “Mayflower,” from painting by A. W. Bayes.

Priscilla, from painting by G. H. Boughton.

Pilgrim Exiles, from painting by Boughton.

Pilgrims going to Church, from painting by Boughton.

Two Farewells, from painting by Boughton.

Return of the “Mayflower,” painting by Boughton.

Portrait of Edward Winslow, Governor of Plymouth Colony, one of the “Mayflower” company. The only authentic portrait of a “Mayflower” Pilgrim.

90

PILGRIM LITERATURE

THE PILGRIM REPUBLIC,

By John A. Goodwin. This is a new edition of a book first published in 1888
and long recognized as the standard history of the Pilgrims. By mail, $7.65.

THE PILGRIMS AND THEIR HISTORY,

By Roland G. Usher, Ph. D. The three hundred ten pages of this book
contain all of the really pertinent information about the Pilgrims and their
history. Illustrated, by mail, $2.65.

THE PILGRIMS IN THEIR THREE HOMES,

England, Holland and America, by W. E. Griffis, illustrated. By mail, $1.85.

THE PILGRIM FATHERS,

Containing reprints of Morton’s New England Memorial, Cushman’s Discourse,
Winslow’s Relation, and other contemporary narrations, 364 pages, flexible
leather, postpaid, $2.60; cloth, $1.10.

IN THE DAYS OF THE PILGRIM FATHERS,

By Mary C. Crawford. The Story of the Plymouth Colony—its settlement and
early days, its events and personalities. By mail, $3.15.

THE WOMEN WHO CAME IN THE MAYFLOWER

And their comrades who came later in The Ann and The Fortune, by Annie
Russell Marble. By mail, $1.60.

WHEN MAYFLOWERS BLOSSOM,

By Albert H. Plumb. A romance of Plymouth’s first years. By mail, $2.15.

THE FIRST CHURCH IN PLYMOUTH,

A brief history from 1606 to 1901, by John Cuckson, Minister. By mail, $1.60.

THE ARGONAUTS OF FAITH,

By Basil Mathews. The Pilgrim Story, told in a dramatic way that holds
the interest alike for young people and their elders. Illustrated in colors.
By mail, $1.60.

CAPTAIN MYLES STANDISH,

By Tudor Jenks. By mail, $1.90.

THE MAYFLOWER PILGRIMS,

By E. J. Carpenter. By mail, $2.15.

CAPE COD, NEW AND OLD,

By Agnes Edwards, profusely illustrated by Ruyl. Written with genuine
appreciation of the charm of “Old Cape Cod.” By mail, $3.15.

THE OLD COAST ROAD

From Boston to Plymouth. By Agnes Edwards. Illustrated by Ruyl. One of
the most historic roads in the country, passing many quaint old houses and
places connected with New England history. By mail, $3.15.

CAPE COD,

By Henry D. Thoreau. 16 full page illustrations. Traveling on foot through
the Cape, Thoreau missed nothing that was entertaining or characteristic.
By mail, $1.85.

91

CAPE-CODDITIES,

By Dennis and Marion Chatham. Illustrated. A pleasurable bit of summer
life on Cape Cod outside the usual routine. By mail, $1.45.

CAPE COD BALLADS,

By Joseph C. Lincoln. By mail, $2.15.

CAPE COD AND THE OLD COLONY,

By Albert Perry Brigham with 35 full page illustrations from photographs and
maps. By mail, $3.65.

OLD PLYMOUTH TRAILS,

By Winthrop Packard. 24 full page illustrations. Entertainingly written by
a true lover of nature. By mail, $3.15.

THE OLD COLONY STORIES,

By Jane G. Austin. New uniform edition in five volumes, $2.00 each. The
set, boxed, $10.00. Add 10c each for mailing.

These novels, dealing with the early settlers of Plymouth, have taken their
place among the American classics, and their combination of romantic interest,
real literary quality, and historical accuracy has won for them wide popularity.
The titles alone bring before the mind a vision of the most famous
colonists: “Betty Alden,” “A Nameless Nobleman,” “Standish of Standish,”
“Dr. LeBaron and his Daughters,” “David Alden’s Daughter and Other Stories.”
This attractive new edition will open the doors of the Pilgrim homes
to many new readers and will be welcomed in its uniform dress by old
acquaintances.

STANDISH OF STANDISH—Dramatized.

A dramatized version by Annie Russell Marble of Mrs. Austin’s famous portrayal
of life in the earliest days of the Plymouth Colony. By mail, $1.35.

ON PLYMOUTH ROCK,

By Samuel Adams Drake. Illustrated, cloth, 173 pages, postpaid, $1.00.

GUIDE TO HISTORIC PLYMOUTH.

Descriptive of the historic points and localities famous in the story of the
Pilgrims. Profusely illustrated, 96 pages, postpaid, 25 cents.

A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE PILGRIMS,

Compiled from the writings of Governor Bradford and Governor Winslow, and
largely in their own words. Alphabetical list of passengers on the Mayflower
with valuable notations in regard to each person. 57 pages, paper covers.
By mail, 28c.

PILGRIM PLYMOUTH ILLUSTRATED.

The pictures are full page, with brief descriptive lines, and consists of reproductions
from paintings of scenes in Pilgrim life, and photographs of historic
points in old Plymouth. Size of book, 8×10. Price, 60 cents postpaid.

HANDBOOK OF HISTORIC DUXBURY,

By Gershom Bradford. By mail, 90 cents.

VALUABLE OUT OF PRINT BOOKS (A few copies for sale)

Ancient Landmarks of Plymouth and Genealogical Register, by Wm. T. Davis.
Postpaid, $8.00.

History of Plymouth, by Wm. T. Davis. Postpaid, $4.00.

Epitaphs Old Burial Hill, complete, by Kingman. Postpaid, $3.25.

92

PILGRIM BOOKS FOR YOUNG READERS

THE STORY OF THE PILGRIMS, FOR CHILDREN.

By Roland G. Usher—a dramatic, accurate and patriotic story which should
leave in the child’s mind correct impressions about the fundamental factors
in Pilgrim history. Illustrated, by mail, $1.35.

THE PILOT OF THE MAYFLOWER.

A Tale of the Children of the Pilgrim Republic. By Hezekiah Butterworth.
Illustrated by H. Winthrop Peirce and others. 12mo, cloth. By mail, $2.15.

THE STORY OF THE PILGRIM FATHERS,

Retold for Young Folks by H. B. Tunnicliff. Illustrated. By mail, $1.35.

YOUNG PEOPLE’S HISTORY OF THE PILGRIMS,

By William Elliot Griffis. Illustrated. A complete story of the Pilgrims in
which prominence is given to the things that must have keenly interested the
Pilgrim boys and girls. By mail, $3.15.

LETTERS FROM COLONIAL CHILDREN,

By Eva March Tappan. These letters give an idea of life in Plymouth and
other representative colonies seen through a child’s eyes, presenting a vivid
and historically accurate picture of the times. By mail, $2.65.

PILGRIM STORIES

For Children, illustrated, postpaid, $1.00.

STORIES OF COLONIAL CHILDREN,

By Mara L. Pratt. 223 pages, illustrated. Postpaid, $1.00.

MAJOR JOHN BRADFORD HOUSE

Built by Major John Bradford in 1674. Partially burned in King Phillip’s
War two years later. It was for a quarter of a century the resting place of
the famous Manuscript History of Plymouth Plantation.

93

PILGRIM GIFTS

of artistic excellence prized for historic and sentimental value.

STERLING SILVER PILGRIM SPOONS.

Your selection from seven artistic designs—the ship Mayflower—Priscilla—Myles
Standish—Pilgrim Monument—Plymouth Rock—Landing of the Pilgrims—Standish
Monument. Tea size $4.50, coffee size $2.25, postpaid, tax
included.

PILGRIM CHAIR.

Hand made models of Gov. Carver’s chair, brought in the Mayflower and now
in Pilgrim Hall. Height 7 inches. By mail, $2.00 each.

COATS OF ARMS OF MAYFLOWER FAMILIES,

Bradford, Howland, Standish, Alden, Brewster, Fuller, Winslow, Warren,
Cooke and White. Hand colored, $1.50 each, plain 25 cents, postpaid.

“PENELOPE WINSLOW” BODKIN.

A perfect copy, in sterling silver, of the bodkin once owned by Penelope
Winslow, and now in Pilgrim Hall. Price, by mail, $1.00.

PRISCILLA CAPS,

In white, pink, blue, lavender and yellow. Very desirable for use at fairs,
pageants, Thanksgiving or New England dinners. Price, by mail, $1.00.

PRISCILLA BROOCH.

A neat and artistic brooch, carrying a portrait of Priscilla Alden. Attractively
colored, with the appearance of being hand-painted. Price, by mail, 30 cents.

PLYMOUTH ROCK RINGS.

Sterling silver finger rings—Plymouth Rock 1620 design—by mail, $1.35—state
size in ordering.

PLYMOUTH PENNANTS

Suitable for decorating a den or student’s room. In attractive colors. Price
of various sizes: 25c, 50c, 75c, $1.00.

SOUVENIR WATCH FOBS,

With leather guards and metal pendants bearing designs in relief—“Plymouth
Rock”—“Pilgrim Monument.” By mail, 50 cents each.

PILGRIM PENCIL TIPS

For protecting the pencil point. A pleasing novelty, hand painted, in representation
of Priscilla and of John Alden. By mail, 70c the pair, or 35c single.

MAYFLOWER NAPKINS.

Paper napkins bearing a design of “The Mayflower” in Plymouth Harbor, 1620.
Dainty for use in giving a Pilgrim lunch or tea. The price, 30c for 50 napkins
by mail.

PLASTIC CASTS.

Wall decorations of historic value. In plaster, not colored. Desirable for
studio or den. Securely packed, by mail—7 inch plaques: Priscilla, John
Alden, Squanto, 90c each; 4½×8 inch panel, Priscilla and John Alden, 90c;
4½×8 inch panel, Landing of The Pilgrims, $2.00.

94

PILGRIM PLACE CARDS.

12 Designs in a package—artistic and pleasing—50c the package.

PLYMOUTH ROCK PAPER WEIGHTS,

Moulded in the shape of Plymouth Rock, with date 1620. A useful memento of
historic value. Genuine bronze, $2.00. Solid glass 35c—add 10c each for
mailing.

PILGRIM TERCENTENARY MEDAL 1620-1920.

A beautifully executed souvenir in genuine bronze, 2¾ inches in diameter,
bearing on one side a model of the ship Mayflower and on the reverse a relief
of The Landing of the Pilgrims, Dec. 21, 1620. By mail, $4.00 each.

THE CAPE COD FIRE LIGHTER.

Everybody loves a log fire and here is a way to start the blaze quickly without
the use of kindling. Made of brass $4.50, or with tray $5.75. Add 15c for
mailing.

PLYMOUTH ROCK BAYBERRY

A miniature model of Plymouth Rock moulded in genuine
bayberry wax with the date 1620. A real novelty for
milady’s work bag. Each one in a box, 30c.

BAYBERRY CANDLES,

Genuine hand dipped, 10c, 15c, 25c, 50c each. On less than six candles add
10c for postage.

A PLYMOUTH CLAM.

A pincushion made from Plymouth clam shells, 25c postpaid.

PRISCILLA DOLLS.

Dressed in ye costume of 1620—a delightful gift for the little ones. Price,
$3.75 postpaid.

PILGRIM PAPER DOLLS.

Packet by mail, 15c.

THE PILGRIM FOLDER.

20 Pictures in colors, by mail, 12c.

YE OLD FARMERS ALMANAC.

By mail, 17c.

95

Ye SWORDE OF MYLES STANDISH,

“Spake, in the pride of his heart, Myles Standish, the Captain of Plymouth,—

‘This is the sword of Damascus I fought with in Flanders.’”

—Longfellow.

The famous Damascus blade of the redoubtable Pilgrim
Captain is one of the most valuable relics to be seen in Pilgrim
Hall. It was handed down to Myles Standish from the Crusaders,
and possessed an interesting history even in his day.
Our swords are perfectly copied from the original, even in the
engraving of the curious Arabic inscription on the blade. Prices
by mail, tax included.

Paper Cutter, sterling silver,        $3.25

THE MAYFLOWER CANDLESTICK.

An exact copy of a brass candlestick brought over in the
Mayflower by William White, father of Peregrine White. The
original candlestick is now in Pilgrim Hall, price $3.75 each.
If by mail add 15 cents postage.

THE COMPACT.

Signed in the cabin of the Mayflower, November 21, 1620,
with the names of the signers.

Printed in old style type on a parchment paper made by
hand in 1856, and mounted on rollers in form of a scroll.
Price, securely packed, by mail, 40 cents.

STERLING SILVER PINS.

Correct representation of Plymouth Rock and of the ship
Mayflower in the shape of stick pins and brooches. Price of
any one design, postpaid, 80 cents, tax included.

BANJO CLOCKS.

A miniature reproduction of a Colonial design. The clock is 17 inches high,
beautifully finished with brass trimmings, and is a good timekeeper. Will make
a distinctive and useful gift. Priced at $12.25; by mail, 35 cents extra. Without
brass trimmings and center panel, $11.25; by mail, 35 cents extra.

96

Old Blue Pilgrim Plates

10 INCH.

This set of plates, as illustrated, was made to our order in Staffordshire, England.

The border design and old blue coloring is an exact reproduction of the old
Staffordshire plates made in the eighteenth century.

The central pictures are from objects and paintings of interest in Pilgrim
history. The reverse side bears the title and a quotation encircled by a wreath
of Mayflowers.

The decoration, in a deep old blue, is under the glaze and therefore indelible.

There are eight subjects: The Mayflower in Plymouth Harbor; The Landing of
the Pilgrims; Priscilla and John Alden; Pilgrim Monument; Myles Standish House,
1666; John Alden House; Pilgrim Hall; “Why don’t you speak for yourself, John?”

The price is twelve dollars per dozen, or $1.00 each, packed for expressing.
Price by mail, in a safety mailing box, $1.25 each.

Old Blue Platter.

17 inch to match plates, $3.50 each.

CUPS AND SAUCERS to match, $10.00 per dozen.

CREAM JUGS
, 75c.

QUART PITCHER
, $2.50.

97

PLYMOUTH ROCK HOUSE

Cole’s Hill

DINNER ON ARRIVAL OF BOAT

Summer Board at Reasonable Prices

HOUSE OPEN THE YEAR ROUND

Electric Lights
Steam Heat

CLARK & SAMPSON, Proprietors

Long Distance Telephone Connection

98

SAMOSET HOUSE

PLYMOUTH, MASS.

First-class in every respect. Large parlors and piazzas,
electric light, steam heat. Open fireplaces and private baths.
Convenient to all points of historical interest. Quiet and
comfortable.

99

PRINCIPAL STREETS OF PLYMOUTH

AND LOCALITIES OF INTEREST
High-resolution Map

A. S. Burbank, Publisher

Pilgrim Book and Art Shop

Plymouth, Mass.

1. Pilgrim Monument.

2. Samoset House.

3. N. Y., N. H. & H. R. R.

4. Pilgrim Hall.

5. Court House.

6. Cole’s Hill.

7. Plymouth Rock.

8. Site of first house.

9. Burial Hill.

10. Pilgrim Spring.

11. Training Green.

12. Watson’s Hill.

13. Pilgrim Wharf.

14. Town Brook.

15. Site of Gov. Bradford House.

16. Pilgrim Bookstore.

Transcriber’s Notes

Silently corrected a few typos; left quotations unchanged.

Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook is public-domain in the country of publication.

In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by _underscores_.

End of Project Gutenberg's Guide to Historic Plymouth, by A. S. Burbank

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GUIDE TO HISTORIC PLYMOUTH ***

***** This file should be named 57135-h.htm or 57135-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/7/1/3/57135/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.