The Project Gutenberg EBook of Hawaii National Park: A Guide for the
Haleakala Section, by George Cornelius Ruhle

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Hawaii National Park: A Guide for the Haleakala Section
Island of Maui, Hawaii

Author: George Cornelius Ruhle

Release Date: June 2, 2018 [EBook #57258]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HAWAII NATIONAL PARK: HALEAKALA ***

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Copyright 1959 by the

HAWAII NATURAL HISTORY ASSOCIATION

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

NATIONAL PARK SERVICE

PUBLISHED IN COOPERATION

WITH THE NATIONAL PARK SERVICE

Covers
: Silversword in bloom

HAWAII NATIONAL PARK

A Guide for the

Haleakala Section

Island of Maui, Hawaii

by

George C. Ruhle

illustrated by Donald M. Black

PUBLICATION OF THE

HAWAII NATURAL HISTORY ASSOCIATION

JUNE, 1959

ii

On the Sliding Sands Trail

iii

Preface

Most of us yearn to travel, and the preliminary to travel is to
choose a place that others, people or books, say is interesting, then
find out more about it.

This guide is to help you find out more about Haleakala. It is
neither a reference book nor a treatise. It sums up what many have
studied and observed. It skims over the myths that the mountain
itself created in the imagination of old Hawaiians. It reflects also
the labor and thought of the compiler. Its aim is to satisfy your
interest while you are here on the brim, or at some other point. For
some of you it may be the start of a deeper curiosity, to be satisfied
by further reading elsewhere.

Think of this booklet as a chatty companion along the way, and a
ready reminder after you have left, of your pleasant experience at
Haleakala.

The system of 29 National Parks contains areas of superlative scenic and scientific
grandeur essentially in the primitive state. The National Park Service of the
Department of the Interior administers these, as well as 152 other areas of outstanding
national significance. The law of the land enjoins us to use them in such
manner that they may be passed unimpaired for the enjoyment of future generations.

The story of
HAWAII NATIONAL PARK
is the story of active volcanism singularly
marked by eruptions of very fluent lava. The park is in two sections; that on the
island of Maui, discussed in this guide, includes the great eroded crater of Haleakala
Volcano; that on the island of Hawaii embraces the summits of Mauna Loa and
Kilauea Volcanoes.

iv

HALEAKALA

The silversword is the pride and distinction of Haleakala.

Haleakala

is a great volcano, 33 miles long and 10,025 feet high. During a long period
of inactivity, stream erosion cut two deep valleys, Keanae and Kaupo, into its sides. These
joined near the summit. When volcanic activity once again resumed, flows of aa and
blankets of cinders were spread on the valley floors. A multicolored cover, emphasized by
symmetrical cones, formed the new floor of the depression, now loosely called Haleakala
Crater.

The well chosen name, Hale-a-ka-la, means House of the Sun. Old Hawaiians associated
Maui, a trickster demi-God, with the mountain. He was a legendary figure throughout
Polynesia long before a few of its inhabitants discovered and settled in Hawaii, bringing
their gods with them.

How Maui brought down or ensnared the sun has several versions. Maui’s mother, Hina,
had trouble drying bark cloth, kapa, because the day was too short, its warmth insufficient.
The sun just sped too fast across the sky. So Maui fashioned a strong net to snare it in its
course. A slight variant, possibly less used, appeals more strongly. In early dawn, one
can watch strong streamers of light from the rising sun break through the clouds and
stalk across the crater. With these spidery legs the sun progresses through the heavens. As
one by one they were placed over Koolau Gap, Maui seized them and bound them with
strong thongs to an ohia tree. Thus captured, the sun pleaded for release. This Maui
granted on promise of a slower gait, for which Hina as well as the rest of us can be
eternally thankful.

v

Table of Contents

Page

Preface
iii

Haleakala
iv

PART I

Your Vacation in the Haleakala Section
1

Access
1

What to do and see
1

Hosmer Grove Campground and Picnic Area
2

The Trail System
4

Park Cabins
4

Suggested Hiking Trips
5

An Outfit for Hiking in Haleakala Crater
7

Horseback Crater Trips
7

Numbered Points of Interest on the Map
8

PART II

Haleakala Hawaiiana
16

Maui Legends
16

The Legend of Kihapiilani
18

The Tradition of Kaoao
21

Archeological Study
22

The Historical Background
24

Important Dates
36

Geology
42

The Origin of the Scenic Features
42

The Geological Interpretation
46

Haleakala Plants
49

Plant Notes
55

The Ferns
55

The Native Grasses
56

The Sedges—Fig. 1
56, 71

Rush
57

Painiu
57

Mauu-laili
57

Orchids—Fig. 2
58, 71

Alaalawainui
58

Sandalwood—Fig. 3
58, 72

Sheep Sorrel
58

Hawaiian Buttercup
59

Hoawa
59

Hawaiian Hawthorn
59

Hawaiian Raspberry—Fig. 5
59, 73

Mamane—Fig. 4
60, 72

Nohoanu—Fig. 6, 7
60, 74

Hawaiian Holly
60

Olomea
61

Aalii—Fig. 8
61, 75

Begonia
53, 61

Tarweed
61

Ohio Lehua—Fig. 9
62, 75

Evening Primrose
62

Apeape
54, 62

Olapa—Fig. 10
62, 76

Ohelo—Fig. 11
62, 76

Pukiawe—Fig. 12
63, 77

Kolea—Fig. 13
63, 77

Selfheal
63

Puaainaka
63

Groundcherry
63

Plantain
64

Kukaenene—Fig. 15
64, 79

Pilo—Fig. 14
64, 78

Manono
64

Catchfly—Fig. 16
65, 79

Oha
65

Naupaka
65

Maui Wormwood—Fig. 17
65, 80

Kookoolau
66

Kupaoa—Fig. 18, 19
66, 81

Pamakani
67

Hairy Cat’s Ear
67

Wood Groundsel
68

Tetramalopium—Fig. 20
53, 68, 82

Silversword
Cover, iv, 47, 68

Summary Lists
70

The Birds and Mammals
83

The Insect Life
85

Hawaiian Words and Place Names
89

Hui O Ahinahina
93

Additional Help
93

Mileages
Inside back cover

Map
Center Pages

1

YOUR VACATION

Anticipate a restful, invigorating interlude. Islanders consider
vacation on the cool mountain an inexpensive, pleasant variant from
a mainland trip.

Silversword Inn at an elevation of 6,800 feet is popular with
luncheon guests and with those staying overnight to view sunset or
sunrise from the summit of the great mountain. Attractive, friendly,
comfortable, it is the loftiest hostelry in the islands. There is no
formal atmosphere: warm, casual clothing is worn; it is strictly
“come in as you are.”

Hiking and riding in the vicinity of the inn are favorite pastimes.
Adjacent groves of trees of the Temperate Zone impart an aspect
novel to the islands. A visit is highlighted by trips into the crater and
to the summit, less than thirty minutes distant by car. The cup
runneth over for photographers and nature enthusiasts. You can
enjoy cool, restful nights between daytime drives to the many points
of interest on Maui. For further details, reservations, and rates,
consult the Manager, Silversword Inn, R.R. 53, Waiakoa, Maui,
Hawaii, or Mr. William S. Ellis, Jr., 900 Nuuanu Ave., Honolulu 17,
Hawaii.

ACCESS

The Haleakala road climbs through plantations and ranchland
from Kahului Harbor and Kahului Airport to the park entrance at an
elevation of 6,740 feet. The distance by the shortest route is thirty
miles. The highway continues eleven miles further to the Park
Observatory on the western rim of Haleakala Crater and to the 10,025-foot
summit. No bus service exists, but taxis and U-drive cars are
hired at the airport and in the towns of Kahului and Wailuku. The
sole access into the crater is over good trails for travel on foot or
by horse.

WHAT TO DO AND SEE

The start of a drive to the park is made by one of three paved
routes. The shortest is Pukalani Road. The other two turn inland
at Paia or Haiku and traverse more interesting country. The three

2

routes converge at Pukalani Junction ten miles up the mountain.

PUKALANI
means a hole in heaven, which picturesquely describes the
fact that the sun breaks through at this place despite a general overcast
elsewhere.

As the road rises up and ever up, it unfolds distant views of fields
of sugar cane and pineapple, of West Maui Range, 6,000 feet high,
and of Molokai, Lanai, Kahoolawe, and Molokini Islands beyond
channels of blue sea. 100 miles southward, the tops of the snowy
volcanoes on the Island of Hawaii float on billowy clouds. 10,000
feet below, the aquamarine Pacific fringes Maui with white surf.

Three viewpoints along the road overlook the great crater: Leleiwi,
at the 9,000-foot switchback; Kalahaku, two miles below the summit:
and the Park Observatory, near the top. The roadway extends along
the crest one mile southwestward to a scenic point beyond the park
boundary and a communication station of the Civil Aeronautics
Administration.

Just above the park entrance, Silversword Inn, a National Park
concession, offers meals, rooms, souvenirs, horseback riding and
guided horseback trips into the crater. Across from the inn, a paved
spur road leads a half mile to Hosmer Grove Campground and Picnic
Area.

Haleakala Crater is a favorite with those who like the back-country;
its inspiring scenery and restful solitude are great reward
for time and effort. The National Park Service maintains three cabins
on the crater floor and 30 miles of well-marked trails for hikers and
horseback parties.

HOSMER GROVE CAMPGROUND AND PICNIC AREA

A quarter mile above the park entrance, opposite the driveway to
the inn, a paved lane, one-half mile long, leads to the Hosmer Grove
Campground and Picnic Area. It has a shelter for rainy weather
that contains two tables and two charcoal burners. Four additional
tables with adjacent charcoal burners are in an open site below the
road. Running water, parking space for eight cars, and sites for
pitching tents are provided. Charcoal may be purchased at the inn.
A self-guiding nature trail leads through the grove.

3

HOSMER GROVE

CAMPGROUND AND PICNIC AREA

The grove was named for the first Territorial forester, Dr. Ralph
S. Hosmer, who experimented with planting temperate trees at high
altitudes on Haleakala and Mauna Kea. Trees, planted here in 1910,
include the deodar,
Cedrus deodara
from the Himalayas; the tsugi,

Cryptomeria japonica
from Japan; eucalypti from Australia; and
from the mainland a cypress,
Cupressus arizonica
; a juniper,

Juniperus virginiana
; Douglas fir,
Pseudotsuga taxifolia
; incense
cedar,
Libocedrus decurrens
; two spruces,
Picea canadensis
,
P.
excelsa
; and seven pines: lodgepole,
Pinus contorta
, Coulter or big-cone,

P. coulteri
, Jeffrey,
P. jeffreyi
, longleaf,
P. palustris
, ponderosa
or western yellow,
P. ponderosa
, white,
P. strobus
, and Scotch,
P.
sylvestris
. Many of these have survived and have borne fruits. The
huge keeled cones of Coulter pines are cherished as ornaments in
some homes.

Native plants associated with the area are the shrubs: Haleakala
sandalwood, mamane, pukiawe, aalii, mountain pilo, ohelo, silver

4

geranium, kupaoa; two or three ferns; two sedges; and three native
grasses.

Two thirds of the distance to the grove, the crater trail from the
inn starts up the mountain to the left. This is a connecting link, 1¾
miles long, to the Halemauu Trail which it joins a half mile below its
start on the highway.
See Numbered Points of Interest,
No. 9
.

THE TRAIL SYSTEM

The Sliding Sands Trail, the popular route into the crater, starts
from the parking area at the Observatory. It is constructed along
the south side of the crater to Kapalaoa Cabin six miles away. Connecting
trails go to Paliku Cabin, four miles farther. The Halemauu
Trail has two upper ends, at the 8,000-foot elevation on the highway
and on the Hosmer Grove Campground Spur near Silversword Inn.
Halemauu Trail goes down Leleiwi Pali, the west wall, to Holua
Cabin, four miles from the road or six miles from the lodge. The
trail continues easterly from Holua for six miles along the north
side of the crater floor to Paliku. Branch trails are built to points of
interest. The Kaupo Trail through Kaupo Gap leaves Paliku Cabin
and the crater to make a rapid descent of the southern, sun-drenched
slope.

PARK CABINS

Each of the three visitor cabins within the crater, Kapalaoa,
Paliku, and Holua, is equipped with running water, a wood-burning
cookstove, firewood, kerosene lamps, cooking and eating utensils,
twelve bunks, mattresses, and blankets. Use of these cabins by hikers
on a priority reservation basis is granted free of charge by the Park.
In consideration for their use
cabins should be left clean and in order

by each party. The following arrangements are necessary: write the
Park, giving an outline of your proposed trip, number in the party,
exact calendar dates, and names of specific cabins which you wish
to use each night. The address is: “Hawaii National Park, Haleakala
Section, P. O. Box 456, Kahului, Maui, Hawaii.” Cabin reservations
can also be made by telephoning the Park. When you arrive in the
Park, stop at the Administration Building for your permit, cabin
key, and orientation.

5

SUGGESTED HIKING TRIPS

For safety reasons, all visitors are required to obtain permits
from the rangers for all trips into the crater, other than those with
Silversword Inn guides.

Short Walks for the Day Visitor
: (1) Along Halemauu Trail
from the highway to the Crater Rim, three-quarters of a mile. Views
down Keanae Valley, across Koolau Gap to Hanakauhi, and of
Halemauu Trail. (2) A short distance down the Sliding Sands Trail.

Be careful not to travel too far down.
The return climb is exhausting
at this high altitude. (3) To the top of White Hill. The trail winds
among ancient Hawaiian stonewalled encampment sites.

One-day hikes into crater
: (1) Down Halemauu Trail to Holua
Cabin and return to the highway, a scenic trip of eight miles that
can be taken by any reasonably good hiker. It is not recommended
when clouds blanket the pali and Koolau Gap. Allow a half-day for
hiking. (2) Down Sliding Sands Trail to the crater floor, across
Ka Moa o Pele Trail to Halemauu Trail at Pele’s Paint Pot or
Bottomless Pit, and return to the highway via Holua and the Halemauu
Trail. This colorful, spectacular twelve-mile trip is recommended
only for good hikers. Allow eight hours of hiking time.
At
your risk
, rangers can often arrange to move your car for you to the
place at which the Halemauu Trail emerges on the highway.

Overnight crater hikes
: Hike down Sliding Sands Trail; spend
the night at either Paliku, Kapalaoa, or Holua Cabin; return via
Halemauu Trail. The choice overnight hike to Paliku, a 20-mile
round-trip, is recommended for good hikers only. The trip with an
overnight stop at Kapalaoa is 14 miles long. The shortest route from
the foot of Sliding Sands Trail to Holua via Ka Moa o Pele leaves
only the four-mile climb via Halemauu Trail for the second day.

The Sliding Sands Trail is not recommended for return from a crater
trip.
The long climb to an elevation of 10,000 feet is too exhausting
for most people.

Two and three day crater hikes
: Entry via the Sliding Sands and
return via Halemauu Trail is recommended. A three-night trip stopping
at Kapalaoa, Paliku, and Holua allows leisurely enjoyment
of the crater. Good health and fair walking ability are all that are
required for these longer trips.

6

1. Koolau Gap; 2. Waikau; 3. Hanakauhi Peak; 4. Paliku; 5. Puu Maile; 6. Kaupo Gap; 7. Haleakala Peak; 8. Puu Kumu; 9. Puu
Naue; 10. Ka Moa o Pele; 11. Puu o Maui; 12. Kamohoalii; 13. Ka Lua o ka Oo; 14. Puu o Pele.

7

No guide service is available or necessary for parties hiking or
riding their own stock into the crater. However, a permit is required
before you start your trip within the crater. For details, consult
the section labelled “
Park Cabins
.”

AN OUTFIT FOR HIKING IN HALEAKALA CRATER

Clothing should consist of hiking shoes, slacks, shirt, jacket, hat,
and preferably a light raincoat. Basketball shoes or keds are preferred
by some. Because of the chill climate at elevations of seven
to ten thousand feet, warm clothing is advisable. In climbing, temperature
goes down as you go up. The top of Haleakala averages
thirty degrees cooler than sea level. You should bring your food
for the trip, a knapsack, sunburn lotion, soap, hand towel, dish
towel, matches, and simple first aid. As cooking facilities in the
cabins are adequate, food need not be precooked.

HORSEBACK CRATER TRIPS

Silversword Inn provides horseback trips on good stock with a
competent guide. Food is provided, cooking is done by the guide,
and sleeping accommodations are arranged by the management. A
guest need only concern himself about personal effects and clothing
suitable for riding in a cool climate. For rates and trip reservations,
telephone or write to the Manager, Silversword Inn, R.R. 53, Waiakoa,
Maui, Hawaii, or to Mr. William S. Ellis, Jr., 900 Nuuanu Ave.,
Honolulu 17, Hawaii.

If you have your own horses
make the same arrangements as
hikers for entry into the crater and for cabin use. You may travel on
any of the crater trails. Fenced horse pastures are adjacent to each
of the cabins.

8

NUMBERED POINTS OF INTEREST ON THE MAP

Basic data for this section was compiled by the park staff and
submitted by Eugene J. Barton, Assistant Superintendent in charge
of Haleakala from 1949-1955. The map is in the center of the booklet.

1
.
Park entrance
(elev. 6,740′)
and inn
: The park entrance,
marked by a rustic sign, is on the slope of Puu Nianiau, an ancient
cinder cone.
Nianiau
is Hawaiian for swordfern. One quarter mile
above the entrance turn right to the Silversword Inn for meals, lunches,
overnight accommodations, color pictures, slides, and souvenirs of
the park. The inn arranges guided trips through Haleakala Crater.

2
.
Ralph S. Hosmer Grove
: Across from the lodge, a paved
spur road leads to the Hosmer Grove Campground and Picnic Area.

3
.
Headquarters of the Haleakala Section of Hawaii National
Park
: Stop at the Administration Building beside the road for
information, permits, cabin keys needed on crater trips, and for
assistance in case of trouble or accident. The park maintenance area
is located behind the station. As you drive toward the summit, note
the small native trees and shrubs growing along the road. This
elfin forest was all but destroyed by goats and cattle; it has recovered
under National Park protection. The book, “Plants of Hawaii
National Park,” and the section on
plants
in this guide may help
you identify the different species. These and other publications of
the Hawaii Natural History Association may be purchased at the inn
or at Park Headquarters.

4
.
Leleiwi Overlook
;
Kalahaku Overlook
: At the switchback
near the 9,000-foot contour, a parking space has been constructed
that is labelled LELEIWI OVERLOOK. This is above Holua and the
Halemauu Trail, so that parties can be watched as they go down
Leleiwi Pali. On clear days, the whole length of Keanae Valley can
be seen through Koolau Gap. The lateral view extends from Hana
Airport across the big isthmus to Kihei on Maalaea Bay. On afternoons,
clouds roll into the gap, making this a good place to see the
Brocken Specter. One’s shadowy image appears within a circular

9

rainbow, projected against the bank of cloud.
KALAHAKU OVERLOOK

(elev. 9,325′) is a remarkable view point on the crater rim that is
reached by a short spur off the main park road. It is the site of the
Old Rest House, in which travellers on foot or horseback stayed
overnight before the road was built. Silversword plants may be seen
just below the main parking area.
KALAHAKU
is the name of the
rugged pali forming the crater wall at this point. The name means
“meeting place of the headmen or chiefs.”

5
.
The Observatory
commands a spectacular view of the crater
near the summit of Haleakala. It was erected in 1937 by the National
Park Service for your comfort and convenience. The observatory is
the main objective of most visitors to Haleakala. Besides being a
welcome shelter during inclement weather, it has a large relief map
and interpretive orientation devices. Modern rest rooms are located
to the rear of the building.

6
.
White Hill, Pakaoao
(elev. 9,865′);
start of Sliding Sands
Trail
: The rocky hill, just above the observatory, is capped
with andesite, a volcanic rock lighter in color and different in composition
from the common basaltic lava of Hawaii. The southwest
slope, up which the trail leads, is covered with Hawaiian sleeping
shelters consisting of oval stone-walled enclosures. These gave protection
against the wind, fog, and cold that is common here. They
may have been used long ago by wayfarers or by sentries and groups
of warriors stationed at this commanding site. They may also have
served as ambush for professional robbers,
aihue
, who waylaid
travellers in lonely places. Refer to the topic,
“
The Tradition of Kaoao
”
in “Haleakala Hawaiiana” for more of the story.

7
.
Red Hill, Pakaoao, Summit of Haleakala
(original English
name, Pendulum Peak; elev. 10,025′): To drive to the summit
take the paved road, turning sharply left below the observatory
parking area. Red Hill is the highest of the three prominent
recent cinder cones. Early morning is a good time to view extended
panoramas and distant seascapes, before streaks of clouds form
shelves along the sides of the mountain. But afternoon is better for
viewing the crater, as its features appear in excellent light and color
at that time. A pointer table by the road indicates the names of
islands and peaks seen. An Army radar and radio communication
station was located on Red Hill during World War II.

10

Halemauu Trail on Leleiwi Pali.

11

8
.
Skyline Drive
: An improved driveway to the Civil Aeronautics
Repeater Station leaves the park at the pass between Red Hill
and Kolekole. Views stretch down the vast, precipitous southwest
outer slope of Haleakala to the Lualailua Hills and a desert seashore,
ten thousand feet below. Morning will most likely yield the cloud-free
views. The Aeronautics Station is open to visitors. A parking
area is just outside the gate to the station. Kolekole is the site of
television relays and a satellite tracking station. It is a mile from
the Observatory to the summit of Kolekole. It is 1.7 miles from the
Observatory at the FAA Station. Magnetic Peak is across the road
from Red Hill. A huge curiously shaped bomb on its skyline has a
silhouette that looks much like a sitting duck.

Volcanic bomb on Magnetic Peak.

9
.
The Halemauu Trail
starts from a curve on the park road
at the 8,000 foot elevation. It leads down a gentle slope for eight-tenths
of a mile to the crater rim. An alternate start is on the driveway
into Hosmer Grove Campground, near Silversword Inn. Built by the
National Park Service in 1937, the trail drops with a gentle grade
down the 1500-foot Leleiwi Pali to the crater floor. It suggests thrilling
trails in Glacier National Park and other rugged mainland areas
as it swings and clings to the vertical cliffs. Hike to the crater rim
for spectacular views of Windward Maui and Keanae Valley in fair
weather; if clouds are rolling up Koolau Gap in the evening, you

12

may possibly be greeted by the Specter of the Brocken. Silver
geraniums, Hinahina, small spherical shrubs peculiar to Haleakala,
grow along the upper trail and road.
HALEMAUU
, grass house, is said
to be derived from one formerly located near the head of the trail.

10
.
Holua Cabin
rests in a grassy plot at the foot of the towering,
3,000-foot Leleiwi Pali. Introduced grasses grow in the meadow
near it. The pale “moss” on the rough lava flow is
Stereocaulon
,
actually a lichen, that strange combination of an alga and a fungus
growing together to appear as one plant. This pioneer on barren
new lavas is sometimes called Hawaiian Snow. The comparatively
recent flow in front of the cabin contains lava tubes or caves. These
are rough and dangerous, and should not be entered except by especially
equipped parties. Holua Cave, above the cabin, was used as
a night shelter before the cabin was built.

11
.
Silversword Loop
, a quarter-mile long, deviates from Halemauu
Trail past several clumps of silversword. Hollows and slopes
of the old, weathered, red lava flow in this area have favorable conditions
for their growth. Near the east end of the loop, the main
trail passes among many piles of stones, ahus, markers, and platforms
built by the Hawaiians. This place, known as
KEAHUOKAHOLO
, appears
to have had special or sacred significance. State law, as well as
Hawaiian customs and ethics, strictly forbids disturbing or damaging
any of these ancient structures.

12
.
Kihapiilani Road
: From a black, cinder-covered flat, an old
Hawaiian pathway crosses the rough shoulder of the small cone on
Halalii to smoother surface between Mamane Hill and Puu Kumu.
It is six to eight feet wide and is paved with flat stones. The start,
difficult to locate, is to the right of a small, horned spattercone seen
from the trail as you look toward Hanakauhi Peak. A chief, Kihapiilani,
built the trail over Mauna Hina along the North Rim to a
pond, Wai Ale, probably the present Wai Anapanapa on the
exterior slope. Refer to “
The Legend of Kihapiilani
”
in “Haleakala Hawaiiana” for the story.

13
.
Bottomless Pit
is a yawning black well, ten feet in diameter,
rimmed with colored lava spatter a few feet high.
Use caution approaching
its edge.
Baseless legend claims that it sinks to sea level.

13

Although no bottom can be seen, debris chokes the opening sixty or
seventy feet below. It is a vent, through which superheated gases
were emitted in an eruption of long ago. The rim around the throat
indicates that a little lava sputtered out with the gas. During the
flank eruptions of Mauna Loa and Kilauea similar vents exhale
columns of blue, incandescent gases at intervals. Old Hawaiians at
Kaupo say that the pit was used for disposition of umbilical cords
of babies. Various reasons are assigned to the custom, such as to
make the child strong, or to prevent its becoming a thief.

14
.
Ka Moa o Pele Trail
branches from the foot of the Sliding
Sands Trail to join the Halemauu Trail across the crater. It is a
scenic route between silverswords on Ka Moa o Pele, a red cinder
cone. Flowering plants can usually be seen from June to September.
Pa Puaa o Pele, Pele’s Pig Pen, is the rim of a spatter cone, now
buried, in the low pass between Halalii and Ka Moa o Pele. Hikers
from Sliding Sands to Holua should go around the right or east side
of Halalii to see the Bottomless Pit and Pele’s Paint Pot, a colorful
pass just a short distance beyond.

15
.
Bubble Cave
is a large, collapsed bubble with heavy walls.
It was blown by gases in ancient molten lava. Only a small segment
collapsed in the center of the roof, which serves as entrance and
smoke-hole; old-timers were wont to camp in this natural shelter. It
was the rest stop now supplanted by Kapalaoa Cabin.

16
.
Wailuku Cabin
, outside the park, was built by the State
Board of Agriculture and Forestry for the use of hunters. Arrangements
for its use must be made at the Maui Office of the Board in
Kahului. Trails to it are not of park standards and are not recommended
to sightseers.

17
.
Old and New Volcanics
: Dikes that protrude as slabs of
light-colored rock from slopes of the ridge toward Hanakauhi mark
part of the ancient divide between Koolau and Kaupo Valleys, the
great erosional canyons worn into the mountain during an age of
quiescence. This divide is deeply buried inside the crater under the
cinders and flows of renewed eruptions that form the present floor.
Adjacent Mauna Hina and Namana o ke Akua, green with shrubs,
grass, and scrub mamane, are cinder cones from ancient eruptions.

14

Puu Nole, a garish, black youngster in the community, has only
silverswords on its barren slopes. Towards Paliku the trail is flanked
by some of the most recent lava flows, only a few hundred years old.
Their source vents are visible on the slopes of Hanakauhi and the
north wall of the crater.

18
.
Lauulu Trail
is plainly visible as it zigzags up the north wall.
Although not maintained at present, it is passable and allows rugged
enthusiasts to climb the rim for views of the crater. On the outer
slopes, moist grassy plots, often fog-bound, blend into jungle that
drops to the Hana Coast, 8,000 feet below. Kalapawili Ridge extends
from the summit of Hanakauhi Mountain eastward around the head
of Kipahulu Valley to the tiny lake, Wai Anapanapa. It is readily
traversable for the good hiker.

19
.
Paliku
is very different from the desert wastes in the other
parts of the crater. Lush grass and ferns, overhanging forest trees,
and a verdant cover on a towering pali result from abundant clouds
pushed by the trade winds over the east wall.
AKALA
, the giant
Hawaiian raspberry, ripens abundantly back of the cabins in July.
It is excellent for pie, conserves, or dessert. Native Hawaiian trees
include:
MAMANE
, far larger than the scrubby growth in the crater;

OHIA
, with gray-green leaves and red lehua flowers;
KOLEA
, with
thick magnolia-like leaves four inches long;
OLAPA
, with leaves that
tremble in the slightest breeze, like those of quaking aspen. The
conifer above the Ranger Cabin is a cryptomeria, a Japanese evergreen
planted early in this century.

20
.
Kipahulu Valley
, beyond the eastern rim, is a remote, jungle
wilderness walled in by loftiest cliffs; a no man’s land, it has barely
been explored, let alone touched or altered by civilization. Look from
the cabin at Paliku across the pasture to the lowest notch in the sheer
eastern pali. For a view into Kipahulu, a good climber can follow an
old goat trail, steep and tortuous, that leads up the left side of the
draw to this notch. A chorus of bird songs rises from the primeval
forest in Kipahulu. With them you may hear complacent squeals
of wild pigs that have been undisturbed for generations.

21
.
Kaupo Trail
is a good trail that winds down Kaupo Gap,
across little meadows, through groves of small
AALII
trees, and under

15

spreading
KOA
trees to the park boundary which is below the 4,000-foot
contour. Wild goats may be heard on the pali or on the lavas
in the gap. Kaupo Ranch extends below the park. From the redwood
water tanks, a jeep trail descends through pastures to ranch headquarters.
It is 8 miles from Paliku to ranch headquarters, which
can be hiked in a half day. Kaupo Village on the belt road around
Haleakala is 1½ miles further. The route is interesting, but
arrangements must be made in advance to be met by car either at
the ranch or the village. It is fifty miles from Central Maui by the
shortest road. Although Kaupo Trail crosses private property,
advance permission is not required to use it; but, in due consideration,
please use care to close gates and do not molest or damage any
property.
The reverse trip from Kaupo Village into the crater is
not recommended
because of the long, arduous climb up the unsheltered,
south-facing mountain slope.

Paliku Cabin.

16

HALEAKALA HAWAIIANA

MAUI LEGENDS

Thus starts the story of Maui, beloved demi-god of all Polynesia
in the never-never land of long ago. Not wanted as a babe, for he
was scrawny and deformed, his mother, Hina, wrapped him in a lock
of her hair and cast him into the sea. But jellyfish rescued and
mothered him, and the god, Kanaloa, gave him protection. For all
that, the growing youngster yearned for his own, so that one day
he crept back and stealthily mingled with his four brothers. He was
accepted in the family circle only after much pleading by the eldest
boy.

Maui-of-a-thousand-tricks is the favorite nickname given this
delightful, oft thoroughly human scamp. Throughout his escapades
he was ever faithful to man, so frequently fickle and unworthy. Maui
made the birds visible, for at first they could only be heard as they
sang and fluttered through the air. Maui invented spears and
barbed fishhooks. His greatest catch, so runs his fish story, was with
a huge hook of powerful magic made from the lifeless jawbone of
his grandmother, who was remarkable, for only one side of her
body was alive. He tricked his brothers into the task of manning
the paddles while he, equipped with his potent tackle, fished up the
Hawaiian Islands from the depths of the ocean. Maui first had
strictly admonished the brothers not to watch him, but only to look
straight ahead. When curiosity overcame the belabored paddlers,
they disobeyed. The line parted as they looked back, leaving the land
only partly emerged, a chain of islands instead of a continuous whole.

The story of the island of Maui thus begins and—so runs one
version—Maui lived in plain fashion on simple fare in a humble
grass hut at Kauiki, the famous foothill of Haleakala in the district
of Hana. Hawaii at the time was covered by darkness and fog, so
Maui pushed the heavens to their present position far above the
highest mountains, Haleakala, Mauna Kea, Mauna Loa, and Hualalai.
Before this feat, man had to stoop and crawl, pressed closely to the
ground, for the skies were low, and were held up by the plants whose

17

leaves became flattened by their burden, even as they remain today.
Yet even now, when Maui is asleep, the heavens rush back as somber
clouds and darken the country with storms. From Kauiki, Maui made
his important journey to the crater to capture the sun and force it
to move slowly through the heavens that tapa may be dried and
fruits can mature. Also there are more daylight hours for fishing
and ceremonial preparations in the
heiau
. This legend, the most
pertinent to this guide, is sketched in the
Introduction to Part I
.

Most Hawaiian legends place Maui’s home in the black lava
bank of the Wailuku River above Hilo, while his mother chose the
dark cave behind Rainbow Falls. His exploits, so often capricious,
more frequently reflect a benefactor’s concern for mankind. Maui
disclosed the art of making fire by rubbing sticks together. Previously,
man was dependent on Pele’s volcanic furnace or on embers carefully
nurtured to kindle his fires. Maui wrung the secret from Alae, the
reluctant mud-hen, who alone knew it and guarded it with greatest
care. Exasperated by repeated frustration and deception, Maui, once
he had gained her secret, punished the stubborn bird by rubbing her
head with a stick so roughly that all the feathers came off and raw
flesh appeared, which is how it remains today.

Maui in his noblest moment gave his all for man, whose frailty
brought about the downfall of both. For Maui, too, was doomed to
die some day, since his father, like Achilles’ nurse Cynosura, had
neglected a part of the proper ceremony to make him immortal. Maui
abhorred the fact that man must die, for he regarded death as degrading
and an insult to the dignity of man. The secret of life was hidden
within the heart of Hina-nui-kepo, the dread ogress of death. To win
immortality one had to steal through her jaws, which had sharp basalt
teeth, enter into the inky blackness of the stomach, and tear out the
heart. This could only be done while Hina slept. First, Maui turned
man into a little bird, and advised him to keep very quiet, lest he
awaken the fearful goddess from her slumber. Then he went stealthily
about his fearsome task, speedily and alone. All went well until the
return journey; alas! poor, weak man could not restrain himself,
but burst into uncontrollable laughter as he watched the plight of

18

the demigod within the ugly, gaping fish-mouth of Hina. The great
jaws closed with a snap that crushed Maui and left Death ever after
the victor. Greater love hath no man!

It would seem that the crater so high in the sky, so remote in
location, so difficult in access, so desolate in appearance, so dread in
origin, should have been shunned by the early native. Quite the contrary,
many marks of frequent and varied use may be discovered in
the crater. A trail through it connected the busy sites on West Maui
and the isthmus with Kaupo and Hana near the eastern shore. This
direct route avoided the wet heavily forested northern slopes of the
mountain as well as the precipitous, arid, rough terrain on the southwest.
It was easily traversed, in spite of the climb involved.

THE LEGEND OF KIHAPIILANI

“Kihapiilani was one time King of Maui. It was he who caused
the road from Kawaipapa to Kahalaoaka to be paved with smooth
rocks, even to the forests of Oopuloa in Koolau, Maui. He also was
the one who built the road of shells on Molokai.” “And,” the great
Hawaiian antiquarian, Abraham Fornander, might have continued,
“he caused the trail across the crater of Haleakala to be paved with
water-worn stones, to the foot of Hanakauhi of the mists.” Kihapiilani
was the great public works king of the islands.

Because of Kihapiilani a most remarkable event of ancient Hawaiian
history came to pass, the expedition of numberless canoes.

Three and a half centuries ago, Piilani, a king of Maui, had four
children: two sons, Lonoapii who was the eldest child, and Kihapiilani,
the youngest; and two daughters, Piikea, who became the
wife of King Umi of Hawaii, and Kihawahine, now regarded as the
lizard god. When the old king was dying, he adjured his successor,
Lonoapii, to take his place as father and to be kind to the younger
brother. But alas, the young prince was neglected and treated with
contempt. One day at Waihee, two calabashes of small fish,
nehu
,
still wet with sea water, were brought to Lonoapii. These he gave

19

to everybody except the younger brother, who, therefore, reached out
and helped himself. This angered the king so that he hurled the
calabash and its contents into Kihapiilani’s face. Without a word,
Kihapiilani arose and travelled to Kula. After some time, he told his
story to the
kahuna
Apuna and asked what he should do. Apuna
replied that he should seek advice at Keanae from a
kahuna
named
Kahoko. Kahoko sent him to Hana, and from there to Hawaii, following
a certain dark object as guide. Kihapiilani and his retinue
travelled the windward side of Kohala on foot, swimming through
shark-infested waters around the bold headlands. Everywhere people
gathered to him, for he was handsome and brave. When he reached
Laupahoehoe, in Hamakua, he found his sister, Piikea, living with
her husband, Umi. Umi had already become a great chief for he had
overthrown his tyrant brother, Hakau, but his greatest deeds were yet
to follow. These include the union of all of the island of Hawaii
under his rule.

When Kihapiilani explained that he was seeking someone to
avenge him, for Lonoapii had thrown salt water into his face, Piikea
goaded Umi to help him, for he had crossed the seas. So Umi sent
messengers with orders that
koa
be felled and many canoes made
ready for the crossing to Maui. These were so numerous that when
the first canoe reached Kauiki, the last were still in Waipio. The sea
was covered with canoes. Umi ordered the canoes to be fastened bow
to stern by twos, and in this way the men walked across instead of
sailing, the canoes being a dependable road. This is known in legend
as the sailing of numberless canoes.

At Kauiki fortress the leader, Hoolae, fought bravely from the
top of the hill in daytime, but at night he set a huge wooden image
of a man with a bristling war club at the head of the ladder up which
the attackers had to climb. The trick frightened away all approaching
enemies, while the defenders slept in peace. One night, however,
Piimaiwaa took his war club and approached the giant. He hurled
insults at him from a safe distance. As his taunts drew no response
or movement, Piimaiwaa twirled his war club, threatened with
gestures, and gradually crept closer to discover the clever ruse that
had fooled the forces of Umi. With that obstacle gone, Umi’s men

20

surprised and slew the enemy. Hoolae was captured and killed on the
eastern side of Haleakala. War spread over all of Maui, until
Lonapii was slain at Waihee and Kihapiilani became king of the
island. It could well be that during this campaign Kihapiilani became
acquainted with our crater, across which he later constructed the
paved trail, another monument to his reign.

Some believe that the trails paved with waterworn rocks were
built by
menehune
, the dwarf race supposed to work secretively at
night. Actually, the commoners performed the labor, being pressed
into service for the task. They formed an endless chain from the
coast, so that rocks could be passed from hand to hand until carefully
fitted into place on the walkway. The spaces between the larger stones
were often filled with sand or gravel.

The early Mauians had many names for different parts of the
crater. Some places had two names; sometimes one name served
more than one place. Thus there is duplication of use of the name
Haleakala, for besides being the name of the whole volcano, it is
also applied to the peak on the rim west of Kaupo Gap. Or could

haole
confusion have given rise to use for the whole mountain a name
that once applied only to a prominence on the rim?

White Hill, Pokaoao.

21

THE TRADITION OF KAOAO

White Hill, Pakaoao, (see
Numbered Points of Interest, topic 6
) is of
pale gray andesitic basalt that splits into slabs. On the leeward
side are many enclosures built of stone, 3 or 4 feet high, which are
believed to have been erected as shelters or bivouacs by the men of
Kaoao, a quarrelsome chieftain who sought refuge on the mountain
after he was driven out of Kaupo, early in the 18th century. Dr.
Kenneth Emory of Bishop Museum has an unpublished manuscript,
in Hawaiian, of a legend given to him on June 22, 1922 by Joseph
V. Marciel, an old native of Maui. Copy of the translation by
Maunupau of Honolulu was graciously given to me so that the
story could be told here.

The South Wall: Haleakala Peak on left, Puu Kumu on right.

The
heiau
of Keahuamanono on Haleakala Peak was built by
Kaoao, younger brother of Kekaulike, great king of Maui. The
brothers were not friends. Kaoao lived on the mountain, but Kekaulike

22

and his men lived by fishing and raising crops in Nuu, the
district west of Kaupo Valley. One day Kaoao sent his men north
to find food from Keanae to Hana. After they had departed, Kaoao
journeyed to his brother’s house, which he found deserted since
Kekaulike had gone fishing. Kaoao proceeded to pull and destroy
all of his brother’s crops, and then returned up the mountain.

Kekaulike was very angry when he discovered all his crops had
been destroyed. As he knew whom to blame, he ordered his men to
wrap
’ala
, sling stones, in ti leaves as if they were potatoes. Armed
with these they marched up the mountain, and found Kaoao with
his bodyguard only, for his men had not returned from the foray for
food. The defenders were soon overpowered, but Kaoao jumped over
a cliff in an attempt to escape. Kekaulike found him dying, and
quickly put an end to him. When Kaoao’s men returned from Koolau
they found that their leader had been dead many days.

ARCHEOLOGICAL STUDY

Dr. Kenneth Emory made an extensive archeological survey of
Haleakala Crater in 1920. He records 58 stone terraces and platforms,
9 groups of open stone shelters, hundreds of
ahu
, and the
paved trail of Kihapiilani.
[1]
(See
Numbered Points of Interest, topic 18
.)

The huge structure built by Kaoao, as mentioned earlier in this
chapter, stands in the saddle above Kapalaoa, due south of Puu Maile.
This is west of the highest point on Haleakala Peak. It measures
57 × 36 feet and has an eastern supporting wall 18 feet high. This
has the appearance of a
heiau
, possibly used for the worship of Pele.
As such, it resembles Oalalauo which was located on the rim of Kilauea
Iki in the Kilauea Section of Hawaii National Park. Oalalauo,
seen in ruins in 1823, was described by the missionary William Ellis,
who, probably the first European to go to Kilauea Crater, has given
us the first record of a visit.
[2]

Since the crater is a place of restricted access, it was used for
burial sites, which is quite in keeping with practice elsewhere in the

23

Hawaiian Islands. A curious local custom was the deposit of
umbilical cords of Kaupo babies in certain localities, principally in
the Bottomless Pit (
Numbered Points of Interest, topic 13
), and in Na Piko
Haua, a pit 15 feet in diameter and 10 feet deep that is located northeast
of Halemauu Trail, less than a half mile east of Holua Cabin. The
cord was wrapped in a small piece of tapa, or, in recent days, in a
scrap of gay calico and tied with string. Sometimes it was placed
in a bottle or other container. This was then carefully stowed in
crevices or cast into Bottomless Pit. Reasons given for the practice
vary. It was believed that if the cord were destroyed or eaten by
rats the child would become a thief. Some claimed that proper
disposition made a child strong. Some aver that the custom persists
to this day, showing, like belief in the existence of Pele, the durability
of ancient superstitions.

On the north wall above Paliku is a rock, Pohaku Palaha or
Broad Rock, which is called the “hub of East Maui.” Boundary
lines radiating from it mark off the pie-shaped land divisions,

ahupuaa
, that extend in all directions to the shores of the ocean.

It is quite natural that legends, traditions, and superstitions
should be woven in and about such a great natural feature as this
crater. All prominent places had original Hawaiian names, although
some were changed with time and some are now lost. Ka Lua o ka Oo
was the residence of Kamohoalii, the brother of Pele and the king of
vapor. Between Halalii and Ka Moa o Pele is the rim of a spatter
cone, Pa Puaa o Pele, which is 30 feet square with an opening on
the northwest side. It protrudes only 10 feet above later volcanic
deposits. This was a place of highest
kapu
(taboo). Merely to disturb
a single grain of sand within it will bring fog and rain, possibly
death. Emory discloses the local belief that a stone structure, 9 × 5
feet, located 45 feet east of the rim, holds the bones of two men and
a woman who had violated this
kapu
and who had perished in the
ensuing fog. His investigation failed to reveal any burial within
the structure. In vaguer vein, it was held that a similar fate would
be meted to those disturbing a silversword. Were the National Park
committed to a policy of nature protection through fear, this belief
would be helpful indeed.

24

THE HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

Captain James Cook discovered Maui on November 26, 1778, as
he sailed southwestward from Alaska on his last voyage. His record
for the day gives us the first description of Haleakala: “An elevated
hill appeared in the country, whose summit rose above the clouds.
The land, from this hill, fell in a gradual slope, terminating in a
steep, rocky coast; the sea breaking against it in a most dreadful
surf.... On the 30th ... another island was seen to the windward,
called, by the natives,
Owhyhee
. That along which we had been for
some days, was called
Mowee
.”
[3]

After sailing along the eastern and southern coasts of the island
of Hawaii in its two armed ships,
Resolution
and
Discovery
, the
expedition landed at Kealakekua Bay on January 17, 1779. Captain
Cook was worshipped as the incarnation of the god Lono, but he overstayed
his welcome, ill-will and violence taking its place. A climax
was reached over the theft of a ship’s cutter, which was broken up
merely for its nails and ironware. On February 14, Cook tried to
seize the aged king Kalaniopuu to hold as a hostage until reparation
was made. In the scuffle that ensued, the Great Mariner was killed
by an
alii
, who thrust quite through his back an iron dagger, a chief
article of trade of the Expedition. Upon departure toward the northwest,
the survivors reached Maalaea Bay on February 24, on which
date the journal remarks about Maui: “This side of the island forms
the same distant view as the north-east; ... the hilly parts, connected
by a low flat isthmus, having, at the first view, the appearance of two
separate islands.”

The ill-fated French explorer, Count Jean Francois de Galaup de
la Perouse, arrived with his two frigates on May 28, 1786, in the
bay southwest of Haleakala that today bears his name. He recorded:
“At every instant we had just cause to regret the country we had left
behind us; and to add to our mortification, we did not find an
anchoring place well sheltered till we came to a dismal coast where

25

torrents of lava had formerly flowed like the cascades which pour
forth their water in other parts of the island.”
[4]
This reference is to
the latest flows of Haleakala. See
page 37
.

On Vancouver’s first exploring expedition to the islands, Edward
Bell made the following entry for March 6, 1792 in the log of the

Chatham
: “... the south shore ... had by no means a very inviting
appearance,—it was remarkably high and seemed extremely barren;—from
the top of the Mountains to the waters edge are deep
Gullies or ruts form’d I suppose by the water running down,—and
there appeared but little wood on this side (except towards the Top)
and as little Cultivation, here and there we saw a few Huts and a
small Village, several of which appeared half way up.”

On Vancouver’s next visit, Thomas Manby recorded in the
journal for March 10, 1793: “... south side of the island which
presented a prospect not very grateful to the eye as the land was
high and rugged with frequent mounds of Cinders caused by volcanic
eruptions.” On March 14, 1793, the botanist A. Menzies, with some
of Vancouver’s crew, climbed a valley back of Lahaina and made
botanical observations.

When the first missionaries from New England came to Hawaii,
Elisha Loomis, a printer, remarked in his journal for March 30,
1820: “As we double the northern extremity of Owhyhee the lofty
heights of Maui are on our right.” The spelling, Maui, is evidently
a correction made later, as the original spelling appears elsewhere
in early missionary usage. Already by 1822, the members of this
expedition had adopted the five vowels and seven consonants of the
Romance languages used today in reducing the Hawaiian language to
writing and printing. Thus, the confusion of earlier English writers
was dispelled.

Lorrin Andrews and Jonathan F. Green, ordained missionaries,
and Dr. Gerrit P. Judd, physician, were with the third mission from
New England. They arrived in Honolulu on March 30, 1828. They
visited Rev. William Richards in Lahaina and toured Maui the
following summer. Extracts concerning the trip of Dr. and Mrs. Judd

26

were published in 1880 with an introductory note by Albert Francis
Judd, a son. In the preface, dated May 1861, Mrs. Judd states that
the sketches were “culled and abridged from a mass of papers”
without pretense of writing a history. Under the date of July 1828,
the narrative relates a Fourth of July excursion and includes: “The
mountain on the east division is Haleakala (house of the sun), and
is the largest crater in the world, but is not in action.”
[5]
Unfortunately,
the original notes have been lost, and the reference to the mountain
by name must have been inserted at a much later date in preparing
the manuscript for publication. It would be hard to believe that Mrs.
Judd could possibly have started the fiction, “largest crater on earth,”
at the early date of 1828. The Judds did not climb the mountain
during their visit, and Hawaiians were not in a position to make comparisons
among craters of the world.

On August 21, 1828, Richards, Andrews, and Green made the
first recorded ascent of Haleakala. They could not have known a
name for the mountain, for they refer to it only as “the highest land
on Maui” and as “an extinct volcano.” Not until six years later was
their account published. The following quotations relate to their
trip:
[6]
“Mr. Richards had for years been particularly desirous of
making the tour of this island for the purpose of examining and
improving the schools, etc., but having been alone, it has hitherto
been impracticable for him to leave his family for a sufficient length
of time. During the present season this object has been accomplished.”
Mr. Richards had arrived in Hawaii in 1823, and had taken
over the mission in Lahaina shortly afterwards at the request of
Queen Keopuolani. He had not mentioned the big mountain in previous
correspondence and reports.

“Here (at ’Kaalimaile,’ perhaps the Haliimaile of today) we
tarried overnight, intending, in the morning, to ascend the mountain,
near which we were, and sleep on the highest land on Maui. We
were told by the natives, that the way was long, but the ascent very
easy. We suppose no English travellers had ever ascended this
mountain.

27

“21. We rose early, and prepared for our ascent. Having procured
a guide, we set out; taking only a scanty supply of provisions.
Half way up the mountain, we found plenty of good water, and, at a
convenient fountain, we filled our calabash for tea. By the sides of
our path, we found plenty of ohelos, (a juicy berry, very palatable,)
and, occasionally, a cluster of strawberries. On the lower part of the
mountain, there is considerable timber; but as we proceeded, it
became scarce; and, as we approached the summit, almost the only
thing, of the vegetable kind, which we saw, was a plant which grew
to the height of six or eight feet, and produced a most beautiful
flower. It seems to be peculiar to this mountain, as our guide and
servants made ornaments of it for their hats, to demonstrate to those
below, that they had been to the top of the mountain.

“It was nearly 5 o’clock, when we reached the summit; but we
felt ourselves richly repaid for the toil of the day, by the grandeur
and beauty of the scene, which at once opened up to our view. The
day was very fine. The clouds, which hung over the mountains on
West Maui, and which were scattered promiscuously, between us and
the sea, were far below us; so that we saw the
upper side
of them,
while the reflection of the sun painting their verge with varied tints,
made them appear like enchantment. We gazed on them with admiration,
and longed for the pencil of Raphael, to give perpetuity to a
prospect, which awakened in our bosoms unutterable emotions. On
the other side, we beheld the seat of Pele’s dreadful reign. We stood
on the edge of a tremendous crater, down which, a single misstep
would have precipitated us, 1,000 or 1,500 feet. This was once
filled with liquid fire, and in it, we counted sixteen extinguished
craters. To complete the grandeur of the scene, Mouna Kea, and
Mouna Roa lifted their lofty summits, and convinced us, that, though
far above the
clouds
, we were far below the feet of the traveller who
ascends the mountains of Hawaii. By this time, the sun was nearly
sunk in the Pacific; and we looked around for a shelter during the
night. Our guide and other attendants we had left far behind; and
we reluctantly began our descent, keeping along on the edge of the
crater.

28

“After descending about a mile, we met the poor fellows, who
were hobbling along on the sharp lava, as fast as their feet would
suffer them. They were glad to stop for the night, though they
complained of the
cold
. We kindled a fire, and preparations were
made for tea and lodgings. The former we obtained with little
trouble. We boiled part of a chicken, roasted a few potatoes, and,
gathering round the fire, we made a comfortable meal; but the place
of lodging, we obtained with some difficulty. At length, we spread
our mats and blankets in a small yard, enclosed, probably, by natives,
when passing from one side of the island to the other. We were within
twenty-feet of the precipice, and the wind whistled across the valley,
forcibly reminding us of a November evening in New England. The
thermometer had fallen from 77 to 43* (*The next morning, the
thermometer stood at 40.), and we shivered with the cold. The
night was long and comfortless.

“22. Early in the morning, we arose, and reascended the mountain,
to its summit, and contemplated the beauties of the rising sun,
and gazed a while longer, on the scenery before us. There seemed
to be but two places, where the lava had found a passage to the sea,
and through these channels, it must have rushed with tremendous
velocity. Not having an instrument, we were unable to ascertain the
height of the mountain. We presume it would not fall short of
10,000 feet.* (*This, I believe, is the height at which it has generally
been estimated.) The circumference of the great crater, we
judged to be no less than fifteen miles. We were anxious to remain
longer, that we might descend into the crater, examine the appearance
of things below, and ascend other eminences; but as we were nearly
out of provisions, and our work but just commenced, we finished our
chicken and tea, and began our descent.

“Nothing remarkable occurred, on our way down....”

The United States Exploring Expedition under the command of
Lieutenant Charles Wilkes, USN, visited Hawaii in 1840 and 1841.
On February 15, 1841, Wilkes dispatched Messrs. Pickering, Drayton,
and Breckenridge from Hilo to explore Maui. They were joined
at Lahaina by Rev. Andrews, his son, four students of the seminary,
and six
kanakas
to carry their food. At Wailuku they were joined

29

by Mr. Bailey (see
page 40
). They spent the night at an elevation
of 1,692 feet on the sugar plantation of Lane and Minor, two
Bostonians. The story of their ascent, which is the second recorded,
is told by quoting from their report:
[7]

“The next day, the party set out at an early hour, in hopes of
reaching the summit, but it began to rain violently, in consequence
of which they took shelter in a large cave, at an altitude of eight
thousand and ninety feet. Here many interesting plants were found,
among which were two species of Pelargonium, one with dark
crimson, the other with lilac flowers; the Argyroziphium began to
disappear as they ascended, and its place was taken up by the silky
species, which is only found at high altitudes. From the cave to the
summit they found shrubby plants, consisting of Epacris, Vaccinium,
Edwardsia, Compositae, and various rubiaceous plants.

“On their arrival at the edge of the crater, on the summit, the
clouds were driving with great velocity through it, and completely
concealed its extent. The height, as ascertained by the barometer,
was ten thousand two hundred feet. The driving of the sleet before
the strong gale soon affected the missionaries and native students,
the latter of whom for the first time, felt the effects of cold. The
limit-line of woods was ascertained to be at six thousand five hundred
feet.

“Some sandalwood bushes were noticed about five hundred feet
above the cave. Above the cave the ground assumed a more stony
appearance, and the rock became now and then more visible, which
had not before been the case. Where the rock was exposed it was
found to be lava more or less vesicular, but no regular stream was
observed. The surface of the lava appeared to be more thickly covered
with earth than that of Mauna Kea, and consequently a greater
proportion of soil existed, as well as a thick coating of gravel. Near
the summit, bullock-tracks were observed, and likewise those of wild
dogs, but no other animals were seen except a few goats.

“The crater of Haleakala, if so it may be called, is a deep gorge,
open at the north and east, forming a kind of elbow: the bottom of

30

it, as ascertained by the barometer, was two thousand seven hundred
and eighty-three feet below the summit peak, and two thousand and
ninety-three feet below the wall. Although its sides are steep, yet a
descent is practicable at almost any part of it. The inside of the
crater was entirely bare of vegetation, and from its bottom arose some
large hills of scoria and sand: some of the latter are of an ochre-red
colour at the summit, with small craters in the centre. All bore the
appearance of volcanic action, but the natives have no tradition of
an eruption. It was said, however, that in former times the dread
goddess Pele had her habitation here, but was driven out by the
sea, and then took up her abode on Hawaii, where she has ever
since remained. Can this legend refer to a time when the volcanoes
of Maui were in activity?

“The gravel that occurred on the top was composed of small
angular pieces of cellular lava, resembling comminuted mineral coal.
The rock was of the same character as that seen below, containing
irregular cavities rather than vesicles. Sometimes grains of chrysolite
and horn-blende were disseminated. In some spots the rock was
observed to be compact, and had the appearance of argillite or slate:
this variety occurred here chiefly in blocks, but was also seen in situ.
It affords the whetstones of the natives, and marks were seen which
they had left in procuring them.

“Of the origin of the name Mauna Haleakala, or the House of
the Sun, I could not obtain any information. Some of the residents
thought it might be derived from the sun rising from over it to the
people of West Maui, which it does at some seasons of the year.

“Having passed the night at the cave, Mr. Baily (
sic
) and young
Andrews preferred returning to the coast, rather than longer to
endure the cold and stormy weather on the mountain.

“Our gentlemen made excursions to the crater, and descended
into it. The break to the north appears to have been occasioned by
the violence of volcanic action within. There does not appear any
true lava stream on the north, but there is a cleft or valley which
has a steep descent: here the soil was found to be of a spongy nature,
and many interesting plants were found, among the most remarkable
of which was the arborescent Geranium.

31

“The floor of the crater, in the north branch, is extremely rough
and about two miles wide at the apex, which extends to the sea.
In the ravines there is much compact argillaceous rock, similar to
what had been observed on Mauna Kea, retaining, like it, pools of
water. The rock, in general, was much less absorbent than on the
mountains of Hawaii.

“Mr. Drayton made an accurate drawing or plan of the crater,
the distances on which are estimated, but the many cross bearings
serve to make its relative proportions correct. Perhaps the best idea
that can be given of the size of this cavity, is by the time requisite to
make a descent into it being one hour, although the depth is only
two thousand feet. The distance from the middle to either opening
was upwards of five miles; that to the eastward was filled with a line
of hills of scoria, some of them five or six hundred feet high; under
them was lying a lava stream, that, to appearance, was nearly horizontal,
so gradual was its fall. The eastern opening takes a short
turn to the southeast, and then descends rapidly to the coast.

“At the bottom were found beds of hard gravel, and among it
what appeared to be carbonate of lime, and detached black crystals
like augite, but chrysolite was absent.

“From the summit of the mountain the direction of the lava
stream could be perceived, appearing, as it approached the sea, to
assume more the shape of a delta.

“From the summit the whole cleft or crater is seen, and could
be traced from the highest point between the two coasts, flowing both
to the northward and eastward. Volcanic action seems also to have
occurred on the southwest side, for a line of scoria hills extends all
the way down the mountain, and a lava stream is said to have burst
forth about a century ago, which still retains its freshness. The
scoria hills on the top very much resemble those of Mauna Kea, but
the mountain itself appears wholly unlike either of the two in
Hawaii, and sinks into insignificance when compared with them.

“Although I have mentioned lava streams on this mountain, yet
they are not to be understood as composed of true lava, as on Mauna
Loa; none of the latter were seen except that spoken of on the southwest
side, and none other is believed to exist. No pumice or capillary

32

glass was at any time seen, nor are they known to exist on this island.
On the wall of the crater, in places, the compass was so much affected
by local attraction as to become useless.

“Near the summit is a small cave, where they observed the silkworm
eggs of Mr. Richards, which were kept here in order to prevent
them from hatching at an improper season. The thermometer in the
cave stood at 44°; the temperature at the highest point was 36°, and
in the crater 71°. After three days’ stay, the party returned to the
establishment of Messrs. Lane and Minor, and thence to Wailuku.
They were much gratified with their tour.”

The name Haleakala can thus be regarded as having been formally
introduced by members of the Wilkes Expedition. As the fame of
the beauties and wonders of the mountain spread, visitors from all
parts of the globe came to make the arduous climb to the summit.
Most found shelter from the elements in natural caves. Big Flea and
Little Flea caves, a quarter of a mile from the summit, are often
mentioned in early accounts. That their accommodation was not
highly relished can be seen from a description by Damon in 1847:
“... which did not hold out many attractions, and I have good reasons
for believing it already possessed tenants that would sharply contend
for occupancy with any way-faring and luckless wight.”
[8]
In tales
of early visits, literature—especially the Bible—was gleaned for
phraseology that might help portray emotions felt; fantastic similes
and metaphors were drawn to transmit comprehension of the scene.
On a visit in 1853, G. W. Bates mentioned: “From the point where
I stood a huge pit, capable of burying three cities as large as New
York—opened before me.”
[9]
True, New York then lacked its present
colossal stature, but a milder expression, “could hold the whole of
New York City” still is in use today. For information, the following
areas are given from
Thrum’s Annual
and the
World Almanac
: area
of Haleakala “crater,” 19.0 sq. mi.; area of Maui, 728 sq. mi.; area
of Manhattan borough, 31.2 sq. mi.; area of New York City, 381 sq.
mi. Discomforts, silversword, sandalwood, wild dogs, cattle, goats, the
weather, and personal impressions form much of the subject matter
of early essays.

33

The early residents of Maui recognized the value of the mountain
as a scenic feature and tourist attraction. Their first move was for
better overnight shelter on the mountain. C. W. Dickey in 1894
raised $850 by popular subscription for material with which to build
a simple shelter at Kalahaku Lookout. H. P. Baldwin and the sugar
plantations furnished labor and pack animals. The long trip of 25
miles to the location had to be made on foot or by saddle, and required
a full, tiring day; all building material except rock had to be transported
by pack stock. In painfully characteristic manner, many of
those for whose benefit the sweat and toil were expended proved
unworthy since they roughly abused the structure. Windows were
broken, timber in the floor and walls was ripped out and used for
firewood, and garbage and filth accumulated. A tropical storm added
to the damage by unroofing the house; Worth Aiken raised $1,500
for its renovation and repair. In 1914-15, the cabin was improved
with a concrete floor, metal doors, and metal shutters. Two additional
dormitories were added in 1924-25 at a cost of $11,000 and operation
of the building was turned over to E. J. Walsh, manager of the Grand
Hotel, Wailuku. Usefulness dropped with the opening of the Haleakala
Road, so that on September 24, 1934 its custodian, the Maui
Chamber of Commerce, transferred ownership to the National Park
Service. The structures were razed in 1957, but plans are underway
to replace them with a modern observatory in which people may look
at the scene in glass-enclosed comfort.

In the movement to create a National Park in Hawaii in the early
part of the 20th century, the idea developed that it should consist of
the craters of Kilauea, Mauna Loa, and Haleakala. The citizens of
Maui gave full approval for including their beloved mountain.
Hawaii National Park, composed of these three sections, was established
by Act of Congress on August 1, 1916, but formal dedication
was delayed until 1921. Following improvement of Halemauu Trail
in 1929, a permanent ranger position was set up for continuous
attention to the area. Today it is administered by an assistant
superintendent who has a staff of two rangers and a naturalist.

The building of a road to the summit was fulfillment of a promise
to the people of Maui when the park was created. The first step had

34

to be construction by the Territory of a highway from Pukalani
Junction to the park boundary near Puu Nianiau. This was completed
at a cost of $504,000 in April 1933 after 39 months of work. As
with similar projects elsewhere in Hawaii, superstitions of long-ago
reappeared. Although not antagonistic to progress, Hawaiians raised
a cry that all effort was futile; the chicken god, Kalau-heli-moa, would
conspire and never permit the project to be completed. Every mishap
was attributed to this nemesis.

The Park Service completed its commitment soon afterwards at
the cost of $376,000. The road was armor-surfaced in the fall of
1935. Extensive, appropriate dedication ceremonies were held for
the opening.

With the establishment of a Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC)
camp in Kilauea, a strip camp of 25 men was set up near Puu Nianiau
cinder cone. Part of the time, a tent camp was also established within
the crater. Many improvements became possible through this undertaking.
The observatory building on the summit was constructed in
1936; the three shelters within the crater, Kapalaoa, Paliku, and
Holua, were built a year later. Prior to their completion, overnight
shelter was sought in caves, the best known being Bubble Cave
(see
Numbered Points of Interest, topic 15
) and Holua Cave which
is in the pali wall behind the cabin.

The CCC camp was abandoned in April 1941, and its structures
were turned over to the Army that greatly improved them. During
the period of its occupancy, the Army constructed for radar installation
the ugly concrete block house that still protrudes on the summit
of Red Hill. With evacuation of the military, the CCC quarters were
adapted for the service of a concessioner to supply meals and lodging
within the park.

Normal travel to Haleakala was interrupted for a year when the
section was closed following the attack on Pearl Harbor, December
7, 1941. Annual travel had passed the 25,000 mark in 1939. Travel
for the year 1958 reached a high of 56,940 visitors.

The summit of Haleakala attracted early consideration as a site
for various scientific studies. It is a prime target for many scientific
planners, because the high mountain is situated in the middle of a

35

broad ocean, yet the summit is readily accessible by road. Often
this eagerness has obscured possible use of other suitable sites and
has clashed with the basic purpose of the area as a National Park.
The National Park Service strives to keep the scene as primitive as
possible, assiduously blending buildings and structures into the landscape,
whereas the non-conformist gives no thought to this but follows
the easiest way. Too often economy of construction and operation,
together with careless housekeeping, invert an attraction to a repulsion
which even the splendor of the scene cannot offset. Skyline buildings,
obtrusively strung wires, thoughtlessly gouged land, and abandoned
debris are not conducive to aesthetic experience, whatever their purpose
or whoever the offender.

Haleakala holiday.

The earliest scientific study associated with the mountain concerned
weather. It is said that the Hawaiian Islands are situated
near a critical area in the Pacific which is a birthplace of weather.
The summit offers an ideal place for detection and observance of
the formation of high clouds. Much additional research is needed
to provide a steady flow of data for successful and safe operation of

36

air transportation. Many crashes have been blamed on lack of
weather data. The task is not always simple, as statistical readings
may be confusing. Those made on Red Hill, for example, are influenced
by local circulation set up by the heating of several
square miles of black, barren lava and cinders.

The Federal Aeronautics Administration maintains a station a
mile beyond Red Hill. In the earlier fifties cosmic radiation was
studied with a huge revolving truss located back of Red Hill. The
military has set up apparatus and teams from time to time for experiments
with radio, radar, and radiation. Finally, for the International
Geophysical Year, Haleakala summit was chosen for one of the
important satellite tracking stations supervised by the Smithsonian
Institution of Washington.

IMPORTANT DATES

500 A. D., ca.—Hawaii discovered by Hawaii-loa, Polynesian
fisherman-navigator who, tradition says, came from Kahiki
(Tahiti?), an island to the south. He made several round
trips, bringing with him a large company of retainers.

1100 ca.—After a wave of navigation, intercourse with Tahiti ended.

1300 ca.—According to an ancient chant,
mele
, Kalaunuiohua,
moi

of Hawaii, conquered Maui.
Moi
, in 19th century Hawaiian,
signifies the supreme ruler or head chief, now usually
termed
king
.

1500—Piilani, king of Maui. He was succeeded by Lonoapii who
in turn was overthrown by his brother Kihapiilani and his
brother-in-law, King Umi of the Big Island. Bloody battles
stretched from Kauiki to the sands of Waihee.

1555—Possible discovery of Hawaii by Juan Gaetano, Spanish navigator.
He prepared a manuscript chart now in the Spanish
archives which contains a group of islands in the latitude of
Hawaii but whose longitude is 10 degrees too far to the east.
What corresponds to Maui is called
La Desgradiada
, the
unfortunate. The largest, most southerly island, which
should be the present Hawaii is labelled
La Mesa
, the table.

37

Three other islands, appearing to be Kahoolawe, Lanai, and
Molokai, are called
Los Monjes
, the monks.

1736—King Kekaulike died and was succeeded by Kamehamehanui.

1737—Alapainui,
moi
of Hawaii, invaded Maui via Kaupo. He
took with him two young princely half-brothers, Kalaniopuu
and Keoua. Keoua was father of Kamehameha I. Since
Alapainui found his adversary, Kekaulike, dead, he made
peace with the nephew, Kamehamehanui. The two joined
forces to repel the invader, Kapiiohokalani of Oahu, in
bloody, obstinate battles that ended in the rout of the Oahu
army at Kawela, Molokai.

1738—At Keawawa, West Maui, Alapanainui and Kamehamehanui
decisively defeated Kauhi, the latter’s brother and usurper
of power.

1750 ca.—The calculated date of the most recent activity of Haleakala,
the Keoneoio flow above La Perouse Bay. The flow
originated at Kaluaolapa at an elevation of 575 feet, and
from vents one mile further northeast at an elevation of
1,550 feet. The method of dating is interesting. In 1841,
Rev. Edward Bailey of Wailuku inquired about the eruption
and was informed by Hawaiians that it happened at the
time of their grandfathers. In 1906, Lorrin A. Thurston
was told by a Chinese-Hawaiian cowboy, Charles Ako, that
his father-in-law’s grandfather at the time of the event was
just old enough to carry “two” coconuts 4 or 5 miles from
the sea to the upper road at an elevation of 2,000 feet.
Since Hawaiians counted coconuts by fours, “two” probably
refers to a total of eight nuts. Mr. Bailey was told that a
woman and child were trapped by the flow but escaped after
it cooled. By 1922, 80 years later, this tale had grown into
a neo-myth about a husband and wife with their two children.
The mother and her young daughter fled
mauka
, but
were seized by Pele, and turned into the two lava columns
that stand beside the vent at Kaluaolapa. The father and
son, plunged into the sea and started swimming toward
Kahoolawe. Pele cast rocks after them and turned the two

38

to stone. The two rocks, a big and a little one, can be seen
today rising out of the sea several hundred feet out from
shore as proof of the tale. Mr. Thurston’s estimate of the
date of the eruption is 1750 while J. F. G. Stokes, Hawaiian
ethnologist, favors a later date, possibly 1770.

1754—Kalaniopuu, warlike king of Hawaii, captured the fortress
Kauiki and held it successfully for more than 20 years.

1765—Kamehamehanui died and was succeeded by his brother,
Kahekili.

1768—Queen Kaahumanu was born at Kauiki. She became the
favorite wife of Kamehameha I.

1775—Kalaniopuu was defeated by Kahekili at Kaupo.

1776—Kalaniopuu invaded Maui at Maalaea; his army was annihilated
on the sand hills near Wailuku.

1777—Kalaniopuu took Lanai but again was repelled when he tried
to invade Maui.

1778, November 26—Captain James Cook, Royal British Navy,
discovered Maui.

1781—Kahekili reconquered East Maui. He recaptured the fort at
Kauiki by cutting off the water supply. To show contempt,
he baked the bodies of the defenders in earth ovens.

1786—Kamehameha I sent an expedition to recapture East Maui.
It was defeated at Kipahulu by Kalanikapule, the son of
King Kahekili.

1786, May 28—La Perouse visited Maui and camped on Keoneoio
lava flow.

1790—Olowalu massacre. The snow,
Eleanor
, under Captain Simon
Metcalf, treacherously opened fire on native boats following
a truce made after one white sailor had been murdered.
More than a hundred natives were slaughtered.

1790—Conquest of Maui by Kamehameha I after landing at Hana.
He decisively defeated Kalanikapule, in the Battle of Iao
Valley or Kepaniwai.

1793—Vancouver visited Maui on his second expedition. He tried
to bring about an end to the wars and to establish a lasting
peace between Maui and Hawaii.

39

1795—Maui was subdued by Kamehameha I without a battle.

1819—Kamehameha I, king of all Hawaii, died. Abolition of the

kapu
system by Kamehameha II, incited by his guardian,
Queen Kaahumanu.

1823—The Christian mission at Lahaina was founded by Rev.
William Richards and A. S. Stewart. On September 16,
Queen Keopuolani, a wife of Kamehameha I and a devout
Christian, died at Lahaina. She was buried with services
by Rev. William Ellis.

1824—At Lahaina, Queen Regent Kaahumanu orally proclaimed a
law forbidding desecration of the Sabbath, fighting, murder,
and theft.

1825—The English frigate
The Blonde
anchored off Lahaina with
the bodies of King Liholiho (Kamehameha II) and his
queen, Kamamalu. They had died from measles while on a
visit to London.

1825—The crew from the Whaler
Daniel
attempted to demolish the
home of Rev. Richards, Lahaina.

Sliding Sands Trail.

40

1826—Mosquitoes from Mexico were introduced at Lahaina by the
SS
Wellington
.

1827—The Whaler
John Palmer
fired on the home of Rev. Richards.

1829—Ascent of Haleakala by a missionary party.

1834—First Hawaiian newspaper
Lama Hawaii
was published at
Lahainaluna Mission School.

1839—An Hawaiian “Bill of Rights” was signed at Lahaina by
Kamehameha III. It afforded protection to all people and
their property while they conformed to the laws of the
kingdom.

1841—Haleakala Crater was visited by Pickering and Breckenridge
of the United States Exploring Expedition under Captain
John Wilkes, U. S. Navy.

1841-1849—Peak of whaling industry in Hawaii. Lahaina was
visited by 596 Whalers in 1846.

1850—David Malo, Hawaiian antiquarian and teacher at Lahainaluna
School, Lahaina, conducted Rev. William P. Alexander and
Curtis Lyons from Kaupo through Haleakala Crater, to
Makawao, “a trip never before undertaken by white men.”

1876—S. F. Alexander and H. P. Baldwin started construction of
the Hamakua Ditch, first big irrigation project in Hawaii.

1890—First pineapples were planted at Haiku.

1893—Overthrow of the monarchy and establishment of the Republic
of Hawaii. Queen Liliuokalani was the last reigning
sovereign.

1898, August 12—Hawaii was annexed to United States by joint
legislation of Congress. President Dole was appointed first
governor.

1916—Hawaii National Park was established by Act of Congress on
August 1 with Haleakala Crater forming the Section on Maui.

1921—Hawaii National Park was formally opened.

1929, November 11—Establishment of commercial air service between
the islands.

1930—First permanent park position (ranger) was established to
give continuous service at Haleakala.

41

1931—First permanent park naturalist was appointed for Hawaii
National Park, although temporary, summer interpretive
services were started in the late twenties by the employment
of Otto Degener, formerly botanist at the University of
Hawaii. Dr. Degener, presently writing Book 6 of his “
Flora
Hawaiiensis
,” kindly supplied many of the scientific plant
names for this guide.

1935 February 23—Dedication ceremonies of Haleakala Road in
Hawaii National Park.

1937—Kapalaoa, Paliku, and Holua cabins were constructed.

1941—Haleakala closed to travel for military reasons.

1952-3—Present exhibits were installed in Summit Observation
Station.

1958—Permanent naturalist position established for Haleakala.

1959—Hawaii becomes the 50th state in the Union.

42

GEOLOGY

THE ORIGIN OF THE SCENIC FEATURES

The Island of Maui
was built by two volcanoes. That forming
West Maui is deeply dissected into several high peaks. The old
summit crater now is encompassed by the head of Iao Valley. Mt.
Kukui, the highest point, has an elevation of 5,788 feet.

East Maui is built of three series of lava products from Haleakala
Volcano whose flows extended westward across the present isthmus
to come to rest against the base of West Maui Volcano. These represent
three great periods of activity, the latter two being separated by
a long interval of quiescence that was characterized by intense
erosion and mild, if any, eruptions. Geologists designate these three
periods by the names Honomanu, Kula, and Hana. The mountain
was built over three rifts, northerly, easterly, and southwesterly,
each extending about fifteen miles.

In earliest (Honomanu) time, about the beginning of the Ice
Ages, a symmetrical shield like Mauna Loa was built of pahoehoe and
aa basalts 8,500 feet above present sea-level. During the next (Kula)
cycle, eruptions were more explosive in nature; flows were composed
of more viscous andesite between which layers of ash and soil
accumulated. Big cinder cones and extensive ash beds were formed
at this time. Like Mauna Kea today, the Honomanu dome was
capped by a craterless mound of cinders, 2,500 feet high, that was
studded with many lesser cones. The summit was a mile east of the
present top on Red Hill and a thousand feet higher than it is today.

As Kula eruptions declined and grew less frequent, running water
cut deeply into the sides of the mountain and excavated four great
valleys, Keanae, Kaupo, Kipahulu, and Waihoi, that had broad heads,
thousands of feet deep. Numerous lesser valleys were later to be
buried more or less by lava flows. Most of the eastern summit ridge
was worn away; Kaupo and Keanae Valleys met near the summit
and fused into a great depression like that near the head of Iao Valley
today. At one time, a great flow of mud, probably triggered by an
earthquake, swept all before it as it moved down Kaupo Valley into

43

the sea. Its remnants today are 350 feet deep at Puu Maneoneo near
the coastal road. A similar mass movement of rock on soft mud was
started by an earthquake on April 2, 1868 at Wood Valley, west of
the Kilauea Section of Hawaii National Park; the flow, in its
precipitous descent, buried a village with 31 people and more than
500 head of stock.

In recent times, volcanism again quickened at Haleakala, giving
the third (Hana) series of volcanics. This veneered the east and west
slopes of the volcano, covered the floor of the depression, and pushed
great lava flows through Koolau and Kaupo Gaps to the sea. Large
flows and cones mask the divide that delimited the two great valleys.
During Hana time, the northern rift alone remained inactive. The
most recent activity, dated by Hawaiian legend as 1750, is represented
by two bare, black flows above La Perouse Bay, the southwest corner
of the island.

The Recent Cinder Cones.

Haleakala Crater, 7 miles long and 2½ miles wide, is locally
proclaimed the largest extinct crater on earth, but the claim like the
name is inaccurate. Nevertheless, it possesses a most unusual geological
origin and beauty that give it a worthy place among the
National Parks.

44

HAWAII NATIONAL PARK

HALEAKALA SECTION
High-resolution Map

NUMBERED POINTS

1. PARK ENTRANCE; SILVERSWORD INN

2. HOSMER GROVE CAMPGROUND AND PICNIC AREA

3. ADMINISTRATION BUILDING, HAWAII NATIONAL PARK, HALEAKALA SECTION

4. KALAHAKU OVERLOOK; SILVERSWORD PLANTS

5. OBSERVATORY

6. WHITE HILL, START OF SLIDING SANDS TRAIL

7. RED HILL; SUMMIT OF HALEAKALA

8. SKYLINE DRIVE

9. START OF HALEMAUU TRAIL

10. HOLUA CABIN

11. SILVERSWORD LOOP

12. ANCIENT HAWAIIAN TRAIL

13. BOTTOMLESS PIT

14. KA MOA O PELE TRAIL

15. BUBBLE CAVE

16. WAIKAU CABIN

17. VOLCANIC DIKES; ANCIENT DIVIDE BETWEEN KOOLAU AND KAUPO RIVER VALLEYS

18. LAUULU TRAIL

19. PALIKU CABIN

20. KIPAHULU VALLEY

21. KAUPO TRAIL

KIPAHULU FOREST RESERVE

KOOLAU FOREST RESERVE

HALEAKALA RANCH

46

THE GEOLOGICAL INTERPRETATION

The summit depression of Haleakala stimulates speculation, and
competent geologists have come up with widely differing hypotheses
regarding its origin. In the account of their visit (see The Historical
Background,
p. 29
), the first foreign visitors naturally used the
term “crater,” which has been in vogue ever since. Pickering and
Drayton of the Wilkes Expedition remark, “The crater of Haleakala,
if so it may be called, is a deep gorge.”
[10]

Drayton’s sketch was the first published map of the crater. James
Dana, the great geologist with the Expedition, sailed past the mountain
and later wrote a physiographic description based on notes
made by Pickering and Drayton. In the official report, he expressed
the idea, suggested by the crude map, that the mountain has been
ripped apart by mighty convulsions that attended the most recent
activity, so that the northeastern (Hana) part was separated along a
zigzag crack from the rest of the mountain by the width of Keanae and
Kaupo Valleys.
[11]
During the great eruptions that attended the rending,
lava covered the floor and poured in great floods through Koolau
and Kaupo Gaps.

W. D. Alexander, who surveyed the crater in 1869, believed:
“... this is a real terminal crater, and not merely ‘a deep gorge open
at the north and east’ or a caldera. I have indeed heard the theory
proposed that the mountain is but a wreck of a complete dome with a
small terminal crater, the whole top of which has fallen in and been
carried away, as is supposed to have been the case with some of the
volcanoes of Java, and the caldera of Palma.”
[12]

C. E. Dutton, volcanologist of the United States Geological Survey,
objected to Dana’s explanation and wrote that the depression is

47

“strictly homologous” to Kilauea Crater, that is, a collapsed caldera.
[13]

He assumed that this had been tapped by the upper ends of Keanae
and Kaupo drainages. In 1887, Dana had opportunity to make a
quick trip through the crater and down Kaupo Valley, so that he
tempered his earlier opinion and decided that Keanae and Kaupo
valleys might be graben.
[14]
Reginald Daly of Harvard rejected the
hypothesis that the depression was like Kilauea Crater, since arcuate
faults so prominent at Kilauea are apparently absent at Haleakala.
[15]

In his paper on petrography, Whitman Cross stated, “What is commonly
called the crater of Haleakala appears to me to be, in some
part at least, a result of erosion.”
[16]
At about the same time, Sidney
Powers stated his belief that Kipahulu and Waihoi Valleys are
graben, but he based his opinion on “authentic reports” and does not
claim that he saw the valleys.
[17]

Ahinahina (silversword).

48

H. T. Stearns analyzed carefully all the supporting evidence and
objections to the various viewpoints.
[18]
Of all of his profession, he
made the most thorough field surveys, with the conclusion that the
“crater” is chiefly erosional, affected by the recession of two great
amphitheater-headed valleys, instead of by collapse, sliding away of
the side of a cone, or explosion. Small craters may have existed at
the time, but not a large one resembling the present depression. He
believed that the big size results from the fact that the heads were
offset and not in a straight line. The shape of the depression is what
would result upon the fusion of two amphitheater heads similar to
those of Waikoi, Kipahulu, and Manawainui valleys of today. Each
of these is a typical Hawaiian valley, narrow at the base, but with a
broad amphitheater at the head. Kipahulu is separated from Waihoi
and from Kaupo Valleys by narrow divides. It can be assumed that
a similar divide once separated the amphitheaters at the heads of the
early Kaupo and Keanae drainages. Stearns further believes that
once the rift zone was reached, stream erosion was greatly accelerated
because of the loosely knit structure, the presence of many weak
cinder cones, and the dike complex. This complex, as in other places
in Hawaii, must have yielded perennial spring water to accelerate
erosion. His summary is as follows:

“No stratigraphic or constructural evidence was found to support
the hypothesis that Haleakala Crater is a true caldera, that it was
formed by renting, or that Keanae and Kaupo valleys tapping this
depression are grabens. Instead, detailed mapping and the examination
of water tunnels show that Haleakala dome has been eroded
by a number of great valleys. The hypothesis is presented that the
so-called “crater” of Haleakala is chiefly, if not entirely, the result
of the coalescence of the amphitheater heads of Kaupo and Keanae
valleys and that renewed volcanic activity has partly masked their
former divide and partly filled these valleys with lava flows.”

49

HALEAKALA PLANTS

Haleakala rises above the belt of warm trade winds into the cold,
dry climate of the Alpine Zone. Temperatures at night may drop
below freezing even in the warmer part of the year; the growing
season is short and life is severe. The sparse plants that can live
here crouch closely to the ground, diffusing or forming compact
rosettes. All they have in which to grow are porous rocks and loose
cinders that cannot hold moisture, lack organic matter, and do not
yield a firm base for rooting. Species extending to lower elevations
are here depauperate from wind and cold, although elsewhere they
may attain a sturdy stature, even tree-size. Few seedlings are seen;
individuals whose life span has finished remain conspicuous in death.
Neither trees nor mats of shrubs are seen, but mosses and lichens
find this Alpine desert to their liking. Oddly enough, one looks in
vain for brilliant blossoms, such as one has come to expect in the
high Sierra and the Rockies. The summit is a biological island on an
oceanic island which, geological evidence indicates, never was part
of a continent. The Hawaiian Chain was never near land of appreciable
height and size.

How the Alpine plants came to Hawaii is uncertain since they
have descended from ancestors so remote that past relationships are
vague. The great Swedish botanist, Carl Skottsberg, believes that
they are derived from a flora that grew on summits higher than any
that exist today. Such assumption adds to the problem, as little else
leads one to believe that elevations ever significantly exceeded 14,000
feet, i.e., the highest that exist today. In a report for the Fifth International
Botanical Congress (Proceedings, pp. 91-97, Cambridge,
1931), Skottsberg listed 13 species found exclusively in the Alpine
Zone, all of which are endemic, native to no other place than Hawaii’s
highest volcanoes. Three other species listed as occurring in the
Alpine Zone extend their range downward into the next lower Subalpine
Zone, for which he has listed a total of 23 species, 20 of which
he labels endemic. These adjoining zones are not sharply delimited,
but blend into each other at 9,000 feet.

50

As elevation decreases and conditions for growth become better,
the number of plant species increases. The Subalpine Zone with
lower limits just above the park entrance has some of the most
interesting plants found in the islands. Trees are absent but some of
its shrubs extend their range to lower elevations and grow big, sometimes
even to tree-size. Most Subalpine plants have small leaves or
leaflets, indicating that lasting moisture is still scant. Occasional
snowfall seldom remains long and never piles into drifts, which
would conserve moisture.

Most of the interior of the crater is bare or thinly covered with
vegetation. The uncongenial climate of the summit spills into it and
extends throughout its length, though the elevation is much lower.
Extensive aa flows, ash, and cinder cones cover the floor. Yet the
crater has perhaps become best known through the presence of one
of its plants, the silversword. Also, the lips of Koolau and Kaupo
Gaps are botanically distinctive in contrast to the barreness elsewhere.
This results from the fog and rain that sweep through them in late
morning, only to dissolve upon mixing with the warmer air inside.
As the day progresses, clouds push further and further inward, until,
rarely, the whole depression may become filled. Koolau especially
is a treasure-trove for the plant-lover. Below 6,000 feet, quite outside
the park, it becomes impenetrable jungle surpassed only by that in
Kipahulu Valley, a few miles east. Kaupo Cap is comparatively dry,
but it supports a sparse scrub cover of great interest. The lower parts
of Kaupo Valley are grazing land. Paliku is the only place within
the park in which vegetation is lush. As it climbs Leleiwi Pali,
Halemauu Trail is bordered by
OHELO
and ferns, among them
AMAUMAU

which is pleasing to the weary hiker’s eye.

In the northwestern angle of the park not far from the inn,
Nianiau Crater has had a renowned floral character and history.
Today it is overgrazed and drab. Dr. Joseph Rock, Hawaii’s famed
dendrologist, discovered a curious tree
lobelia
,
Clermontia haleakalensis
,
growing within it. He happily described the plant as “antediluvian
in appearance.” This most primitive member of a distinctive
Hawaiian floral group had a robust trunk from which clumsy, stubby
branches shot off, each crowned with a feather-duster of long, thick,

51

strap-shaped leaves like some pompous dictator’s headdress.
MAMANE

and
AKALA
grew thickly around it; rarer associates included tree
geraniums,
Neurophyllodes sp.
, with flowers like violets, tree
Railliardia
,
shrubby Hawaiian buttercups, and greensword,
Argyroxiphium
virescens
, that is threatened with extermination by grazing to an
extent greater than of its relative, the silversword.

BISHOP MUSEUM, J. F. ROCK COLLECTION
Clermontia Haleakalensis.

Even though they are outside the park, some plant communities
on the outer slopes of the mountain should be mentioned, because
they are related to park forms and carry a compelling interest. The
trail from Olinda to Waikamoi is through a transition forest between
the wet and the dry that once drew botanists from many parts of

52

the globe. It is now overgrown with foreign weeds, so that native
shrubs survive only here and there. The mountain forests above
Olinda have all been destroyed and are replaced by plants from
faraway lands.

Although it now lies devastated by change, one of the richest
botanical regions in Hawaii comprises the forbidding lava fields of
Auwahi on the southwest slope of Haleakala. Fifty species of native
trees once thrived in its fabulous mixed forests. The only known
specimen of Maui hibiscadelphus,
H. wilderianus
, a relative of the
hibiscus, was found here. It had a curved corolla that opened only
slightly at the top. Its congener,
H. giffardianus
, once equally rare,
still survives in Kipuka Puaulu at Kilauea, where a few vigorous
plants, started by air-layering, receive tender care from the National
Park. The last known Maui specimen of
MAHOE
,
Alectryon macrococcus
,
grows in an Auwahi gulch. This tree has large double fruits
(
mahoe
means
twins
) that split open to expose a shiny, chestnut-brown
seed clasped in a brilliant scarlet aril. The
ALANI
,
Pelea multiflora
, of
the lava fields is festooned with a lichen,
Usnea australis
, that appears
to prefer it to all other trees. Haleakala sandalwood,
Santalum haleakalae
,
with attractive red flowers grows to be a tree 25 feet tall. Other
famous native trees include
’OHE’OHE
,
Tetraplasandra kauaiensis
;

’OHE
,
Tetraplasandra meiandra
;
A’E
,
Fagara
sp.;
’ALA’A
,
Planchonella
auahiensis
, with golden fruits;
HO’AWA
,
Pittosporum terminalioides
;

OLOPUA
,
Nestegis sandwicensis
;
A’IA’I
,
Pseudomorus sandwicensis
;

MEHANE
,
Antidesma pulvinatum
; and
KAUILA
,
Alphitonia ponderosa
,
whose hard and durable timber was used in sacred structures.

Many unusual plants occur in the steep valleys to the north and
east outside the park. Since the dense jungles in which they grow are
inaccessible except to hardiest botanists, they are seldom seen. Here
grow
’APE’APE
,
Gunnera petaloidea
, a plant with geranium-like leaves
three or more feet in diameter; a delicate, rare, native begonia,

Hillebrandia sandwicensis
; several exquisitely flowering lobelias.
The summit bogs on Kukui and Mt. Eke in West Maui have a curious,
distinctive flora that includes three species with origins ascribed to the
Antarctic:
Orebolus furcatus
, a sedge;
Acaena exigua
of the Rose
Family; and
Lagenophora mauiensis
, a composite.

53

BISHOP MUSEUM, J. F. ROCK COLLECTION
Tetromalopium.

BISHOP MUSEUM, J. F. ROCK COLLECTION
Begonia.

54

The Haleakala road is the easiest way to reach elevations above
7,000 feet in Hawaii. The lower mountain slopes up which it winds
were once clothed with fern jungles that yielded with altitude to dry
forest. All is now altered. Extensive grasslands and eucalyptus
groves today leave the lasting impression on the visitor. Even on the
heights, cattle, goats, introduced plants, insects, and other agents have
wrought permanent change. Rare and interesting forms of native life
have been exterminated or are well on the way to extinction. The
National Park is trying hard to save what is left of the native cover
within its boundaries and to restore the former scene wherever it is
possible to do so.

BISHOP MUSEUM, J. F. ROCK COLLECTION
’Ape’ape.

Plants of the distinctive Haleakala environment show differences,
some slight, some considerable, from close relatives elsewhere.
Examples are the
OLAPA
at Paliku, the silversword, and the
KUPAOA
.
The differences have been fashioned by combinations of factors. The
unstable, permeable ash and cinders have scant soil and little available
mineral matter. They cannot hold water nor do they yield secure

55

anchorage. The effects of winds, isolation, exposure, and nature of terrain
are reflected by the distorted shapes. Silversword,
Artemisia
,

Bidens
, and many other plants well show adaptation to peculiar environment.
Why are some species found nowhere else? How did the
plants get here in the first place and how have they changed with the
passing of time? What has been the impact of exotics? What use
did the Hawaiians make of the plants? To the hurried and casual
visitor, the flora of Haleakala may appear drab and uninteresting.
With better acquaintance, it becomes a stimulating study indeed.

PLANT NOTES

THE FERNS. The Sliding Sands Trail drops from White Hill
on bare slopes of red and gray Cinders. As it levels below Puu o Pele,
a lush, green carpet spreads along the south wall of the crater. It is
a surprise to discover that ferns compose the verdure, for several
kinds find the shelter of the cliffs agreeable. Haleakala’s
KA’UPU
,

Polystichum haleakalense
Brack., a rather coarse, low plant with
scaly stems, grows among the shrubs. The pellucid polypody,
’AE
,

Polypodium pellucidum
Kaulf., and the maidenhair spleenwort,

’IWA’IWA
,
Asplenium adiantum-nigrum
L., grow here, but they are
common elsewhere as well. Iwaiwa is a small plant with shiny,
slender stems and stiff, triangular fronds that thrives in the brush.
On Leleiwi Pali it is a tiny thing, clinging to the rocks. This fern is
known in mountainous regions in many countries. Another maidenhair
spleenwort,
’OWALI’I
,
Asplenium trichomanes
L., makes its home
on barren lava above 5,000 feet on the inner slopes of the crater.
Its small, opposite, rounded or ovate frond segments,
pinnae
, grow on
wiry stems that form dense clumps. Look for it along Halemauu
Trail on Leleiwi Pali. It is found in the temperate zones and on high
mountains in many parts of the world.

Bracken,
KILAU
,
Pteridium aquilinum
var.
decompositum
(Gaud.)
Tryon, a stiff cosmopolitan, is among the best-known ferns. It
grows in grassy spots inside and outside the crater. Foraging
pigs, seeking its tasty rootstocks, often uproot it in the forests. The
young leaves of
AMA’UMA’U
,
Sadleria cyatheoides
Kaulf., add a touch
of red along Halemauu Trail on Leleiwi Pali. At Paliku, several

56

moisture-loving ferns grow on logs, rocks, and moss-covered trees.
Large, dense ae are quite unlike the frail specimens on Leleiwi Pali.
The following can be seen in damp spots and on tree trunks: Maui’s
paddle,
’EKAHA
,
Elaphoglossum reticulatum
(Kaulf.) Gaud., with
paddle-shaped blades 6-12 inches long;
’EKAHA-’AKOLEA
,
Pleopeltis
thunbergiana
Kaulf., a small fern with tough, pale, elliptico-oblong
(paddle-shaped) fronds; and
MOA
,
Psilotum complanatum
Sw.,
belonging to a small group of tropical plants,
PSILOTALES
, which
reproduce by spores, but are distinct from true ferns, clubmosses,
and the better-known orders.

Swordfern,
NI’ANI’AU
or
’OKUPUKUPU
,
Nephrolepis exaltata
(L.)
Schott., is widely distributed at Haleakala as it is elsewhere in Hawaii.
Cliffbrake,
KALAMOHO LAULI’I
,
Pellaea ternifolia
(Cav.) Link, grows
among rocks in dry, sunny locations at higher elevations above the
park entrance and inside the crater. It is common. The bluish-green
pinnae of this short, slender fern grow on opposite sides of the dark,
wiry stems. They are cleft into three linear segments.

THE NATIVE GRASSES. Several native grasses grow above the
park entrance:
Trisetum glomeratum
(Kunth) Trin.,
Deschampsia
australis
forma
haleakalensis
Skottsb., and
Agrostis sandwicensis

Hillebr. The
Trisetum
, also common inside the crater, is called mountain
pili,
PILI
being the lowland grass known in many tropical regions
and used for thatching houses in Hawaii. The Hawaiian name for

T. glomeratum
is
PILIUKA
, upland pili. In some places it is also
called
HE’U PUEO
, the hoot of an owl.

All three grasses are tufted, i.e., bunch grasses. The
Deschampsia

has tough, wiry blades (leaves) with shiny, open panicles of flowers
and seeds. The
Agrostis
has stiffly upright blades and culms (jointed
stems) with spike-like panicles. The pili has flat blades usually
covered with soft hairs. The panicles are contracted or spike-like.

THE SEDGES.
Fig. 1
. Sedges are generally grasslike wind-pollinated
herbs that grow in tufts or bunches. They are often the
dominant plants in cold marshes, especially in the Arctic. They have
little economic value and grazing animals find them unpalatable. Some
have tough, pliable stems that are woven into mats and baskets;
some have fruiting spikes that are attractive in dry bouquets. Most

57

have 3-angled stems around which the blades are ranked. The inconspicuous,
green flowers are crowded in tight, flattened spikes, often
grouped on top of a slender, grasslike stem. Hawaii has a dozen or
more native genera with many of its species widespread in the world.

The species common on the upper slopes of Haleakala and on the
crater floor,
Gahnia gaudichaudii
Steud., bears shiny, ebony fruits.
These can dangle, suspended by the wilted, threadlike stamens for
more than a year from the fruiting stalk. Another sedge,
Carex
macloviana subfusca
(W. Boott) Kukenth., grows in clumps along
the south wall. The fruiting stalks bear cylindrical or ovoid clusters
of 4-9 spikelets, each ½-1 inch long. This sedge grows from Lapland
and Greenland to northern South America, but in Hawaii it has been
found only on Haleakala and Kohala Mountains above 4,000 feet.
The Hawaiian variety was first described from a specimen collected
at Lake Tahoe, California. The interesting
Oreobolus furcatus
H.
Mann, mentioned as occurring on West Maui, also grows in Koolau
Gap.

RUSH,
Luzula hawaiiensis
(O. Ktze.) Buch. A visitor brought me
a small tufted plant with grass-like leaves covered with soft, silky
hairs. He was all excited, believing he had found a young silversword
on the cinder flats near the summit of Mt. Hualalai. The plant was the
endemic rush that lives in wet places above 3,000 feet in the
mountains of Maui, Hawaii, and Kauai. In Haleakala Crater, I
found it on Leleiwi Pali and near Paliku, where others might mistake
it for an immature silversword or greensword. The Hawaiian general
name for grasses, sedges, and rushes is
MAU’U
.

PAINIU,
Astelia degeneri
Skottsb. This plant is reported by
Degener to be growing within the crater.
[19]

MAU’U-LA’ILI,
Sisyrinchium acre
H. Mann. A native member of
the Iris Family with grass-like leaves that grows on old lava flows
between altitudes of 3,500 and 7,500 feet on Maui and Hawaii. It
is an attractive plant that rarely exceeds 12 inches high. In July and
August it bears yellow flowers ¾ inch across that last only a few
hours. In the crater it may be found in Koolau and Kaupo Gaps.

58

The leaves, bound tightly around the wrists and ankles, stain the skin
a blue color that lasts several days. This stain was regarded as proof
that a person had been to the crater. A number of other species of
the genus are mainland wildflowers commonly called blue-eyed grass.

ORCHIDS.
Fig. 2
. The Orchid Family of over 15,000 species
is second only to the Composite Family in size, yet only three species
of three genera are native in Hawaii, a land connected in thought with
an exuberance of gay orchids. Moreover, the three endemic species
are characterized by small size, relative rarity, and inconspicuous
flowers. Twayblade,
Liparis hawaiiensis
H. Mann, grows in open
woods on the ground and on moss-covered trees on the flanks of the
volcano and at Paliku. The rarest of the three natives,
Habenaria
holochila
Hillebr., has been found growing 1-2½ feet high in deep
moss in fog-swept Koolau Gap. It bears its dull-greenish, inconspicuous
orchids on a tall, many-flowered spike.

’ALA ’ALAWAINUI,
Peperomia sp.
A small herb with succulent
leaves found at Paliku. It is a member of the Pepper Family,

Piperaceae
, to which
AWA
,
Piper methysticum
, belongs. There are
many Peperomias native to Hawaiian forests. Some have leaves with
gay red undersides.

SANDALWOOD,
’ILIAHI
,
Santalum haleakalae
Hillebr.
Fig. 3
.
A small but striking tree found above the park entrance, in
Koolau Gap, and along the Kaupo Trail below Paliku. It has leathery,
dark green leaves so that it stands out in the vegetation and is readily
distinguished from afar. In mid-summer, corymbs of four-pointed,
deep-red or vermillion flowers appear on the ends of branches. The
dry heartwood has the fragrance which is associated with the name
sandalwood. Degener tells the detailed story of sandalwood trade that
flourished in the islands for fifty years beginning in 1790.
[20]

SHEEP SORREL,
Rumex acetosella
L., an abundant, well-known,
introduced weed found both inside the crater and out. A native
species called
PAWALE
,
Rumex gigantius
Ait., is more interesting.
It grows as a stocky undershrub on barren lava flows and in rock
crevices inside the crater. In Koolau Gap, it becomes a sprawling

59

vine. It is said that a mixture of an extraction from the boiled bark
and
AWA
was used by Hawaiians for skin diseases. This was tried in
vain as a cure for leprosy when the disease first appeared in the islands
in 1840.

HAWAIIAN BUTTERCUP,
MAKOU
,
Ranunculus hawaiiensis
A.
Gray. Like the native violets and geraniums, members of this genus,
well-known on the mainland, either become bushy or spread as a
woody vine in Hawaii. Two native species occur on Haleakala, but
the yellow-flowered, sprawling
R. mauiensis
A. Gray is reported only
outside the park. The larger flowered, erect Hawaiian buttercup, however,
was reported by J. F. Rock to be abundant formerly in Puu
Nianiau Crater. It is a coarse, hollow-stemmed, hairy herb with compound
leaves divided into three sharply-toothed, irregular leaflets.
Within Haleakala Crater it grows on moist, grassy slopes in Koolau
Gap.

HO’AWA,
Pittosporum confertiflorum
A. Gray. A small tree,
sometimes becoming 25 feet tall. The large leaves, shiny green on
top, brown hairy underneath, are crowded like whorls on the ends of
the branches. In the centers of these, dense clusters of fleshy, cream-colored
flowers appear in late summer. Wrinkled fruits, resembling
English walnuts, hang on the trees throughout the year. Very few
trees grow in the crater, but they are more numerous above 4,000 feet
along the Kaupo Trail and at Ulupalakua. The genus of some 200
species is widespread; it has many species native to Hawaii. Some
kinds are well-known garden plants.
Pittosporum tobira
(Thunb.)
Ait., a native of China and Japan, is a favorite shrub in California.

HAWAIIAN HAWTHORN,
’ULEI
,
Osteomeles anthyllidifolia

Smith (Lindl). A spreading shrub with compound leaves and fragrant,
small, white flowers, like apple blossoms, that may appear
throughout the year. The fruit is white and contains five stony seeds.
Plants growing on ash flats are very small. The strong but pliable
wood of ulei was used for digging sticks, fish spears, and hoops to
keep the mouths of fishing nets open.

HAWAIIAN RASPBERRY,
’AKALA
,
Rubus hawaiiensis
A. Gray.

Fig. 5.
A shrub with attractive pink flowers abundant at Paliku.

60

It is found also in Koolau Gap at the foot of Leleiwi Pali and elsewhere.
The fruit, agreeable but somewhat bitter, is remarkable for
its large size. It ripens about the Fourth of July or later. A trailing
native,
R. macraei
A. Gray, sprawls in foggy Koolau Gap. Its large,
dark fruits are bitter.

MAMANE,
Sophora chrysophylla
Salisb.
Fig. 4.
A common
native shrub or small tree of the Bean Family both inside and outside
the crater up to tree line. It is recognized by more or less downy,
narrow, compound leaves, racemes of yellow flowers, and twisted
pods that have four wings and are constricted between the seeds. Goats
eat it greedily and quickly exterminate it in an area. The hard, durable
wood was used by Hawaiians in many ways; today it is a principal
firewood for the crater cabins. A tree in full bloom is a beautiful
object. The height of the flowering season is mid-spring.

GERANIUM,
NOHOANU
,
HINAHINA
. Fig.
6
,
7
.
Neurophyllodes
tridens
(Hillebr.) Degener & Greenwell is common above the park
entrance and on the south wall within the crater. It sometimes becomes
three feet tall and is readily identified by its silvery leaves,
each of which has three small teeth on the end. The white flowers
have purplish veins especially toward their centers. The blooming
season is July to October. The silvery aspect of the plant, like the
silversword, is imparted by a mesh of fine white hair that reflects the
light of a passing car as effectively as the glass-beaded paint of
directional signs.

Two native geranium relatives grow in Koolau Gap,
N. ovatifolium

(A. Gray) Degener & Greenwell and its variety
superbum
. The latter
is common on the trail to Waikau not far from the foot of Leleiwi Pali.

One of the common plants growing on the crater floor is the exotic
pink-flowered
G. carolinianum
var.
australi
(Benth.) Fosberg whose
pointed fruiting bodies give it the common name,
cranesbill
.

HAWAIIAN HOLLY,
KAWA’U
,
Ilex anomala
Hook and Arn. The
forest growing on the talus behind the Paliku cabins is the finest
within the crater. A striking tree of this association is the Hawaiian
holly that has dark, shiny, oval leaves with conspicuous networks of
slightly depressed veins that make identification easy. Dense panicles

61

of small, white flowers are followed by shiny, black drupes, like
Christmas holly “berries.” The genus is that of the English holly.
Curiously, the scientific name has been locally corrupted to
ileck
.

OLOMEA,
Perrottetia sandwicensis
A. Gray. A native shrub or
small tree belonging to the same family as the bittersweet of the
continent. The numerous tiny, round, red fruits, borne in panicles,
suggest the relationship. The bright red venation of leaves and
petioles make the plant easily recognized. I know of no plants within
the park, but found many trees a thousand feet below the park
boundary in Keanae Valley.

A’AL’II,
Dodonaea eriocarpa
Smith.
Fig. 8.
This is a common
shrub in several varieties along the highway and in the western end of
the crater. At Paliku and Kaupo Gap it becomes a tree up to 20 feet
high and 8 inches in diameter. Its flowers are inconspicuous but
clusters of dry, reddish fruit-capsules contrast, flower-like, with the
surrounding green foliage. The fruits, abundant from July to September,
are used for leis and dry bouquets. The hard brown heartwood
was used for spears,
pololu
, daggers,
pahoa
, and other implements.

BEGONIA—
PUAMAKANUI
,
Hillebrandia sandwicensis
Oliv. (See
illustration
p. 53
.) The only native begonia, found in wet ravines
often by waterfalls. It grows profusely at Koolau a mile below Holua
Cabin at the foot of the rain-drenched
pali
. This succulent herb has a
tuberous rhizome, unbranched, slender stems, and hairy, toothed
leaves 4-10 inches in diameter. From June to August it bears sprays
of bright, pink and white flowers. This is one of the floral treasures
of Hawaii.

TARWEED.
Cuphea carthagenensis
(Jacq.) McBride. A low,
sticky, hairy perennial from tropical America widely spread at lower
elevations in the park. It has red or green branches, small ovate
leaves, and tiny but not unattractive pink flowers ¼ inch across.
Plants in rock crevices on cliffs are tiny; on the crater floor, they
may become a foot high and form a dense shrubby mat over a sizeable
area. The plant belongs to the
LYTHRACEAE
or Crepe Myrtle
Family.

62

’OHI’A LEHUA,
Metrosideros collina
(Forst.) A. Gray.
Fig. 9.

This, the commonest tree in the islands, consists of a swarm of hybrids
of which the parentage is still unknown. It is scattered within the park
to tree line. It is abundant in the eastern end of the crater and at
Paliku. The beautiful flowers, mostly red, a few yellow, may appear
throughout the year. Here spring seems to be the best season for them.

EVENING PRIMROSE,
Raimannia odorata
(Jacq.) Sprague &
Riley. A slender, erect, hairy South American herb introduced forty
years ago. It is a prolific bloomer, is widespread, and, in blooming
season, the most conspicuous flower both at Park Headquarters and
within the crater. The large, sulphur-yellow flowers appear at night,
but wilt within the following day, turning reddish as they do so.

’APE’APE—
Gunnera petaloidea
Gaud. (See illustration
p. 54
.)
A huge-leaved forest perennial with a massive prostrate stem which
stands erect 3 or 4 feet at the tip. In the center of the leaves a tall
stalk rises that bears hundreds of small yellow-brown flowers. I know
of no plants within the crater, but some grow within a mile of the
park boundary below Koolau Gap, as well as in adjacent wet valleys.

OLAPA,
Cheirodendron trigynum
(Gaud.) Heller.
Fig. 10.
This
tree occurs in several varieties. The variety
oblongum
Sherff grows
30 feet tall around the cabins at Paliku, also at Ulupalakua. The
variety
mauiense
Levl. common at Olinda, also grows in Kaupo
Gap. The genus is Hawaiian but has a lone representative in the
Marquesas. It is widespread in deep soils in all of the islands. The
leaves are compound with 3 or 5 leaflets which, at Paliku, have reddish
petioles. The panicles of small, green flowers are followed by
black drupes. The leaves, bark, and fruit are said to have yielded a
blue dye for staining tapa.

’OHELO,
Vaccinium reticulatum
Smith.
Fig. 11.
Hikers in the
crater are grateful for the widespread ohelo bushes that yield pleasant
fruits to be nibbled along the way. In areas rich in moisture, like
Koolau Gap, large, maroon bell-shaped flowers droop from the axels
of the leaves. The berries found in the eastern end of the crater
appear to be largest. The bearing season appears at its height in

63

mid-autumn. The plants along the Halemauu Trail constitute a
distinct species,
V. berberidifolium
Skottsb.

PUKIAWE,
Styphelia tameiameiae
(Cham.) F. Muell.
Fig. 12.

A most abundant shrub, both inside and outside the crater, but near
the top it is replaced by a trailing shrub that has been classified as

S. douglasii
(A. Gray) Hochr. The berries of this plant are white,
pink, red, or mahogany brown; they are most abundant in winter, but
some may be seen on the shrub throughout the year.

KOLEA,
Suttonia lessertiana
(A.DC.) Mez; syn.
Rapanea lessertiana

(A.DC.) Degener and Hosaka.
Fig. 13.
This variable tree grows
up to 50 feet tall as one of the common trees around Paliku cabins. The
thick leaves with short petioles, crowded near the ends of thick
branches, have a beautiful roseate hue when young. The branches are
studded with spurs on which grow small 5-parted flowers in clusters
of three or more that are followed by dark, purplish-red or black
fruits up to ¼ inch in diameter, often so numerous that the branch is
completely hidden. Hawaiians made a red dye for tapa from the
sap and bark. The crimson sap bleeds freely from a cut made deeply
into the bark of a living tree.

SELFHEAL,
Prunella vulgaris
L., a common weed of Eurasian
origin, is widespread in rocky, scrub cover, and at Paliku. A dense
cluster of small, lipped, blue to purple flowers appears on the end
of each upright stem.

PUA’AINAKA,
Stenogyne rotundifolia
A. Gray. This endemic
long-branched shrub of the Mint Family is found only on Haleakala.
Within the crater and on upper slopes it is trailing and is relatively
rare, being most abundant in Kaupo Gap. The attractive, pale purple
flowers in whorls of six are 1½ inches long and are covered with
silky, white hair. They appear in late summer. Outside the crater,

S. haliakalae
Wawra is abundant in forests as a large, diffuse shrub
that often forms a dense mat over surrounding shrubs. Another
mint,
Stenogyne crenata
A. Gray, was collected by Skottsberg among
shrubs on the south wall of the crater.

GROUNDCHERRY,
Cape Gooseberry
,
POHA
,
Physalis peruviana

L. A South American perennial herb, widely scattered throughout

64

Hawaii, well-known for its round, orange, many-seeded, husk-enclosed
fruits that are edible raw or preserved. It grows extensively in Kaupo
Gap. The large yellow flowers with brownish spots near the center
appear from June to late fall in this area.

PLANTAIN,
LAUKAHI
,
Plantago
sp. Plantain is a hardy, cosmopolitan,
stemless weed forming a rosette of broadly oval leaves, 1-10
inches long, near the ground. The tiny flowers and seed capsules are
borne as cylindrical heads at the ends of tall stalks. The plant is
widespread along the side of the road as well as within the crater.
Of several hundred species of
Plantago
, four or more are endemic to
Hawaii. One of these,
P. princeps
Cham. & Schl., is a shrub several
feet high with tufts of long narrow leaves at the ends of the branches.
It grows on cliffs at Kaupo Gap. Other plantains with thick leaves,
silky underneath, creep on the ground in Koolau Gap.

KUKAENENE,
Coprosma ernodioides
A. Gray.
Fig. 15.
A common
woody shrub with long trailing branches that send up short,
erect, densely foliose branchlets at each node. The awl-shaped leaves
are rigid and dark-green. The fruits are shiny black drupes which
are a favorite food of the native goose,
nene
.

PILO,
Coprosma montana
Hillebr.
Fig. 14.
One of the commonest
shrubs throughout the crater and from Park Headquarters to
9,000 feet outside the crater. It is a small tree up to 20 feet tall in
Kaupo Gap. As a shrub the ascending tips look like jets shot up from
densely foliose branchlets. The alternate, small, thick leaves have
conspicuous nerves impressed on the upper face. Below each pair
of leaves is a pair of triangular bracts, stipules, with cilia on the
upper border. The greenish, inconspicuous flowers are followed by
showy, bright orange, yellow, or red fruits which make the plant a
subject attractive to color photographers in fall.

MANONO,
Gouldia terminalis
(H. & A.) Hillebr. A shrub or
small tree growing on the talus above the Paliku cabins. It has shiny,
opposite leaves and dense terminal clusters of greenish, four-lobed,
cup-shaped flowers that are followed by small black berries. It blooms
in late summer. The genus is one of three in the Coffee Family that
are endemic to Hawaii.

65

CATCHFLY,
Silene struthioloides
A. Gray.
Fig. 16.
A plant
that is typical only of arid Cinders and ash on East Maui and on the
island of Hawaii. With the silversword as its companion in Haleakala
Crater the plants are found at the bases of barren cones. They show
neat adaptation to their stark home. The Haleakala plants, as illustrated,
are low and compact, but those growing at Kilauea Crater
bear only a few awl-shaped leaves and resemble dead twigs. The
thick tap roots are sweet and edible. About 250 species belong to
this genus, a member of the Pink or Carnation Family. A well-known
introduced weed, the English catchfly,
Silene anglica
L., was reported
by Degener at 10,000 feet on Haleakala.

’OHA,
Labelia grayana
E. Wimm. A low plant with woody trailing
stems with knobby leaf scars and ending with a crowded arrangement
of silvery, linear leaves, 4-8 inches long and crowned with
densely flowered racemes, 6-15 inches long. The flowers are lilac-blue
with a satiny sheen. The plant is not uncommon on wet
pali
from
5,000-7,000 feet at Paliku, Kaupo and Koolau Gaps, and in the northwestern
end of the crater. It is a glorious plant worth hunting for and
going miles to see.

NAUPAKA.
Scaevola chamissoniana
Gaud. This shrub was
noted only on the east side of Kaupo Gap. This is a varying species
found up to the 6,000-foot elevation. It is not common and blooms
in summer. The white flowers with purplish streaks are slit to the
base on the upper side. They look like flower-halves rather than
complete corollas. There are several legends about the peculiar
flower, each dealing with lovers separated from each other. In a
song composed about it, the lovers were forceably parted, so the girl
divided a perfect corolla, giving one half to her lover while keeping
the other half herself. One of the lovers carried the flower to the sea,

naupaka kahakai
, the other to the mountain,
naupaka kuahiwi
, where
the plants are found today.

MAUI WORMWOOD,
Artemisia mauiensis
(A. Gray) Skottsb.

Fig. 17.
Typical of Maui and found only on Haleakala, this hoary
ornamental shrub, usually 2-3 feet high, perches on cliffs usually
above the reach of man. It has a densely-branched crown with silvery

66

leaves that are aromatic and bitter. The leaves are composed of thin
segments that are covered with a mat of cottony hair, giving the
plant a silvery appearance. The small orange flowers are borne in
terminal panicles.

The Hawaiians call the wormwood
AHINAHINA
, applied also to
silversword, geranium, and other gray plants. The basic word refers
to the color of silvery-gray hair, the connection being obvious. Hawaiians
use the pounded leaves to relieve asthma. The genus is
large, having some 250 species that are generally found in arid
regions. The sagebrush of the western states,
A. tridentata
Nutt., is
the best known to most park visitors.

KO’OKO’OLAU,
Bidens
sp. Like
Artemisia
, the genus is a huge
one with over 200 species and belongs to the Composite Family which
includes dandelions, daisies, and sunflowers. E. E. Sherff of the
Chicago Museum of Natural History, a specialist on the genus, lists
sixty species native to Hawaii. Native
KO’OKO’OLAU
are shrubby and
often of great beauty. This is true of
B. campylotheca pentamera

Sherff which sprawls over the vegetation in Koolau Gap. It has fern-like
leaves and large, pretty, yellowish flower-heads. Hawaiians use
the tips of young plants for tea, often in preference over imported
tea.

Besides the native varieties, three introduced species grow in the
islands, including beggar ticks or Spanish needles,
B. pilosa
L. It is
a nuisance, as the three-pronged fruits that give it the common name
readily attach themselves to clothing as well as to fur of passing
animals.

KUPAOA,
NA’ENA’E
. Fig.
18
,
19
. Several kinds of composite
shrubs are called by these names, both of which mean fragrance or
perfume. They were used for scenting tapa. They belong to the
endemic genera
Dubautia
and
Railliardia
, both of which have species
found in the park.
Dubautia plantagiena
var.
platyphylla
Hillebr.
Gaud., a shrub at 6,000 feet in Kaupo and Koolau Gaps, has linear
leaves 4-8 inches long, with 7-13 conspicuous nerves. It is a small
tree below Nianiau Crater. It is a handsome sight when in flower; the
flower-heads are yellow. In general appearance it is much like that
of
Railliardia platyphylla
A. Gray which grows in cinders and ash,

67

mostly inside the crater. At 8,000 feet,
R. platyphylla
becomes a
straggling shrub. The commonest member of this group,
Railliardia
menziesii
A. Gray, is a shrub in the crater and on the rim from 8,000-10,000
feet. Between 6,000 and 7,000 feet it is a tree up to 20 feet
tall. The dark green, pointed, linear, fleshy leaves are ranked in
vertical rows of four on upright stems and branches. Its dark yellow
flower-heads are borne in panicles.
R. scabra
DC., found in Kaupo
Gap and on Leleiwi Pali, does not have the regular leaf arrangement.

PAMAKANI-HAOLE,
Eupatorium glandulosum
HBK.
Eupatorium

is another huge genus of the Composite Family with several
hundred species, mostly from tropical America. Five species have
been introduced into Hawaii of which two are bad pests.
E. glandulosum
,
a native of Mexico, spread rapidly on Maui, crowding out
desirable plants and making pasturelands worthless. A parasitic
insect,
Procecidochares utilis
Stone, was introduced in 1944 to combat
it. This insect belongs to the order
DIPTERA
, the flies, gnats,
midges, and mosquitoes, and to the family
TRYPETIDAE
, that includes
the Mediterranean fruitfly and the common “apple-worm” which is
actually the larva of a fly. The trypetids infest living plants,
frequently causing galls, and have piercing ovipositors, often prominent,
with which females deposit eggs beneath the skin of their host.

It is not expected that the studied introduction of a parasite will
result in the extermination of a host, but rather that it will check
unbridled increase and spread. The method is termed “biological
control.” It has been successfully adopted against several menaces,
such as cactus, lantana, and a fern-weevil,
Syragrius fulvitarsis

Pascoe, that kills amaumau ferns in the Kilauea Crater area.

Pamakani abound throughout the crater, even clinging as tiny
starvelings in small cracks in cliffs, like those along Halemauu Trail.
Every plant shows swellings in which the little maggots live, and exit
holes through which the new adults emerge. Many plants bear only
few leaves and fight tenaciously for survival. Big plants may be seen
along Kaupo Trail.
Pamakani
means
wind-blown
, in reference to the
method of seed dispersal.

HAIRY CAT’S-EAR, “Dandelion,”
Hypochoeris radicata
L. A
common composite, native to the Mediterranean, found in abundance

68

throughout the park. Its narrow leaves with yellow hairs form flat
rosettes. A branching, leafless stalk up to a foot or more tall bears
yellow flower-heads, an inch in diameter, that resemble the well-known
dandelion,
Taraxacum officinale
Weber, by which common
name many call the cat’s-ear. The hairless,
H. glabra
L. is a smaller
plant with smooth leaves and flower-heads ¼ inch in diameter. The
cat’s-ear is a favorite food of the Hawaiian goose,
nene
.
Gosmer

is a common name used locally.

WOOD GROUNDSEL,
Senecio sylvaticus
L., a native of Europe,
is a branching, weedy herb, 1-2 feet high, abundant along the foot of
Kalahaku Pali. It has irregularly lobed leaves and small yellow
flowers in a tight flower head, ⅓ inch long and ½ inch in diameter.

TETRAMALOPIUM.
Fig. 20
, illustration
p. 53
. This endemic
genus has a dozen species, two of which are a pride of Haleakala. The
small leaves are narrow and crowded at branch ends. The showy
flowerheads of white, pinkish, or lavender ray florets surround a disk
of purplish central florets.
T. humile
(A. Gray) Hillebr. is found
inside and outside the crater between 6,000-9,000 feet. It is a small,
low, shrubby plant with narrow, spoon-shaped leaves quite covered
with sticky, curly hair. The plant growing in cracks between rocks at
the very summit is stiffer and considerably different.

SILVERSWORD,
AHINAHINA
,
Argyroxiphium sandwicense
DC.
Illustrations on
cover
and pages
iv
,
47
. As famous as the crater itself,
and almost as well-known, the silversword is regarded as typical of
Haleakala, although its natural range embraces Mauna Loa, Mauna
Kea, and Hualalai from 7,000 to 12,000 feet. A lustrous silvery
down thickly covers all leaves and makes the plant exceedingly
beautiful. It is highly evolved to withstand the extreme dryness of
cinder cones and the intense sunlight of lofty elevation. Surprising to
most visitors on first acquaintance is the fact that it bears no relationship
to the yucca of the Lily Family, but belongs to the
COMPOSITAE

along with sunflowers, asters, and chrysanthemums. Like
Dubautia

and
Railliardia
, it has no close relatives outside of the islands.

Wilkesia
, endemic to Kauai, is so closely similar that some authorities
class it in the genus
Argyroxphium
.

69

The Haleakala silversword has a short, simple, woody stem 2-3
inches in diameter crowded with thick, dagger-like leaves arranged
spirally around it. After growth from 7 to as much as 20 years, a
foliose raceme 3-8 feet high develops on which 100-500 flower-heads
nod. Each has a central disk of hundreds of bright yellow florets surrounded
by a score of short reddish-purple ray florets. The flowering
season is from June through October. The whole plant dies after
flowering but once.

The greensword,
A. virescens
Hillebr., a much rarer plant with
green leaves, once grew from 6,000 to 9,000 feet. Today it has all
but vanished; a few plants are still to be found in Koolau Gap just
outside the park, and between rocks on the edges of cliffs at Kaupo
Gap.

Visitors once gathered specimens of silversword as evidence that
they had been up the mountain, even as the mountaineer gathers
edelweiss in Switzerland. Thoughtless people uprooted the silvery
globes merely to watch them tumble down the slopes. Goats eat the
growing heart of the plant. Grazing stock are incompatible with its
existence. It has many insect parasites (see
The Insect Life
). All
of these, singly and in combination, threaten the existence of the
species.

The outer slopes of the mountain had thousands of silverswords
according to early accounts, while today they are rare. In the
crater, some of the cones were so thickly covered that they appeared
to be bathed in moonlight. Except for strong, enlightened action, this
beautiful plant might have completely vanished from the mountain.

70

SUMMARY LISTS

The following are incomplete lists of plants reported at various
places within the park. They may serve as the start or a check for
those wishing to know something of the plants in a certain area. The
names given are those most commonly used locally or those used to
head the corresponding sections above.

COMMONEST SHRUBS ALONG THE HIGHWAY above Headquarters.
Sandalwood, mamane, geranium (
N. tridens
), aalii, ohia,
ohelo, pukiawe, mountain pilo, kupaoa.

WIDESPREAD below 8,500 feet.
Stereocaulon
lichen (mostly
on barren lava), pellucid polypody, maidenhair spleenwort, cliffbrake,
swordfern, bracken, sedge (
Gahnia
), sheep sorrel or dock;
ulei, mamane, aalii, tarweed, ohia, evening primrose, ohelo, pukiawe,
selfheal, plantain, kukaenene, mountain pilo, kupaoa, pamakani,
hairy cat’s-ear, horseweed.

SUMMIT FLORA (above 8,500 feet). Mountain pili (grass),
trailing pukiawe,
tetramalopium sp.
, kupaoa, common dandelion.

CRATER FLOOR on ash or barren lava. Mountain pili, sheep
sorrel, ulei, mamane, bur clover, white clover, cranesbill, aalii, tarweed,
ohia, evening primrose, ohelo, pukiawe, selfheal, common
plantain, kukaenene, mountain pilo, catchfly, kupaoa, pamakani,
hairy cat’s-ear, Canadian horseweed,
Tetramalopium humile
, silversword.

KOOLAU GAP. Amaumau, rush, mauulaili, tree orchid, sandalwood,
pawale, Hawaiian buttercup, trailing
akala
, native strawberry,
nohoanu, apeape, highbush ohelo, trailing plantain, lobelia, wormwood,
trailing kookoolau, greensword.

PALIKU. Amaumau, ekaha, akaha akolea, twayblade, alaalawainui,
hoawa, akala, kawau, olapa, kolea, manono, lobelia, naenae.

KAUPO GAP. Rush, mauulaili, sandalwood, hoawa, puaainaka,
poha, common potato (naturalized), Jerusalem cherry, tree plantain,
lobelia, naupaka,
Dubautia sp.
,
Railliardia scabra
.

71

Figure 1—SEDGE,
Gahnia

Figure 2—HAWAIIAN ORCHID,
Liparis

72

Figure 3—SANDALWOOD,
Santalum haleakalae

Figure 4—MAMANE,
Sophora chrysophylla

73

Figure 5—HAWAIIAN RASPBERRY,
Rubus hawaiiensis

74

Figure 6—HINAHINA,
Geranium tridens

Figure 7—NOHOANU,
Geranium (Neurophyllodes) arboreum

75

Figure 8—AALII, Seed capsules, leaf detail

Figure 9—OHIA LEHUA, Twig with flower beginning to open

76

Figure 10—OLAPA

Figure 11—OHELO

77

Figure 12—PUKIAWE, Twig, flower magnified

Figure 13—KOLEA, showing fruit

78

Figure 14—MOUNTAIN PILO. Twig, fruits, leaf shapes, magnified flower and leaf showing veination

79

Figure 15—KUKAENENE, fruiting twig, male and female flowers

Figure 16—CATCHFLY,
Silene struthioloides

80

Figure 17—MAUI WORMWOOD, leaves, magnified flowers

81

Figure 18—NAENAE,
Dubautia plantaginea

Figure 19—KUPAOA,
Raillardia menziesii

82

Figure 20—TETRAMALOPIUM

83

THE BIRDS AND MAMMALS

It is a general rule that, as among plants, numbers and species
of birds decrease as one goes up a mountain. It is true also that
native Hawaiian birds are to be found mostly in upland forests. Of
the members of the endemic nectar-sipping family, DREPANIDAE,

’apapane
and
’i’iwi
may be seen up to 8,500 feet. They are associated
with ohia which give them their food.
’Amakihi
are fond of the
mamane blossoms, so it is not surprising to find them widespread
although not numerous in the park. Far rarer is the little Maui
creeper,
’alauahio
, which finds insects and spiders for food in the
bark of trunks and branches of trees and shrubs. It follows the
latter up to the Alpine Zone.

Except for migrants and sea birds, other natives nowadays are
absent. Occasionally an Hawaiian owl,
pueo
, has been seen flying
over grasslands near the park entrance and at Paliku. Tropic birds,

koa’e
, occasionally soar around the cliffs inside the crater. The dark-rumped
petrel,
’ua’u
, a vanishing species, is heard at night back of
Holua and Kapalaoa cabins, and at Leleiwi Overlook. This pigeon-sized
bird of the ocean nests in burrows 4-6 feet deep, at the bases of
cliffs in the crater. Both young and adults were formerly hunted, often
with nets, because they were highly prized as food. Bird catching
was an important occupation of Hawaiians; at times one stumbles
upon the remains of shelter caves and campsites used by them in a
lonely mountain vastness. Except the period from early May to mid-August
while it is away on its migration to Alaska, the golden plover,

kolea
, is a most conspicuous bird inside and outside the crater.

Introduced birds are everywhere. The Japanese white-eye or

mejiro
can be found in vegetation up to the Alpine Zone. It is especially
common at Paliku, the most rewarding bird area in the park.
The Pekin nightingale or Japanese hill robin,
sochi-cho
, goes all
the way to the summit. I observed a pair at the structure on Red
Hill, and picked up a dead one above the elevation of the Observatory.
They sing in the trees around Paliku. Linnets and skylarks are
often seen or heard anywhere up to the Alpine Zone. Commoner at
low elevations, a mockingbird appears infrequently above Park

84

Headquarters, and mynahs visit the inn grounds in summer. They
also appear at Paliku. English sparrows may linger around the horse
barns, as expected.

The most conspicuous and commonest Haleakala birds are introduced
game-birds. Ringnecked pheasants are flushed or heard up to
8,500 feet, while Chukar partridges are numerous from 7,500 to
10,000 feet. Both of these are abundant in the crater. The Chukar,
only a newcomer here, is already definitely at home. California quail
scurry from the road or trail at elevations up to 7,500 feet. In 1958,
27 Erchel’s francolin were released just below the park line near the
inn, but success of their establishment is still a question.

The bat was apparently the only mammal living in Hawaii at
the time when Polynesian navigators first visited here. They carried
the pig, dog, and tramp rat along with them on their voyages. After
Cook, many mammals were brought in, some of which readily
reverted to a wild state. These include sheep, goats, cattle, horses,
burros, dogs, cats, and mongooses.

The feral goat is the problem child of the Haleakala area. Often
a beautiful creature, with long, black, flowing hair, it soon exterminates
silversword, mamane, and desirable vegetation wherever it is
left uncontrolled. Upon being forceably separated from its mother,
the terrified kid quickly becomes tame and attaches itself as closely
to the human associate as it did to its natural parent. Occasionally
a stray dog that has reverted to the wild is seen in the park area. It
is only a reminder of the days of the past century when packs roamed
the side of the mountain and harassed visitors with their ferocity.
Joining their members were wild bullocks that also constituted a
threat. These were inevitably mentioned in all journals of early
visitors. In the wet forested areas below Koolau Gap, on the fringe
of upper Kipahulu Valley, and along the rim at Waianapanapa, pigs
flourish in bliss that is broken only occasionally by a local hunter who
seeks them just outside the boundary of the park.

85

THE INSECT LIFE
[21]

Hawaii National Park is rich in insect life although, as is typical
of insular areas, insects are much more sparse than in continental
regions. Most of our insects are endemic species, i.e., are found only
in these islands; many are very limited in distribution. For the most
part the endemic insects are associated with the native plants. Most
of our insects are comparatively small and inconspicuous; nevertheless,
a great many are strange and unusual so that our fauna is
particularly interesting to the scientist. We have none of the larger,
showy butterflies and other insects which the visitor often expects
to find here. No noxious or harmful species are present in areas used
by park visitors, but the large blowflies which breed in goat carcasses
in Haleakala Crater sometimes become a nuisance, due to their
presence in large numbers. These are mainland species which have
been accidentally introduced into Hawaii and which are now restricted
to the highland areas where the climate is temperate. With the
exception of lice and domestic flies, which were brought here by the
Hawaiians themselves, Hawaii was free of pestiferous insects before
the arrival of the Europeans.

One of the best known endemic Hawaiian insects is the butterfly
named after King Kamehameha,
Vanessa tameamea
, a highly colored
relative of the painted lady, the tortoise shells, and the red admiral
butterflies of the mainland. This species is highly prized by amateur
butterfly collectors since it is found no place else in the world. Its
colors are orange, brown, and black. The female has small white
spots in the apical portions of the front wings; these spots are rosy
colored in the male. The caterpillars, green or purplish, feed on the
leaves of the
mamaki
. Adults are found in forests throughout the
islands. They are attracted to the native hydrangea,
kanawao
, to the
introduced thimbleberry, or to the sap exuding from
koa
or
naio
.
This butterfly is a strong flier, and ranges from the seacoast to the
top of Haleakala. The female of
Hodegia apetala
, an endemic genus

86

of only one described species, is an Hawaiian moth unable to fly.
[22]

The male is unknown. This jumping insect, related to the bollworm,
lives in bunch grass near the summit. The narrow, pointed, reduced,
ashen-brown wings are ½ inch long; the abdomen, about as long as
the wings, is brownish gray.

As one walks over open patches at higher elevations a brown moth,
1½ inches wide, rises readily before one. This is
Agrotis aulacias
that
possesses great powers of flight.
[23]
The genus of 27 species is related
to army worms, cut-worms, and a host of agricultural pests.
Fletcherana
insularis
is a geometrid moth (inch worm, measuring worm,
or looper) found in late spring high above the forest belt near the
park entrance. The insect is an inch wide, its color is white, speckled
with black. The genus of 5 species is confined to Hawaii.

Nesophrosyne haleakala
is a mottled, gray-brown leafhopper, ⅛
inch long; the head and front part of the thorax are yellowish. In
the park it is found in
pilo
and
ohelo
at 8,500 or 9,000 feet. The
genus is endemic and contains over 60 forms distributed throughout
the islands.

An undesirable pest has publicized its presence high above the
park entrance by leaving its name on two caves which early visitors
found convenient for shelter. Big Flea and Little Flea Caves often
appear in accounts of early trips, but never without mention of the
annoyance that was caused by their permanent occupants. Of the 7
different kinds of fleas recorded for Hawaii, only the so-called cat
flea (
Ctenocephalides felis
) annoys people to any extent. Several
species of fleas infest the Hawaiian rat and were presumably brought
in when this rodent arrived with the earliest Polynesian immigrants.

Because the beautiful silversword has no very close relatives,
which means that its ancestors arrived in Hawaii in earliest time,
any species of insects associated solely with it as a host plant draws
particular interest. Moreover, since the survival of silverswords is
precarious in this day of rapid change, all agents that threaten must
be carefully scrutinized. Silverswords are specific hosts to a half

87

dozen or more endemic species of insects.
[24]
Among Lepidoptera, the
family of moths and butterflies, the larvae of a pyralid moth,
Rhynchephestia
rhabdotus
, feeds in the flower-heads, destroying the seeds.
Caterpillars of a noctuid,
Euxoa epicremma
, have been collected
beneath plants. The caterpillars of a tineid moth have been found
among dead leaves. Of the
DIPTERA
, great numbers of yellow maggots
of a gray fly,
Tephritis cratericola
, feed on the seeds and prevent their
development. The larvae of one of the Coleoptera, a beetle described
as
Aescheithmysus terryi
, feeds apparently only on old and dead
stems. A relative,
A. swezeyi
, similarly feeds on
Railliardia
. Great
members of a leaf-hopper,
Iburnia argyroxiphii
, suck the sap of
Haleakala silverswords. It is preyed upon by a wasp,
Polynema sp.
,
so tiny that the naked eye can hardly see it. The wasp lays its egg in
the egg of the hopper. The larval wasp, upon hatching, feeds on the
contents of the hopper egg, pupates within it, and emerges from it.

The Paliku area is very rich in insect life; many hundreds of
species have been recorded from here and many are apparently very
restricted in distribution and are known only from this locality.
Species of pomace-flies (
DROSOPHILIDAE
) and the long-legged flies
(
DOLICHOPODIDAE
) are especially prevalent at Paliku. Two species
of the native genus
Idiomyia
are the largest members of
DROSOPHILIDAE

found any place in the world; they measure approximately 7 mm. in
length. Two species of flightless Neuroptera (
Pseudopsectra cookeorum

and
lobipennis
) occur on the vegetation (
Dubautia
,
Metrosideros
,
and
Cyanea
) in Haleakala; these represent one of the
strangest entomological curiosities of the world.

Over five thousand species of insects have been recorded from
the Hawaiian Islands and it is probable that several thousand more
species remain to be described. In the past our knowledge of the
insects was based largely upon the monumental study, “Fauna
Hawaiiensis,”
[25]
published by a group of institutions including the
British Museum (Natural History) and the Bernice P. Bishop

88

Museum. A new faunistic study is now under way titled “Insects of
Hawaii.”
[26]
This is an extremely valuable reference work and is
indispensable to anyone studying Hawaiian insects. It gives a complete
review of the insects from the lowest orders through the butterflies
and larger moths. Two volumes on the
DIPTERA
are now in
press. Volume one gives a most comprehensive account of the mode
of dispersal of our endemic fauna and flora to these islands. It is
estimated that the 3,722 known endemic insects developed from
approximately 250 ancestral species.

89

HAWAIIAN WORDS AND PLACE NAMES

THE HAMZA. During the centuries, changes occur in dialects.
Hawaiian is one of the dialects of the Polynesian language. A striking
change in Hawaiian is the dropping of the letter
k
that once appeared
in some words. But instead of complete discard of the sound, its
former existence is revealed as a little catch in the throat, called a
glottal stop. This is represented in print by a mark (’) called
hamza
.
The omission of this mark can spell a word of entirely different
meaning. Yet, without explanation, the hamza can be more bewildering
than helpful to those unfamiliar with Hawaiian. Its use in this
book therefore has been limited to this section and to the section on
plants
, because it is needed if correct pronunciation is attempted. And
who fails to want to try Hawaiian on his tongue!

These brief, literal interpretations are not mentioned in the text. Principal authorities
are K. E. Emory and M. K. Pukui.

AHU—Pile, cairn, altar, shrine. Often a small or large pile of
stones erected as a trailmark or landmark.
Ahu
were sometimes put
up by passing parties as monuments or evidence that they had been
there, even as mountain climbers do to this day. To be assured of a
safe journey, an
ahu
of three stones was made as tribute to the god
of the locality.

ALII—
Ali’i
, chief, chiefess, sovereign, ruler. One of the upper
class.

HALALII—
Hala-li’i
, fun-making, from the name of a traditional
chief of Ni’ihau.

HALEAKALA—
Hale-a-ka-la
is usually interpreted as “house of
the sun,” a simple translation of the Hawaiian name given us for
the mountain. It assumes vague reference to the Maui legend. An
old explanation converted the translation to “house built by the sun.”
Rev. A. O. Forbes
[27]
says that the name is a corruption of
Alehe-ka-la
,
“snarer of the sun,” in reference to Maui’s deeds. Still another
version would have it
Ahale-ka-la
, to be interpreted as “rays of the
sun.”

90

HALEMAUU—
Hale mau’u
is grass hut;
hale ma’u’u
signifies
damp house.

HANA—Bay or valley, when used in a place name.

HANAKAUHI—
Hana-ka-uhi
, the mist-maker; yam valley.

HAOLE—A foreigner, one of foreign extraction; today, usually
in reference to a Caucasian; adj., foreign.

HEIAU—Pre-christian place of worship, hence, usually translated
temple. This was often a stone platform or an earth terrace.

HOLUA—A course used for the ancient royal sport of sliding
down steep slopes; also the sled itself.

HONOKAHUA—
Hono-ka-hua
, joined foundation.

IAO—
’I-ao
, high; into the clouds.

KAHULUI—
Ka-hului
, a sea for drag-net fishing.

KALAHAKU—The proclamation of the Lord.

KALAPAWILI—
Ka-lapa-wili
, winding or twisting ridge.

KALUAAWA—
Ka-lua-’awa
, the
’awa
pit.
’Awa
or
kawa
is the
well-known traditional drink of Polynesia made from
Piper methysticum
.

KALUAIKI—
Ka-lua-iki
, small pit or crater.

KALUANUI—
Ka-lua-nui
, large pit or crater.

KALUA O KA OO—
Ka lua o ka ’o’o
, the pit of the
’o’o
. The

’o’o
, now extinct, was an endemic, black, nectar-sipping bird. It had
tufts of yellow feathers under each wing and at the base of the tail,
which were used in featherwork.

KALUA O UMI—Umi’s Cave.

KAMOALII—
Ka moa li’i
, the little chicken.

KA MOA O PELE—Pele’s chickens or chicken coop.

KANAKA—(
Haw. pl. kanaka
;
Eng. pl. kanakas
) human being,
person, man.

KAPA—Tapa, a cloth made from the bark of
mamaki
or
wauke
;
formerly, clothes of any kind; bedclothes.

91

KAPALAOA—
Ka palaoa
, the
palaoa
was a highly-prized pendant
of whale-tooth ivory, a symbol of royalty over the theft of which
wars were waged.

KAUPO—
Kau po
, to land at night. A variety of banana is given
this name, probably after the place name.

KAWILINAU—
Ka wili nau
, literally, the twist of pain. This
is the Hawaiian place name for Bottomless Pit.

KEAHUOKAHOLO—
Ke ahu o ka holo
, a heap resulting from a
landslide.

KEANAE—
Ke ’anae
, the large mullet.

KEONEHEEHEE—
Ke one he’ehe’e
, the sliding sands.

KIHEI—Shoulder covering; a rectangular fine mat or tapa used
as a mantle.

KIPAHULU—Worn-out soil.

KOLEKOLE—Bright red, blood red.

KOOLAU—
Ko’olau
, windward side.

KUIKI—
Ku iki
, a moment’s stop, a short halt.

KUMUILIAHI—
Kumu ’iliahi
, sandalwood trunk.

LAUULU—
Lau ’ulu
, leaf of breadfruit tree.

LELEIWI—Carved figure on the bowsprit of a canoe or ship.

LILINOI—Goddess of Haleakala.

MAKAWAO—
Maka wao
, forest region.

MAUI—Contrary to popular belief and despite the similar
spelling, the island does not bear the name of the demigod. The
name of the island is pronounced mow-ee. This almost rhymes with
an enthusiastic “WOWIE!” especially as a Virginian might pronounce
it. The
au
must be treated in the fashion for Hawaiian dipthongs,
that is, the crisp vowels are more loosely connected than in
the English, and a slight accent is imposed on the leading one. The
demigod’s name has three syllables, with accent on the second, i.e.,
the
u
. Thus, Ma-u’-i.

MAUNA—Mountain.

92

MAUNA HINA—Gray mountain.

MOI—
Mo’i
(A 19th Century word), King, queen, sovereign.

NAMANA O KE AKUA—
Na mana o ke akua
, the miraculous
power,
mana
, of Deity, gods, or spirits.

NA PIKO HANA—The hiding place for navel cords.

NIANIAU—
Ni’ani’au
, the sword fern.

OILI PUU—
’O’ili pu’u
, hill appearing, hill shot out.

PALIKU—
Pali ku
, upright cliff.

POHAKU PALAHA—Broad stone; wide stone.

PUKALANI—
Puka lani
, heavenly entrance, chief’s doorway.

PUU—
Pu’u
, hill. This is contracted in some names to
pu
.

PUU HELE—
Pu’u hele
, moving hill.

PUU KAUAUA—
Pu’u ka uaua
, the stubborn hill; the tough hill.

PUU KUMU—
Pu’u kumu
, stump hill.

PUU MAILE—
Maile
is a fragrant vine,
Alyxia oliviformis
,
used and loved like the laurel of Europe.

PUU MANEONEO—
Pu’u mane’one’o
, itching hill.
Maneoneo

means
barren
.

PUU NAUE—
Pu’u naue
, trembling hill; loose or insecure hill.

PUU NOLE—Grumbling hill.

WAIALE—
Wai’ale
, rippling water.

WAI ANAPANAPA—
Wai ’anapanapa
, sparkling water.

WAIHOI—
Wai ho’i
, water that returned.

WAIKAU—
Wai kau
, water on a high place.

WAIKEKEEHIA—
Keke’ehia
means to twist and wind like a
rivulet or stream, hence, the name is interpreted as crooked waters.

WAILUKU—
Wai luku
, water of destruction.

93

HUI O AHINAHINA

The exclusive Society of the Silversword (Hui o Ahinahina)
invites you to become a member if you have visited the summit or
the crater of Haleakala. Only one class of membership. Life: one
dollar! By joining you can help scientific study, interpretation, and
display exhibits of the Park. Exchange your dollar at the Park or
at the office of Silversword Inn for a silvery, engraved certificate,
suitable for framing. With pride you can hand it down to your
grandchildren, a souvenir of Haleakala.

ADDITIONAL HELP

The following publications contain information on the two sections
of Hawaii National Park. They may be purchased at either Park
Administration Office, at Silversword Inn, Haleakala, and at the
Volcano House at Kilauea.

Volcanoes of Hawaii National Park.
(pamphlet) by Gordon
A. MacDonald and Douglas H. Hubbard.

Hawaii Natural History Association, 1951.
50¢

Ferns of Hawaii National Park.
(pamphlet) by Douglas H.
Hubbard.

Hawaii Natural History Association, 1952.
50¢

Trailside Plants of Hawaii National Park.
(pamphlet) by Douglas
H. Hubbard and Vernon R. Bender, Jr. Hawaii Natural History
Association, 1960.

Plants of Hawaii National Park.
By Otto Degener, 1945.   $4.00

Illustrative of Plants and Customs of the South Seas.

The Land of Pele.
(pamphlet) by Nash Castro.

A historical sketch of Hawaii National Park.

Hilo Tribune Herald, Ltd., 1953.
85¢

Cartons, cigarette butts, and other trash do not add to your enjoyment
of the park. You can easily dispose of these so that they cannot become
obnoxious to you and those who come after you. With the number of
visitors increasing each year, you can help protect and preserve the
natural scene by placing all paper and other refuse in containers provided
for this purpose and by refraining from picking or breaking flowers,
plants, and natural specimens.
Won’t you do your share?

THANK YOU.

95

MILEAGES

Roads

Park Boundary to:

Miles

Silversword Inn
1.0

Hosmer Grove
1.5

Park Headquarters
2.0

Halemauu Trail
5.6

Leleiwi Overlook
8.4

Kalahaku Overlook
10.1

Observatory
12.1

Red Hill (Summit)
12.8

CAA Station
13.8

Halemauu Trail

Silversword Inn to:

Miles

Halemauu Trail Junction
2.9

Holua Visitor Cabin
5.9

Haleakala Park Road to:

Holua Visitor Cabin
3.9

Holua Visitor Cabin to:

Silversword Loop
.9

Bottomless Pit
2.3

Bubble Cave
3.3

Kapalaoa Visitor Cabin
3.8

Paliku Visitor Cabin
6.3

Kaupo Village
14.1

Sliding Sands Trail

Observatory to:

Miles

Holua Visitor Cabin
7.4

Kapalaoa Visitor Cabin
5.8

Bubble Cave
6.5

Paliku Visitor Cabin
9.8

Kaupo Village
17.5

Miscellaneous Mileages:

Holua Visitor Cabin to Kapalaoa Visitor Cabin
3.8
Miles

Kapalaoa Visitor Cabin to Paliku Visitor Cabin
4.0

Paliku Visitor Cabin to Holua Visitor Cabin (Direct Route via Halemauu Trail)
6.3

White Hill
0.2

Crater Overlook Trail
350
Feet

A FEW STATISTICS

Area of the Crater
19
Square miles

Circumference of the Crater
20
Miles

Extreme length of the Crater
7½
Miles

Extreme width of the Crater
2½
Miles

Elevation of the summit of Red Hill
10,005
Feet

Elevation of Puu o Maui
8,133
Feet

Elevation of Park Boundary, Kaupo Trail
3,847
Feet

Elevation of Park Boundary, Koolau Gap
6,450
Feet

Area of the Haleakala Section, Hawaii National Park
26.7
Square miles

Footnotes

[1]
Emory, Kenneth P., An Archaeological Survey of Haleakala, Bernice P. Bishop Museum, Occasional Papers,
vol. VII, No. 11. 1921.

[2]
Ellis, William, A Narrative of a Tour Through Hawaii, or Owhyhee; with remarks on the History, Traditions,
Manners, Customs and Language of the Inhabitants of the Sandwich Islands, London 1825.

[3]
“Voyages of Discovery of Captain James Cook,” vol. II, page 958. Ward Luck, Bowden & Co., London.

[4]
L. A. Milet-Mureau, ed., “Voyage de la Perouse Autour du Monde” (Paris, an V) II, 110-129.

[5]
“Honolulu; Sketches of the Life, Social, Political, and Religious in the Hawaiian Islands from 1828 to 1861,”
Laura Fish Judd; Honolulu, 1880.

[6]
THE MISSIONARY HERALD, v. XXV, August 1829, No. 8, pp. 246-251 (no author).

[7]
Narrative of the United States Exploring Expedition during the Years 1838, 1839, 1840, 1941, 1942. Charles
Wilkes. U.S.N. v. IV, 1845, pp. 252-256.

[8]
Damon, S. C., Ascent of Haleakala, The Friend, vol. 5, pp. 116-117, 1847.

[9]
Bates, Geo., Sandwich Island Notes, pp. 116-117, New York, 1854.

[10]
Wilkes, Chas., Narrative of the U. S. Exploring Expedition, vol. 4, p. 254, 1845.

[11]
Dana, J. D., U. S. Exploring Expedition 1838-42, vol. 10, Geology, p. 228, 1849.

[12]
W. D. Alexander, On the Crater of Haleakala, Island of Maui, Hawaiian Group. Am. Jour. Sci. 2nd ser.,
vol. 49, No. 145, P. 48, Jan. 1870.

[13]
Dutton, C. E., Hawaiian Volcanoes, U. S. Geol. Survey, 4th ann. rept., pp. 81-219, 1874.

[14]
Dana, J. D., Characteristics of Volcanoes, New York, 1891, pp. 277-278.

[15]
Daly, R. A., Igneous Rocks and the Depths of the Earth, p. 171, New York, 1933.

[16]
Cross, Whitman, Lavas of Hawaii and their Relations: U. S. Geol. Survey Prof. Paper 88, p. 25, 1915.

[17]
Powers, Sidney. Geol. Soc. America Bull., vol. 28, p. 512, 1925.

[18]
Stearns, H. T., Origin of Haleakala Crater, Maui, Hawaii: Geol. Soc. America Bull., vol. 53, pp. 1-14, 1942.

[19]
Degener, O., Plants of Hawaii National Park, p. 101; Flora Hawaiiensis, Family 68, 1946.

[20]
Degener, O., Plants of Hawaii National Park, pp. 142-148.

[21]
Basic data for this section prepared under the supervision of D. Elmo Hardy, Entomologist, University of Hawaii, to whom grateful acknowledgement is made.

[22]
Perkins, R. C. L., Ent. Monthly Magazine, 32:195, 1896.

[23]
Myrick, E., Fauna Hawaiiensis, vol. 1, p. 145, 1899.

[24]
Swezey, O. H. and Degener, Otto. Insect fauna of the silversword and greensword. Proc. Haw. Ent. Soc.,
7(1): 183-195, 1928.

[25]
Fauna Hawaiiensis; being the Land Fauna of the Hawaiian Islands. Edited by David Sharp. Vols. I-III.
Cambridge, England. 1899-1913.

[26]
Zimmerman, Elwood C. Insects of Hawaii. Vols. 1-3, 1948-1959. Univ. of Hawaii Press, Honolulu.

[27]
Rev. A. O. Forbes, Hawaiian Almanac and Annual for 1881, p. 59, Thos. G. Thrum, editor, Honolulu.

Silversword in bloom

Transcriber’s Notes

Silently corrected a few typos.

Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook is public-domain in the country of publication.

In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by _underscores_.

End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Hawaii National Park: A Guide for the
Haleakala Section, by George Cornelius Ruhle

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HAWAII NATIONAL PARK: HALEAKALA ***

***** This file should be named 57258-h.htm or 57258-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/7/2/5/57258/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.