The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Juvenile Scrap-book for 1849, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Juvenile Scrap-book for 1849
A Christmas and New Year's present for young people

Author: Various

Editor: Grandfather Merryman

Release Date: June 4, 2018 [EBook #57275]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE JUVENILE SCRAP-BOOK FOR 1849 ***

Produced by Chris Curnow, For Emmy and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)

THE JUVENILE SCRAP BOOK.

FOR MDCCCXLIX.

EDITED BY,

GRANDFATHER MERRYMAN.

New York. D. Appleton & Company 200 Broadway

[i]

THE

JUVENILE SCRAP-BOOK

FOR

1849;

A

CHRISTMAS AND NEW YEAR’S PRESENT

FOR YOUNG PEOPLE.

EDITED BY

GRANDFATHER MERRYMAN.

WITH TWENTY-EIGHT ENGRAVINGS ON STEEL.

NEW-YORK:

D. APPLETON & CO., 200 BROADWAY.

PHILADELPHIA:

GEO. S. APPLETON, 143 CHESNUT-STREET.

MDCCCXLIX.

[ii]

Entered
, according to act of Congress, in the year 1848, by

D. Appleton & Co.
,

In the Clerk’s Office of the District Court for the Southern District of
New-York.

[iii]

PREFACE.

One day while sitting in my garden at my country-seat
in New York State, from which, by looking at the
title, you will see I have a fine view of the high bridge
across the Harlem River, one of my favorite little
granddaughters came running to me, just as I had
seated myself in my old garden-seat, and earnestly
begged me to again read her book to her. But, as I
thought she had heard those stories so often, I supposed
she would like to hear some new ones much
better, so I related to her two or three. With these,
and with others that I told her during the holydays
which she was spending with me, she was so much
pleased, that I thought my numerous juvenile friends
throughout the country would also like to possess
[iv]

them. I have accordingly collected them into a volume,
which my publishers have made very attractive
by the addition of twenty-eight beautiful engravings;
and it is now offered as a Christmas and New Year’s
Present, to amuse and instruct you, by your friend,

Grandfather Merryman.

Philadelphia
, December, 1848.

[v]

CONTENTS

PAGE

The Proud Girl

9

The Use of Punishments

17

Julian and his Rabbit

20

Queen Anne’s Physicians

25

Lizzie Carson

29

Cruelty to Animals

37

Deception Punished

40

Brothers and Sisters

43

The Geraldines

45

Faithful Fido

51

Generosity Rewarded

54

Danger of Coquetry

61

Pussy-hood

67

Harry and his Rabbits

69

The Shipwrecked on an Uninhabited Island

72

Hints on Reading

80

Scenes in the Life of a Roach

82

[vi]
The Carter’s Helpmates

85

The Folly of being Vain

89

Orphan Wanderers

95

Anticipations and Realities

99

A Fox’s Tale of his Adventures

104

New Charades

119

Mary and her Little Goat

122

Confidence in an Indian

125

“The Spell of a Gentle Word”

129

Indian Children

133

The Boyhood of Washington

141

[vii]

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

PAGE.

Grandfather Merryman

Frontispiece.

The Proud Girl
(2 plates)

9

The Use of Punishments

17

Julian and his Rabbit

20

Queen Anne’s Physicians

25

Lizzie Carson
(2 plates)

29

Cruelty to Animals

37

Deception Punished

40

Brothers and Sisters

43

The Geraldines

45

Faithful Fido

51

Generosity Rewarded
(2 plates)

54

Dangers of Coquetry

61

Harry and his Rabbits

69

The Shipwrecked
(2 plates)

72

[viii]
Hints on Reading

80

The Carter’s Helpmates

85

The Folly of being Vain
(2 plates)

89

Orphan Wanderers

95

Anticipations and Realities

99

A Fox’s Adventures
(2 plates)

104

Mary and her Goat

122

[9]

JUVENILE SCRAP-BOOK.

THE PROUD GIRL.

“How I wish gran’pa was here!” exclaimed little
Susan Fielding, one day to her mother, who was busying
herself about household affairs, and could not devote
as much of her time to her children, Susan and
Robert, as usual. Robert was about nine years old,
and thought himself too much of a little man to complain
of any fancied neglect on his mother’s part; so
he amused himself by drawing horses and dogs on his
new slate, a department of the fine arts, for which, if
he had no particular talent, he showed at least a plentiful
supply of industry. Susan was two years younger
than Robert, and having no female companion of her
own age, to converse with when her mother was engaged,
[10]

really felt lonesome; and this is the reason why
she cried, perhaps, a little impatiently, “How I wish
gran’pa was here!”

Mrs. Fielding entered the room at this moment, and
hearing Susan’s earnest wish, inquired of her why she
was so anxious to see her grandpapa just then.

“Because, ma,” replied the little girl; “gran’pa
always tells me such nice stories when I ask him to,
and I
do
want some one to talk to me just now.”

“Well, my dear,” replied her mother, soothingly,
“you will soon have your wish, for I saw your gran’pa
coming up the lawn as I entered. He’ll be here presently,
but do not tease him the moment he comes in, for
you know he is very old, and must have time to rest
after his walk.”

Susan clapped her hands for joy, and promised that
she would be very patient, but she could not conceal
her anticipated pleasure. As for Robert, as soon as he
heard of his grandpapa’s being near the house, his slate
and pencil were dropped immediately, and running to
the door to meet him, his eyes fairly sparkled with delight
as he cried lustily, “Gran’pa’s coming! gran’pa’s
coming!”

Old Mr. Fielding was as much delighted with the
children as they were with him, and when he seated
himself in his easy chair, drawn from its corner by the
[11]

children, he kissed both affectionately, and placed one
on each knee, saying,

“Well, my children, have you been well since I saw
you last?”

“Oh, yes, gran’pa,” said Susan, “but I wanted you
to come here
so
bad. Ma has been busy all day, and
could not talk to me, and Robert would talk of nothing
but dogs and horses, and you know, gran’pa, little girls
don’t care about such animals. But now you’re here,
and you’ll tell us all about the proud little girl you
spoke of last week—that is when you rest yourself,
gran’pa,” exclaimed Susan, suddenly recollecting that
she must not tease him, as her mother desired.

The old gentleman smiled at his grandchild’s thoughtfulness,
and after a few moment’s spent in collecting
his ideas, during which time Robert’s slate lay quite
neglected, and Susan tried to look very patient, he began
as follows:

“Caroline Ellis was the only child of parents who
thought that indulging her in every wish was all that
was necessary to make her happy, which idea, my dear
children, is very erroneous, for little boys and girls are
not as well qualified to judge what is good for them as
grown people are. Caroline was delicate, and notwithstanding
her father’s wealth, she became paler and paler
each day, until at last great fears were entertained that
[12]

her life would pay the forfeit of her parents’ pride, for
that was the sole cause of their daughter’s ill-health.
Her mother was not like yours, Susan; she taught her
child to believe that it was low and vulgar to play as
other children do; but kept her always dressed up in
the parlor, except when she took her to balls and parties
with herself. The consequences were that she
pined away, until, as I told you, great fears were felt
for her life.

“Country air was recommended by the physicians,
and, accompanied by her mother, she visited several
watering places, but always dressed up in beautiful
silks and satins, so that it was impossible to go in the
fields or meadows, without soiling her expensive dresses.
Although the change of air did her a great deal of good,
her health was by no means re-established, and now the
physicians told her mother that her child must be allowed
to skip and jump about with children of her own
age—which I forgot to say was twelve years—instead
of promenading like an old person.”

“What is promenading, gran’pa?” interrupted Susan.

“It is walking slowly, my child, the way vain little
girls walk who think more about fine clothes than the
sweet little flowers my darling Susan loves so well.
However, her mamma was prevailed on to send her to
[13]

the country, alone, to the house of her uncle, who had
four children; but Caroline had never seen them, and
it was hard to persuade her to go into the ‘dull country,’
as she called it, and mingle with ‘vulgar country
people.’ But she discovered her error in time.

“At her uncle’s, she was treated with great kindness
and attention by her cousins, who did all that lay in
their power to please her—fresh bouquets of flowers
were pulled for her daily, and although she would at
first scarcely open her lips to any one of them, their
repeated acts of kindness overcame her pride somewhat,
and she would occasionally talk with her cousin
Ellen, who was nearly her own age; but sometimes
she would let her proud feelings overcome her, and exclaim
to her cousin, ‘Ellen, how can you content
yourself in this dull place?’ Ellen was too much of a
real little lady to notice the rudeness, which must have
hurt her feelings, for she was doing every thing in her
power to make her cousin happy.

“Caroline was too selfish to care for any one’s
pleasure but her own,” continued old Mr. Fielding,
“she had never been taught that the way to be happy
is to try to make others so. Ellen had given up her
own pleasures to amuse her cousin in her own way;
but she was beginning to get tired of her constant complaints
of dullness, for to her nothing could be more
[14]

charming than the sweet singing of the birds, and she
had little time now to listen to the music of nature.

“One morning Ellen and Caroline were walking,
and Ellen proposed a visit to a cottage down a long
green lane, occupied by their old nurse, greatly beloved
by the whole family, who visited her almost every day
in good weather. Caroline consented, and when they
arrived near the place, they were surprised to hear the
voices of children, as if in great glee. Ellen was
further surprised and delighted to discover that they
were her own brothers and sisters, who had arrived by
another route, and were busily engaged with agricultural
implements in their hands. Charles and Mary
had rakes, raking the hay, Emma was gathering flowers,
and calling to Charles to come and see how sweet
they looked, and little Eddie was trying to make the
hay into bundles. ‘See, sis, how nice I can make it!’
shouted he, and his voice rang clear through the pure
air, as he clasped the sweet-scented hay in his little
hands. Ellen could resist the temptation no longer; she
ran to join her little brother in his healthful exercise.
Caroline remained looking at them through the window,
shocked at first at the idea of her cousin Ellen
joining in such rude and vulgar sports; but in a few
moments the rich perfume of the new-made hay tempted
her to mingle with her cousins. At first, she made sad
work of it, and several times was on the point of withdrawing
from the party; but fortunately she did not—and
for two long hours these happy children laughed
and played, until the time arrived to go home to supper.
Caroline’s cheeks were now flushed with exercise—she
felt like a new being, and conscious that her cousins
were right, and she wrong, she laid her head on
Ellen’s lap, and bursting out into tears, asked her forgiveness
for her rudeness. But Ellen had nothing to
forgive—she was happy because she was the means of
breaking her cousin of a fashionable vice, and when
next day they went again, refreshed after a sound sleep,
to ramble and run among the grass and flowers, the
cousins became better acquainted than they ever had
been before, and the healthy color soon returned permanently
to Caroline’s cheeks, and she became quite
well, and her aunt prevailed on her to remain during
the whole summer with them, which she willingly did,
for she now loved her aunt and cousins dearly.

“When at last her time arrived to go home, she cried
heartily at the thought of parting, and promised to come
again next summer, and every letter sent by her afterwards
told of her continued good health, and was full
of thanks to her country cousins for their persevering
kindness to her until her proud spirit was completely
broken, and she was enabled to become a happy child
[16]

of nature, and no longer worthy of the title of the

Proud Girl
.”

Susan and Robert both thanked their grandpapa for
telling them such a nice story, and hoped that they
would never become proud and despise any body; and
they felt thankful to God for giving them such a good
mamma, to lead them in the way to do right.

[15]

[17]

THE USE OF PUNISHMENTS.

NEW-YORK

D. APPLETON & CO. 200 BROADWAY.

Frank had a little cousin Mary; when Mary was
six years old, she was brought to live at his father’s
house. Frank soon grew fond of Mary and played
with her at whatever she liked; sometimes he was her
horse; sometimes she was his horse; sometimes he
rolled her in his wheelbarrow, and sometimes she made
a cat’s cradle for him.

Though Mary and Frank were good-natured, yet
they had faults. Frank was sometimes impatient; and
Mary was sometimes a little cross. Frank had not
been used to play with children younger and weaker
than himself. When he found that he was the
strongest, he made use of his strength to force Mary
to do as he commanded her; and when he wanted any
thing she had, he would snatch it rudely from her
hands. Once Frank took a ball from her in this manner,
and hurt her so much that she roared out with the
pain.

Frank’s father, who was in the next room, heard
[18]

her, and came to inquire what was the matter. Mary
stopped crying; and Frank, though he felt much
ashamed, told his father how he had hurt her.

Frank’s father was pleased with his honesty, in telling
the truth, but he ordered the children into different
rooms, and they were not allowed to play together any
more that day.

The next morning, at breakfast, Frank’s father
asked if they liked best to be together, or to be separate.

“To be together,” answered Frank and Mary.

“Then, my children, take care and do not quarrel,”
said Frank’s father, “for whenever you quarrel, I shall
end your dispute at once, by separating you. You,
Frank, know the use of punishment.”

“Yes, I know,” answered Frank, “that when I have
done wrong, you give me pain; you take away what I
like; or hinder me from doing as I like.”

“Do you think,” asked his father, “that I like to give
pain—for what purpose do I punish you?”

“Not because you like to give me pain, but to hinder
me from doing wrong again.”

“How will punishment hinder you from doing wrong
again?”

“You know, papa, I should be afraid to have the
same punishment again, if I were to do the same wrong
[19]

action; and the pain, and the shame of the punishment,
make me remember them a long while. Whenever I
think of doing the wrong action again, for which I was
punished, I recollect the punishment, and then I determine
not to do wrong again.”

“Is there any other use in punishments, do you
think, Frank?”

“Yes, to prevent other people from doing wrong:
when they see a person who has done wrong punished,
if they are sure they shall have the same punishment,
if they do the same wrong thing, they take care not to
do it.”

[20]

JULIAN AND HIS RABBIT.

One day little Susan Clare came to her mother, with
the request that she would tell her a short story. Her
mother, after satisfying herself that Susan had been
industriously employed during the morning, promised
to comply with her request, and the following conversation
took place between them.

“What shall I tell you about, my little girl?” said
Mrs. Clare; “do you know the story of the grateful
Julian?”

“No, mother,” was the reply.

“Well, you shall hear it,” said Mrs. Clare. “There
once lived a very poor man, who had one child six
years old, whose name was Julian. This little boy
was the owner of but one thing in the wide world,
and that was a rabbit.”

“Ah, mother,” exclaimed Susan, “it is a pretty
little animal—the rabbit. I wish that I had one.”

NEW-YORK

D. APPLETON & CO. 200 BROADWAY.

“My dear Susan,” replied her mother, “you have so
many nice things to make you happy, that you can do
[21]

very well without a rabbit. You have nice clothes,
good food and drink, and a clean bed on which to lie
down at night. You have a pretty doll, a couple of
pigeons, and a whole closet full of books and playthings.
Poor little Julian had nothing of all these.”

“What!” said Susan, “had he not even good clothes
to keep him warm?”

“Some old rags hastily patched together, were all he
had to cover himself.”

“And did he have no bed?”

“A little straw in the corner, upon the ground.”

“And nothing to eat or drink?” asked Susan.

“Oftentimes nothing to eat,” said Mrs. Clare; “or,
when he was very hungry, a morsel of dry brown bread
with some water.”

“O, poor Julian!” exclaimed Susan. “If he were
here, I would give him every day half of my breakfast
and of my luncheon.”

“Now hear the rest of my story,” said her mother.
“Notwithstanding he was so poor, Julian was contented,
for his little rabbit made up for all his privations, and it
was indeed a charming animal. Its hair was as white
as snow glittering in the sunshine, and soft as silk. Its
eyes were bright as diamonds, and then it was so tame,
so fond of its little master! When his father gave
him a bit of bread, Julian would go behind the hut,
[22]

and sit down upon the grass; and then he had but to
call, ‘Jeannot, Jeannot;’ and instantly his rabbit would
run to him, leap upon his arm, and take from him the
morsels of bread one by one in his mouth.”

“O, my dear mother,” Susan here exclaimed, “I
must, indeed, I must have a rabbit exactly like it.”

“But you might tame with equal ease your lamb
and your pigeons,” answered Mrs. Clare. “Believe
me, my child, all animals are indued with gratitude,
and they all love us, when they see that we love them.
But let me return to little Julian. Although he had
often to suffer hunger, cold, and numerous other hardships
and privations, he still kept a good heart, because
his little rabbit was to him every day a source of new
pleasure.

“But at last a sad misfortune befell poor Julian;
he became very sick. His father, for want of money,
could not take care of him, which his sickness needed.
So the poor little fellow lay stretched upon the damp
floor, enduring great pain, without any one to cure
him.

“His little rabbit soon came to find him, and took a
place by his side on the straw. The little creature
even looked at him so mournfully, that it seemed as if
he would say to him:—‘Ah, my poor master, how I
pity you!’ And Julian regarded his rabbit with looks
[23]

so forlorn, that he seemed ready to reply: ‘Ah, my
little rabbit; I shall soon have to leave you!’

“Fortunately there resided in the neighborhood a
rich and benevolent man, who chanced to hear of
Julian’s sickness and his father’s poverty. He immediately
resolved to visit their hut, to learn if
what he heard was true, and to see what aid he
could render. When this good man entered the hut,
and saw poor Julian sick, thin and pale, upon his
bed of straw, he could hardly refrain from shedding
tears.

“‘My poor child,’ said he, ‘be consoled. I come
to bring you assistance.’

“So, without more delay, this kind friend caused
Julian to be carried to his house, where a proper bed
was prepared for him, and every care was taken to
restore him to health. The means employed for his
cure were so successful that, at the end of two weeks,
he was able to return to his father’s hut.

“During that time the rich man had also afforded
some aid to the father, and had presented little Julian
with a whole new suit of clothes. So the father and
son found themselves happier than they had ever been
before. The little rabbit leaped up with joy on again
beholding its dear Julian.

“The father now said to his son: ‘You see, my dear
[24]

Julian, how happy this gentleman has made us. What
shall we do to show him our gratitude?’

“Julian reflected a moment; and then exclaimed,
full of joy: ‘Oh! I will go and carry him my little
rabbit!’ ‘Yes, my child,’ said his father; ‘it is the
most valuable thing that you have; it is all your wealth;
you can do nothing better to prove to him your gratitude.
Tell him, also, that your father will work for
him, without pay, one day every week.’

“Julian took his rabbit, and, although much attached
to it, he went nevertheless with a good deal of joy, to
offer it to his benefactor. This worthy man first heard
all that he had to say, but then fondly embraced him,
and said: ‘It is well, my dear boy: we ought to be grateful
towards those who do us a kindness; I am content
with your good will. Not only I do not wish to deprive
you of your rabbit, but I wish to do more for you than
I have yet done.’ To be brief, the good gentleman
paid the expense of Julian’s schooling, that he might
have a good education; then he employed the boy’s
father so profitably, that both were soon above want.

“Julian grew up an intelligent and industrious lad.
Every thing prospered with him; and when the parents
of other children wished to inspire their children
with gratitude, they used to tell them the story of Julian
and his little rabbit.”

[25]

QUEEN ANNE’S PHYSICIANS.

Anne, who was Queen of England from 1702 to
1714, was not a woman of strong mind, and among
other whimsies, she had that of frequently fancying
herself indisposed, when no one else could discover
that any thing ailed her. One day, a fit of this sort
seizing her, she sent in all haste for her physician, who
was then Dr. Radcliffe, founder of the Radcliffe Library,
Oxford. This functionary replied that he would “be
at St. James’ presently after.” But he not appearing
so quickly as was desired, a second and a third messenger
were sent after him in succession, whereat the
Doctor, well acquainted with the princess (Anne was
then Princess of Denmark only), asseverated, in terms
more energetic than courtly, that “her highness had
nothing but the vapors, that she was in as good a state
of health as any woman breathing, could she but give
into the belief of it.” This outrageous assertion so
greatly offended the princess, that Dr. Radcliffe was
[26]

immediately superseded, and Dr. Gibbons, his rival and
antagonist, appointed in his place.

It was not until the mortal illness of her husband,
Prince George, awoke all the anxieties of the queen,
that she consented once again to admit her offending
servant to her presence; but the prince’s physicians all
declaring that Dr. Radcliffe was the only person from
whom help could be hoped for, her majesty sent her
own coach to bring him to court, and was pleased to
tell him that “no favors or rewards should be thought
too much, could he but remove the convulsions she
was troubled with in the cure of those that were racking
the prince.” But it was too late—neither had the
Doctor yet learned to flatter. He assured her majesty
that nothing but death could release his Royal Highness
from the pangs he suffered, and gave her further
to understand, that there was nothing in the art of
physic which could keep her consort in life more than
six days from that period. The prince died accordingly,
to the deep grief of the queen and her whole court.

The exact fulfillment of Radcliffe’s predictions as to
the precise moment when his patients would cease to
exist, was a subject of frequent surprise, and gave his
contemporaries very exalted ideas of his knowledge.
The Duchess of Marlborough, applying to him to go
to Cambridge for the purpose of visiting her son, the
[27]

Marquis of Blandford, who had been improperly treated
for the small-pox by the medical men in attendance,
Radcliffe replied, with more bitterness against his blundering
compeers, than sympathy for the suffering
mother—“Madam, I shall only put you to expense for
no purpose, for you can do nothing for his lordship
now, but send down an undertaker to take care of a
funeral, for I can assure your grace that he is dead
even by this time, and that of a disease called doctor;
but for which unfortunate malady he might have recovered
well enough.” Nor were his conjectures
unfounded, as was proved by the next messenger.

The death of Queen Anne was almost immediately
followed by that of her physician, and this last is said
to have been hastened by the vexation Dr. Radcliffe
suffered from a report that he had refused to attend the
queen in her last illness. It appears that he had never
been sent for by the council and authorized attendants
of her majesty, but that a message had been sent by
Mrs. Masham two hours only before the queen’s death.
Dr. Radcliffe had received constant reports of her
majesty’s condition from his friend Dr. Mead, and
knew she was irrecoverable. “But had it not been so,
the Doctor, says our authority, could not have attended
through such an intimation.” By court etiquette it
would seem that he could not, but the common sense
[28]

view of the case would be, that the mere knowing her
majesty to be ill was sufficient to warrant his attendance.
Leaving these knotty points, however, we return to the
fact, which was, that the Doctor’s life was so heavily
embittered by threatening letters and attacks of various
kinds after the queen’s death, that he no longer durst
stir out of his house, and could have no peace within
it. This preyed upon his health, already declining, and,
“to conclude, this great and excellent man, who had
made all manner of diseases fly before him, fell a victim
to the ingratitude of a thankless world,
and the fury
of the gout
, on the 1st of November, 1714, the Feast
of All Saints: on that day being numbered with the
blessed spirits, among whom sits enthroned our late
sovereign lady, whose decease has been so injuriously
and falsely laid to his charge.”

[29]

LIZZIE CARSON.

Franklin, del. Davenport, sc.

“Let me draw your chair nearer the window, dear
mother; you will be better able to see your knitting,
while I can sketch off my pattern on the pane.”

It was a childish and cheerful voice that woke the
silence of that little cottage, where mother and daughter
had long sat absorbed in their different employments,
and it may be in melancholy thought. But Lizzie Carson,
though only fourteen, had learned the necessity of
subduing her sadness in the presence of her mother,
that she might not add one unnecessary pang to the already
burdened heart of her beloved and only parent.—My
little readers will ask what grief can they have?—if
the mother is kind, and the daughter dutiful, and
living in a cottage, which must of course be in the
country, among the birds and flowers—why should
they not be happy? Some of you, whose bright eyes
are glancing over these pages, a present among many
others perhaps from a fond father, can scarcely understand
the many trials of the poverty-stricken and fatherless
[30]

child. The constant toiling for mere sustenance—the
anxious fear that illness may put a stop to their
labors, and grim want stare them yet more steadily in
the face—these and a thousand other ills, the pampered
child of wealth can never know. Oh, if I could by any
effort of my pen induce some of you, dear children, to

think
of these things—if I could persuade you how
much happier you would feel in giving from your little
stores, than in hoarding up all you receive, thereby engendering
a selfish disposition—if, I say, I could induce
you to be generous to the poor, I should think my time
well spent in writing you this little story.

The mother of Lizzie Carson having received a
good education from her parents, all they had to give,
accepted the situation of teacher in a little village
school, which she left to become the wife of John Carson,
a small farmer in the neighborhood. Upright and
honest, he had yet too little energy, owing to ill health,
to succeed in the world, and year after year saw them
sliding back instead of becoming more independent.

At last, when almost every thing had been sold to
pay the rent, distress and anxiety did their work upon
the enfeebled frame of the husband and father, and his
plain deal coffin was among the last articles borne from
the now desolate cottage.

NEW-YORK

D. APPLETON & CO. 200 BROADWAY.

Lizzie was at this time in her twelfth year, and accustomed
[31]

as she had been from infancy to habits of
self-denial, her manners were gentle and serious beyond
her years. Deeply grieved at the death of her kind father,
she yet strove hard to win back her mother to
some degree of cheerfulness; and consulted with her
upon their future means of support. It was at last
decided that they should rent a room in a cottage not
many miles distant from their former residence, where
the mother hoped, by means of her needle, to keep
themselves from want. But they were to be yet further
tried in affliction, for Mrs. Carson, after obtaining work,
was taken suddenly ill, and though able in a few weeks
to get about the house, the rheumatism had settled in
her hands, utterly preventing the use of her needle.
Now was she to reap the reward of the religious instruction
so carefully bestowed upon her daughter, now
was “the bread cast upon the waters” returning “after
many days,” for Lizzie’s noble spirit rose to meet their
stem necessities.

“I am young, dear mother, but I am strong, and with
God’s blessing upon my endeavors, will yet be able to
support you. If I could obtain some paper and pencils,
I think I could draw patterns for embroidery, and the
storekeeper at the next town tells me they are quite in
demand.”

Mrs. Carson drew her daughter to her bosom, inwardly
[32]

blessing her; and promised she should have the
materials, if they could borrow the requisite pence from
their neighbor. This was obtained, and Lizzie soon
completed a number of patterns, which she carried to
the neighboring town, a distance of three miles. Here
she was doomed to a disappointment, for owing to the
number of patterns in the store, the woman, though
kind-hearted and much interested in the appearance of
the little girl, could not afford to give her so large a
sum as she had first promised. Bearing up with what
spirits she might, Lizzie turned her steps homeward,
after purchasing some few necessaries for her mother.
But the way seemed very long, and her little feet ached
with traveling on the stones, so that it was with a
heavy heart that she greeted her mother on her return.
Still Lizzie Carson persevered, though her mother’s
increased debility made severe inroads in her little
earnings; and the evening on which we introduce
them to our readers there was not a penny in the
house, and they were beside in debt to a neighbor. Had
they not cause for sad thoughts?

“I think, mother,” said Lizzie, after she had finished
her drawing, “I will take this to the store to-night,
and then I can get you some mixture. It distresses
me so to hear you coughing when you should be sleeping.”

[33]

“Is it not too far? I am afraid it will be dark before
you get back—beside there are some heavy clouds
in the west.”

“Oh, I do not feel the least fear, and you know,
mother, there is nothing in the house to eat, and no
money to buy with, unless I sell my patterns to-night.”

The widow bowed her head upon her clasped hands,
and remained silent a few moments,—when she raised
it, there was a holy calm upon her face as she replied,
“God tempers the wind to the shorn lamb; our prospects
look very dark now, my daughter, and we have
no earthly friend to turn to, but always remember, my
beloved child, when I am no longer here to counsel
you, that ‘God will never forsake those who trust in
Him.’”

Pondering upon her mother’s words, the little girl set
out upon her errand; but after walking some distance,
the clouds, which had been long lowering, broke into a
storm—the vivid lightning blinding her eyes so that she
was obliged to cover them with her hands. Lizzie
stopped and looked around her, in hopes of seeing a place
of shelter, but though she could discern a farmhouse,
it was at too great a distance to be reached in such a
pelting rain. The scene was indeed a fearful one for
that lonely child to gaze upon—the trees bending and
[34]

creaking with the mighty wind, the forked lightning
wreathing around and above her, while the crouching
forms of the frightened cattle added terror to the picture.

“God will never forsake those who trust in him,”
murmured the trembling child, as she sunk on her
knees beneath the shelter of a large elm. At that instant
came a flash so vivid that the whole heavens
seemed in a blaze, and the crashing thunder deafened
her for the instant, then rolled echoing away among
the distant hills. Stunned and terrified, Lizzie remained
for some moments on her knees, her face
buried in her lap; and when she gazed once more
around her, her heart had well nigh stopped its beatings.
Within a few feet of where she had been kneeling, a
noble oak was riven by the storm, and a nest of little
birds lay dead among its branches—beside a fence at a
little distance was the stiffening body of a fine horse—and
still further to the right, flames were issuing from
the barn belonging to the farmhouse she had seen.
All, all around breathed the desolation of the tempest,
save that little child, who, with upraised hands and
streaming eyes, again repeated, “God will never forsake
those who trust in him.”

The storm had done its worst—that last peal had
broken up its fury, and the sun was already struggling
[35]

through the parting clouds, as Lizzie Carson continued
her memorable walk. By the time she reached the
store, all traces of it had disappeared, and her wet dress
was almost dried. A carriage was drawn up before the
house, and a richly-dressed lady was standing at the
counter, while a benevolent-looking gentleman, apparently
her father, leaned upon his cane in the doorway.
The storekeeper turned to Lizzie with a smile,
remarking, however, “I hope you have not brought me
any more patterns; my stock is so large, and the demand
for them decreasing.”

“Patterns for embroidery—I should like to look at
some,” said the lady, turning again to the counter.

“Will you please to look at mine, dear madam,” said
Lizzie earnestly, catching hold of her dress and reaching
up one, which the lady took to examine. “Indeed
it will be a charity to buy of me, I have walked so
far through the storm, and my poor mother has no
bread.”

“Walked through this storm! why child, were you
not afraid?”

“My mother told me God would protect me, and he
did,” replied Lizzie, raising her pure innocent eyes to
the lady’s face.

“Tell me of your mother, sweet child; she deserves
assistance for instilling such sentiments in her child.”

[36]

We must not make our story too long, suffice it that
Lizzie and her mother found kind and substantial friends
in these strangers, through the piety, industry, and filial
obedience of this little girl.

M. G. W⸺.

[37]

CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.

NEW-YORK

D. APPLETON & CO. 200 BROADWAY.

It is impossible to view the cheerfulness and happiness
of animals and birds without pleasure; the latter,
especially, appear to enjoy themselves during the fine
weather, in spring and summer, with a degree of hilarity
which might be almost envied. It is astonishing
how much man might do to lessen the misery of those
creatures which are either given to him for food or use
or for adding to his pleasure, if he were so disposed.
Instead of which he often exercises a degree of wanton
tyranny and cruelty over them, which cannot be too
much deprecated, and for which no doubt he will be
one day held accountable. Animals are so capable of
showing gratitude and affection to those who have been
kind to them, that I never see them subjected to ill-treatment
without feeling the utmost abhorrence of
those who are inflicting it. I know many persons
who, like myself, take a pleasure in seeing all the animals
about them appear happy and contented.

Cows will show their pleasure at seeing those who
[38]

have been kind to them, by moving their ears gently,
and putting out their wet noses. My old horse rests
his head on the gate with great complacency when he
sees me coming, expecting to receive an apple or a
piece of bread: I should even be sorry to see my
poultry and pigs get out of my way with any symptoms
of fear.

Let us take notice of the great variety of creatures
which are made for our use; some for labor, some for
food, some for clothing, some for pleasure. At the
same time let us remember, that our right in these
creatures is not absolute; we hold them from God, and
he can deprive us of them whenever he sees fit, and
whenever we abuse them:—and therefore the Spirit of
God has given us this rule: “The merciful man is
merciful to his beast.” And whoever abuses any of
God’s creatures, or tortures them, or destroys such as
are neither hurtful when they are alive, nor of use
when they are killed, will have more to answer for
than many usually think.

I hope none of you, after reading what I have written
above will kill cats, or stone frogs or toads, as many
naughty boys do; or rob birds of their nests and little
ones, as you see those children in the picture are doing.
No matter how much you may like to have the
young birds, you should not touch them. Just think
[39]

how your parents would feel if some giant, if there
were such people, should come and carry you off and
shut you up in a cage. Your parents do not love you
any more than the birds do their little ones; then remember
how they feel when you rob them.

[40]

DECEPTION PUNISHED.

There was an old woman who lived in the country,
and who had two daughters, the eldest of whom was
fourteen years old, and the youngest twelve. Their
mother was often obliged to go to market to sell the
produce of her small farm, and to leave her baby to the
care of Anna, her eldest daughter. Anna was old
enough to take care of the child, if she had liked the
trouble, but that was not the case. As soon as her
mother had gone, she placed the little creature in the
cradle, and told Mary to sit by it for a minute or two,
and she would return directly; but she seldom came
back, till she heard old Dobbin trotting down the lane,
and then she ran in, and, if her sister had the baby on
her lap, snatched it up in her arms, so that her mother
might think she had not left it.

Little Mary never told tales of her sister, though her
mother was sometimes angry that she had not finished
her task of knitting; and she could not help it, for the
baby often cried, and would not stay in the cradle, and
[41]

Mary was obliged to hold it on her lap all the time her
mother was away.

One morning, the good woman was making ready to
go to market, and as she had a great deal to do, she
said that she should not return so soon as usual. So
she put some food for the baby by the fire, to keep it
warm, and told Anna to be careful to feed it if it cried,
and to sing it to sleep. But Anna had something to do
that she liked better. So away she went, and Mary
hardly knew what to do; for the baby did nothing but
cry. It was crying when the naughty girl put it into
the cradle, and left it, but she did not trouble her head
about the matter.

Poor Mary warmed the food, and then took the child
upon her lap, and fed it as well as she was able, and as
she had seen her mother do. At last it became quiet,
and Mary began to sing lullaby with such a sweet little
voice, that it fell fast asleep.

I do not think you will be sorry to hear that Anna’s
naughtiness was now discovered. Her mother had forgotten
something which she was to have taken with
her; so instead of staying longer than usual, she came
back half an hour sooner. She was much surprised
to find Mary alone with the baby. Anna was not to be
found, though she called and inquired for her all round
the house; but she soon heard from her neighbors that
[42]

this was the way she always did. So her mother, as
she was of no use to her, sent her to a farmer’s house,
where she could not play any of her tricks, but was
made to work very hard; and Mary, as she grew older,
became every year more useful, and lived very happy
with her mother and the little baby.

[43]

BROTHERS AND SISTERS.

NEW-YORK

D. APPLETON & CO. 200 BROADWAY.

A gentleman of Marseilles, named Remonsat, shortly
before his death, desired that his numerous family might
be assembled about his bed. As he was now an old
man, he had children who had been long married and
who now had children of their own. There were sons
and daughters who were married, and who had two
daughters, and one son about nine years old, who was
so much of a cripple as to be obliged to walk with a
crutch. The old gentleman acknowledged the delight
which his children had afforded him by their affection
and attachment, and especially for the tender love which
they bore to one another. “But,” continued he, “I
have a secret to disclose, which will remove one of you
from this circle. So long as I had any hopes of living
I kept it from you, but I dare not violate your rights
in the division of the property which I leave you. One
of you is only an adopted child—the child of the nurse
at whose breast my own child died. Shall I name that
[44]

child?” “No, no,” said they with one accord, “let us
all continue to be brothers and sisters.”

What a noble and beautiful example of disinterestedness!
How often do we sigh for opportunities of doing
good, whilst we neglect the openings of Providence in
little things, which would frequently lead to the accomplishment
of most important usefulness! Dr. Johnson
used to say, “He who waits to do a great deal of good
at once, will never do any.” How many of my readers
do you think would have acted towards their brothers
and sisters in the same way?

It is related by St. Jerome, that “the blessed apostle
John, living at Ephesus to extreme old age, was with
difficulty carried to church in the arms of his disciples,
and being unable to make a long discourse, every time
they assembled, was wont to say nothing but this:
‘Little children, love one another.’ At length, the
disciples and brethren who attended, tired of hearing
so often the same thing, said, ‘Sir, why do you always
say this?’ Who then made this answer, worthy of
himself: ‘Because it is the Lord’s command; and if
that alone be done, it is sufficient.’”

[45]

THE GERALDINES.

A NARRATIVE OF PERSECUTION BY HENRY THE EIGHTH.

Among the many acts of severity practised against
his nobles by Henry VIII, few are more remarkable
than the terrible persecution suffered by Fitzgerald,
Earl of Kildare, and his unhappy family. This nobleman,
whose second wife, Lady Elizabeth Grey, was a
daughter of the Marquis of Dorset, and first cousin to
the king, was for some time favored at court, and had
been made Lord Deputy of Ireland; but the country
being much disturbed, he was summoned to answer for
this before the king in council, and proceeded to London,
leaving his eldest son to administer the Irish affairs
in his absence.

But on reaching the court, Fitzgerald was committed
to the Tower; and his son, exasperated by a false report
of his father’s being beheaded, broke into open rebellion.
Succeeding for a short time, but afterwards reduced to
difficulty, Thomas Fitzgerald received a promise of
[46]

pardon; and confiding in this, he surrendered himself
to Lord Leonard Grey, brother of his step-mother, the
Countess of Kildare. His five uncles, who had taken
part with him in the rebellion, also submitted, and the
whole six were conveyed to London; but in spite of
the remonstrances of Lord Leonard Grey, who declared
his honor pledged for their safety, they were all hanged
at Tyburn.

The Earl, worn down by these heavy sorrows, died
in the Tower; an attainder was issued against him
(after his death), and his lands and goods declared
forfeited to the crown. Not content with this cruel
injustice, the king sought by all means to get into his
power the young heir of this unhappy house, Gerald
Fitzgerald, then not more than twelve years old;
but his evil designs were frustrated by the zeal and
affection of the martyred earl’s foster-brother, a priest
named Leverous, to whom the boy had been confided
for education. When this good man received notice
that the brother and uncles of his ward had been sent
to England, he became fearful for the young Gerald’s
safety; the child was then lying ill of the small-pox, but
intrusting the care of his nursling to no arm less zealous
than his own, he wrapped him up warmly, and as
carefully as he could, and carried him by night to the
house of his sister, where he was nursed in concealment
[47]

till quite recovered. But, justly judging that the
child would not be safe with any one known to be connected,
however humbly, with his own family, the good
priest removed him successively into the territories of
two or three different Irish chieftains, by whom he was
sheltered for nearly twelve months; after this he contrived
to place the boy in the protection of his aunt, the
Lady Eleanor, widow of a chieftain named Macarty
Reagh. Now this lady had been long sought in marriage
by O’Donnel, lord of Tyrconnel, whom she had
hitherto refused; but hoping to secure an efficient protector
for her nephew, she now consented to an immediate
marriage, and taking Gerald with her to her
new home in Donegal, she hoped he would here remain
in safety.

The devoted Leverous had refused to leave his
charge even in care so seemingly unexceptionable as
this; and the king, having ordered a large reward to be
offered for the boy, O’Donnel was soon discovered by
this watchful guardian to be meditating the baseness of
delivering the orphan into Henry’s hands. Seeking
the Lady Eleanor, Leverous unfolded this intended villany,
and causing Gerald to assume a sufficient disguise,
his aunt gave him what money she could gather
in haste, and shipped him at once with his tutor and
another old servant of his father’s, in a vessel bound to
[48]

St. Malo, in Brittany. The safety of the boy thus
secured, she next sought her husband, and bidding him
remember that her interest in this child had been the
sole cause of her marriage with him, she declared that
all future intercourse with a man who had so basely
broken his promise, and that for so mercenary a motive,
was impossible, and gathering her possessions together,
she departed to her own country. Gerald meanwhile
had been well received by the King of France; but
Sir John Wallop, the English ambassador, having demanded
him in the name of King Henry, the French
king took time to consider; and Leverous, fearing the
result, again bore his charge from the threatening danger,
and took refuge with him in Flanders, in the house
of a cottager, whose daughter waited upon Gerald
with the utmost kindness. They had not been long
here before it was perceived that their every step was
dogged by an Irish servant of Sir John Wallop. The
governor of Valenciennes, befriending the orphan,
threw this man into prison; but he was liberated by
the generous intercession of the youth whom he had
sought to betray, and Gerald reached the Emperor’s
court at Brussels without farther molestation.

He was here again demanded by the English ambassador,
but the Emperor excused himself on the plea
that Gerald’s youth sufficiently attested his innocence,
[49]

and sent him privately to the Bishop of Liege, with a
pension of one hundred crowns a month. Here he remained
in comfort and safety for six months, when
Cardinal Pole, his mother’s kinsman, invited him into
Italy, and, allowing him an annuity, placed him first
with the Bishop of Verona, and afterwards with the
Duke of Mantua; but would not admit him to his own
presence until he had first acquired the Italian language,
an extraordinary condition, the Cardinal’s English
parentage considered.

This accomplished, however, the Cardinal summoned
his young kinsman to Rome, and had him instructed,
under his own eye, in all the accomplishments then required
to constitute the finished gentleman. At the
age of nineteen, his generous patron permitted him to
choose between continuing his studies or traveling for
adventures, as was then the custom. Gerald chose
the latter, and falling in with some knights of Rhodes,
he joined them in the fierce wars they were then
waging against “the Turks and miscreants.”

Returning to Rome laden with rich booty, “proud
was the Cardinal to hear of his exploits,” and proud
also we may be sure was another priest; for the faithful
Leverous still clung to the fortunes of the child he
had saved. Soon after this “fighting with Turks and
miscreants,” the Cardinal having increased the pension
[50]

of Gerald to £300 a year (a very large income in those
days), permitted him to enter the service of Cosmo,
Duke of Florence, with whom he remained three years
as master of the horse; a very honorable appointment.

His exile at length terminated by the death of Henry.
Gerald Fitzgerald proceeded to London, still accompanied
by his attached Leverous. Appearing at King
Edward’s court, he saw the daughter of Sir Anthony
Brown at a ball, and afterwards marrying this lady, her
family procured the restitution of a part of his estates
from the king, who also knighted him. Under Mary
he was restored to all the titles and honors of his house,
all which, and the prosperity of his middle life, was witnessed
by the happy Leverous, who died at a good old
age under the roof of his grateful pupil, by whom he
was ever honored as a father. The Earl himself lived
till far into the reign of Elizabeth, closing his life
peacefully in the year 1585.

[51]

FAITHFUL FIDO.

“What shall I do,” said a very little dog one day to
his mother, “to show my gratitude to our good master?
I cannot draw, or carry burthens for him like the
horse; nor give him milk like the cow; nor lend him
my covering for his clothing, like the sheep; nor produce
him eggs like the poultry; nor catch rats and
mice as well as the cat.

“I cannot divert him with singing like the linnets
and canaries; nor can I defend him against robbers
like the great dog Towzer. I should not be fit to be
eaten, even if I were dead, as the hogs are. I am a
poor insignificant creature, not worth the cost of keeping;
I don’t see that I can do a single thing to entitle
me to my master’s regard.” So saying the poor little
dog hung down his head.

“My dear child,” replied his mother, “though your
abilities are but small, your good will entitles you to
regard. Love your master dearly, and show him that
you love him, and you will not fail to please him.”

[52]

The little dog was comforted, and the next time he
saw his master, ran to him, licked his feet, gamboled
before him, and every now and then stopped, wagging
his tail, and looking at him in the most affectionate
manner. The master observed him.

“Ha! little Fido,” said he, “you are an honest,
good-natured little fellow!”—and stooped down to pat
his head. Poor Fido was ready to go out of his wits
with joy.

Fido was now his master’s companion in his walks,
playing and skipping round him, and amusing him by a
thousand sportive tricks. He took care not to be troublesome
by leaping on him with dirty paws, nor would
he follow him into the parlor unless invited. He also
attempted to make himself useful by a number of little
services. He would drive away the sparrows, as they
were stealing the chickens’ meat; and would run and
bark with the utmost fury at the strange pigs, and
other animals, which offered to come into the yard.

He kept the poultry and pigs from straying, and particularly
from doing mischief in the garden. If his
master pulled off his coat in the field to help his work-men,
Fido always sat by it, and would not suffer either
man or beast to touch it; for this faithful care of his
master’s property, he was esteemed very much.

He was soon able to render a more important service.
[53]

One hot day after dinner, his master was sleeping
in a summer house, with Fido by his side; the
building was old, and the watchful dog perceived the
walls shake, and the pieces of mortar fall from the
ceiling.

He saw the danger, and began barking, to awake his
master; this was not sufficient, so he jumped up and
bit his finger. The master upon this started up, and
had just time to get out of the door, before the whole
building fell.

Fido, who was behind, got hurt by some rubbish
which fell upon him; on which his master had him
taken care of, with the utmost tenderness, and ever
after acknowledged the little animal as the preserver of
his life. Thus his love and fidelity had their reward.

[54]

GENEROSITY REWARDED.

Mrs. Clifford being particularly satisfied with the
attention that her three children, Alfred, Robert, and
Helen, had for some time past paid to their lessons, and
to the instructions of their masters, told them that she
would treat them with a charming walk in the wood, on
the opposite side of the river; and that if they would
carry some bread or biscuit with them, she thought
they would have no difficulty in finding a house where
they might procure some milk. So instead of returning
home to drink tea, she would spend the whole
afternoon and evening in rambling about with them.

This was charming news for the young folks, who
took care not to give her the trouble of waiting for
them, for they were all three ready at least half an
hour before the time she had appointed for their departure.
The moment Mrs. Clifford joined them in the
hall, away they all went, with joyful hearts and cheerful
faces, through the field and down the long lane,
which led to the ferry.

[55]

“This is very pleasant, mother,” said Alfred: “I
think I should never be tired of walking in the fields
and woods; yet, I must own, I do long for winter, that
we may purchase the magic lantern we are to have.
I think, with the money grandpapa has given each of
us, and what we had before in our purses, we shall be
able to have a very large one.”

“O dear!” exclaimed Helen, “how delightful it will
be to see it as often as we please, and to show it to our
friends; and, mother, do you know that Robert is to be
the person to show it; for, he says, he can talk just like
the man who came to our house last year?”

“So I can,” answered Robert, “and I wish it were
bought, that you might hear what a long story I shall
tell you about the sun and the moon; and the King of
Prussia and his huzzars; and the cat and the cook!
I would rather have a magic lantern, than any thing in
the whole world!”

Chatting in this manner, and amusing themselves by
looking at different objects as they passed along, they
found themselves at the ferry before they expected it.
The boat being just ready to put off, they stepped into
it, and seated themselves with several others, who were
going over to the other side of the river.

Their attention was very soon drawn to a poor woman,
who, with an infant on her knee, and a little boy
[56]

and girl by her side, whom she frequently kissed and
pressed to her bosom, wept as if her heart would break.
As soon as they landed, Mrs. Clifford, stopping the woman,
kindly inquired into the cause of her distress;
and was informed by her, that she had lately lost her
husband, who having been long in a state of ill health
and unable to work, had left her incumbered with several
debts, which she had not the means of paying; and
that though she labored very hard, and had discharged
some of the small debts, a hard-hearted man, to whom
she owed six dollars, declaring he would not wait a day
longer, had that morning seized upon her furniture,
and all her little property. He was determined, he
said, to have his money before six o’clock, or to turn
her and her children out to sleep in the high road, or
where they thought fit.

She had been, she told Mrs. Clifford, to an uncle of
her husband who lived at the market town, begging
him to take pity upon her and her innocent children;
“but madam,” added she, “he was deaf to my entreaties,
and turned me from his door; and I am now
going home to see all my things taken from me; and
what will become of us this night, God alone can
tell!”

Mrs. Clifford was extremely affected by this melancholy
tale, and walked with the poor woman to her
[57]

cottage, where they really found two ill-looking men
taking down the bed, and packing up the furniture.
The woman began to wring her hands and cry bitterly;
and the children, though they did not understand what
the men were going to do, clung to their mother and
would not move from her side.

Alfred, Robert, and Helen, were however old enough
to understand perfectly well the distress of the poor
woman, and the misery and wretchedness to which she
and her helpless children were exposed; and fortunately
for her, their tender and compassionate hearts
immediately prompted them to endeavor to relieve her.
The pleasure they had promised themselves in purchasing
a magic lantern, and in being in possession of
such an amusement for the long evenings of the approaching
winter, appeared to them very trifling, in
comparison to the delight of snatching this poor family
out of the hands of the unfeeling people they had to
deal with; and leading their mamma into the little garden,
they earnestly entreated her to take the three dollars
their grandpapa had given them, as well as the contents
of their purses, and employ the whole to relieve
the poor woman; and farther, they begged her, in the
most pressing manner, to make up the deficiency.

Mrs. Clifford was delighted with the idea, expressing
the greatest satisfaction at the resolution they had taken.
[58]

She assured them that she would make up the sum
with the greatest pleasure, and that the proof they now
gave of their feeling and humanity made them dearer
to her than ever; adding, that she was certain twenty-four
hours would not pass before they were rewarded
for their goodness.

The men were immediately stopped, the debt was
discharged, and the furniture replaced in proper order.
The poor woman knew not how to express her joy and
gratitude. She scarcely knew what she was doing, but,
at length recollecting herself, she entreated Mrs. Clifford
and her children to be seated, and accept of such
refreshment as she had to offer them. Her little table
was soon covered with a cloth as white as snow; and
fresh milk, eggs, butter, and a nice brown loaf were
set before them, of which they partook with great satisfaction.

They did not quit this little family till a late hour,
and could talk of nothing on their way home but the
pleasure they felt in the reflection of having left them
so happy; of how they had been delighted, when they
saw the two hard-hearted men walk out of the cottage,
and how differently the poor woman and her children
would pass the night, to what they might have expected.
Alfred said, the good action they had done
that afternoon, would be the pleasantest thing they
[59]

could have to talk of in the winter evenings; and Robert
was of opinion, that a visit now and then to the
cottage would afford prettier stories for him to repeat,
than any thing he could tell of the King of Prussia and
his hussars. As for Helen, she declared that her heart
was so light, and she felt herself so happy and joyful,
that she could almost jump over the moon.

They retired to rest in this pleasant disposition; and
they told their mamma, the next morning, that they had
never been so happy in their lives; that they went to
bed, thinking on the good they had done, and, after
thanking God, who had given them the means of doing
it, they had immediately fallen into a sweet sleep; that
the moment they awoke, they had found themselves in
the same happy humor, pleased with themselves, and
with every body they saw. They were very well convinced
that the magic lantern could never have procured
them one quarter of the pleasure which they
now felt, and which would be renewed every time they
visited the poor woman at the cottage, and whenever
they recollected her story.

“I told you, my children,” said Mrs Clifford, “that
four-and-twenty hours would not pass before you would
be rewarded; and you must now, I am certain, be well
convinced, that the heart-felt pleasure arising from the
reflection upon such an act of kindness and benevolence
[60]

to a fellow-creature in distress, is the greatest
and most solid reward that could possibly have been
bestowed on you; far superior to, and more lasting
than any satisfaction you could have procured by laying
out your money in any other way.”

[61]

DANGER OF COQUETRY.

It is no less strange than true, that, however intimate
friends of the same sex may be, there is ever a
disposition to assume a certain air, as it were, of patronage
on one or the other part; and without any serious
intention of committing malicious injury, great mischief
may ensue, from the foolish belief of one that he or
she could (if they would) alter the fate of the other in
peace or war, love or hate, business or idleness.

Christina Smith had, from her earliest youth, entertained
a warm affection for her old playmate and schoolmate,
Katharine Wing. Both were “lovely in their
lives,” though very little resemblant in their separate
attractions. Christina was slender, moderately tall,
with regular features, but with a pallor of complexion,
that, while it indicated great delicacy and sensibility, intimated
also to the beholder of her charms, that she
held them with but a slight tenure. Katharine, on the
contrary, was ruddy-cheeked, plump, and looked altogether
like one that could laugh the world to scorn—laugh
[62]

at every body and every thing, and being possessed
of excellent health, ought to have an imperturbable
good temper. All this she, in reality, possessed,
but in addition—as Nature has ordained that perfection
shall never centre in an individual—she had a spirit of
coquetry—innocent coquetry she imagined it to be—which
cast a shadow over her otherwise fair character
and accomplishments.

Christina was, as every young lady of eighteen imagines
herself to be, in love and beloved. Alas! that
time should tell us how cruelly deceived and deceiving
we are! Her lover was a young Irishman, “ardent as
the sun”—importunate with billet-doux, anxious for reunions—waiting
with eager impatience for the happy
time when, his diploma and his majority obtained, he
might offer himself, body and soul, to his true love, who
equally doted on him.

As a matter of course, Katharine was well advised
of all this most momentous history—gave her opinion
on every separate step of its progress—was understood
to be the confidante of her friend as it advanced, and
the bridesmaid when completed. Who would not have
anticipated a hearty co-operation from the playmate of
infancy, the companion of youth? Alas! the wild
ambition of patronage is stronger than friendship, the
spirit of coquetry is superior to love!

[63]

“The course of true love never does run smooth.”

So sayeth Shakspeare, and so have all found it who
have indulged in the seducing, uncertain passion. A
slight expostulation with the young man as to his habits,
which were somewhat irregular—as the habits of students
in this and in most countries generally are—produced
a lovers’ quarrel, and they parted with strong
protestations
of the lips
that they should meet no more.
No sooner had separation taken place, than cool reflection
came to both. Each most bitterly regretted what had
been said in haste, but neither was willing to be the first
to say
peccavi
. In this emergency Christina bethought
her to call on her dear friend, consult her, and derive
what consolation she could from her advice and good
wishes.

Accustomed to enter unhesitatingly into the house in
which Katharine lived with her aunt, she passed up
stairs to her boudoir without alarming any of the inmates
or attendants, and sat down waiting for her approach.
Half an hour had elapsed, when her attention
was arrested by the noise of voices in earnest conversation
on the stairs. Satisfied that one party was her
quondam lover, she hastily concealed herself behind the
curtain which veiled the balcony, and she had no sooner
done so than she beheld her dear friend Kate and her
[64]

beloved John enter. Entertaining a sincere esteem for,
and having unlimited confidence in, her old companion,
she at first believed that, having heard of the dispute
between them, she had sent for her lover, and would
eventually do so for herself, that she might interpose
her kind offices between them. But what was her
horror and dismay when she distinctly heard words of
love on the one hand and of encouragement on the
other, interchanged between them! Grieved to the
heart, smitten as a “bruised reed” did she remain—motionless,
though not tearless, behind that curtain—till
after having become the involuntary witness of many
endearments, sweet to the false-hearted, but bitter to
her, her former lover took his leave.

Pale as death, yet calm and steady in her gait, did
Christina emerge from behind the friendly shade, and
appear before the astonished gaze of her whom she had
always called
friend
. One short moment they stood
with their eyes fixed on each other—the next, Katharine,
stung by remorse, and bowed down by shame, was
at the feet of her whom she had so cruelly deceived.
“Forgive me, oh forgive me!” she most piteously exclaimed,
“indeed I meant no harm by what I said to
him and allowed him to protest to me—I merely meant
to show you that I could wean the affections of any
young man from yourself or any other, without the
[65]

slightest intention of appropriating them to myself. I
really believe that he yet sincerely loves you—allow
me to be the happy instrument to bring about such a
blessed result.”

“Never, no—no—never!” replied Christina. “You
I can forgive—I thank God for it!—but I can never
forget. How could I ever wed with one who had, by
reason of a slight quarrel, declared his love to another,
with vows and endearments, though unwittingly to
him, in my very presence? It may not, cannot be—farewell,
dear Kate! May you and he be happy! I
pray God to bless you both—I bear to neither of you
any ill-will—farewell!”

Crushed to the dust, deeply, though too late, repentant,
Katharine long remained, till roused by the re-entrance
of him for whom (in the thoughtless, but dangerous
spirit of coquetry) she had sacrificed her dearest friend.
Mutual criminations and recriminations took place, and
they parted with a hearty dislike for each other.

Christina, in the following year, engaged another of
her friends to be her bridesmaid, and now, with a young
Kentuckian husband, resides in the far west, blessed
with a cheerful home, and with “two young babes,”
as she expressed herself in a letter to a female friend
of ours, “so exquisitely beautiful, that all Kentucky
cannot show the like—little angels in fact.”

[66]

Katharine still lives, changeable, discontented, coquettish,
angry with herself, and at times repentant, yet
without any real change. She is still beautiful, though
an air of chagrin and peevishness has somewhat marred
the expression of her formerly laughing visage. There
is no apparent hope for her.

He, the fickle one, whom Christina so luckily avoided
marrying, is now a worthless drunkard, degraded in his
own opinion and in the opinion of others—utterly irreclaimable.

W. V. H.

[67]

PUSSY-HOOD.

Pussy with the large gray eyes,

In whose orb, a cunning lies

Deep as the blue in yonder skies;

Thou whose back outshines the sun,

Sable hairs all smoothed in one,

As if by loving hands ’twere done.

Wetting thy reluctant feet,

To gain a dainty piece of meat,

Knowing that stolen food is sweet.

Gazing with ensnaring glance,

On the pigeon’s swift advance,

Which by thy look thou dost entrance.

Oh, why pause with indecision,

When the young bird before thy vision

Beckons thee on to meals Elysian?
[68]

Hearest thou sounds beneath the floor?

Say, knowest thou those sounds of yore,

And mouse than pigeon lovest thou more?

Oh thou cat with many hairs,

And many lives, each life has snares,

Care
[1]
and dogs come unawares.

Bear thou many a sharpen’d claw,

Often dog, with strongest paw,

From thy clutch would fain withdraw.

Oh, those claws like pins shall steal,

Making wounds that will not heal—

Alas for those their power that feel.

And oh, those claws of thine oft dart

Into the most tender part,

For a treacherous thing thou art.

P.

[1]
Care killed a cat.

[69]

HARRY AND HIS RABBITS.

Little Harry feeding his Rabbits.

NEW-YORK

D. APPLETON & CO. 200 BROADWAY.

The care with which a doe rabbit provides for its
young is very remarkable. She not only makes a nest
of the softest hay, from which she carefully munches
out all the harder portions, but she actually strips the
fur or down off her own breast, to spread over the hay.
At first she covers up her young ones with the same
materials, in order to keep them warm, uncovering
them only for the purpose of giving them suck. She
is also extremely careful in proportioning this covering
to the severity of the weather, and the tenderness or
strength of her offspring, gradually diminishing it as
they grow more robust.

If rabbits are kept and raised apart from their
mother, it is then necessary that proper attention
should be paid to them by the person who undertakes
to raise them. That is the reason why you see little
Harry feeding his rabbits. Little Harry is the only son
of a poor woman who lives in a small cottage at the
end of a lane on a large farm in this state belonging to
[70]

a wealthy and thriving farmer. Although the farmer
is very kind to Harry’s mother, allowing her to have
the use of the cottage and an acre of ground free of
rent, still the old woman has hard work to live comfortably.
Knowing the advantages to be derived from
the possession of a good education, she deprives herself
of many comforts to enable her to send her only child,
Harry, to school. Many of my little readers who peruse
this, go to excellent schools, and never imagine
that there are many who are deprived of that great advantage.
When they think of this, and the opportunities
they enjoy for improving themselves, they should
exert themselves to the utmost to do so.

Harry being anxious to learn every thing he could,
so that he might one day become a smart man, and be
able to support his mother, never spent a cent for himself,
but carried all he got to his mother. Perhaps you
may think a poor little boy like him did not get many
cents; but in this you are mistaken, for Harry was up
bright and early every morning, and would often do
little jobs for the farmers before he went to school.
Then he had rabbit houses at the end of his mother’s
cottage, where he kept a number of rabbits, which
often had young ones; these he would take to market
and sell for a good price. He raised a good many
poultry, which brought in a good deal of money for the
[71]

eggs and chickens. With these and other little matters
that he raised on their acre of ground, he was enabled
to collect enough money to pay for his schooling, and
give his mother many comforts.

I hope all my readers will join with me in wishing
Harry’s efforts may be successful, and that they
may reap that reward which industry and kindness to
parents deserve.

W. P.

[72]

THE SHIPWRECKED ON AN UNINHABITED
ISLAND.

In the year 1805, a large ship, on the voyage homeward
from the East Indies, was wrecked in a violent
storm in the South Pacific Ocean, about 500 miles
from the Cape of Good Hope. The ship went to pieces
in the night, having struck on the rocky coast of an
unknown island. When daylight appeared, 37 persons
only remained out of about 200, who had been in the
ship. These had been, for the most part, saved by
seizing hold of spars or pieces of wood when the
ship’s timbers separated. A woman and her two children
got safe to shore on a hen-coop; indeed they were
wrecked so near the shore, that the fowls in the hen-coop
were found to be little worse for having been
thrown into the sea. Part of a regiment, which had
been some time in India, was returning to England in
the ship, and some of the soldiers and their wives and
children were among those who were saved. The
ship’s cook and the carpenter were also saved, and some
[73]

of the common sailors, but none of the officers of the ship,
or those belonging to the regiment, were among the
survivors. Only one of the many passengers had the
good fortune to get to shore; and he had saved his
life by being a strong swimmer. His name and station
were unknown to the crew, but he had gained among
them, during the voyage, the name of
the Philosopher
.

The first day which this small remainder of the
ship’s crew passed on the island, on which Providence
had thrown them, was melancholy enough. Most of
them sat on the rocks or on the ground, and kept
looking on the sea from which they had so lately
escaped. Some were bewailing the loss of their relatives,
some that of their money, and others that of their
ship’s provisions; they were cold, and wet, and comfortless,
and yet disposed to do nothing to better their
condition.

Amidst this general idleness, the Philosopher, as he
was called, was as busy as a bee. Instead of sauntering
about with a book, or gazing at the clouds, as he
had often done on board the ship, he was hurrying
along the shore in all directions, with such of the men
as he could persuade to move, and examining every
little creek and bay about the part of the island on
which they were cast away. And he was well rewarded
for his trouble, for the sea threw upon the land
[74]

all the lighter part of the cargo of the lost ship; provisions
in sufficient abundance, some boxes of clothes,
many chests of tea, some casks of flour, and large portions
of the timbers and ropes of the vessel. In a
small sandy creek, about a quarter of a mile distant
from the wreck, one of the ship’s boats was found,
upside down, and in it, preserved by being covered
down tightly with a sail, were found a compass, a
watch, and a few bottles of wine, with some biscuit,
which had probably been put in for the use of the unfortunate
persons who had ventured into the boat in
the hope of reaching the land. A few yards farther
on was found the dead body of a lady, one of the passengers
from India, and by her side, wrapped closely
and very carefully in a Scotch plaid, a male child of
about a year old, which was first supposed to be dead
also; but the Philosopher, fancying he perceived signs
of life in the little creature, hurried back with the
infant to the party who had refused to move, and gave
it in charge to the women, which soon made them
busy, for in the midst of their own misfortunes they
were all anxious that the poor little child should live.

Before the day was over, many of the dead bodies
were thrown ashore, and all were decently buried.
Many of the drowned persons had filled their pockets
with money, trinkets, and different valuables which
[75]

they possessed. The hope of sharing this booty soon
spread activity among all the other idlers, and the recovered
property was pretty equally divided among
them all; the Philosopher alone refusing to receive
any of the money or valuables, and only reserving for
his own use the compass, one of the watches, some of
the books, with the paper and other contents of his
writing-desk, which floated ashore after they had been
on the island nearly a week. The spirits of the whole
party being a little revived, they made fires, partook of
an evening meal, and retired to rest in sheltered places
under the hills, much more cheerfully than might have
been expected in their situation.

It would be curious to relate the contrivances which
the new inhabitants of the island had recourse to for
their own comfort. The island was of a crescent
shape, like most islands in the South Sea, and was five
miles across and six in length, with a large and beautiful
harbor. There was grass, and there were shrubs,
and many beautiful and delicate trees, and flocks of
wild pigeons and other birds, and many butterflies and
other insects, but no quadrupeds of any kind.

Those who have read the adventures of Robinson
Crusoe, know how much even one man might do in a
desolate island, with the help of the stores of a ship,
and with a gun and ammunition. Our shipwrecked
[76]

people had many advantages over him. Some of the
sailors had been brought up farmers’ boys, three of the
soldiers were Glasgow weavers, the carpenter and the
cook soon found plenty to do, and the women were tailors
to the whole settlement.

In six months from the time of their landing, corn
and potatoes were growing, hand-mills were working,
women were spinning and teaching their children the
same, and there were two looms nearly made by the
ship’s carpenter, under the direction of the Glasgow
weavers. Flowers were seen at the doors of several
of the huts, and some parts of the island were inclosed
with shrubs and trees. Women might be seen spinning
and teaching their children how to do the same.
Within six months more, the population of the island
was increased by the birth of four children.

Every man at first worked at every thing; and the
same man dug his ground, caught his wild-fowl, gathered
the eggs from the nests in the rocks, and repaired
his house when necessary. In short, every man was
what we call a jack-of-all-trades, and as happens commonly
in such cases, hardly any was master of one.
But when the first clothes which they had got from the
ship were almost worn out, and every man tried to
patch and mend his own, they began to think it would
be better if one or two of the party should take that
[77]

business into their own hands, and it was then given
up to the women. When the looms were set to work,
the two weavers were chiefly employed in making a
coarse kind of cloth from a sort of hemp which grew
on the island, from which, after it was steeped in water
and beaten with sticks, a strong thread could be spun.
Of this cloth, of various thicknesses, they helped the
women to make coats and gowns, boots and shoes, and
stockings. They made hats of a strong flat rush
which grew on the sand-hills near the sea. This work
took up so much of their time that the land of the two
weavers was overrun with weeds, and it was found
better for them to give up their farm to a neighbor,
who should be paid for the produce in boots, coats, and
money. The carpenter also was but a poor farmer,
and his crop failed. So he gave up farming, and
worked away at building houses, and making tables,
and chairs, and bedsteads, receiving payment in potatoes,
corn, wild-fowls, eggs, or sometimes in money.
In the course of two or three years, some were bakers
only, some poulterers, some potato merchants, and only
about half of the company were farmers; of which the
consequence was the land was better tilled, the corn
better ground and baked, the fowls better fed, eggs
more easily to be had, the potatoes better, and the huts
kept in better repair. Each man had a trade of his
[78]

own, and each knew his trade pretty well. Each man
was consequently better fed, clothed, and lodged, than
when he worked at every trade himself.

The individual whom we have mentioned as the
Philosopher, was not an idle man among all these
working people. He was schoolmaster to all the children,
who were so fond of him, that he was seldom to
be seen without the strongest of them scrambling over
the rocks or along the coast after him. He measured
out and divided the land which was each man’s portion.
He taught the rest of the men to select some of the roots
with which the island abounded; and to cultivate near
their dwellings the graceful trees which were natural
to the soil. He made curious nets, which enabled
others to catch a constant supply of fish and of birds.
He constructed clocks of wood, which were found very
useful in the different huts; and he taught some of the
bigger boys to make vessels of clay as well as bricks,
the latter of which made the foundation of the houses
better able to resist the storms that now and then swept
across the island. He also managed to make two or
three musical instruments, on one or other of which he
would occasionally play in an evening, whilst the children,
and indeed often their fathers and mothers also,
would dance on the grass after the labors of the day.
He was the only person in the island who could keep
[79]

an account of time; and he was of much use to the
farmers in advising them when to sow different seeds,
and in what soils. In short, there was no end to his
contrivances. He also found time to make a collection
of all the different plants that grew on the island, from
some of which he prepared medicines for those who
happened to be sick. He made a survey of the whole
of the island, and made drawings of it and of the little
town in which the shipwrecked people lived; cheering
them by saying they would some day look at them in
England. He persuaded every man and woman in the
island to rest from work one day in seven; on which
day he used to have them collected together, and on the
long winter evenings, to read some prayers to them, and
a chapter or two from a Bible which had come ashore
with some other books. He taught many of the men
and women to sing the hymns and ballads of their own
country; and contrived to make them so busy and so
comfortable, that many of them ceased to sigh for
home; whilst their children, too, were growing up in
the peaceful island, ignorant of all that was doing in
any other land upon the globe, except what they learnt
from the lessons and books of the good Philosopher.

[80]

HINTS ON READING.

A proper and judicious system of reading is of the
highest importance. Two things are necessary in perusing
the mental labors of others;—namely, not to read
too much, and to pay great attention to the nature of
what you do read. Many persons peruse books for the
express and avowed purpose of consuming time; and
this class of readers forms by far the majority of what
are termed the “reading public.” Others, again, read
with the laudable anxiety of being made wiser; and
when this object is not attained, the disappointment
may generally be attributed, either to the habit of reading
too much, or of paying insufficient attention to
what falls under their notice.

It is recorded of Madame De Stäel Holstein, that before
she was fifteen years of age, she had “devoured”
600 novels in three months, so that she must have
read more than six a day, upon an average. Louis
XVI, during the five months and seven days of his imprisonment
immediately preceding his death, read 157
[81]

volumes, or one a day. If this species of gluttony is
pardonable in circumstances like those of Louis, it is
less so in those of a young lady of fourteen or fifteen.
No one can have time for reflection who reads at this
rapid rate; and, whatever may be thought, these devourers
of books are guilty of abusing nature to an
extent, as much greater than those who overcharge
their stomachs, as the intellectual powers are higher
than the animal propensities. Thousands of young
persons spend their time in perpetual reading, or rather
in devouring books. It is true, the food is light; but it
occupies the mental faculties for the time in fruitless
efforts, and operates to exclude food of a better quality.

The manners of a people are not to be found in the
schools of learning, or the palaces of greatness, where
the national character is obscured or obliterated by
travel or instruction, by philosophy or vanity; nor is
public happiness to be estimated by the assemblies of
the gay, or the banquets of the rich. The great mass
of nations is neither rich nor gay: they whose aggregate
constitutes the people, are found in the streets and
villages, in the shops and farms; and from them, collectively
considered, must the measure of general prosperity
be taken.

W. P.

[82]

SCENES IN THE LIFE OF A ROACH.

WRITTEN AFTER SEVERAL INEFFECTUAL EFFORTS TO DRIVE ROACHES AWAY.

“I left my home some prey to track,

And promised my loved ones I soon would come back;

But when I returned—alack! alack!

I looked in vain for the well-known crack.”

Thus spake a poor Roach as he wandered alone,

And sad was his face, and mournful his tone;

For he thought on the home he never should see,

On Mrs. Roach and his loved family.

He remembered with grief that their larder was bare,

And young roaches he knew could not live upon air.

Ah! do you
human beings
think what you’re about

When you fill up the cracks, and the old roaches out?

And poor Mrs. Roach sat sobbing at home,

Dreading that to her sposa some evil had come,
[83]

And the poor little young ones lay tumbling about,

Grieving much for their father who stayed so long out.

“At last,” quoth the eldest, “dear mother, I’ll go

And find if I can what keeps father so”—

And he started to go as he aye went before,

But gone was the crack they had used for a door!

Alas, human beings! do you know how you sin,

When you fill up the cracks, and the young roaches in?

Oh! then there was wailing within that dark hole,

For their grief was too deep to be under control,—

Said poor Mrs. Roach, “a widow I’ll be,

And who will provide for my dear family?”

Cheer up, little group! oh grieve not so sore!

If you’ll wait but a little there is comfort in store.

In the midst of their wailing a scraping they hear,

And lo! in their midst doth their sire appear.

“Cheer up, my dear wife, and ye children small,

For see, I have eaten my way through the wall!”

MORAL.

Good people, ’tis vain for you to stop up the holes,

For we roaches have
instinct
, if we have not got souls.
[84]

Here we’ve long been at home, and here we’ll remain,

And your
phosphorus
,
[2]
your
elder
,
[2]
and
wafers
,
[2]
are vain.

You may give up your efforts, your trouble and pother,

For when driven from one place, we will go to another:

If we weary your patience, your best plan, beyond doubt,

Will be to move off
, ere we know that you’re out.

Margaret R⸺.

[2]
Various means for getting rid of roaches.

[85]

THE CARTER’S HELPMATES.

AN ANECDOTE OF KING GEORGE THE FOURTH.

The minuter details of George IV’s life are not of a
kind either to interest or edify young people, but here
is an anecdote of his boyhood that will be certain of
securing your sympathies.

The manners and appearance of George III and his
family were entirely simple and unostentatious, and the
early youth of the young princes and princesses was
but very slightly different from that of other young
people of rank throughout the kingdom. It was the
frequent habit of the king to wander about the neighborhood
of Windsor, altogether unattended, and accompanied
only by the young Prince of Wales, who was
his almost inseparable companion.

One morning they were pursuing their walk in their
usual manner, when they met a farm servant driving a
covered cart towards Windsor; they had passed him
[86]

only by a few paces, when a sudden stoppage of the
vehicle, and the outcries of the driver, caused them to
look around, and they then perceived that the cart had
got fast into a rut of the road, and the man was vainly
urging his horses to drag it out.

The prince sprang back, and with little thought of
ceremony, began applying his strength to the wheel,
his majesty watching his efforts for a moment in
silence, but instantly after stepping forward himself in
the same service. Encouraged by this unlooked for
help, the carter flogged and bawled to his horses, while
the royal shoulders heaved as heartily at the wheel;
and Hercules—moved no doubt by their ship-shape
mode of invoking his aid—gave them strength enough
to accomplish what they desired: the vehicle was extricated,
and the driver, grateful to his friends, swore
roundly that they must take a draught of ale with him,
offering at the same time a seat in front of his cart to
the next public house.

This civil offer was not accepted; the King and
Prince shook the dust of their late labor from their
plain clothing, and prepared to bid their friend adieu;
but first his majesty presented the fortunate carter with
a guinea, which the prince, holding to be no very worthy
gift, instantly amended by a couple from his own
purse. The carter, lost in astonishment, stood looking
[87]

after these surprising helpmates (first making any thing
but graceful, though very sincere acknowledgments),
and it was not until they had got fairly out of his sight
that he could bethink himself of once more getting on
with his team.

On arriving at the public house which he had destined
as the place of his rejected treat, and relating the
wondrous occurrence that had taken place, he was acquainted
with the quality of his assistants; but he
could in no way be brought to believe the fact. Above
all, he insisted that, though the prince might be the
prince, yet the king could not be the king; for, he argued,
why else did the first give him two guineas, when
the second, whom his informants would have to be the
greater, gave him only one! No, this was not “in his
philosophy,” and he was convinced that his friends
were wrong.

The story, and especially the man’s obstinacy, was
talked of till it reached the king, whom it greatly
amused. Some time after, his majesty met the same
man on the road, and thus accosted him:

“So, you think, my friend, that my present was not
a king’s present, though my son’s might do for a prince,
hey? But remember that I must be just before I am
generous; the prince has only himself to think about,
but I have many who look up to me, as your children
[88]

at home do to you, for all they want—do not forget

that
, my friend; good morning, good morning.” And
the monarch once more left John Carter to his cogitations.

[89]

THE FOLLY OF BEING VAIN.

Caroline was trifling away her time in the garden
with a little favorite spaniel, her constant companion,
when she was sent for to her music-master. But the
servant called her no less than three times, before she
thought proper to go into the house. When the lesson
was finished, and the master gone, she turned to her
mother, and asked her, in a fretful and impatient tone of
voice, how much longer she was to be plagued with
teachers—for she had had them a very long time, and
she really thought she now knew quite enough of every
thing.

“That you have had them a very long while,” answered
her mother, “I perfectly agree with you; but
that you have profited so much by their instruction, as
you seem to imagine, I am not so certain. I must,
however, acquaint you, my dear Caroline, that you will
not be
plagued
with them much longer. Your father
says he has expended such large sums upon your education
that he is quite vexed with himself for having
[90]

done so, because he finds it impossible to be at an equal
expense for your two little sisters. I should therefore
advise you, whilst he is so good as to allow you to continue
your lessons, to make the most of your time, that
it may not be said you have been learning so long to no
purpose.”

Caroline appeared quite astonished at her mother’s
manner of speaking. The vain girl assured her that
she knew every thing perfectly. She said, that if her
father wished to save the expense of masters for her
sisters,
she
would undertake to make them quite as accomplished
as she herself was.

Some time after this conversation, she accompanied
her mamma on a visit to a particular friend, who resided
in the country. As there were several gentlemen and
ladies at the same time in the house, Caroline was extremely
happy in the opportunity she thought it would
give her of surprising so large a party by her music
and other accomplishments. It was not very long before
she gave them so many samples of her vanity and
self-conceit, as rendered her quite ridiculous in their
eyes.

She was never in the least ashamed to contradict
those who were older and better instructed than herself.
She would sit down to the harp, with the utmost unconcern,
and attempt to play a sonata which she had
[91]

never seen before, though at the same time she could
not get through a little simple air, without blundering
half a dozen times.

There lived, at about the distance of a mile from Mrs.
Melvin’s house, a widow lady, with her daughter, a
charming little girl, thirteen years of age. So very
limited was the fortune of this lady, that she had never
had it in her power to be at the smallest expense on
account of her daughter’s education. Indeed, her income
was so narrow, that, without the strictest economy
in every respect, she could not have made it suffice
to procure them the necessaries of life. So she was
obliged to content herself with the little instruction she
could give to her child. She encouraged her, as much as
possible, to exert herself, and to endeavor to supply, by
attention and perseverance, the want of a more able instructor.

When Caroline heard this talked of, she concluded
immediately that Laura must be a poor little ignorant
thing, whom she would astonish by a display of her
accomplishments. The vain young lady enjoyed in
idea the wonder she would show, when she beheld her
beautiful drawings, heard her touch the keys of the
piano, and speak French and Italian as well as her own
language. This she wished to persuade herself was
the case, though she knew no more of either of these
[92]

languages than she did of all the other things of which
she was so vain and conceited.

She told Mrs. Melvin that she really pitied extremely
the situation of the poor unfortunate Laura, and wished,
whilst she was so near, that she could have an opportunity
of seeing her frequently, as she would give her
some instruction, which would be of service to her.
Mrs. Melvin was extremely disgusted with the vanity
of her friend’s daughter. But, wishing to give her a
severe mortification, which she thought would be of
more use to her than any lesson she had ever received,
she told her that she should pay Laura a visit the next
morning.

The morning was very fine, and the whole company
set forward immediately after breakfast. They were
soon in sight of a very neat but small house, which
they were informed belonged to the mother of Laura.
A little white gate opened into a garden in the front of
it. The grounds were so neat, and laid out with so
much taste, that they all stopped to admire them, for
the flowers and shrubs were tied up with the utmost
nicety, and not a weed was to be seen in any part of
the garden.

“This is Laura’s care,” said Mrs. Melvin; “her
mother cannot afford to pay a gardener, but she hires a
laborer now and then to turn up the ground, and, with
[93]

the help of their maid, Laura keeps this little flower-garden
in the order in which you see it. By inquiring
of those who understand the subject, instead of fancying
herself perfect in all things, she has gained so
much information, that she is become a complete
florist.”

They were shown into a very neat parlor, which
was ornamented with a number of drawings. “Here,”
said Mrs. Melvin, “you may again see the fruits of
Laura’s industry and perseverance. She has had no
instruction except the little her mother could give her,
but she was determined to succeed, and has done so, as
you may perceive. These drawings are executed with
as much taste and judgment as could possibly be expected
of so young a person, even if she had had the
advantage of having a master to instruct her. The
fringe on the window-curtains is entirely of her making.
The pretty border and landscape on that fire-screen are
of her cutting.”

Caroline began to fear she should not shine quite so
much as she had expected to do. When Laura came
into the room, and was desired to sit down at the piano,
she was extremely mortified at hearing her play and
sing two or three pretty little songs, so well and so
sweetly, that every one present was delighted with
her.

[94]

After they had amused themselves indoors, Laura’s
mother invited them out into the garden, where the extreme
neatness and care exhibited by Laura in its care
was the theme of universal praise. One of the ladies
of the party spoke in such extremely high terms of the
beauty of the flowers, that Laura’s mother, who was
now getting rather old and feeble, and was obliged to
walk with a cane, picked a pretty bouquet and begged
her to accept it.

Laura and her doings were so much the theme of
praise from all, that Caroline found there was little opportunity
of making the display she had expected to,
and in fact felt her real inferiority, notwithstanding the
many masters she had had, to the humble Laura, that
she did not enjoy her visit near so much as she had anticipated
to do. But her visit was of great service and
benefit to her, for ever after she tried really to make
good use of the instructions of her teachers; and it is
therefore no wonder she became a better and wiser
girl, casting aside her excessive vanity.

When my youthful readers attempt to show off, I
think it will be of great use to them if they will
remember this story of the vain little girl.

[95]

THE ORPHAN WANDERERS.

NEW-YORK

D. APPLETON & CO. 200 BROADWAY.

Gentle lady, good and happy,

Hear my simple tale, I pray;

’Tis the sad, sad truth, I tell you,

Send us not so soon away.

Once we had a home of plenty,

Once we knew a father’s care,

Once a mother’s fond affection

Breathed for us the nightly prayer.

Now we wander, lost, and lonely,

Over many a weary mile;

Gloomy night comes gathering round us,

But we find no mother’s smile.

Once there came a gloomy winter,

Trade was bad, and wages low,

Dark December rains were falling

Over heaps of melting snow.
[96]

One sad evening—never, never

Can that evening be forgot;

Something came, across our father,

Anger—grief—we knew not what.

From that time his mind seemed wandering,

And his manly look was gone;

Sometimes kind, and sometimes fretful,

Constant to one vice alone.

Constant to one guilty pleasure,

When those fatal doors were passed,

Shame was vanquished, conscience followed,

All our comforts went at last.

Long my mother bore in silence

Loss of plenty, loss of fame;

Though sometimes the gossip’s slander

Tinged her faded cheek with shame.

Little did we know that sorrow

Had such deep and deadly power,

Little dreamed her strength was failing—

Failing faster, hour by hour;
[97]

Till one awful moment told us

All the fatal truth at last;

To her restless bed she called us,

O’er my brow her fingers passed.

There were sighs, and words so broken,

Yet so fond, and full of love;

And her smiles—we ne’er forgot them,

Like an angel’s from above.

Thus she passed; and oh how lonely—

Worse than lonely we were left!

All too late, our wretched father

Seemed of every hope bereft.

Sometimes frantic, sometimes sullen,

Weeping like a fretful child,

Oftener to his haunts returning,

Lost and reckless, weak and wild.

Thus he died: we asked not whether

By the public way he fell;

Strangers brought him to our dwelling,

None the dreadful tale would tell.
[98]

Thus, kind lady, thus we wander

Over many a weary mile:

I could work—but little Martha,

Who would care for her the while?

Would your daughters, gentle lady,

Hear my little sister sing?

Small the pittance that we ask you,

Hunger is a fearful thing.

May you never know how bitter

Sorrow is, and want, and shame;

Gracious Heaven has made you happy,

May it keep you still the same!

M⸺ E⸺.

[99]

ANTICIPATIONS AND REALITIES.

“A party of pleasure! oh, mamma, let us go,” said
Rosamond. “We shall be so happy, I am sure.”

“What! because it is a party of pleasure, my dear,”
said her mother, smiling.

“Do you know,” continued Rosamond, without
listening to what her mother said—“Do you know,
mamma, that they are going in the boat, on the river;
and there are to be streamers flying, and music playing
all the time? And Mrs. Blisset, and Miss Blisset, and
the master Blissets, will be here in a few minutes.
Will you go, mamma? may Godfrey and I go with
you?”

“Yes, my dears.”

Scarcely had her mother added the word “yes,”
than Rosamond uttered a loud exclamation of joy, and
ran to tell her brother Godfrey, and returned, repeating
as she capered about the room—

“Oh! we shall be so happy! so happy!”

“Moderate your transports, my dear Rosamond,”
[100]

said her mother. “If you expect so much happiness
beforehand you may be disappointed.”

“Disappointed, mamma!—I thought people were
always happy on parties of pleasure; Miss Blisset told
me so.”

“My dear, you had better
judge for yourself
, than to
trust to what Miss Blisset tells you, without knowing
any thing of the matter yourself.”

“Mamma, if I know nothing of the matter, how
can I judge? Why should I not trust what Miss
Blisset says?”

“Wait and you will know, my dear.”

“You said, mamma, do not raise your expectations.
Is it not well to expect to be happy?—to hope to be
happy, makes me happy
now
. If I thought I should
be unhappy, it would make me unhappy now.”

“I do not wish you to think you shall be unhappy;
I wish you to have as much pleasure now as you can
have, without being made unhappy by disappointment.
I wish you to attend to your own feelings, to find out
what makes you happy, and what makes you unhappy.
You are going on a party of pleasure, I beg you to observe
whether you are happy or not; observe what
pleases and entertains you.”

Here the conversation was interrupted. A carriage
came to the door, and Rosamond exclaimed—

[101]

“Here they are—Mrs. Blisset, Miss Blisset, and her
two brothers. I see their heads in the coach; I will
run and put on my hat.”

“I assure you, mamma,” continued she, as she was
tying the string of her hat, “I will remember to tell
you whether I have been happy or not.”

Rosamond went with her mother, and Mrs. Blisset
and her children, on this party. The next morning,
when Rosamond went into her mother’s room, her
mother reminded her of her promise.

“You promised to tell, my dear, whether you were
as happy as you expected to be.”

“I did, mamma. You must know, then, I was not
happy all day yesterday; that is to say, I was not
nearly so happy as I thought I should have been. I
should have liked going in the boat, and seeing the
streamers flying, and hearing the music, and looking at
the prospect, and walking in the pretty island, and
dining out of doors under the large shady trees, if it
had not been for other things, which were so disagreeable
that they spoiled all our pleasure.”

“What were those disagreeable things?”

“Mamma, they were
little
things. Yet they were
very disagreeable. Little disputes—little quarrels between
Miss Blisset and her brothers, about every thing
that was to be done. First, when he got into the boat,
[102]

the youngest boy wanted us to sit on one side, and Miss
Blisset wanted us to sit on the other side; now, mamma,
you know we could not do both.

“But they went on disputing about this for half an
hour; and Godfrey and I were so ashamed, and so
sorry, that we could not have any pleasure in listening
to the music or looking at the prospect. You were at
the other end of the boat, mamma, and you did not see
and hear all this. Then we came to the island, and
then I thought we should be happy; but one of the
boys said, ‘Come this way, or you will see nothing.’
The other boy roared out, ‘No, they must come my
way;’ and Miss Blisset insisted on our going her
way.

“All the time we were walking, they went on disputing
about which of their ways was the best. Then
they looked so discontented and so angry with one
another. I am sure they were not happy ten minutes
together, all day long; and I said to myself, ‘Is this a
party of pleasure? how much happier Godfrey and I
are every day, even without going to this pretty island,
and without hearing this music, or seeing these fine
prospects—much happier, because we do not quarrel
with one another about every trifle.’”

“My dear,” said her mother, “I am glad you have
had an opportunity of seeing all this.”

[103]

“Mamma, instead of its being a party of pleasure, it
was a party of
pain
. Oh, mamma, I never wish to go
on another party of pleasure. I have done with parties
of pleasure for ever,” concluded Rosamond.

“You know, my dear, I warned you not to raise
your expectations too high, lest you should be disappointed.
You have found that unless people are good-tempered,
and obliging, and ready to please each other,
they make pain even of pleasure; therefore avoid quarrelsome
people as much as you can, and never imitate
them; but do not declare against
all parties of pleasure
,
and decide against them for ever because
one
happened
not to be so delightful as you had expected it to be.”

[104]

A FOX’S TALE OF HIS ADVENTURES.

TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN OF RUDOLPHI.

I was born in a retired spot, along with four brothers
and sisters. Our mother had made a nice soft bed of
moss, in a hole which she had scooped in the side of a
steep bank; and a comfortable dwelling it was. As
soon as we were weaned, our parents supplied us with
good food,—sometimes young hares, partridges, and
such dainty provisions. Occasionally we had mice,
which we did not relish quite so much; but our mother
used to say, that we must accustom ourselves to every
thing, for the time might perhaps come when we
should be glad of even a mouse to make a meal of.
We grew apace, and as the den soon became too small
for us, we tried to escape out of our dwelling. But
our parents strictly forbade this; saying, that nothing
but dangers awaited us; but that, as soon as we were
old enough, they would take us to a place of greater
security.

[105]

Alas! it happened to us as to many other children,
who will not obey their parents, but think themselves
the wiser. Early one May morning, the sun shone in
so brightly at the mouth of our hole, that we longed to
know what it was to be outside; and, as soon as our
parents had set out upon their hunting excursion, to
bring provision for us, we slipped out softly, and jumped
and tumbled about on the open sandy space in front
of our cave, enjoying ourselves much, and hastening
in as soon as we thought papa and mamma Fox would
be coming back again.

We went on in this way for a long time, without
being found out; but one day, while we were chasing
a mouse in front of the den, and tumbling head over
heels in great delight, we observed something looking
at us through the bushes, which we concluded must
be the face of a man. We hurried back into the den
immediately, terribly frightened, and were right glad
when we neither saw nor heard any more of the creature;
little guessing, that from that moment our fate
was decided. For, the very next morning, when father
and mother were gone out as usual, we heard footsteps
and voices; and, before we were aware, a savage,
crooked-legged dog entered the den, barking very loud.
Our agony was extreme. We drew back into the
farthest corner of the den, barking as loud as we could:
[106]

but this did not in the least deter our enemy; for,
encouraged by the men, he seized hold of the foremost
of us.

Despair will inspire the weakest with courage. We
flew at our black foe, and scratched him so much, that
he was obliged to draw back. Now we thought that
the danger was over; but, alas! the greatest was to
come, and from an unexpected quarter. How could
we guess that the dog was sent into the den to find if
we were still within, and where the cave ended! For
one of the hunters had laid himself down with his ear
to the ground, and listened as the dog barked; after
which they began to dig a hole, and we listened in
deadly fear to the strokes of the spade and pickaxe, as
they came nearer to us. They had soon broken through;
and, as all resistance was vain, we could do nothing
better than bury our heads deep in the sand. Then a
man stretched his arm down to us, drew one after another
by the tail, and struck each one upon the back of
his head with a club, so that he died immediately. I
was the last, whom he pulled up with a cruel shout.
He had raised his staff for the deadly blow, when a
man, passing by, cried to him, “Hold! friend, just let
me look at that little animal.” He looked in my face,
and then added, “I wish you would give me that little
Fox: I could make him useful!” “What!” replied
[107]

my murderous captor, “would you bring him up to
steal your cocks and hens? He will be true to his nature.”
“No,” said the stranger, “I will make him
useful to me in my trade.” “Well, then, take him;”
and the man held me, while the other opened a great
leathern pocket, into which I was popped; and thus he
carried me to his dwelling in the city.

“Look here,” said my new master to his wife, jokingly,
“what a pretty, sharp-nosed little dog I have
met with!” as he drew me out of his pocket. “He
shall learn by and by to blow the bellows.” The man
was a locksmith, and had a wheel fixed to his bellows,
in which a dog, by running round set the bellows in
motion. But a short time before my capture, the dog
had died; and the man was glad to have me, rather
than a dog, for which he would have to pay an annual
tax. I had a small collar put on to which a chain was
fastened, and the other end secured to the dog-kennel.
He brought me food and water: I quenched my
thirst, but I was too much afraid and sorrowful to eat
at first, until compelled by hunger. I was kindly
treated: the man would stop as he went to or returned
from his work, and stroke and feed me from his hand.
“How goes it, little Foxy?” he would say: “thou
wilt soon be able to help me in my business.” After
a while he showed me the wheel, made me ascend into
[108]

it, and taught me how to run. I was glad to be in
motion, after so long a confinement. I soon understood
my office, and took pleasure in the work. When he
was not smithying, I was allowed to rest; and then I
amused myself by watching him at his filing and hammering,
making large and small locks and keys. I
could not complain of my treatment; for I was well
fed, and always had my plate of meat not far from the
wheel. But yet two circumstances troubled me.
Liberty was not mine. Could I ever forget that I had
once enjoyed freedom? I longed for the woods, the
mountains, the sunny knolls, where my race wander
so merrily about.

I had also an enemy in the person of a neighbor’s
old, grizzly, red tom-cat, an envious, spiteful, and
greedy animal. He would sit for hours in a gap of
the wall, eyeing me with apparent indifference, as I
went round and round at my work; but, if my master
turned his back, if but for a moment, he was instantly
down upon the spot, stole the best bits out of my dish,
and was back again as swift as a bird could fly. He
also plundered my master’s kitchen in various ways;
and, as I was sometimes allowed to run about at liberty
in the house, I was suspected of the thievery, and
received the beating.

I was even with my enemy at last, and, moreover,
[109]

against his will, he procured me my liberty, though but
for a short time.

One day, when the master was absent, I felt very
well and lively, and jumped merrily about in my
wheel, and blew the bellows till the sparks began to
fly. Then I sat down to enjoy my dinner. The cat
came near, and contrary to custom, began to converse
with me:—“Fox, you are merry; I wish I was so too:
you seem happier in your work, than I in my sleepy
dreaming on the wall.” “Yes,” I replied, “that is quite
true. You see that I earn abundance of food by turning
this wheel for my good master; and I may leap
and jump about in it to my heart’s content. Just come
up to me for once,” continued I, “and I will show you
how merrily it runs.” So the cat ascended, and we
shook the wheel awhile, which pleased the old fellow
very well; then I invited him to sit down and eat; for
I had a nice leg-bone of mutton left, and he found it
quite to his taste.

When he had done, the old cat said, “Fox, that thing
pleaseth me. I should like to learn thy trade, and
then I can seek out a master. Wilt thou teach me?”
“With pleasure,” I answered: “only put on my collar,
and run on boldly in the wheel, you will learn quickly.”
“Well, I will try,” said the cat. But first we had to
get the collar off my neck, and it cost us some trouble.
[110]

“Look!” said I: “this thing which hangs upon the
collar is called a lock, and that thing which hangs upon
the nail there, is called a key. Now, if you put the
key into the hole in the lock, and turn it round, the
lock will slip off, and the collar will be unfastened;
then I can draw it off, and put it on you.” The cat
fetched the key, and after many trials, at last managed
to put it into the lock properly. “Now,” said I, “take
the key between your teeth, and turn it round.”
This he did easily; and, when he had drawn the padlock
out of the ring of the collar, I trembled for joy.
I quickly put the collar upon the cat, however, and
turned the key in the padlock. “There,” said I, “now
take care to run steadily, and you will find what a
merry business it is. Good bye! cat;” and then I
sprang through the open window.

“Stop! stop!” cried the cat, terrified; and he tried to
spring after me, but found himself held back by the
chain which was fastened to the collar; and I heard
how he tugged in vain, and mewed pitifully.

But whoever diggeth a ditch for another, is pretty
certain to fall into one himself. This proverb was
verified in my case; for scarcely had I gained the
street, when I was observed by a dog; which chased
me so quickly, that I had but little hope of saving myself
from his teeth. By chance I took the direction of the
[111]

market-place, in the middle of which there was a
wooden booth, where there were apes, and parrots
swinging on long sticks, outside, and a great brown
bear kept guard at the entrance. “Brother bear,” I
cried, out of breath, “take me under thy protection!”
“Just jump in here,” said the bear kindly, and showed
me the opening. I did so, and was saved from my
enemy; but, to my great astonishment and terror,
only to fall into the hands of more dreadful enemies. I
found myself in a large room, surrounded on every
side by wild animals, imprisoned in iron cages. I
endeavored to make my escape, but in my confusion
could not find the way out. The master and his men
hunted me from one corner to another, till at last I
was caught; and what did they with me—can you
imagine? I was thrown into the den of a mighty lion:
there I lay trembling in deadly fear, when the great
king of beasts came slowly up, smelled at me, and
then laid himself down quietly as before. When I
found that he had no intention of taking away my life,
I ventured to approach him very modestly. “I’ll do
thee no hurt,” murmured the lion; “be without fear
of me.” Then I took courage, seated myself near
him, licked his paws, and looked up quite fearlessly
into his face. When feeding time came, I had a bone
thrown to me also. After our meal, I entertained the
[112]

lion with merry feats, leaping over him, laying myself
down before him, and inviting him to play.

Thus we went on from one day to another, and the
lion began to take great pleasure in me. After some
time, the dens were placed in great wagons, and conveyed
to another town, where the people came in
crowds, curious to behold the lion and the Fox.

Though we lived in great harmony, yet, before long,
my life became tedious and sorrowful. “Lion,” said I
one day, “we must try to obtain our freedom.”

“Well said!” replied lion: “can I break these iron
bars which keep us within the den?” “That neither
of us can do,” I rejoined; “but, where strength is
vain, cunning may succeed. Just let us try; I have
a device in my head.”

Now, the master of the menagerie had a tame peacock,
which was allowed to go about in perfect liberty;
and to secure his assistance formed a part of my plan.
The servant whose office it was to feed the animals,
was accustomed to slip the bolt only of our den, without
locking it. This had not escaped my observation;
and the knowledge I had picked up in my servitude
with the locksmith, I was able to turn to good account.
I therefore said one evening to the peacock,
“Now, good friend, do me a little favor, and push
back the iron thing at the door.” He did so, and the
[113]

door opened instantly. “Now for it, lion,” said I,
“break out: only take me with you, and protect me.”

The lion had no sooner left the den, and felt that he
had once more the free use of his limbs, than he darted
towards the entrance.

Almost terrified to death, every body fled out of his
way, and the lion and the fox were once more free in
open air. But a few leaps, and we were out of the
town, and in the broad meadows. Whoever we met,
instantly betook themselves to flight; and in a short
time we reached a dark, thick forest, in whose shades
we rested for the night. The lion wished to remain
here; for he felt quite at home under the deep shadow
of the great oak-trees: but I advised him to continue
his flight. So, very early in the morning, we left
the forest, and hastened to a distant woody mountain,
which we reached the same day; and there, after
devouring some hares, reposed in quiet. But alas!
our escape could not remain a secret, nor could we
doubt of being actively pursued.

In a few days, a crowd of hunters appeared; we
were chased about, and with difficulty saved ourselves
by flight to another forest. There neither were we suffered
to remain in peace; for the number of our pursuers
was constantly increasing, and day and night we were
driven before them, from one place of refuge to another.

[114]

On the fifth night of our flight, we had lain down to
rest on the edge of a cliff, which overlooked a deep
hollow place, surrounded by trees; when we saw lights
advancing through the wood, and I immediately advised
the lion to fly with all speed. “No,” he replied, “I will
be hunted no longer; if I must die, it shall be here!”
We descried armed men approaching, carrying torches;
and in the midst there rode a young man of beautiful
countenance and majestic stature, and, by his side, a
large, noble-looking dog. When the party had reached
the hollow; they stopped, kindled a fire, seated themselves
around it and began to eat. The young man
had dismounted, and was standing at a little distance,
leaning against the stem of a tree, when suddenly the
dog uttered a sharp bark; and the men alarmed, rose up
hastily, and followed the animal, who had evidently got
scent of our track. With one mighty bound, the lion
sprung from the overhanging rock, alighting on his
feet, just opposite to the young man, who was no other
than the son of the king. The king’s son drew back
for a moment, and raised a sharp sword, putting himself
in an attitude of defence. But the lion laid himself
down in front of him, stretched his paws out on the
earth, and looked up into the face of the prince, as
much as to say, Let us be friends. At that moment
the attendants returned, and would have attacked the
[115]

lion with sword and lance, but the prince forbade,
saying, “You shall do him no hurt, he has placed
himself under my protection.” He advanced fearlessly,
laying his hand upon the noble animal’s head. “Let
us bind him at least,” cried one. “It is unnecessary,”
replied the prince, as he seated himself on the ground
near the lion: “he will follow me, I am sure, of his
own accord.” And so he did.

The king’s son laid himself down to rest, and slept
peacefully; the lion resting near him, while the attendants
passed the night in anxious and fearful watching
around them. As soon as the prince awoke in the
morning, the whole party prepared for their return to
the city; the lion following willingly with Ossian, the
faithful dog, side by side.

Then I pressed forth from my hiding-place; and, as
I could not bear to be separated from the lion, I
hastened to join him, much to the astonishment of all
present. “Lo! here is another follower,” said the
prince; “he also shall receive protection.”

We traversed the forest, and before noon reached
the capital city. News of the wonderful affair went
before us, so that young and old crowded from all
quarters to see the remarkable animals pass. When
we arrived at the palace, the prince commanded comfortable
dwellings to be prepared for us on each side of
[116]

the principal gate; but every night the lion had to lie
at the door of the royal sleeping chamber, in order to
keep guard there. Besides these favors, we were well
supplied with food, and daily received proofs of our
lord’s attachment.

It was not long before we both had an opportunity
of rendering him a good service for all his kindness.
Some wicked men had plotted together to murder the
prince, and had hidden themselves in a thicket, intending
to lie in wait for him, when he should pass by on
his daily walk. I happened to spy these wretches in
their hiding-place; and, suspecting them of evil intentions,
I told the lion, who agreed with me in opinion;
and we both went and concealed ourselves, very near
the spot where I had seen the villains. As soon as the
prince approached, they started out with lifted daggers;
but, just as they thought themselves sure of their
victim, out broke the lion from the bushes, crushing
them in his way. With one spring he seized the foremost
by the throat, then tore down the next; and before
the third could recover from his terror, he had caught
him by the breast, and shaken him so violently, that
he fell breathless and insensible to the ground. The
guards hastened to the spot and secured the villains,
who received the punishment of their crime that very
day. From that time, the prince regarded us with
[117]

more favor than ever, and never went out without us
for his attendants.

Thus we led a quiet, honorable life for some years;
but at last the period of our separation arrived. The
king engaged in a war, and the prince commanded his
army which we accompanied to the field. When passing
through towns I rode upon the baggage wagons, but
when traveling in the country I scampered along over
the fields. Lion fought bravely by the side of his lord,
and I rendered considerable service as a spy. But one
day, when I was out at a distance, the prince and his
attendants fell into an ambuscade of the enemy. He
defended himself bravely; and the lion broke through
the opposing ranks, tearing down whoever came in his
way. The enemy were soon overpowered and put
to flight, when, from behind a tree, an arrow, aimed at
the lion, pierced his heart: he sunk down at the feet
of his master, giving him a loving look, and died. The
prince was nearly inconsolable for the loss of the noble
animal, and had him interred with honors, and a
marble pillar erected to mark his grave.

I also grieved much for my generous companion and
protector, and looked quite forlorn and unhappy. One
day, therefore, the kind prince said to me, “Good Fox,
since thou hast lost thy friend, I think thy liberty
would be acceptable to thee.” I made signs that I
[118]

would prefer to go. “Well,” said he, “go. I thank
thee for thy fidelity, and will command my subjects to
refrain from doing thee any harm.” And, in order to
secure my safety, he had a king’s crown marked upon
my haunches, which you may yet see plainly. Afterwards
I departed, and sought out my place of birth,
where I have lived ever since in undisturbed tranquillity.

[119]

NEW CHARADES.

My first quite tall in Egypt grows,

Above it hovers my second,

My whole I’m sure each sportsman knows,

And when cooked quite dainty reckoned.

Ans.

Reed-Bird.

My first, what is it? Scholars know,

My second’s all the muses,

My whole, a bark, in the south doth grow,

And in fever oft we use it.

Quinine.

My first we say when we address a lady,

My second’s a destructive insect,

My whole is the greatest thing that ever lived.

Mammoth.

[120]

My first is a score,

My second, if more

You wish to know, you will use;

My whole is a game

Of very good fame,

And when well played will not fail to amuse.

Twenty Questions.

My first is part of a wheel,

My second is half of a trifle “light as air,”

And my whole is a commotion.

Hubbub.

My first will make you think of smoke; my second
of dust; my whole an aspiring mortal.

Chimney-Sweep.

My first is nought but empty sound,

And yet we can’t converse without it;

My second, when on earth ’tis found,

Commands respect, though some may doubt it;

My whole’s the name of a living poet,

Both sweet, and simple in his lays,
[121]

His name I’m sure when you do know it,

You’ll one and all join in his praise.

Wordsworth.

It is hard to tell whether my first or second has
kindled the greater number of flames; my whole is
the name of a celebrated manufacturer of an article
without which royalty could not exist.

Warwick the King Maker.

[122]

MARY AND HER LITTLE GOAT.

Kids are little goats. Goats do not like to live in the
streets and houses, like the dogs and pigs. Goats love
to run and jump about in the country, and to gnaw the
bark of trees. Goats give very thick, rich milk.
People cannot carry cows to sea in ships, so they take
goats, which are smaller than cows, and do not take up
so much room in the ship. Without goats, the people
in ships would not have milk for their tea.

Mary, a little girl, who lived in a place where there
are many goats, taking a walk one day, found a little
kid; its mother, the old goat, had left it—it was almost
dead.

Mary felt sorry for the poor little kid; she took it
up, hugged it in her arms, and carried it home with her.
She begged her mother to let her keep the kid for her
own; her mother gave her leave.

NEW-YORK

D. APPLETON & CO. 200 BROADWAY.

Mary got a basket full of clean straw, and laid it on
the warm hearth, for a bed for the kid. She warmed
some milk, and held it to him to drink; the kid drank it
[123]

and licked Mary’s hand for more. Mary was delighted
when she saw him jump out of the basket, and run
about the room; presently he lay down again and took
a comfortable nap.

The next day, Mary gave her kid a name; he was
an excellent jumper, so she called him
Capriole
. She
showed him to all the family, and allowed her little
brothers and sisters to stroke and pat him. Capriole
soon followed Mary all about the house; trotted by her
side into the yard; ran races with her in the field; fed
out of her hand; and was a great pet at all times. Capriole
soon grew troublesome; he thrust his nose into
the meal tub, and flour box; and sometimes got a blow
for sipping the milk.

Capriole’s little horns soon began to appear, and a
white beard sprouted at the end of his chin; he grew
bold enough to fight when he was angry, and sometimes
threw down Colin, Mary’s little brother, into the
dirt. Every body said, “Capriole is getting too saucy;
he must be sent away, or be taught to behave better.”
Mary always took his part, and indulged him very
much. Capriole loved his little mistress dearly.

Near to Mary’s house, were some large fields, and
some tall rocks; a little further off was a high hill.
One fine summer’s day, Mary had finished her morning’s
work, and wanted to play with her kid; she
[124]

looked about the house door, and could not see Capriole,
she then ran to the field, and called aloud “Capriole!
Capriole!” No Capriole came. She went on, and on,
still calling her kid, but nothing was to be seen of him.

Her heart began to beat. “What can have become
of him? Somebody must have stolen him—perhaps
the neighbor’s dogs have killed him. Oh my Capriole!
my dear Capriole! I shall never see you again.”

Mary began to cry, but she still went on, looking all
round, calling “Capriole! Capriole!”

After a while she heard the voice of Capriole—she
looked up, and saw her little goat standing on the edge
of a high rock; she was afraid to call him, lest he
should jump down, and break his neck. There was no
danger; Capriole had run away from his mistress; he
liked the fields and the rocks better than he liked Mary.
She waited for him, however, till she was tired, and
then went home and got her little brothers to go back
with her to the foot of the hill. They carried some
bread and milk for Capriole, but they could not persuade
him back again; he had found a herd of goats, and
they were playing together.

Mary went home crying to her mother, and told how
Capriole had served her. “I’m sorry for you, my
dear,” said her mother, “but take care, my daughter,
not to love
run-a-ways
any more.”

[125]

CONFIDENCE IN AN INDIAN.

That part of the country round the thriving town
of Utica, in the State of New York, and through which
a railroad now runs, was formerly called Whitesborough,
and there is now a small town joining Utica
so called. The first settler in that part of the country
was a Mr. White, after whom the place was named.
At the time we speak of, there were numerous Indians
living in the neighborhood; with them he had several
interviews, and mutual promises of friendship were exchanged.
He also smoked the pipe of peace with them,
to confirm the contract more solemnly.

Still the Indians were suspicious. “The white
men,” said they, “are deceitful, and we must have
some proof of his sincerity.”

Accordingly, one evening, during Mr. White’s absence
from home, three Indians went to his house. At
first, Mrs. White and her children were much alarmed,
but on perceiving one of the Indians to be Shen-an-do-ah,
whom they knew to be a mild, humane man, their
[126]

fear was in some degree quieted. On entering the
house, they addressed Mrs. White, saying, “We are
come to ask you for your little daughter Jane, that we
may take her home with us to-night.”

Such a request might well startle the good woman;
she knew not what answer to give. To refuse
might, she feared, excite their anger; to grant their
request might hazard the liberty or even the life of her
child.

Lucidly at this moment, whilst the Indians were
waiting for a reply, Mr. White, the father of the child,
came in. The request was repeated to him, and he had
sufficient presence of mind to grant it, instantly and
cheerfully.

The mother was overwhelmed with surprise, and felt
all the horror that can be conceived; but she was silent,
for she knew it would be vain to resist. The little girl
was fetched, and delivered to the Indians, who lived
about ten or twelve miles off.

Shen-an-do-ah took the child by the hand, and led
her away through the woods, having first said to her
father, “To-morrow, when the sun is high in the
heavens, we will bring her back.”

Mrs. White had often heard that the Indians were
treacherous; and she well knew they were cruel; she
therefore looked upon her little daughter as lost, and
[127]

considered that she was given as a kind of sacrifice to
save the family.

Mr. White endeavored to comfort her, for he felt assured
that his child would be brought safely back the
following morning. To the poor mother the night was
long and sleepless; her anxiety became greater as the
promised time approached. Already she imagined that
the Indians would keep their word, and indeed bring
back their child, but she fully believed that they would
not bring her back alive. She watched the sun with a
beating heart, and just when it seemed at the highest
point of the heavens, she cried out to her husband,
“there they are!”

Shen-an-do-ah and his companions were faithful to
their promise; they now came back with the little Jane,
who, smiling with delight, was decked out in all the
finery that an Indian wigwam could furnish—necklaces
of shells, dyed feathers, and moccasins beautifully
worked with porcupine quills. She was delighted with
her visit and with her presents.

The effect of Mr. White’s confidence was just what
might be expected. From this time the Indians were
his friends; had he acted with timidity, and refused to
let his child visit them, they would have had no confidence
in him.

Shen-an-do-ah was an Oneida chief of some celebrity,
[128]

having fought on the side of the Americans in the Revolutionary
war. He lived to be a hundred years old, and
though in his youth he was very wild, and addicted to
drunkenness, yet by the force of his own good sense,
and the benevolent exhortations of a Christian missionary,
he lived a reformed man for more than sixty
years.
[3]
He was intrepid in war, but mild and friendly
in the time of peace. His vigilance once preserved the
infant settlements of the German flats (on the Mohawk)
from being cruelly massacred by a tribe of hostile Indians;
his influence brought his own tribe to assist the
Americans, and his many friendly actions in their behalf
gained for him, among the Indian tribes, the appellation
of the “White man’s friend.”

To one who went to see him a short time before his
death, he thus expressed himself: “I am an aged hemlock—the
winds of a hundred winters have whistled
through my branches—I am dead at the top. The
generation to which I belonged have passed away and
left me. Why
I
still live, the Great Spirit alone
knows! But I pray to him that I may have patience
to wait for my appointed time to die.”

[3]
In 1775 Shen-an-do-ah was present at a treaty made in Albany.
At night he was excessively drunk, and in the morning he found himself
in the street, stripped of all his ornaments, and every article of
clothing. His pride revolted at his self-degradation, and he resolved
never more to deliver himself over to the power of “strong water.”

[129]

“THE SPELL OF A GENTLE WORD.”

BY MARGARET J. BURWELL.

’Twas night, and the cool and perfumed breeze,

Breath’d soft mid the boughs of the waving trees,

Or low to the wild wood-flowers it sigh’d,

While the tiny buds to its tones replied;

But when the gay music of fairy-glee,

In the clear, calm midnight rose merrily,

And a thousand glancing beings of air,

Like countless gems held their revels there,

It fled from the woods and the flowers away,

And stole to a silent room, where lay

A dying girl:—

Her mournful eyes

Look’d out from their tears on the dark’ning skies,

Where a single star in its glory shone,

Like a haughty heart, bereft and lone.
[130]

Round the marble brow waved the clust’ring hair,

And the tiny hands were clasp’d as in pray’r;

She spoke, and each low and trembling word

Was sad as the wail of the widow’d bird.

“Oh! sweet is the spell that the zephyr flings

As it sweeps o’er the wild harp’s silvery strings;

And soft is the murmur’d minstrelsy

Of the flashing waves on the summer sea;

And the rain drops breathe, as they near the earth,

A gladsome chorus of joy and mirth;

The blue-bells ring ever in tones of glee,

And a pleasant sound hath the humming bee;

And though strangely sad is the spirit’s sigh,

When the crimson clouds leave the evening sky,

Yet when sunbeams burst on the sleeping flowers,

With visions of streamlets and fragrant bowers,

With a flush of joy on their petals bright,

They ope with a chorus of wild delight.

The gem that gleams on the velvet vest,

That shelters each slumbering floweret’s breast,

And has whisper’d all night of its home on high,

Where its sisters dwell in the beaming sky,

Takes a sweeter tone when the dawning day

Bids it leave the earth on its heavenward way;

The dancing brook murmurs a joyous tale,

Of the leafy wood and mossy vale;
[131]

And have ye not heard, when the shades of night

Hung dark o’er the earth, and the stars were bright,

A soft, sweet tone like the violet’s song,

Or the lay of the waves as they glide along?

But no! it is sweeter than they, by far,

’Tis the spirit-strain of some wand’ring star.

But softer than music of star or sea,

Than dew drops’ murmur, or hum of the bee,

Than the tale of the brook, or the song of the bird,

Is the mystic spell of a gentle word;

It falls on the heart as a summer shower

On the fading leaves of the thirsting flower;

Like a beam of hope, with its cheering ray,

It lightens the gloom of life’s weary way;

And when the darkness of death draws near,

And the spirit shrinks from a nameless fear,

It tells the soul of a radiant shore,

Where sorrow and sighing are known no more.

But I am alone;—no loved one is nigh

To bend kindly o’er me and pray e’er I die:

I hear the clear song of the joyous bird,

But I listen in vain for
one
gentle word.”

Then an aged man with his locks of snow,

Press’d an earnest kiss on her fever’d brow;

She had knelt with him oft at the hour of prayer,

In her childhood’s home, when the world seem’d fair,
[132]

And a thousand flow’rs on her path were shed;—

But now, when they all were faded and dead,

And her heart was sad, and her soul most drear,

And death hover’d o’er her, he only was near.

“My child!”—he said—“though none o’er thee may weep,

Fear not, for the angels a vigil shall keep

By thy lowly grave, and a requiem sing

For the bud that died in its blossoming.

Yon star that is shining so brightly above,

Would tell thee a tale of God’s merciful love;

For e’en as
it
glows through the darkness of night,

Thy
spirit shall beam in the land of light;

Thy mother, my dear one, awaits thee on high,

She would welcome her child to her home in the sky.”

“My mother!” she murmur’d—a sweet smile play’d

Round the tiny mouth, while the cool breeze stray’d

’Mid the clustering curls on that low, pale brow,

And breath’d on the cheek of stainless snow;

But the dark eye was closed—the maiden ne’er stirred—

Her spirit had passed with that gentle word.

[133]

INDIAN CHILDREN.

The Indians have been frequently represented as
almost devoid of natural affection, or indeed of feeling
altogether; but this is a mistake, which probably arises
from the great command over their feelings which they
are in the habit of exercising, particularly when in the
presence of strangers. Those persons who have had
the best opportunities of knowing the real character of
the Indians have remarked, amongst many other good
traits, the great affection that they have for their children,
and the respect which young people pay, not only
to their own parents, but to all elderly people.

The children, both boys and girls, appear to be particularly
under the care of their mother; she teaches
them how to make leggins, moccasins, and many other
things that have already been described; and if she be
a good mother, as many of these poor squaws are, she
is particular in keeping her daughters continually employed,
so that they may have the reputation of being
[134]

industrious girls, which is a recommendation to the
young men to marry them.

Corporal punishment is very seldom resorted to for
the correction of children; but if they commit any
fault, it is common for the mother to blacken their faces
and send them out of the lodge: when this is done,
they are not allowed to eat till it is washed off, and
sometimes they are kept a whole day in this situation,
as a punishment for their misconduct.

There is a considerable difference in the manners
and characters of different tribes, some being brave,
honorable, and generous, while others are noted for
their treacherous disposition and filthy habits. In many
tribes their families appear to be well regulated, and
great pains are taken by the chiefs and principal men
to impress upon the minds of the younger part of their
respective nations what they conceive to be their duty.

When the boys are six or seven years of age, a
small bow and arrows are put into their hands, and
they are sent out to shoot birds around the lodge or village:
this they continue to do five or six years, and
then their father procures for them short guns, and
they begin to hunt ducks, geese, and small game. In
the winter evenings their father will relate to them the
manner of approaching a deer, elk, or buffalo, and describe
the manner of setting traps for different animals:
[135]

when he is able, he will take them a hunting with him,
and show them the tracks of wild beasts. To all these
instructions the boys pay the most earnest attention.

The Indians generally appear to be more afflicted at
the loss of an infant, or young child, than of a person
who has arrived at mature years; the latter, they think,
can provide for himself in the country whither he has
gone, but the former is too young to provide for himself.

The men appear ashamed to show any signs of grief
at the loss of any relation, however dear he might have
been to them; but the women do not attempt to conceal
their feelings; and on the loss of either husband
or child, they cut off their hair, disfigure their faces
and limbs with black paint, and even with cuts, and
burn all their clothes excepting a few miserable rags.

A striking display of the strong affection that an Indian
feels for his child occurred some years since in a
town in Maine. One of the Kennebec tribe, remarkable
for his good conduct, had received a grant of land
from the State, and settled himself in a part of the
country where several families were already settled.
Though by no means ill-treated, yet the common prejudice
against Indians prevented any sympathy with him;
and he felt this keenly, when, at the death of his only
child, none of his neighbors came near him to attend
the funeral.

[136]

A few months afterwards he announced his intention
of leaving the village: he called on some of the inhabitants,
and expressed himself in the following manner:—“When
white man’s child die,” said he, “Indian
man be sorry; he help bury him. When my child die,
no one speak to me—I make his grave alone—I can no
live here.” He gave up his farm,
dug up the body of
his child
, and carried it with him two hundred miles,
through the forest, to join the Canadian Indians.

Not long after the first English settlers had established
themselves in Pennsylvania, during the winter a
white man’s child strayed away from his parent’s house;
and after having in vain been sought in every direction
by the parents for a whole day and night, the father
resolved to apply for assistance to one of his Indian
neighbors, with whom he had always lived on friendly
terms. He knew the superior facility with which the
Indians, who are in the habit of constantly roaming the
woods, can detect and distinguish objects of sight and
sound.

Osamee, for that was the name of the friendly Indian,
immediately went to the house of the parents, and
looking attentively round it, soon discovered the little
footsteps of a child, and the direction which they had
taken; and although the child’s father could hardly
discover the marks and signs by which he was guided,
[137]

he followed the track with as much apparent ease and
confidence as an English traveler would a turnpike
road, and after tracing it for about three miles into the
forest, he found the poor child lying under a tree, crying
bitterly, and almost perishing with cold.

This little incident was the means of reconciling
some of the white people to the near settlement of the
Indians, of whom they had been in dread; but they
now rather rejoiced in having such good neighbors;
and it would have been well for both parties if the good
feelings shown by the Indians to the first settlers in
some hundreds of instances had met with such a return
as men calling themselves Christians were bound to
make; but, alas! it was far otherwise.

An anecdote which has been preserved, concerning
an old Mohegan Indian named Wa-nou, affords a striking
example of the strong affection of a father towards his
only son.

During the frequent wars which took place between
the Indians and the white men, the former had defeated
a party of English soldiers, and put them to flight. The
retreat being without order, a young English officer, in
attempting to escape, was pursued by two of the savages,
and finding an escape impracticable, he determined
to sell his life as dear as possible. He turned round to
face his enemies, and a violent conflict commenced, in
[138]

which he must have soon fallen; but just as one of his
assailants was about to raise the fatal tomahawk over
his head, an old Indian threw himself between the combatants,
and the red men instantly retired with respect.

The old man took the young officer by the hand, dispelled
his fears, and led him through the forest to his
wigwam, where he treated him with the greatest kindness.
He seemed to take pleasure in the youth’s company;
he was his constant companion; he taught him
his language, and made the rude arts of his countrymen
familiar to him. They lived happily together,
though the thoughts of home would occasionally disturb
the Englishman’s tranquillity, and for awhile his
countenance appeared sorrowful. At these times Wa-nou
would survey his young friend attentively, and
while he fixed his eyes upon him, the tears would start
into them.

On the return of spring, hostilities were recommenced,
and every warrior appeared in arms. Wa-nou, whose
strength was still sufficient to support the toils of war,
set out with the rest, accompanied by his prisoner. The
Indians having marched above two hundred miles, at
length arrived within sight of the English camp. Wa-nou
observed the young man’s countenance whilst he
showed him the camp of his countrymen. “There
are thy brethren,” said he, “waiting to fight us. Listen
[139]

to me. I have saved thy life. I have taught thee to
make a canoe, a bow and arrows; to hunt the bear and
the buffalo; to bring down the deer at full speed, and
to outwit even the cunning fox. What wast thou
when I first led thee to my wigwam? Thy hands
were like those of a child; they served neither to support
nor to defend thee; thou wert ignorant, but from
me thou hast learnt every thing. Wilt thou be ungrateful,
and raise up thine arm against the red
men?”

The young Englishman declared with much warmth,
that he would rather lose his own life than shed the
blood of one of his Indian friends. The old warrior
seemed to be overcome by some painful recollection;
he covered his face with his hands, bowed down his
head, and remained in that posture for some time; then,
making as it were a strong effort, he again looked at
the young man, and said to him in a tone mixed with
tenderness and grief, “Hast thou a father?”

“He was living,” said the young man, “when I left
my country.”

“Oh, how fortunate he is still to have a son!” cried
the Indian; and then, after a minute’s silence, he added,
“Knowest thou that I have been a father, but I am no
longer so? I saw my son fall in battle; he fought
bravely by my side; my son fell covered with wounds,
[140]

and he died like a man! but I revenged his death; yes,
I
revenged
it.”

Wa-nou pronounced these words with great vehemence;
his whole frame seemed agitated; his eyes lost
their usual serenity, and his chest heaved with deep
sighs. By degrees he became more calm, and, turning
towards the east, where the sun had just risen, he
said,—

“Young man, thou seest that glorious light—does it
afford thee any pleasure to behold it?”

“Yes,” replied the Englishman, “I never look upon
the rising sun without pleasure, or without feeling
thankful to our great Father who created it.”

“I am glad that thou art happy, but there is no more
pleasure for me,” said Wa-nou. A moment after, he
showed the young man a shrub that was in full bloom.

“Seest thou that beautiful plant?” said he. “Hast
thou any pleasure in beholding it?”

“Yes, great pleasure,” replied the young man.

“To me, it can no longer give pleasure,” said the
old man: and then, after embracing the young Englishman
with great affection, he concluded with these
words: “
Begone, hasten to thine own country, that thy
father may still have pleasure in beholding the rising
sun and the flowers of spring
.”

[141]

THE BOYHOOD OF WASHINGTON.

Some of the most interesting anecdotes of the early
years of Washington, are such as connect him with
his mother, or were derived from her narrations. She
was a dignified and excellent woman, and is remembered
with respect and love, by all who had the honor
of her acquaintance.

Her husband died while their children were young.
So, she had the sole care of their government and
education. For this great charge she was eminently
qualified. She was often asked what course she had
pursued, in training up her illustrious son. And her
reply was, “I only required
obedience
,
diligence
, and

truth
.”

These were the simple rules by which Washington
became good and great. They were wrought in with
the elements of his character, until his
goodness became
greatness
, and his
greatness, goodness
. Is there
any thing, in these three precepts of
obedience
,
diligence
,
[142]

and
truth
, which those who read this work are
unwilling or careless to observe?

Washington, when a boy, was taught to be accurate
in all his statements. He told things exactly as they
were, and repeated words just as they had been spoken.
If he had committed a fault, he did not try to conceal
it, or lay the blame upon others.

Whatever his errors were, and the best child in the
world sometimes does wrong, he always spoke of them
to his mother, without disguise, and without delay.
This was the foundation of that noble frankness, and
contempt of deceit, which distinguished him through
life, and made him revered by all.

Once, from an indiscretion of his boyhood, a considerable
loss was incurred. He knew that it would
interfere with favorite plans of his mother, give pain
to her feelings, and perhaps awaken her severe displeasure.
But he did not hesitate in his duty. He
went immediately to her, and made a full acknowledgment;
and she said, “I had rather this should have
taken place, than my son should be guilty of a falsehood.”

She was careful not to injure him by indulgence, or
luxurious food. She required him to rise early, and
never permitted him to be idle. Labors were sometimes
[143]

assigned him, which the children of wealthy
parents might have accounted severe. Thus he acquired
strength, firmness of frame, and disregard of
hardship.

He was taught to have certain hours for certain employments,
and to be punctual. The systematic improvement
of time, thus early taught, was of immense
service when the mighty concerns of a nation devolved
on him. Then he found leisure for the transaction of
the smallest affairs, in the midst of the most important
and conflicting duties.

It was observed, by those who surrounded his person,
that he neglected nothing, and was never known
to be in a hurry. He was remarkable for neatness, yet
spent but little time in arranging his dress.

His habits of early rising, and strict attention to
order, gave him time for every thing, so that the pressure
of public business never rendered him inattentive
to private duty, domestic courtesy, or kind hospitality.
In winter, he rose two hours before day, and in summer
was ready to enjoy the freshness and beauty of the
dawn.

Such benefits did a man, whom the world beheld
with admiration, derive from the counsels of a mother,
who accustomed him to habits of early rising, order,
[144]

and industry. His obedience to her was cheerful and
unvarying. Even after he attained mature years, and
a nation regarded him as its deliverer and ruler, the
expression of her slightest wish was a law.

THE END.

End of Project Gutenberg's The Juvenile Scrap-book for 1849, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE JUVENILE SCRAP-BOOK FOR 1849 ***

***** This file should be named 57275-h.htm or 57275-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/7/2/7/57275/

Produced by Chris Curnow, For Emmy and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.