The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Bellman Book of Fiction, by Various,
Edited by William C. Edgar

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Bellman Book of Fiction
1906-1919

Author: Various

Editor: William C. Edgar

Release Date: June 13, 2018  [eBook #57322]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)

***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BELLMAN BOOK OF FICTION***

This etext was transcribed by Les Bowler

The Bellman

Book of Fiction

1906–1919

Chosen and Edited by

WILLIAM C. EDGAR

late Editor of The Bellman

Minneapolis, Minn., U.S.A.

The Bellman Company

1921

p. iv
Copyright 1921

by

The Bellman Company

p. v
TO

FORMER READERS OF

The Bellman

WHOSE GENEROUS GOOD WILL

AND LOYAL SUPPORT MADE

ITS SUCCESS POSSIBLE

p.
vii
PREFACE

The
kindly reception given to The
Bellman Book of Verse is mainly responsible for the publication
of this collection of short stories, originally printed in The
Bellman, and should it find favor equal to that of its
predecessor, it is probable that other volumes of like character
may follow this.

Indeed, the former editor of The Bellman has in mind the
publication of a series of books, uniform in size and appearance
with this, including a second and perhaps a third volume of
fiction and, finally, The Bellman’s Book of Essays, to
contain some of the essays and editorials of that periodical
which are esteemed of more than transient value; in all, perhaps
half a dozen small volumes.

Whether this congenial undertaking shall be carried out or
abandoned depends very largely upon the welcome given this, the
second book of the contemplated series.  There is no desire
to exploit the files of The Bellman for commercial purposes, but
should it appear that there exists a sincere demand for such
literature it will be the writer’s pleasure to supply
it.

More than two years have passed since The Bellman was
discontinued, and it is most gratifying to its founder, as well
as to all those who were concerned in its publication, to note
many continuing evidences of the regard and appreciation
p. viii
in which
it was held by its former readers and to receive repeated
expressions of regret that it has ceased to exist.

The Bellman is no more, but his memory still endures, and
evidently a large number of his loyal old friends continue
faithfully to cherish it.

For them, more especially, is this collection published.
The selection has been made almost at random and does not pretend
to be a choice of the best stories that were printed in The
Bellman, but merely a few of those among the many which appeared
under the familiar heading, “The Bellman’s
Tale,” and which the editor considers meritorious and
worthy of perpetuation in book form.

November, 1921.

—W. C. E.

p.
ix
CONTENTS

PAGE

The Mute
,
Robert W.
Sneddon

1

The Laughing Duchess
,

Virginia Woodward Cloud

13

Long
,
Long
Ago
,
Frederick Orin Bartlett

34

The Right Whales Flukes
,
Ben
Ames Williams

45

When Breathitt Went to Battle
,

Lewis H. Kilpatrick

70

The Forgiver
,
Marjorie L. C.
Pickthall

87

Told to Parson
,
Eden
Phillpotts

100

Iron
,
Randolph Edgar

111

The Perfect Interval
,

Margaret Adelaide Wilson

113

The Archbishop Of Rheims
,

Emily W. Scott

132

The Trawnbeighs
,
Charles
Macomb Flandrau

145

The Life Belt
,
J. J.
Bell

157

Amina
,
Edward Lucas
White

168

The Silver Ring
,
Frank
Swinnerton

183

The Surgeon
,
B. W.
Mitchell

193

The ’Dopters
,
Aileen
Cleveland Higgins

201

Prem Singh
,
John
Amid

216

Even So
,
Charles Boardman
Hawes

223

The Cask Ashore
,
Sir Arthur
Quiller-Couch

243

p. 1
THE
MUTE

Le Muet started as the cold steel of a rifle barrel touched
his neck, and turning his head stumbled to his feet.  Behind
him stood four Bavarian soldiers grinning maliciously at his
surprise.  They spoke to him, and he made no attempt to
answer.

“Have you seen the French?” they asked again.

He gaped at them with an empty expression.  One of them
seized him by the arm, and twisted it cruelly.  A low,
hoarse, guttural sound came from Le Muet’s lips, and his
face was convulsed with effort.  Shaking himself loose, he
pointed to his ears and mouth, then let his chin sink upon his
breast.  He spread his hands in a gesture of despondency,
and shook his head from side to side.

The soldiers looked at him angrily, then their leader, giving
the peasant a push which sent him upon his knees among the
turnips, issued an order in a low voice, and as silently as they
had come the four men disappeared, with bodies bent low, among
the trees of the plantation.

When Le Muet looked again they were out of sight.  His
heart was beating, he trembled, and it seemed as if there was no
strength in his limbs and that the struggle he had made to utter
intelligible sounds had left him exhausted.  For a long time
he knelt staring at the woods before he rose to his feet and
shook his fist in the direction in which they had gone.
Then he took to his heels, and ran as quickly as he could to the
village.

p. 2
When all
the able-bodied men in the village had gone, there remained only
two, Monsieur the curé and he whom they called Le Muet, a
strapping big fellow with the strength of an ox, to whom, for no
fault of his own, had been denied the gifts of speech and
hearing.

Naturally Le Muet was not called upon to do his years in the
army.  His dumb deafness would have broken the heart of any
drill sergeant as it did that of his schoolmaster who, having
heard of lip-reading, experimented with him for a month and then
broke his best ruler over the lad’s stupid head.

Not that Le Muet was stupid except in book learning.
When one is dumb, one talks to beasts and birds in sounds that
they can understand, and as for hearing, there is no need of that
with a dog who speaks with his eyes, his tail, his body.
And Le Muet had a dog, a shaggy, unkempt animal with vagabond
habits, who disappeared for days at a time, and returned without
explanation from marauding expeditions in the woods.  It was
said that the gamekeeper had sworn to riddle him with shot the
first time he caught him in the act, but, after all, the
gamekeeper was a merciful man, and there is no doubt that he
missed many a good chance to rob Le Muet of his heel
companion.  The dog was harmless enough, although it may
well be understood that he would not have hesitated to try his
teeth upon those Bavarian invaders, had he not gone the day
before upon a poaching quest.

There was only one person to whom Le Muet could betake himself
in the hour of need: Monsieur the curé, who had remained
behind to look after the women and children.  The
curé was a robust
p. 3
little man, with a brown, wrinkled
face and eyes full of understanding and sympathy: eyes that,
alas, no longer twinkled merrily, but were dulled with a great
sadness.  He was standing on the other side of the square
from the church, looking intently at the building as if to commit
to memory the position of every one of its timeworn and hallowed
stones, for it was known that even churches were not spared by
the barbarians, and any day they might appear in the village with
fire and sword.

Le Muet hesitated a little, standing with heaving breast, his
eyes bloodshot with his running, before he ventured to lay his
hand upon the sleeve of the black soutane.  The curé,
as if roused from a dream, looked at him, then grew grave with
apprehension.  Hastily he looked in the direction from which
Le Muet had come, and pointed.  Le Muet nodded his head
eagerly, and in clumsy pantomime told his tale: four fingers for
four men, the helmets, the barrel upon his neck, the crouching
retreat.

The curé, laying his hand upon Le Muet’s arm,
patted it gently, and led the way across the square and into the
church.  Near the door he knelt, and Le Muet followed his
example.  For a few seconds they remained thus, side by
side, their faces turned to the altar, then the curé rose
to his feet and let his eyes pass lovingly from window to window,
from painted saint to sculptured and, guiding Le Muet to the
door, came out, locked the carved double door, and descended the
steps.

For a moment he stood there with bent head, then set out
briskly, going from house to house, telling the women not to be
afraid, but to collect
p. 4
the children, get food and covering
together, and to meet in the square.  Soon they were there,
a piteous band, very silent and hushed.  One mother carried
in her arms two children, a baby a few months old and a boy of
three, and as the curé saw her stumble, he reached out and
took the boy into his arms.

As the curé led the way, there was a moment of panic,
and some hung back, but gradually the little band fell in behind
him, and at the end came Le Muet, stepping out with short strides
so as not to tread upon any one’s heels.  They passed
through the village street, their eyes straining in front of them
that they might not see the open windows and the doors, the
flowers climbing and crowding about the green shutters, the smoke
still rising from hearths on which the midday meal had been
cooking.  An old woman sank to the ground, and without a
word two of the younger raised her and, supporting her, guided
her frail and stumbling feet.

At the crossroads, the curé halted and, standing on the
steps of the cross with its carven figure of the Redeemer, looked
over his little band, and raising his hand blessed them in a
trembling voice, then in a command, ringing out strong and clear
like that of a soldier, set them in motion once more on the road
to safety.

All at once Le Muet halted.  What was he doing?  He
who had no human kin had left behind him the one thing he loved:
his dog.  His brain was confused by the excitement of the
day, otherwise he would not have forgotten how often he had been
sought out and found by the faithful creature.  He looked in
front of him.  The company of refugees was just turning the
corner.  He must find his dog.  Surely Monsieur the
curé would forgive him;
p. 5
besides, with his long legs, he could
easily catch up.  Resolutely he turned on his heel and
trudged back the way he had come.

As he passed through the village square, from an open door
came a tempting odor of cooking, and with a sly grunt he stepped
inside, filled a bowl from the soup pot and sat down.  One
must eat, whatever comes to pass, and it is easier to die with a
full stomach than an empty one.

He had just sopped up the last drop of cabbage soup with an
end of loaf when, turning his eyes to the open door, he was
amazed to see a couple of horsemen dismounting in front of
it.  As if they knew their way, they tethered their horses
to a post and strode into the cottage.

Le Muet rose to his feet, and the intruders covered him with
their rifles.  Suddenly one of them broke into a grin and,
turning, spoke to his companion.  They lowered their rifles,
and the first comer nodded in a friendly fashion to Le Muet and
offered him his hand.

In a daze Le Muet accepted the courtesy.  What a
surprise!  Here, in a Uhlan uniform, was the peddler,
Woerth, who had travelled the countryside for many a year.
He had not been seen for a long time, and now—Le Muet
grinned in response.  The peddler had done him many a
kindness, and tramped the woods with him more times than once: a
sharp-faced, thin man, with white-lashed blue eyes.

He sat down at the table again as they dipped their cans into
the soup pot and divided the loaf.  With a careless air the
peddler knocked in the head of the cider cask, and filled three
glasses.  Le Muet began to feel at his ease.  After
all, he knew the
p.
6
peddler, and if this was war, surely it was not an affair
of bloodshed; one sat at the table with an old friend and drank
cider.  He could not understand what they were saying, but
he could discover nothing to be afraid of in their looks.

When they had eaten and drunken their fill, the peddler lit
his pipe, and with a smile strolled about the room, opening
closet doors, lifting up the lid of the linen chest, pulling out
the drawers of the carved bureau and scattering the contents on
the floor, knocking the walls and stamping on the floor as if to
discover the hiding place of treasure.  But nothing of value
rewarded his search, and he appeared angry, for he swept the few
little china ornaments from the mantel shelf and stamped upon
them.

Le Muet rose to his feet.  He must be going.  His
dog might be searching for him, and, besides, if he was to catch
up with Monsieur the curé he must be getting along.
As he walked to the door, the peddler turned sharply, and taking
a couple of quick strides let his hand fall heavily on his
shoulder.  There was no good humor in the peddler’s
face now.  He gave a word of command to his companion, who
produced a rope, and putting a tight knot around Le Muet’s
wrist, gave him a shove that propelled him out of the door.

What was going to happen now, wondered Le Muet.  He was
not long left in doubt.  His captors went from house to
house, picking their plunder, clothes, bric-a-brac, copper
cooking utensils, till they had accumulated two huge bundles tied
in blankets.  They were loaded upon Le Muet’s back
and, mounting their horses, the peddler and his comrade rode on
slowly, driving Le Muet like a cow before them.

p. 7
A dull
rage, all the more terrible since it could find no expression,
filled his heart now.  His load lay upon his neck and
shoulders like lead, and the sweat trickled down his face and the
furrow of his bent and tortured hack.  When he stopped, a
prod from lance or saber set his failing legs moving once more,
and he ground his teeth in speechless agony.  So, too,
perhaps feel the dumb carriers of burdens, but in the brain of Le
Muet the suffering was intensified.  In his obstinate way he
had set his heart upon finding his dog, and now with every step
he took he might be going further away.

They were going through the plantation now, and approaching
the forest.  It was hard going among the low brushwood that
caught like so many grasping hands at his legs and tripped him
up.  Would they never stop for rest?  They were within
the woods now.  At last the two horsemen dismounted, and
looked about them as if seeking a landmark.  Seeing a pile
of white stones from the quarry, they nodded their heads, and
with a look at their watches sat down on the edge of the
pathway.

Le Muet lay on the ground exhausted, and they let him lie
undisturbed, talking to each other in low tones.  The mute
must have slept, for when he opened his eyes again there were
gray uniforms all about him, their wearers sprawling on the
ground in easy attitudes.  Here and there dimly among the
trees he could see others leaning upon their rifles.  He sat
up and looked about him.

The peddler had a map in front of him, and bending over it was
a fine officer; for so he must be, since the peddler nodded
servilely whenever the other spoke.  Le Muet was still
staring when the
p.
8
officer raised his head and caught sight of him.  He
turned to the peddler, who laughed and pointed to his mouth and
ears, assuming a stupid expression, and the officer nodded curtly
and bent over the map again.  In a little while he called
some of his men about him and spoke to them.  They
disappeared on either side of the narrow path.  There was no
sign of a horse anywhere, and Le Muet wondered if they were
stabled in the quarry, and if their lot was better than his.

The peddler folded up his map, and coming over to Le Muet
pointed to a clump of brushwood, and with a struggle the weary
unfortunate rose to his feet, shouldered his bundles and
followed.  They lay down, the peddler with his rifle by his
side.  In a moment they were joined by the officer and six
of his men.  They reclined quietly, as if listening.

Suddenly the officer raised his pistol.  Something was
coming through the brushwood; but he lowered it with a grim smile
as a shaggy head, followed by a shaggy body, made its
appearance.  There was a bound, and Le Muet felt himself
tumbled to earth under the impact of a clumsy body.  A rough
tongue was licking his face.  His dog had found him.

Nothing else mattered now, and with strange, uncouth
murmurings he clasped the shaggy body to his own again and
again.  He did not see that the officer’s face had
grown dark with anger or that he had raised his pistol again only
to slip it back into the holster as the peddler touched his arm
and cautiously pointed through an opening in the bushes.  A
man in a blue uniform had just risen to his feet on the path, and
was looking about him
p. 9
with a searching glance.  Nothing
stirred in the thickets, and he walked on.

Le Muet saw the figures beside him stiffen, and rifles
raised.  Suddenly the dog moved uneasily and gave a low
whimper.  With a savage indrawing of his breath the officer
turned sharply and, shortening his sword, drove it into the body
of the dog.  A whispered command, and a heavy rifle butt
fell upon its head.

Le Muet sat upright, staring, confused.  He held the
quivering body close against him, dead to all thought but that of
this strangely cruel deed.  What was it all about?  In
a flash it came to him.  Those about him were lying in wait
to kill, and those whom they would kill were his own: Frenchmen
like himself, like the man who had risen in the clearing and
walked on unconscious of danger.

With a mighty effort he held himself from flinging his weight
upon the officer.  He was not afraid now.  They had
killed his dog.  They might kill him, only there were others
coming, unwarned, and he without voice to warn them: those others
who were also of France.

Oh, if only Monsieur the curé were with him.  The
curé had shown him pictures of miracles wrought by God,
the blessed mother and the saints: miracles wherein the sick were
healed, the blind were made to see, the dumb to speak.
Perhaps, if he tried, words would come to his lips, words would
come in time to save those who were about to come into this
trap.  Bending his head low, he filled his lungs, he felt
the muscles about his abdomen tighten.  His mind was surging
with desire, he was about to speak at last; and then the breath
he had sucked within him filtered through the passage of his
throat in harsh and broken gasps.

p. 10
A
buffet on the mouth from the officer threw him on his back, and
for a moment he lay stunned, but for a moment only; then bounding
to his feet, with a desperate leap that cleared the brush he was
out and upon the path.  Through the trees in front of him he
saw the glint of bayonets.  They were coming, coming into
the trap.  He must run to them.

All at once he felt arms about his knees.  Two of the
Germans had crept out from the other side of the path and were
holding him by the ankles.  With a wrench of his strong legs
be loosened himself from the hold: two swift kicks, and he was
free.  To run—he did not notice the rope stretched
across the path at the level of his ankles and with a jerk he
fell upon his face.  At once they were upon him.  He
felt a writhing hand that tore at his throat and, bending his
chin, he bit savagely at it with his firm teeth.  It seemed
to him as if he had superhuman power, and that he had but to open
his mouth to send forth a ringing cry.

He was on his knees now, a man upon his back, and bending
forward suddenly he swung the clawing thing over his shoulder to
the ground.  His hands sought the throat.  Then came a
sharp, agonizing pain.  The other had stabbed him in the
back, with a wrench and a twist of the bayonet blade.

He rose to his feet as if by a miracle, one foot uplifted to
step forward, then set his foot down upon the ground.  The
earth was trembling and swaying beneath him.  With his
lacerated hands he tore at his throat as if to pluck the useless
vocal cords from their covering of flesh.  A strange
bellowing came from his lips,—now red with a bloody
p.
11
foam,—growing in volume, and then, as he strained
at his throat with compressing hands, he felt a great joy and
triumphant peace come upon him.  He was speaking—no,
it was a shout—so clearly—so easily:

“Back, comrades—a boche trap—” and
then, as he sank to his knees, “Vive la France!”

He did not hear—how could he, the deaf one?—the
volleys that passed over his body as the French halted and in a
swift rush deployed to left and right of the path; the tramping
of feet in the brushwood; the dull thud of rifle butts, and
squeal of agony as bayonet found what it sought.

When it was over, the French commander looked grimly and
without compassion at the sullen face of the German captain
staring up at him from the ground, then turned to look down
curiously at the body of Le Muet.

“One of yours?” he asked.  “He wears no
uniform.”

“A peasant from the village—captured; he was deaf
and dumb,” grunted the captain with a spasm of pain.

The commander drew himself up sharply.  “Deaf and
dumb—nonsense!”

The peddler, lying against a tree endeavoring to staunch a leg
wound, saw the French commander look at him inquiringly.

“Surely, he was a mute.  It was impossible for him
to say a word.  I knew him very well,” he hastened to
answer.

The commander looked at him as if astonished, then turned
away, with a murmur.

“I must have been dreaming, but I could have sworn he
called out, ‘Vive la France’”; and then,
p. 12
because he
was a poet, he added: “But then, when every stone of la
patrie cries out, why not this dumb peasant?  It is a war of
miracles.”

Robert W. Sneddon
.

p. 13
THE
LAUGHING DUCHESS

The optimist, safely outside our own environs, prescribes the
old formulas: “Look Around You and Write; Look Within the
Human Heart—”

“But, dear sir, where is the story?”  Usually
it is a “Sir,” and this time it was Felmer
Prince.  “Look Around You!”

I mocked: “I defy you to find anything more stirring
than old Sam Peters, driving a moth-eaten mule to the
mill.”

“And you and I,” supplemented Felmer.
“The human heart—”

But I retreated behind the gate and barred it upon the
“human heart,” retorting that if the organ disturbed
me as it did some people I should confine my conversation to
“Yes” and “No.”

“You are sufficiently expert in the use of the
negative,” said Felmer, switching at a dead brier, and I
proceeded: “As for ‘looking within,’ when
Martha and I reach the homicidal point I take a walk.”

“How many subscriptions have you gotten for that
confounded thing, Enid?” he asked, abruptly.  I
temporized.

“One can live on very little after the habit is
formed.”

Felmer shook the gate fiercely.  “I wish that you
would listen to reason!”

“I do, to my own.  I’m thinking of
selling—”

p.
14
“Not the place!” he broke in.  I asked
him, as a man and a neighbor, if he thought that any sane tenant
would invest in a left-over colonial, with roof leaking, paint
off, shutters hanging; populated by generations of bats, and with
a frog pond beside which Poe’s Raven was a pæan of
joy?

“A place with no remaining virtue—”

“Except beauty,” he added.  I clung to the
gate’s bars, my brow upon my hands, and pain shaking my
heart.

“And I’m a fool about it!” I said,
miserably.  “Every mossy old flagstone, and the very
wizardry of its black woods against the sky, means me.  It
is psychic with inherited memories.”

“Miss E-enid!  Are your shoes dry?” screamed
Martha from the back door.

“To sell?” prodded Prince, relentlessly.

“The ivory Buddha and the Mercury, at the
Collectors’ International Exposition opened up in
town.  Now is my chance.”  He nodded.

“But be wary, Enid.  You women—”

I reminded him that the vice president was Cary Penwick, a
cousin of my own, the fear and fascination of childhood’s
idolatry.  Prince said rather gloomily that he had never
heard me mention this cousin, which was not surprising; the last
time I saw Cary Penwick he was a wild boy of fourteen, with hair
in his eves and a brain full of adventurous mischief.  I was
an imaginative child of eight years, and memory’s tenderest
association with Cary was a mutual and unappeased hunger.

“We roasted corn at the field’s edge and climbed
the roof to steal bricks out of the chimney, to build the
oven.”  I marched on, with Cary borne banner-like
before, to relate how the poor boy’s father had
p. 15
been the
family skeleton, grandma’s black sheep son, smirched with
disgrace, who died in Paris.  Finally, Cary’s
mother’s family had sent him off to school, from which he
consistently ran away, and we never saw him again.  He had
vowed that one day he would return—  At Prince’s
laugh, I ended haughtily: “To get even with me for kicking
him, when he carried me dripping from the frog pond.  I
remember that he slapped me.  Now, the papers call him a
famous collector, and I am sure Cary will help me dispose of the
things to advantage.”

Prince dug wells in the mud with his stick.  “Of
course, Enid, being a relative—but it is safer always to
have the opinion of more than one before coming to a
settlement.”

And, according to history’s human law, I laughed his
caution to the winds.

“Are your feet dry, Miss Enid?”

This being her perennial, I stuck them on the fender and drank
tea, while Martha hovered, hen-like and solicitous.
“Did you get any, miss?”

As on preceding afternoons, I explained that “The World
at Home” did not drag subscribers in with a seine.

“You know that I got one last week, Martha, but the
people look for me now.  Poor Mr. Petty was at the gate with
a flaming sword.  I mean, the shovel.”

“Then he wasn’t sober, miss.”

“Obviously not.  I let sleeping Pettys lie, since
he put me out of the house as ‘them
agents.’”

“Eight sticks, some fence rails and three
p.
16
barrels,” chanted Martha, to the wood-basket on
the hearth.

“And the last timber sold for the mortgage,” I
ruminated.  “How’s the caravansary: the food, O
faithful Achates?  I can eat less.”

“For the land’s sake, don’t, Miss
Enid!  You don’t weigh more’n a sparrow
now.  It’s a long road that’s got no
turnin’, but joy cometh in the mornin’, as the hymn
says.”  Martha stood over me, her hands under her
apron, her little shawl crossed and tied behind.
“There’s some corn meal left—”

“Too fattening.”

“A quart of vinegar—”

“Ah, now we are arriving!  Socrates and the
hemlock!”

“No, miss, vinegar.  Half a ham, some
rice—”

“And you call it low rations!” I rebuked.
“I’ll bet my hard-earned subscription that your
grandfather wasn’t a highwayman, Martha.”

“My soul, no, miss!  There wasn’t
nothin’ of the kind in our family.  He was a
elder.”

“I feared so.  There is nothing of the pirate
concealed about you, else you’d not be toasting starvation
with half a ham and a pound of rice in reserve.  You and Dr.
Prince could do ensemble work as star pessimists.  Now,
nature contrived me in a perverse and whimsical mood.  Give
me a black night and a star’s twinkle, and I’ll dig
for doubloons; a red sunset and a dark woods converts me into a
doughty knight, ready to hew his way through the thorny hedge of
the world!  Eight sticks and half a ham!  Woman,
we’re good for flood or barricade.”

But Martha, hardened to a lifetime of like panegyrics, was not
to be diverted.

p.
17
“Yes, miss.  So I say.  We must do
something.”

“The telephone!  It shall go at the end of the
month.”

“And there’s that there Duchess, Miss Enid,
sittin’ in there in a gold frame, not doin’ no good
to nobody.  The collector gentleman said it would bring its
price, miss.”

I came to earth with a thud, and retrod the battlefield
peopled by ghosts of past encounters.  The Fierienti
Duchess, my grandmother’s great-great-grandmother, had been
the family mascot for generations.  Cary Penwick alone, as
grandma’s last surviving male relative, should have the
responsibility of the Laughing Duchess.

“But, don’t forget it’s yours, Miss,”
Martha held on.  “Your grandma says,
‘Martha,’ she says, ‘take care of her always,
and keep the Duchess dusted!’  ‘I will,
ma’am,’ says I, ‘long as there’s breath
in my veins!’ says I.  ‘Tenny rate, Miss Enid,
there’s that there Chinese idol settin’ on his heels,
lookin’ enough like Wung Loo at the laundry to be his
brother—”

This of thee, O shade of Buddha!

“—And that boy with wings on his feet,
’stead of skates—”

And thou, immortal Mercury!

“—You could get as high as two hundred for
’em, maybe.”

I admitted the possibility, but was determined to submit the
Fierienti only to the first authority among collectors.

And, at that moment, with the ringing of the telephone, the
unexpected stepped in as stage manager, and gave me a protracted
performance for twenty-four hours.

p.
18
“I guess Dr. Prince’s ringin’ to see
if we’re all right for the night,” speculated Martha,
who invariably gambled upon a letter before opening it.

“Suppose you go up to town tomorrow, Enid, and consult
Penwick,” came Prince’s kind voice.  “We
are instructed to catch opportunity by the forelock.  And,
if you want me to go along—”

I cruelly ignored the eager implication.  I would go
alone.

“Collecting becomes an unmoral science,” he went
on.  “Knowing your incredible
enthusiasms—”

“Help!  Help!” I interposed.

“—Your incredible enthusiasms, you should not take
the antiques with you.  Let a collector come out and value
them.”

As I had a vision of starting with eight inches of Buddha and
returning with five hundred cash, I demurred, but he held his
point, and finally I capitulated, and for peace at any price
agreed to telephone him which train to meet.  In the
morning, I covered the two miles to the station with the elation
of the adventuress who casts her last two dollars on the roulette
of the railroad, and draws a possible fare to fortune.

In the exposition building, I went from office to committee
rooms, only to discover that the vice president was away for the
day, and not expected to return until evening, and, having
dropped forty degrees mentally, I sat at the end of a corridor,
killing time upon the pretense of examining a telephone
register.  Three delegates, obviously wined and lunched,
halted near, talking.

“Yes, yes, smart chap,” said number one,
“but keen on the main chance.  Ever hear the story of
old Mrs. Mace’s Romney?  Old Mrs. Mace, widow
p. 19
of his
friend, owned a great Romney.  He was hard on its track and
sent an agent, who valued it, as a good copy, at two
hundred.  The old lady indignantly refuses.  The
collector goes off to Mexico to investigate the Talahiti
excavations, but sends a second agent, who declares it to be
worth all of three hundred.  The old lady, finally, at the
cud of everything, sells.  The Romney disappears.  When
her money goes, the old lady in despair dies.  Now, his
Romney sells high in the thousands.  Not a nice story,
what?”

The chorus admitted that it was not, and I sat petrified, and
thankful that I had a relative among the elect.  Number two
spoke:

“There is big betting on his wager with
Dantrè.  He swears to better Dantrè’s
exhibits with a gem that will knock them into cockles.  Says
he can produce a genuine original Fierienti.”

“Piffle!” exclaimed number three.
“There were two Fierientis, the Laughing Duchess, destroyed
in the great fire of London, and its copy, made by Fierienti, now
in the Metropolitan.”

Arguing this point they passed on and I sat with face bent
over the book, and with thought rushing tumultuously.  My
picture, at Brookchase, was the original Fierienti, the copy of
which was in the Metropolitan.  Of this there had never been
a doubt; the Chevalier de Russy, member of the French Academy,
had vouched for it, when on a visit to grandma.  Besides, I
had its records.  Who, then, was “he”?  And
where could “he” find another original Fierienti?

I was on my feet to follow and find out, when Prince’s
words swung back to me: “Knowing your incredible
enthusiasms—”  I sank back, crushing
p. 20
down impulse,
and then, under a desperate desire for action, gave his number to
the local exchange, and entered booth number four.

Inside the booth, through the blurred reflection of my own
image upon the glass, I discerned the outline of a man, in the
adjoining booth: a smooth, dark head bent upon a slender hand,
above which was visible an odd cufflink, two swastikas in red
Roman gold.  My call was answered by Prince’s old
housekeeper.

“This is Miss Legree,” I said.  Then came
Prince’s voice: “What luck, Enid?”

“None,” I replied.  “Penwick is away
for the day, and I am glad that I left the Fierienti at home,
although I am eager to solve a mystery.  I overheard
something about another Fierienti, whereas I know that there is
no other.  I will be at Brookchase by the four o’clock
express, but can walk to the gate at the crossroads.”

Prince laughed, and as I rang off I clearly heard the voice of
the man in the adjoining booth, repeating his number.  He,
in turn then, must have overheard me.  Dismissing this as
irrelevant, I went to the station and waited morosely until the
afternoon express bore me back to the realization of being the
poorer by one railroad fare.

Driving between bare fields, Prince said: “Don’t
worry.”

“If a woman loses an eye or has a toothache it is quite
intelligible,” I resented.  “But if she
collapses from nerves, or stares nothingness in the face, men
tell her not to worry.  I shall write to Cary Penwick
tomorrow, and hand the Laughing Duchess over to him.  He may
sell it for what he can get.”

p. 21
Prince
flicked the colt to a trot, and said: “Better go
slow.  I’ve heard some queer things about
collectors.”

“Things like old Mrs. Mace’s Romney, I
suppose,” I said.

He jerked the reins abruptly: “What of it?  There
was an old Mrs. Mace in our home town who owned a Romney.
Jove! I’d forgotten all about that.  Why—”
he stopped short, his brows drawn sharply into a frown.  I
related the story I had heard, but added that all collectors were
not pickpockets.  Prince, however, drove in thoughtful
silence.  “I wish you’d let me do more for
you,” he began at the gate.  But I ran up the path,
laughing back at him.

At seven o’clock the unexpected again rang the
telephone, and thought instantly visualized the voice as fat,
florid and fed.  The revolution was therefore complete when
it said: “Cousin Enid, this is Cary Penwick.  I hope
you remember me. . . .  Yes, my dear girl, twenty-five
years!  You would not recognize me.”

“Oh, but I should!” I cried, happily.
“A dark-eyed boy with his hair in his eyes, and a brain set
on adventure. . . .  But your voice does not in the least
sound like you.  Do come out and let me see you.”

He assured me that such had been his intention, but an
official banquet and a directors’ meeting intervened.
Finally, it was decided that he should motor out after the
banquet, and remain at Brookchase for the night.  “Do
not wait up for me.  Your man can meet me.  I shall be
there by twelve,” he said.

Having recovered from the natural effects of
p. 22
hearing that
there was no man, he added: “By the way, Enid, I seem to
remember that your grandmother had some quaint old things.
Were there not several paintings and a carving or two?
Trifles probably, but I might help you do something with
them.”

“Trifles!  Why, Cary, surely you remember the
Laughing Duchess?  It has been the family treasure for
generations, that and the Mercury.  It is about these things
that I want particularly to consult you,” I replied.

“Well, well,” he said, tolerantly, “I
vaguely recall the piece.  A very nice copy, no doubt, of
Fierienti’s Duchess.”

“Copy!” I cried.  “Indeed, it is the
original from which Fierienti made his copy.  I can prove it
from grandma’s records.  It is the Fierienti thought
to have been destroyed in the London fire.”

He laughed softly.

“I will have a look at it, Enid.  I hate to
disillusion you, but old ladies attach exaggerated value to their
treasures.  No doubt your grandmother believed in
it.”

“She was your grandmother, too,” I found myself
murmuring.

“Surely, surely,” he continued cheerfully,
“but the things are yours, my dear girl, and it occurred to
me as an opportunity now for you to raise a little something on
them.”

He rang off, and I sat with my head in my hands.  The
Fierienti a copy!  I could not credit it.  In spite of
the disappointment which the mirage of a fortune almost
invariably disguises, this alluring, laughing little
figure’s identity had been family history.  Three
centuries had staked
p. 23
their faiths upon it.  Yet, Cary
Penwick was an expert. . . .  I paced the floor, assuring
myself that even experts were not infallible; the Chevalier de
Russy was an authority, whereas Cary had been but a careless boy
when he saw the Fierienti.  My mercurial spirit soared
upward again; I refused to believe the worst until confronted by
it; then I would surrender gracefully.  I ran to tell Martha
of the guest’s coming, and found her poised, Mahomet-like,
between the ether of joy and the mundane condition of the
larder.

“There’s enough coffee for one, with corn muffins,
rice fritters and broiled ham—”

“If he asks for truffles, serve the Buddha; if for
partridge, bring on the Mercury!”

“Eight sticks and two barrels,” chanted Martha,
“and I say it’s the Lord who sent him here at this
time.  Maybe he’ll buy that there Duchess at your
price, miss.  But, I can’t heat up the library: it
would take the whole woodshed.  Many’s the time, when
Mr. Cary wasn’t but ten year old, he would climb up on them
shelves and pitch the books down on me.  And eat!
Anything this side of a tin can that boy could eat.”

The living room at Brookchase was early Victorian.  Its
threadbare, flowered carpet, high cornices, brass fender and
firedogs, with long mirror over them, its harpbacked chairs, and
Dickens at Gadshill, were free of more modern innovation than a
brass lamp and the crashing contrast of a telephone.

By nine o’clock three of the precious logs crackled on
the andirons, and grandma’s armchair was drawn before
them.  On various pretenses Martha peered in the door, like
the prompter in
p.
24
the wings, at every few revolutions of the minute hand,
and latterly found the house owner before the mirror, adjusting a
stray lock of hair.

“That gray does become you, Miss Enid, if ’tis
your grandma’s made down, you being so straight and
slim.  But you didn’t put her pin on.  That
weepin’ willer is a grand piece!”

This worshipful object was the cameo of a lachrymose female
playing the harp over a mortuary urn.  “Yet, I
don’t know but them amber beads has more style!”
added Martha.  I assured her that unless Mr. Cary had
changed beyond belief, he would be as impervious to beads as to
sackcloth; and at the moment a motor horn sounded in the
lane.

“He has come out early!” I cried, catching up a
candle and lighting it, while Martha opened the outer door, like
the warden of a castle, sending a beam of light straight into the
eyes of a tall, slender man on the threshold.

“Cary!  Cary Penwick!” I cried, drawing him
into the firelight’s glow, where he stood, smiling a little
behind a dark, Van Dyke beard, and blinking a little behind
horn-rimmed glasses.  Martha hovered with: “Are your
feet dry, Mr. Cary?  I’d best be bringin’ your
grandma’s cordial!”

She hurried off, and I proffered the armchair.

“How good of you to leave the banquet early,” I
said, conscious now that an intent, but veiled, gaze was studying
me.

“I left it as the lesser attraction,” he said, in
a reserved voice that gave me a sense of baffled surprise.

“Why, you do not in the least resemble your voice over
the telephone!” I told him.  “Telephones are so
misleading.”

p.
25
“What was it like?” he asked.

“Rather fat and—clubby,” I confessed;
“but you are really like my childhood’s vague
dream-knight,” I laughed, as Martha reappeared with
cordial, in infinitesimal glasses.  Inside the door she
lingered.

“What of the old Deacon, Mr. Cary?  He died, of
course, poor creature!  A body couldn’t help
bein’ fond of him, for all his ways.”

“The Deacon, of course”—he looked absently
in his glass.  “Well, his habits killed him, after a
while.  He drank too much, you know.”

“Then it wasn’t hydrophobia, sir?  That was a
blessing!  I never seen a dog more devoted than the Deacon
was to you, Mr. Cary!”  Martha closed the door, and my
guest stood on the hearth rug, smiling gravely, but with an
expression best described as a listening face.  Glancing
from ivory Buddha to winged Mercury, his look returned to me, and
lingered, as in indecision.

“You are looking for the Fierienti,” I smiled
back; “I am immune to the wiles of collectors.”

“Guilty!” he said, with the same shy
aloofness.

“But you must see grandma’s last portrait
first.  Brookchase remains primitive enough for
candles.”  I held one under the picture above the
mirror.  “The Chevalier de Russy sketched her in oils,
to preserve what he called the expression
‘angelique,’ and afterwards sent me this from
France.  The eyes always follow one with
understanding.  See how they smile upon you, Cary!  As
though she knew that you had fulfilled her pride and faith, and
had become the honorable man she had aimed to make you in
spite—” I stopped.  His eyes were upon mine, in
the glass, with profound questioning.  “In spite of
all,” I ended.

p.
26
“In spite of all!” he repeated, drawn to
grandma’s look, and although aware that when a skeleton is
safely locked in its closet, it is wise to lose the key, I felt
the moment to be surcharged with unspoken confidence.

“You remember that she would not admit inheritance to be
a menace to you, and held that a man’s character lay in his
own hands.”

“You mean that because my father happened to be—a
rascal, I could successfully live over the effects?” he
asked, impersonally; but the question in his eyes caused me to
motion him to the easy chair, and I sat beside him.

Prince calls me half irrepressible pagan, and Prince has an
aggravating way of winning out; but there are moments when
nothing more romantic than the protective hen seems
uppermost.  Therefore, I attribute the hour which followed
to the subconsciousness, groping to assert its right of
divination.  Back of his impersonality lay an expression of
profound solitariness, an appeal as impassioned as it was
naïve: quickly masked, but revealing some dumb tragedy of
soul.  The source mattered nothing to me.  Words from a
modern philosopher swam through my thoughts: “All tormented
souls are not in Inferno.  They sit beside us, smile in our
faces, devoured by the flame of present torture.  Reach to
them the drop of cold water.”

Imagination’s shuttle began to spin its swift, silent
threads around this aloof personality, and I spoke without
restraint of grandma’s enduring, pervasive spirituality,
and of his boyhood’s promise.  Gradually, then
eagerly, response came, his restraint unveiling boyishly under
the luxury of sympathy.  He talked glowingly of Italy, of
p. 27
unconfessed
adventure in Egypt, of wandering and wonder in Sahara, of
unexplained mystery in India.  Conversationally, his proved
to be a sentient comprehension, finely imaginative and
suggestive, and momentarily revealing an unsuspected, dual side,
alien to the wild boy that I had known in childhood.  At
last, I said:

“Forgive me, but experiencing and appreciating life as
you do, is it not remarkable that you have not
married?”

“No.  Some are born to be units,” he paused,
“and the women I have known have not been like
you.”

“Ah, now you shall see the Laughing Duchess!” I
returned, rising for the candle.

He smiled down gravely upon me.

“It has been an unusual hour for me.  You have
caused me to forget time and errand.  But, now I must look
at your things and go.”

I reminded him of his promise to remain for the night at
Brookchase, and he cast a wistful look around the room, but
repeated:

“It is better that I should go.”

Feeling baffled, yet mentally exhilarated, I went into the
adjoining library, but the cold draft blew out my candle.
Groping my way back, with the little picture, I was arrested by
the scene in the room beyond.  My guest stood with arms
folded and face lifted to grandma’s portrait, as though, in
a tense moment, he were asking an impassioned question and
receiving a benedictory answer.  When I entered, he turned
to examine the Mercury through his glass, and presently said:

“This is undoubtedly a genuine Benvenuto, Miss
Legree.  I believe your fortune lies here!”

p.
28
“Miss Legree!” I chided, and be flushed
slightly, adding: “Enid.”

I reminded him that grandma owned only originals, and related
the history of the Fierienti; how it had been painted by the
great Italian for the queen, who was godmother to the little
Laughing Duchess; how it came into England with the eldest son of
the duchess, and thence into France with a grandson, an

émigré
from the Revolution, who was
grandma’s father.

“It was her treasure, but you, yourself, prevented us
from making a fatal mistake,” I smiled back to the luring
laughter of the picture.  “She needed money once,
almost as badly as—”  I stopped.  In his
bladelike glance of comprehension, quickly sheathed, lay the
perception of a forlorn hope in the shape of half a ham and eight
sticks of wood.  “As many do,” I added,
tritely.  “The mortgage was due and I suggested
selling this picture, but the sons of the family had owned it,
and she wished to wait for your coming, that yours might be the
decision.  You may call it an old lady’s
over-scrupulous sense of loyalty, but I think it very
sweet.  She sold, instead, the companion to the Buddha, and
left the Duchess to me.  Now, I can, in a measure, fulfill
her wish.  Sell the bronze and ivory, Cary, but do as you
will about the Laughing Duchess.”

I put the picture in his hands, and he sat under the lamp
examining it with an expert’s eagerness.  At last he
said:

“I believe this to be the original Fierienti.  Will
you trust me with it, irrespective of relationship?”

I said that I would trust him with anything, and he smiled,
gravely, and took out pen and
p. 29
check-book.  “I must feel
that you believe me to be acting for your best interest.  I
confess that I came with the intention of buying the
picture.  Its records were hazy where the London fire was
concerned, and it is a gem, but the Cellini Mercury must be
valued by the committee.  I will leave you a deposit to
secure both as my property, and you will receive the maximum
value after the final estimate is made.  But you may
withdraw the sale at any time during the coming month, by wiring
to the bank upon which this check is drawn.”

“You are not—” I tried to say.

“Acting merely upon a personal basis?  Not in the
least.  I am eager to own the things, but will hold them at
your disposal for a time.”

“Then they are yours,” I said.  “For I
confess having intended to sell them to the first collector
tomorrow.  And probably rue it ever afterwards, like old
Mrs. Mace and her Romney.”

He rose, frowning darkly.

“So!  You have heard of that nefarious
transaction?  Well,” he added, cryptically, “you
may have cause to thank old Mrs. Mace’s Romney.
Justice has a strange, inexplicable way of working out her
problems in spite of us.”

It was here that the clock struck eleven-thirty.

“I feel like Cinderella,” I said, my hand in a
strong clasp which was folding a check in it.  “I do
not want you to go, Cary!”  For something told me that
I should see this brave, elusive personality no more.

“And I astonish myself by not wanting to go,” he
said.  “This room, this hour, will linger like the
perfume of a dream.  Adieu, Cinderella!”

His lips touched my hand.  A motor horn
p. 30
sounded
sharply.  He caught up the antiques and his overcoat; there
came a rush of cold air, a door slammed and the motor rolled
off.  Then a blinding wave swept over consciousness, and for
a second I saw two lamp flames instead of one.  I caught at
the table, and stood helpless with fact hammering the thing upon
unwilling reason, for, on the cuff, lifted to thrust into his
coat sleeve, I had seen two swastikas, in red Roman gold.

Then, I knew.

The smooth, dark head, the slender hand, the swastikas,
belonged to the man in the adjoining booth who had overheard my
conversation with Prince, even to the Brookchase address.
Thought, like the wireless, was humming electrically, putting
together the sinister puzzle, insisting upon me that I had been
robbed.  My fortune was gone; and at the same time perverse
subconsciousness was whispering: “No!  No!
No!”

Like the heroine of a movie melodrama, Martha advanced from
the door, with face set to tragedy.  She held out a
newspaper, uttering hoarsely:

“Look!  ’Tain’t him!”

The front page was lavishly decorated with the heads of
officers of the International Exposition, the center one in large
headlines: “Cary Penwick, vice president.”
Martha pointed dramatically to the heavy-jowled, baggy-eyed
visage, fully illustrating the voice over the wire.  She
looked over her shoulder fearfully, and around the room, before
whispering:

“That’s him!  Then who’s the other
one?”

“Oh, he has gone,” I said, hysterically;
“quite gone, and everything with him!”

Martha sank on the nearest chair, and the paper fell
fluttering to the floor.

p.
31
“I said we’d wake up some mornin’ and
find ourselves murdered in our beds on account of that there
Duchess!” she wailed.  I laughed helplessly; so after
all, I was juggled by fate into old Mrs. Mace’s
successor!  I smoothed out the bit of crumpled paper, under
the light, and read it mechanically.

“To Enid Legree. . . .  Forty thousand
dollars. . . .  Signed Ettère
Dantrè.”

Dantrè! . . .  And Dantrè had a wager on
with Penwick. . . .  And somebody had vowed to exhibit a
Fierienti!  And Dantrè had cried out about old Mrs.
Mace’s Romney!  What did it mean? . . .  And that
heavy, shifty-eyed countenance in the paper. . . .  I sprang
up, as the telephone again rang, with hope surging upward.
It was the voice of the vice president of the Exposition:

“I could not get out tonight, my dear girl. . . .
’Fraid you’d wait up.  I’ll see you in the
morning.”

The sharp contrast of that voice’s quality enhanced the
memory of the other.  I thanked him, and proceeded to play
the game.

“What should you say an original Fierienti would
bring?” I asked.

“Your old copy?  Well, about two-fifty, as
it’s you, Enid.”

“And a genuine Cellini Mercury?” I added.

“A Cellini?  Oh, my dear girl, that is
nonsense!  No doubt, though, yours is a nice little
imitation that ought to bring you as high as fifty
dollars.”

I thanked him, and rang off.

“Martha,” I said, breathlessly, “something
tells me that we are on the brink of a fortune.”

Martha shook her head.  “You always have
p. 32
been, Miss
Enid,” she said.  But I went to bed with a sense of
elation and fearlessness, prompted by the memory of a voice.

At seven the next morning I had Prince over the wire.

“Are you willing to catch the eight-thirty express, and
to stop first and relieve me of a check for forty thousand
dollars?” I asked.  “Stop, you will hurt the
receiver!”

After all, an ideal supplanted is hardly overthrown.  I
confess, however, to a day of apprehension until the rural free
delivery handed me a letter.  It was consistently terse:

“When you greeted me as another, I knew that
it was the only way to insure the safety of your valuables.
Had you suspected me you would not have trusted a stranger.
Yours is the right to withdraw the sale.  Otherwise, a check
for the maximum value will go to you.  Forgive me,
Cinderella, and think gently of

Dantrè
.”

Withdraw it? . . .

When I ran to the gate at sunset to hear Prince’s
sequel, it was with high heart, for I felt that the day of the
lady agent had waned.  Martha was joyfully trolling a somber
tune in the kitchen; ahead of me was the radiant vision of a new
roof, a basket laden for Mrs. Petty, and sticks innumerable in
the woodshed.  The vision materialized, when Prince gravely
placed a bank-book in my hand.  His measures had been
summary.  He went first to Penwick’s hotel, and called
him up to say that his estimate of Miss Legree’s antiques
was too low; she had sold them.

“Oh, I am sorry!  After all, he was a
relative,” I said, regretfully.

p.
33
“Stick to the past tense, please,” said
Prince, briefly.  “His language over the wire
wasn’t publishable.  He is safer at a distance, and I
implied as much.”

“And—Dantrè?” I ventured.

“Banks conjure by that name.  You did a wonderful
stroke of business, Enid—for a woman.”

Had I?  I hid a smile.

“Dantrè is a Richard Burton for wandering, and an
infallible expert.  Collectors swear by him.  I heard
an odd thing about the man today.  It seems that
Dantrè is not his name.  His father was a notorious
criminal speculator, and ruined many before he served his time in
the penitentiary, Dantrè is equally keen on the trail of
tricksters in collecting, but the disgrace made a recluse of
him.  He has gone again, and his agent was placing the
Fierienti on exhibition today.  I’ve no doubt that he
turned up from the end of the earth just to get even
with—”  Prince hesitated.  “You see,
Enid, I remembered the name of the collector who bought old Mrs.
Mace’s Romney.  I hated to tell you.  It was Cary
Penwick.”

But memory swung back to a firelit hour and a dark, listening
face upon a slender hand, with two swastikas—

“Oh, I am glad it wasn’t Dantrè!” I
breathed to the spring sunset.

Virginia Woodward Cloud
.

p. 34
LONG,
LONG AGO

When the brakeman swung back the door and with resonant
indifference shouted in Esperanto “Granderantal
stashun,” Galbraithe felt like jumping up and gripping the
man’s hand.  It was five years since he had heard that
name pronounced as it should be pronounced, because it was just
five years since he had resigned from the staff of a New York
daily and left to accept the editorship of a small Kansas
weekly.  These last years had been big years, full of the
joy of hard work, and though they had left him younger than when
he went, they had been five years away from New York.  Now
he was back again for a brief vacation, eager for a sight of the
old crowd.

When he stepped from the car he was confused for a
minute.  In the mining camp at present substituted for the
former terminal he was green as a tenderfoot.  It took him a
second to get his bearings, but as soon as he found himself
fighting for his feet in the dear old stream of commuters he knew
he was at home again.  The heady jostle among familiar types
made him feel that he hadn’t been gone five days, although
the way the horde swept past him proved that he had lost some of
his old-time skill and cunning in a crowd.  But he
didn’t mind; he was here on a holiday, and they were here
on business and had their rights.  He recognized every
mother’s son of them.  Neither
p. 35
the young
ones nor the old ones were a day older.

They wore the same clothes, carried the same bundles and
passed the same remarks.  The solid business man weighted
with the burden of a Long Island estate was there; the young man
in a broker’s office who pushed his own lawn mower at New
Rochelle was there; the man who got aboard at One Hundred and
Twenty-eighth Street was there.  There was the man with the
Van Dyke, the man with a mustache, and the fat, smooth-shaven
man, and the wives, the sisters and the stenographers of all
these.  They were just as Galbraithe had left them—God
bless ’em.

Swept out upon Forty-second Street, he took a long, full
breath.  The same fine New York sky was overhead (the same
which roofed Kansas) and the same New York sun shone down upon
him (even as in its gracious bounty it shone upon Kansas).
The thrill of it made him realize as never before that, though
the intervening years had been good to him, New York was in his
blood.  His eyes seized upon the raw, angular buildings as
eagerly as an exiled hill man greets friendly mountain
peaks.  There are no buildings on earth which look so
friendly, once a man gets to know them, as those about the Grand
Central.  Galbraithe noticed some new structures, but even
these looked old.  The total effect was exactly as he had
left it.  That was what he appreciated after his sojourn
among the younger cities of the West.  New York was
permanent—as fixed as the pole star.  It was
unalterable.

Galbraithe scorned to take cab, car or bus this morning.
He wanted to walk—to feel beneath his feet the dear old
humpy pavement.  It did his soul
p. 36
good to find men repairing the
streets in the same old places—to find as ever new
buildings going up and old buildings coming down, and the
sidewalks blocked in the same old way.  He was clumsy at his
hurdling, but he relished the exercise.

He saw again with the eyes of a cub reporter every tingling
feature of the stirring street panorama, from gutter to roof top,
and thrilled with the magic and vibrant bigness of it all.
Antlike, men were swarming everywhere bent upon changing, and yet
they changed nothing.  That was what amazed and comforted
him.  He knew that if he allowed five years to elapse before
returning to his home town in Kansas he wouldn’t recognize
the place, but here everything was as he had left it, even to the
men on the corners, even to the passers-by, even to the articles
in the store windows.  Flowers at the florist’s,
clothing at the haberdasher’s, jewels at the
jeweler’s, were in their proper places, as though during
the interval nothing had been sold.  It made him feel as
eternal as the Wandering Jew.  The sight of the completed
public library restored him to normal for a moment but, after
all, the building looked as though it had been long
finished.  A public library always does.  It is born a
century old.

The old Fifth Avenue Hotel was gone, but he wondered if it had
ever been.  He didn’t miss it—hardly noticed any
change.  The new building fitted into its niche as perfectly
as though it had been from the first ordained for that particular
spot.  It didn’t look at all the upstart that every
new building in Kansas did.

He hurried on to Park Row, and found himself surrounded by the
very newsboys he had left.  Not
p. 37
one of them had grown a day
older.  The lanky one and the lame one and the little one
were there.  Perhaps it was because they had always been as
old as it is possible for a boy to be, that they were now no
older.  They were crying the same news to the same
indifferent horde scurrying past them.  Their noisy shouting
made Galbraithe feel more than ever like a cub reporter.  It
was only yesterday that his head was swirling with the first mad
excitement of it.

Across the street the door stood open through which he had
passed so many times.  Above it he saw the weather-beaten
sign which had always been weather-beaten.  The little brick
building greeted him as hospitably as an open fire at home.
He knew every inch of it, from the outside sill to the city room,
and every inch was associated in his mind with some big success
or failure.  If he came back as a vagrant spirit a thousand
years from now he would expect to find it just as it was.  A
thousand years back this spot had been foreordained for it.
Lord, the rooted stability of this old city!  He had
forgotten that he no longer had quarters in town, and must secure
a room.  He was still carrying his dress-suit case, but he
couldn’t resist the temptation of first looking in on the
old crowd and shaking hands.  He hadn’t kept in touch
with them except that he still read religiously every line of the
old sheet, but he had recognized the work of this man and that,
and knew from what he had already seen that nothing inside any
more than outside could be changed.  It was about nine
o’clock, so he would find Hartson, the city editor, going
over the morning papers, with his keen eyes alert to discover
what had been missed during the
p. 38
night.  As he hurried up the
narrow stairs his heart was as much in his mouth as it had been
the first day he was taken on the staff.  Several new office
boys eyed him suspiciously, but he walked with such an air of
familiarity that they allowed him to pass unquestioned.  At
the entrance to the sacred precinct of the city editor’s
room he paused with all his old-time hesitancy.  After
working five years under Hartson and then five years for himself
as a managing editor, be found he had lost nothing of his
wholesome respect for the man.  Hartson’s back was
turned when Galbraithe entered, and he waited at the rail until
the man looked up.  Then with a start Galbraithe saw that
this wasn’t Hartson at all.

“I—I beg pardon,” he stammered.

“Well?” demanded the stranger.

“I expected to find Mr. Hartson,” explained
Galbraithe.

“Hartson?”

“I used to be on the staff and—”

“Guess you’re in the wrong office,” the
stranger shut him off abruptly.

For a moment Galbraithe believed this was possible, but every
scarred bit of furniture was in its place and the dusty clutter
of papers in the corner had not been disturbed.  The new
city editor glanced suspiciously toward Galbraithe’s
dress-suit case and reached forward as though to press a
button.  With flushed cheeks Galbraithe retreated, and
hurried down the corridor toward the reportorial rooms.  He
must find Billy Bertram and get the latter to square him with the
new city editor.  He made at once for Billy Bertram’s
desk, with hand extended.  Just beyond was the desk he
himself
p.
39
had occupied for five years.  Bertram looked
up—and then Galbraithe saw that it wasn’t Bertram at
all.

“What can I do for you, old man?” inquired the
stranger.  He was a man of about Bertram’s age, and a
good deal of Bertram’s stamp.

“I was looking for Billy Bertram,” stammered
Galbraithe.  “Guess he must have shifted his
desk.”

He glanced hopefully at the other desks in the room, but he
didn’t recognize a face.

“Bertram?” inquired the man who occupied
Bertram’s desk.  He turned to the man next to him.

“Say, Green, any one here by the name of
Bertram?”

Green lighted a fresh cigarette, and shook his head.

“Never heard of him,” he replied
indifferently.

“He used to sit here,” explained Galbraithe.

“I’ve held down this chair for fifteen months, and
before me a chump by the name of Watson had that honor.
Can’t go back any farther than that.”

Galbraithe put down his suit case, and wiped his
forehead.  Every one in the room took a suspicious glance at
the bag.

“Ever hear of Sanderson?” Galbraithe inquired of
Green.

“Nope.”

“Ever hear of Wadlin or Jerry Donahue or
Cartwright?”

Green kicked a chair toward him.

“Sit down, old man,” he suggested.
“You’ll feel better in a minute.”

“Ever hear of Hartson?  Ever hear of old Jim
Hartson?”

p.
40
“That’s all right,” Green encouraged
him.  “If you have a line in that bag you think will
interest us, bring it out.  It’s against office rules,
but—”

Galbraithe tried to recall if, on his way downtown, he had
inadvertently stopped anywhere for a cocktail.  He had no
recollection of so doing.  Perhaps he was a victim of a
mental lapse—one of those freak blank spaces of which the
alienists were talking so much lately.  He made one more
attempt to place himself.  In his day he had been one of the
star reporters of the staff.

“Ever hear of—of Galbraithe?” he inquired
anxiously.

By this time several men had gathered around the two desks as
interested spectators.  Galbraithe scanned their faces, but
he didn’t recognize one of them.

“Haven’t got a card about your person, have
you?” inquired Green.

“Why, yes,” answered Galbraithe, fumbling for his
case.  The group watched him with some curiosity, and
Harding, the youngest man, scenting a story, pushed to the
front.  With so many eyes upon him Galbraithe grew so
confused that he couldn’t find his card case.

“I’m sure I had it with me,” he
apologized.  “Remember where you were last
night?” inquired Green.

“Just got in this morning,” answered
Galbraithe.  “I—here it is.”

He drew out a card and handed it to Green.  The group
gathered closer and read it.

“Harvey L. Galbraithe, Moran County Courier.”

Green solemnly extended his hand.

p.
41
“Glad to meet you, Mr. Galbraithe.  Up here
on business, or pleasure?”

“I used to work here,” explained Galbraithe.
“I came up on a vacation to see the boys.”

“Used to work on this sheet?” exclaimed Green, as
though doubting it.

“I left in nineteen seven,” answered
Galbraithe.

“Nineteen seven,” exclaimed Green, with a low
whistle.  “You are sure some old-timer.
Let’s see—that’s over fifteen hundred days
ago.  When did you come on?”

“Just before the Spanish War,” answered Galbraithe
eagerly.  “Hartson sent me to Cuba.”

Harding came closer, his eyes burning with new interest.

“Gee,” he exclaimed, “those must have been
great days.  Why in thunder can’t Taft stir up a
little trouble like that?  I ran across an old codger at the
Press Club once who had been with Dewey at Manila.”

He spoke as Galbraithe might speak of the Crimean War.
He pressed the latter for details, and Galbraithe, listening to
the sound of his own voice, allowed himself to be led on.
When he was through he felt toothless, and as though his hair had
turned gray.

“Those were the happy days,” exclaimed
Harding.  “The game was worth playing then—eh,
old man?”

“Yes,” mumbled Galbraithe.  “But
don’t any of you know what has become of
Hartson?”

“Haydon would probably remember him—”

“Haydon?” broke in Galbraithe.  “Is he
here?”

He looked wistfully about the room to the corner where the
exchange editor used to sit.

p.
42
“He died last spring,” said Green.
“Guess he was the last leaf on the tree.”

“He came on five years ahead of me,” said
Galbraithe.  “He and I did the barrel murders
together.”

“What was that story?” inquired Harding.

Galbraithe looked at Harding to make sure this was not some
fool joke.  At the time nothing else had been talked of in
New York for a month, and he and Haydon had made something of a
name for themselves for the work they did on it.  Harding
was both serious and interested—there could be no doubt
about that.  That was eight years ago, and it stuck out in
Galbraithe’s mind as fresh as though it were
yesterday.  But what he was just beginning to perceive was
that this was so because he had been away from New York.  To
those living on here and still fighting the old game it had
become buried, even as tradition, in the multiplicity of
subsequent stories.  These younger men who had superseded
him and his fellows already had their own big stories.  They
came every day between the dawn and the dark, and then again
between the dark and the dawn.  Day after day they came
unceasingly, at the end of a week dozens of them, at the end of
the month hundreds, at the end of a year thousands.  It was
fifteen hundred days ago that he had been observing the manifold
complications of these million people, and since that time a
thousand volumes had been written about as many tragedies enacted
in the same old setting.  Time here was measured in hours,
not years.  Only the stage remained unchanged.

Galbraithe stood up, so dazed that he faltered as though with
the palsy.  Harding took his arm.

p.
43
“Steady, old man,” he cautioned.
“You’d better come out and have a drink.”

Galbraithe shook his head.  He felt sudden resentment at
the part they were forcing upon him.

“I’m going back home,” he announced.

“Come on,” Harding encouraged him.
“We’ll drink to the old days, eh?”

“Sure,” chimed in Green.  The others, too,
rose and sought their hats.

“I won’t,” replied Galbraithe,
stubbornly.  “I’m going back home, I tell
you.  And in ten years I’ll be twenty-five years
younger than any of you.”

He spoke with some heat.  Harding laughed, but Green grew
sober.  He placed his hand on Galbraithe’s arm.

“Right,” he said.  “Get out, and God
bless you, old man.”

“If only Haydon had been here—” choked
Galbraithe.

“I expect he’s younger than any of us,”
replied Green, soberly.  “He’s measuring time by
eternities.”

Galbraithe picked up his bag.

“S’long,” he said.

He moved toward the door, and the entire group stood stock
still and without a word saw him go out.  He hurried along
the narrow corridor and past the city editor’s room.
He went down the old stairs, his shoulders bent and his legs
weak.  Fifteen hundred days were upon his shoulders.
He went out upon the street, and for a moment stood there with
his ears buzzing.  About him swarmed the same newsboys he
had left five years before, looking no older by a single
day.  Squinting his eyes, he studied them closely.
There was Red
p.
44
Mick, but as he looked more carefully he saw that it
wasn’t Red Mick at all.  It was probably Red
Mick’s younger brother.  The tall one, the lanky one
and the little lame one were there, but their names were
different.  The drama was the same, the setting the same,
but fifteen hundred days had brought a new set of actors for the
same old parts.  It was like seeing Shakespeare with a new
cast, but the play was older by centuries than any of
Shakespeare’s.

Galbraithe hailed a taxi.

“Granderantal stash-un,” he ordered.

Peering out the window, he watched the interminable procession
on street and sidewalks.  He gazed at the raw, angular
buildings—permanent and unalterable.  Overhead a
Kansas sun shone down upon him—the same which in its
gracious bounty shone down upon New York.

Frederick Orin Bartlett
.

p. 45
THE
RIGHT WHALE’S FLUKES

’Ware th’ sparm whale’s jaw,

an’ th’ right whale’s flukes!

—
Old Whaling Maxim
.

In the old whaling museum on Johnny Cake Hill there is a big
room with a fireplace where, on a rainy or stormy day, the
whaling captains like to gather; and when storms or cold keep him
from his rocking chair on the after deck of his Fannie,
Cap’n Mark Brackett climbs the hill to the old museum and
establishes himself in a chair before the fire.  From the
windows you may look down a short, steep street to the piers
where great heaps of empty oil casks, brown with the grime of
years of service, block the way.  Tied up to the piers there
may be an old square-rigger, her top hamper removed, and empty so
that she rides high in the water and curtsies to every gust; and
you will see squat little auxiliary schooners preparing for the
summer’s cruising off Hatteras; and beyond these the eye
reaches across the lovely harbor to Fair Haven, gleaming in the
sun.

The old museum is rich with the treasures of the sea, and this
room where the captains like to gather is the central treasure
house.  An enormous old secretary of mahogany veneer stands
against one wall, and in cases about the room you will find old
ship’s papers bearing the names of presidents a hundred
years dead, pie crimpers carved from
p. 46
the solid heart of a whale’s
tooth, a little chest made by one of the Pitcairn Island
mutineers, canes fashioned from a shark’s backbone or the
jawbone of the cachalot, enormous old locks, half a dozen careful
models of whaling craft with the last rope and spar in place, and
the famous English frigate, in its glass case at one side.

I found Cap’n Brackett there one afternoon, in an old
chair before the fire, his black pipe humming like a kettle, his
stout body relaxed in comfortable ease.  He had advised me
to read “Moby Dick,” and had loaned me the book; and
when I entered, he looked up, a welcoming twinkle in the keen old
eyes that lurk behind their ambush of leathery wrinkles, and saw
the book in my hand.

“Read it?” he asked, between puffs.

“End to end,” I assured him.

“A great book.  A classic, I say.”

I nodded, and drew up a chair beside him, and opened the
volume to glance again across its pages and to dip here and there
into that splendid chronicle of the hunt for the great white
whale.  The old man watched me over his pipe, and I looked
up once and caught his eye.

“He’s stretching it a bit, of course,” I
suggested.  “You would never meet the same whale
twice, in all the wastes of the Seven Seas.”

The cap’n’s eyes gleamed faintly.  “Why
not?” he asked.

“It’s too much of a coincidence.”

“It happens.”

One certain method to provoke Cap’n Brackett to
narration is to pretend incredulity.  I smiled in a wary
fashion, and said nothing.

“There was one whale I saw four times, myself,” he
asserted.

p.
47
“How do you know it was the same?”

“He was marked. . . .  And the hand of Fate was in
it, too.”

I turned the leaves of the book, and chuckled provokingly,
watching covertly the captain’s countenance; and, as I
expected, he began presently to tell the story that was in his
mind.  His gruff old voice ran quietly along; the fire
puffed and flared as the wind whistled down the chimney, the snow
flurried past the windows and hid the harbor below us.
Cap’n Brackett’s voice droned on.

“You never heard of Eric Scarf,” the old man
thoughtfully began.  “Not more’n three or four
men alive now that knew him.  He were mate of the Thomas
Pownal when I knew him; a big, straight, fiery man, powerful and
strong.  He came of some Northland breed, with a great shock
of yellow hair, and eyes as blue as the sea; but he was not like
most Norsemen in being slow of speech and dull of wit.
Quick he was; quick to speak, and quick to think, and quick to
act; quick to anger, quick to take hurt, and quick to know Joan
for the one woman, when she began that v’y’ge on the
Thomas Pownal.

“James Tobbey was the captain of the Pownal; Joan was
his daughter.  She was a laughing girl, always laughing; a
child.  Her hair was fine-spun and golden, and it
curled.  When the fog got into it, it kinked into ringlets
as crisp as blubber scraps.  You wanted to rub them in your
hands, and hear them crinkle and crackle between your
palms.  And her voice, when she laughed, was the same way,
crisp and clean and strong; and her eyes were brown.  Give a
girl light curly hair and dark brown eyes, and any man’s
heart will skip a beat or so at seeing her.

p.
48
“She used to be everywhere about the ship, always
laughing; and little Jem Marvel forever hobbling at her
heels.  Jem was a baby, a little crippled baby, the son of a
sister of Joan’s who had died when Jem was born; and
Jem’s father was dead before that, although no one knew it
till the Andrew Thomes came back without him, two years
after.

“Thomes had been a hard, bitter man; and little Jem took
after him.  The baby was black—black hair, black eyes,
a swart skin; and when he dragged his withered leg about the deck
at Joan’s heels, his face worked and grimaced with spleen
that was terrible to watch.  Maybe six or seven he was then;
and for all Joan tended him like a mother, I’ve known him
to rip out at her black oaths that would rot a grown man’s
lips.

“Cap’n Tobbey kept his eyes away from the boy; but
Joan loved the little thing.  None but her could bear with
him.

“Eric Scarf was the only man aboard that ever tried to
win the baby.  I’ve seen him work for weeks at some
dinkus he was making for the boy, only to have Jem scorn it when
it was done.  He put six months of whittling into a little
model of the Pownal, with every rope in place; and when he gave
it to Jem at last, the boy smashed it on the deck, and stamped
upon the splinters.

“Eric but laughed.  The mate was a hard man with
men, quick with them; but with the child he was as gentle as Joan
herself.

“He loved Joan.  I loved Joan.  Every man
aboard the Pownal loved the girl; but Eric more than most of
us.  He sought ways to please her, and when he bungled it,
it was a fight with him to
p. 49
hide his grief.  One of the
greenies, when the Pownal was but a few days out, bumped against
the girl in the waist of the ship at the lurch of a wave; and
Eric knocked the man halfway to the fo’c’s’le
scuttle with one cuff.  But while the greenie was scrambling
to his feet, nursing his mouth with one tooth gone, Joan flamed
at Eric.

“‘Why was that?’ she demanded, her voice
very steady and hot.

“‘He bumped you!’ Eric tells her.

“‘I did not complain.  Only a coward hits men
who cannot hit back.’

“Eric’s face crimsoned; he whirled to the
man.  ‘Here,’ he shouted.  ‘Forget
I’m the mate.  Do you want the chance to get
even?’

“The man stared affrightedly, then ducked down the
scuttle like a rabbit, with Eric glaring after him.  But
when Eric turned, Joan had gone aft without another word, and he
was left to grope for understanding of her.

“Scarf was the strongest, quickest man I ever saw.
He was tall and powerful, and built slim and flat like a
whalebone spring.  He was boiling with his own strength all
the time.  He suffered for a vent for it; and he trod the
deck on his toes like a tiger, his fists swinging, not from any
lust for battle so much as from the excess of his own power and
vigor.

“I’ve seen him set his hands to tackle, and brush
the fo’mast hands aside, and do three men’s work
himself for the mere peace and joy it gave him to put forth all
his strength for a space; his shoulders and back and arms would
knot and swell and bulge with his efforts, and his lungs would
shout with gladness at the task.

p.
50
“Eric was never still.  On deck, where others
would lean against the rail with an eye to the ship and their
thoughts somewhere off across the water, he was always moving,
pacing up and down, climbing into the rigging, shifting this and
stirring that, restless like a caged beast.  Something drove
him.  He could not rest.  The springs of life and
energy in the man would have torn him to bits if you had held him
motionless for an hour.  He had to move, to act, to do; and
when he buffeted the men, it was neither native cruelty nor
bullying.  It was but the outburst of his own impatient,
restless power.

“It was a strange thing to see such a man gentling
little Jem Marvel, or wooing the boy to a romp about the deck;
and it was strange to see Scarf stand near Joan, watching her,
and the muscles in him twitching and straining with the agony of
inaction.  Eric worshipped Joan; and she bewildered
him.  He used to plan little pleasant surprises for her, and
watch her joy at them and take his reward in watching.  He
never spoke love to her, never so much as touched her hand unless
it might be to help her along the deck when the ship was
wallowing; and when the things he planned failed to delight her,
a man watching him could see that his very soul was writhing.

“I said Scarf was a quick man, quick of thought and
quick of deed.  But where Joan was concerned, he was very
dull and slow.  He never could learn, try as he would, to
please her; and his own impotence and his strength combined to
drive him to feats which he meant for wooing, but which the girl
abhorred.

“He trapped a little sea bird once, and made a tiny cage
for it, and left it for her to find; and
p. 51
when the girl
discovered it, she cried out with pity for the captive, and ran
on deck with the cage and set the little creature free.
Eric Scarf saw her, and she knew it was he who had done it, and
pitied him.

“‘I’m really grateful,’ she said,
smiling very gently at the big man, ‘but he is so unhappy
in a cage.’

“Eric tried to speak, and saw one of the men by the
tryworks grinning at him; so he went forward and drove the man
with blows to the knight’s heads, and Joan scorned him for
days thereafter.

“I’ve seen a cock pa’tridge ruffle his
feathers and beat and drum with his wings, all glory and strength
and vigor in his wooing; and no doubt the hen liked it.  But
if the pa’tridge had tried such measures in the courting of
a singing thrush, he would only have frighted and dismayed her
whom he sought to please.  It was so with Eric.  His
courting would have pleased some women; Joan it but disgusted and
disturbed.

“‘Eric Scarf and I were closer friends than you
would think; and I knew the big, strong man to be as shy and as
easy to take hurt as a child.  But it was his way when he
was hurt or shamed to strike out at the nearest, and so to those
without understanding he seemed a mere bully, cruel and exultant
in his strength.

“Lucky for us on the Pownal, Scarf delighted in the
whaling.  There was no other task in the world so fitted to
the man.  So strong he was that nothing short of a whale
could give him the fierce joy of battle which soothed him.
He drove his men as he drove himself, and they either broke under
it or became hard-bitten and enduring hands, fit to match
him.  His boat was always first away;
p. 52
and he would
strike and kill one whale and then another while other officers
were content with a single catch.  I’ve known him to
do what few attempt: to lower at night when moonlight revealed a
spout, and make his kill, and tow the fish to the ship by
dawn.  Cap’n Tobbey never interfered with Eric, for
the mate was too valuable; and when the mate’s watch was on
deck, he would lower and kill without ever calling the Old Man
from his cabin at all.

“I had heard of Scarf before this v’y’ge,
but never watched him work before; and many a time I found myself
biting my lip and holding the breath in my chest at the daring of
him.  In any weather short of a gale, he would lower; and
once two boats were swamped in lowering before he took the third
mate’s and got away—and got the whale.

“With such an officer, and decent luck, a quick voyage
was sure; and so it was this time.  Before we’d been
out two years, the casks were filled, oil was stored in
everything that would hold it, and the Old Man gave the word to
fly the Blue Peter and put for home.  We threw the bricks of
the tryworks overboard to lighten ship that much, and struck
across the South Pacific, fought our way around the Horn, and
took a long slant north’ard toward Tristan.

“There was no place to store more oil if we had it, and
we could not try out if we had the blubber; so, though we sighted
fish now and then, we let them go—though I could see Eric
was fretting at it, and wishing the ship empty again.

“For months now, Eric had been wooing Joan in his own
wild, longing way; but the girl would have none of him.  He
must have known it, and he
p. 53
bridled his tongue as he could.
But the word was bound to come some day; and it came at last when
we were rocking in a calm, with an island two or three miles to
starboard, and the sun hissing on the sea that sighed and swelled
like the bosom of a sleeping woman whose dreams are troubled and
disturbed.

“The ship was idle, the men squatting forward in what
shade they could discover, and the rigging slatting back and
forth as the Pownal rocked on the long swells.  Eric had the
deck, the Old Man was asleep below, and Joan and the boy, Jem,
were sitting aft, the girl sewing at something she held in her
lap.

“Scarf, with nothing in the world to do, fretted and
paced about, his eyes never leaving her, and a worship in them
that all the world could see.  The afternoon droned away,
the Pownal creaked and swung in the cradle of the sea, and the
sun burned down endlessly.  Scarf could not bear it.
He strode across to where the girl sat; and she looked up at him
to see what he had come for, and at the look in his eyes rose
quickly to face him, her face setting hard.

“Eric must have seen; but he blundered blindly on.
The words came awkwardly.  He lifted no hand to touch
her.  ‘I love you.  I love you,’ he said,
in a dry, husky voice.  ‘I love you.  I want you
to marry me.’

“Black little Jem looked up at them and, with the quick
perception of the child, grinned malignantly.  Joan’s
face turned white beneath the soft bronze the sun and wind had
given her cheeks.  She could not help pitying the big man;
but she could not love him.

p.
54
“‘I’m sorry, Eric,’ she
said.  ‘I do not love you.’

“‘I love you,’ he repeated, as though it
were an argument he were advancing.

“‘I’m sorry,’ she told him
again.  ‘I’m sorry to hurt you.  I
don’t want to hurt you.  But I don’t love
you.’

“His eyes were quivering and trembling like the raw
flesh of a wound, but he stood impassively before her, staring
down into her eyes, searching there for something he would never
find.  Little Jem chuckled, and the sound broke the spell
upon the man.  He turned rigidly away; and as it always was
with him when his heart was torn, his great body clamored for
action.  His fingers bit at his palms.

“And then one of the boat steerers, standing in the
waist, uttered a low ejaculation; and Eric turned and saw the man
was pointing toward the shore, where a misty spout was just
dissolving against the dark background of the cliffs that dipped
to the water there.

“It was the vent Eric wanted for the torment that was
tearing him.  Without a word, he leaped to his boat; and his
men, well trained, came tumbling at his heels.  In a
minute’s time, Eric had caught up some gear that had been
removed from the boats when the fishing was finished, and gave
the order to lower.

“Joan came softly to him.  ‘You are not going
to kill the whale, are you?’ she asked.  ‘We
have no need for it.’

“Eric did not hear her; for the boat had split the water
and was bobbing there below him, and he dropped with his men and
in a moment was
p.
55
away.  Joan, her eyes burning angrily, watched him
go; and presently she brought the glass to see what was to
come.

“The whale inshore was lying quietly, but Eric sent the
boat along as though his life hung on success.  He drove the
men till the oars bent like whip-shafts; he drove them and he
drove himself; and they ran fair upon the creature before they
realized their speed.  Then, at Eric’s cry, the boat
steerer in the bow leaped up and drove the harpoons home, and the
boat sheered off while Eric changed places with the man.

“They had struck a cow whale, a right whale, with a calf
not a week old tucked under her fin; and the little thing lay
there, lifting its tiny spout against its mother’s side,
its fins feebly fanning.

“A cow whale is the easiest of game; and there is no
sentiment in the whaling ships.  If the Pownal had been
empty, she would have been counted clear gain.  With the
Pownal full to brimming, this that Eric was doing was mere
murderous slaughter.

“When Eric saw that he was cheated of the battle he had
craved, a fury seized him.  He shouted hoarsely to his boat
steerer, and the man swung them in alongside the whale.  The
great mother had not stirred, save for a trembling shudder of her
whole bulk when the irons seized upon her.  The calf was
fighting to escape, but the mother’s great fin pinioned it
against her side, soothingly, assuringly, as though she promised
it should be safe there.

“Eric lifted his lance and pierced the mother, driving
home the steel for six feet into the great body; and he withdrew
it, and prodded the vitals of the whale again and again, with a
desperate energy,
p.
56
pouring out the fire of his own strength in his
efforts.

“It was like piercing butter with a hatpin; and this
dull acquiescence on the creature’s part only whetted
Eric’s blind rage.  When at the last the great flukes
lifted once, his heart leaped with the hope that at the end there
might come the struggle and the opposition for which he hungered;
but agony had lifted the flukes, and the bursting heart of the
mother brought them gently down again, never even disturbing the
little creature at her side.

“She died; a thrust killed the calf.  The boat
sheered out; and then the boat steerer shouted a warning from the
stern.

“Eric whirled and saw a great bull whale just emerging
from the depths; and the whale headed for them furiously.

“I do not say the creature was the dead cow’s
mate.  It would not be strange if this were so; but it need
not be asserted.  I do not say the bull attacked the
boat.  He was badly gallied, he was running blindly.

“But whatever the explanation, he charged them; and Eric
shouted triumphantly at thought that here was the adversary he
had desired.

“The boat steerer swung the boat about to meet the
onrush; and Eric snatched a harpoon.  They swerved out of
the path of the bull.  As he roared past them in a smother
of foam, Eric sent the harpoon home.

“But next instant the smashing flukes struck them, and
the boat’s whole bottom was driven away.  Eric chopped
the loose line in time to save them; and in ten seconds from the
appearance of the bull, they were to their necks in water, the
boat beneath them.

p.
57
“The bull charged on and disappeared.  I
lowered and went after the men in the water; and we got them
aboard.  Eric was reacting from his fury now; he was shamed
at what he had done; and he looked back once to the body of the
cow, about which sharks were already fighting, with something
like apology in his eyes.

“The men were talking.  ‘Did ye see the cross
on the bull’s head?’ the tub oarsman asked; the
steerer assented.

“‘A white scar in the blubber,’ he
agreed.

“The others nodded; and Eric looked at me and said
quietly: ‘The old bull was marked.’

“It was when we were all aboard again, and Eric had
changed to dry garments, that Joan came up to where he stood with
me.  Her eyes were blazing; and little Jem, at her heels,
was chuckling blackly.

“‘That was murder,’ said the girl, trembling
with her own anger.

“Eric flushed, and his head bowed a little.

“‘A cow and a calf—killed uselessly!’
Joan exclaimed.

“The big man, uneasy, shy, not knowing where to turn,
saw little Jem beside him; and he turned to the boy and caught
the lad under his arms, and swung him high in the air.
‘Up you go!’ he cried, trying to laugh.

“He meant only to start a romp—anything to divert
the girl’s searing scorn; but the malignant spirit of
little Jem converted the movement into black tragedy.  The
child screamed indignantly, and kicked down at Eric’s
upturned face with his sound foot.

“Eric was standing a yard from the rail, his
p. 58
back to
it.  The kick in his face made him lose his balance, and he
staggered backward, and before I could stir, with the boy
extended above his head, he had fallen overboard.

“Joan screamed; and together we leaped to the
rail.  I reached for a coil of rope.  The two had sunk
in a smother of bubbles; and in the second that we waited for
Eric to fight his way to the surface again, a sinister shadow
shot like fire along the ship’s side, and I saw the flicker
of a silver-white belly, and heard Joan scream again.

“The water turned crimson; and then Eric came to the
surface with empty hands.  He dove instantly, furiously; and
I got a boat into the water.  Eric broke to the surface
again, his face convulsed with the anguish that tore him; and two
of us grabbed him and dragged him, fighting, into the boat.

“‘Let go, let go,’ he screamed, and struck
us back.  ‘Let me go.  I can get him.’

“He was mad; and we caught him, and he broke and
dropped, sobbing, in the bottom of the boat.  I saw that one
of his arms was rasped raw by the shark’s rough skin.

“Joan met him like a fury when he stepped upon the deck
again, and I thought she would strike him.  He stood before
her, drooping and crushed; and the girl caught herself.  But
I heard the word she said.

“‘Thrice murderer!’ she told him
softly.  ‘Thrice murderer!  A mother and
child—and now my baby!  Oh curse you, curse you!
May you be always accursed until you die!’

“She held him for a moment, and then turned away from
the man; and Eric Scarf drooped sick
p. 59
and weak where he stood, until I
dragged him below to tend his wounded arm.”

The old man paused, and stared into the fire; and when I had
waited fruitlessly for another word from him, I asked:

“Is that all?”

He looked up at me quietly.  “No,” he
said.  “No—that is not the whole of
it.”

Still he did not continue, and so I prompted him.
“You said the whale was seen four times,” I
suggested.

He nodded; and so drifted into his story again.
“Aye, four times,” he agreed.  “The old
bull with the cross upon his skull.  Four times.
I’ve but told the first.”

He puffed silently for a little, shifted his great bulk in the
chair, rose and crossed to the window to look down toward the
harbor, and returned at last to me.

“Joan kept to her cabin much, from that day,” he
said.  “She kept to her cabin; and Eric Scarf did his
tasks and held aloof from her.  We came smoothly northward,
and presently were at our pier, unloading the casks that filled
our holds.  Eric had slowly recovered something of the old
strength and power that moved him; and though he avoided the
girl, and though I could see how he suffered and what agony he
was enduring, he kept a steady face to the men, and drove them as
he always drove.

“Cap’n Tobbey was a quiet, stern man; but he was
just.  He blamed Eric for taking out the boat, but he knew
the other for what it was, an accident of Fate; and when time
came for the next cruise, Eric was too good a man to stay
ashore.  He shipped as mate, and I was second mate
again.

p.
60
“This time, Joan stayed behind.  She had had
enough of the sea for a lifetime, she told me; and from a girl,
she was become a woman.  Lovely as ever, her laughter as
sweet and crisp as a spring wind, yet there was a depth in her
that had not been there before, and at times her eyes shrank as
though they gazed upon awful, tragic happenings.

“She was on the pier the day we sailed; and I saw Eric
Scarf watching her with the hopeless longing in his eyes that
tears at the vitals of a man.

“There was a shadow over the mate from the beginning of
that cruise.  Any man could see it; and the fo’mast
hands used to watch him, and whisper among themselves.
Outwardly he was the same; strong and quick and proud, alive,
alert, his body uplifted with the energy it housed.  He trod
the decks lightly, he moved with the quick precision of an
animal; and he plunged into his work in a fashion that would have
worn another man to threads.

“A sprinkling of our old crew was aboard; so
Eric’s story was no secret.  But it was never
mentioned by him or in his presence.  He seemed to find a
joy in his toil that allowed him to forget; and the man’s
eyes brightened and his cheeks set in their old firm, fine lines
as we drove southward.  There is no better index to a man
than the cheeks of him.  Flabbiness of body or soul shows
quickest there, and there all other vices and all virtues first
appear.  Eric’s face was neither gaunt nor round, but
it had a chiseled perfection of contour that was like a song.

“There is a deal of superstition that hangs about the
sea; and a whaler has her share of it, and
p. 61
more.
But it is never allowed to interfere with the work at hand.
And so if the men wished Eric off the ship, they kept their
wishes to themselves; and if they were reluctant to serve in his
boat, they hid this reluctance.  For Eric was a quick man,
quick to anger, with a quick fist to him.  In his place, I
should have moved tremblingly, fearful of a blow from behind
during the watch on deck at night.  But Eric strode
fearlessly about the ship; and none laid hand to him.

“The sea is a grim thing, and inscrutable.  No man
can look out across its smooth bosom day and day, and remember
the vast multitude of lives which go their way beneath that
smiling surface, without a sense of the mystery and wonder of it
all.  The sea in a storm may be terrible and appalling, when
its broad expanse is cut up into myriad gulleys and mountains in
which the ship is lost as in a labyrinth; but to me it has always
been even more terrible and menacing when it is calm.  In
time of storm, its fury rages without curb; the worst is with
you.  But when the sea is quiet, all its energies hidden, it
is like the smiling mask of Fate which conceals unguessed and
unpredicted blows.

“Thus, when we sailed southward over smooth and smiling
seas, I fell victim to unrest that harassed me.  I rose and
looked abroad each day with eyes that searched eagerly for a
threat of the fate that seemed impending; and even as I watched
the sea, in like manner did I watch Eric Scarf, to discover if I
could what it was that hung so threateningly over the man’s
smiling head.

“If Eric felt any uneasiness, he gave no sign at
first.  He was as he had always been, confident, and quick,
and strong.  But the day came when a
p. 62
hint was
given us, just as the impalpable atmospheric changes reveal
through the glass the approach of storm.

“We had sighted whales more than once, and made a fair
beginning on the long task ahead of us; and then one day in the
South Atlantic, the boats were lowered for a pod that lay far off
to southward.  Eric got fast, and the third mate
likewise.  But the whale I had chosen as my goal took alarm,
and whirled toward us, and then fled before our irons could reach
him.

“There had been time, however, for us to see upon his
head a dull scar, in the form of a cross, and I heard a cry from
Eric’s boat, that was just getting fast, and turned to see
Eric staring toward the spot where the old bull had
disappeared.

“Then I remembered what the men had said about the whale
which had stove Eric’s boat after the kill on the other
voyage; and when we were aboard again, the cutting-in done, and
the tryworks boiling and smoking, I was not surprised that Eric
came to me.

“‘Mark,’ he whispered huskily, ‘was
there a cross on the bull that got away?’

“I nodded.  ‘On his head.’ I
said.  ‘An old scar, gouged into the
blubber.’

“I saw his jaw set hard.  ‘It can’t
be!’ he exclaimed, half to himself.  I said nothing;
and he looked at me a moment later, with an agony of doubt in his
eyes.

“‘Well, what of it.  Eric?’ I asked,
knowing, but thinking that to talk might ease the man.

“‘It was a scarred bull stove my boat—that
day,’ he told me.

“‘Every old bull has his scars,’ I said
easily.

p.
63
“‘Aye—but—this was the same,
Mark!’

“‘What matter?’

“He flushed and stammered like a child.  ‘Her
curse is on me,’ he declared.  ‘The old bull is
going to wait for me!’

“‘He’ll suffer by it,’ I
laughed.  ‘He’s a fat old duke, too.’

“Eric looked forward where the men were working, and
looked aft, and then out across the sea; and then he looked at me
at last with an appeal in his eyes.  ‘Are you calling
me “murderer” as she did, Mark?’ he asked.

“I shook my head.  ‘She’s but a
girl,’ I told him.  ‘There was no need of
killing the cow.  But what matter for that?  And the
other—was no one’s blame.’

“His hand gripped my arm till I winced.  ‘You
mean it?’ he begged, hungrily.

“I clapped him on the shoulder.  ‘Forget it
all,’ I urged.  ‘No harm will come.’

“‘It is not that I’m afraid,’ he told
me swiftly; and I saw that I had roused him as I hoped to do.

“‘Sure of that?’ I asked.

“His eyes flamed.  ‘I fear nothing, except
myself,’ he exclaimed.  ‘But I hear her word
always; and I cannot bear it, Mark.’

“Before more could be said, Cap’n Tobbey came
toward us; and Eric laughed as though at some jest of mine.
His laughter was not a pleasant thing to hear, and I would have
wished to reassure the man.  But thereafter he gave me no
further opportunity.

“I could see the thing was on his mind through the days
that followed.  He could not forget it; and he took to
standing watch at the masthead
p. 64
when there was no need.  I asked
him once why he did this.

“‘To get the scarred bull, Mark,’ he told
me.  ‘That will end it.’

“‘You’ll never see him again!’

“He shook his head, and smiled grimly.  ‘No
fear,’ he said.  ‘He’s about
us.’

“And Eric was right; for the day we were finishing the
trying out, the scarred bull was sighted again, this time so near
the ship that his mark could be discerned through the glass as he
rose to spout.  Eric was aloft; and he tumbled down the
rigging like a madman, and lowered; but there was a fog, and in
the fog the bull was lost for that time.

“That was thrice he had been seen; and the fourth time
came swiftly.

“Eric was never a man to fear or avoid conflict, even
with the forces of the universe itself; and after this third
appearance of the scarred bull whale, he scarce slept at all, but
held himself and his boat’s crew ready for battle the day
long.  He was aloft from dawn till dark, endlessly scouring
the seas for a spout that would reveal the creature which
personified to him the thing he was fighting.  He became
silent, thoughtful; and strength flowed into him and nerved him
to a hard and efficient readiness.  He was like an athlete
in training for a contest, every nerve and muscle tuned.

“We sighted the scarred whale for the fourth time on a
Sunday morning; a day when the sea was just rippled by the
gentlest breezes, when the sun shone warmly and comfortingly upon
the world, when the boats danced upon the waves with a soothing
and caressing motion.  The water was blue as turquoise, and
the sky above it; and the two met at
p. 65
the horizon with the sea’s
deeper blue below the sky’s, and the whitecaps gleaming
like silver in the wind.

“It was not Eric who sighted the whale, but one of the
men on the fore-t’gallant crosstrees; and his long
‘Blo-o-o-o-o-ow’ came droning down to us on the decks
and snatched each one to his post like machinery.
Cap’n Tobbey turned his glass on the distant spouts, and
ordered the boats away; and Eric’s hard and seasoned men
made his boat swing ahead of the others instantly, and steadily
increase the lead.

“There was no way of knowing whether or no this was the
old scarred bull; but his spout told us it was a right whale, and
not a sperm whale.  Nevertheless, either Eric knew it was
his enemy he went to meet, or else he was eager to discover
whether it was or no, for he drove his men unsparingly, and was
more than a quarter of a mile ahead of us when he reached the
monster, and ran alongside.

“Over the water came to us the sound of his shouted
command: ‘Let ’im have it!’  And I saw the
boat steerer, standing in the bow with his knee in the
clumsy-cleat, put all the strength of back and arms into the
stroke, and snatch the second iron and send that home even as the
whale leaped forward.

“While Eric and the boat steerer were changing places,
the great whale up-ended ponderously, his flukes lifting gently
toward the sky full thirty feet clear of the water, and slid down
out of sight.  He had sounded; and I spurred my men to
harder efforts so that we might be at hand to help if need
arose.

p.
66
“Ahead of us, the boat lay idle on the
waves.  I could see Eric in the bow, his hand on the line
where it ran through the notch, bending to peer down into the
depths; and I could see he was putting a strain upon the line,
for the bow was down and almost dipping in the waves.

“Then suddenly the bow bobbed up, the strain relaxed;
and Eric bent further over in an effort to pierce the depths
below him.  The whale was coming up; and if by chance he
came up under the boat, the fight would be done, forthwith.
Eric shouted a command; and the men began to haul in the line
desperately, dropping it in a loose coil astern.  The boat
steerer leaned upon his long oar, alert, bending to hear the word
from Eric, and himself looking overside for any sign of the
monster who was rushing up from the depths toward them.

“Then a shout from Eric, the boat swung around as though
on a pivot; and next instant the whale breached between his boat
and mine.

“There is no more splendid sight in the world than this;
to see the biggest creature that breathes flinging his four or
five score tons clear out of the water to hang, a black bulk
against the sky, for an instant before he falls
resoundingly.  Imagine a leaping trout, magnify the
trout’s size a million-fold or more, and you have some
faint notion of the monstrous majesty and grace of the breaching
whale.

“I had seen whales breach before, sometimes with terror,
sometimes with wonder at the beauty of the spectacle; but when
this whale leaped clear into the sky and seemed to hang for an
instant fair above us, a thrill of horror shot through me.

“For as he was in the air, fair for all to see,
p. 67
the scar upon
his head was revealed; a scar like a sunken cross, mark of some
ancient wound.  It was the scarred bull to which
Eric’s boat was fast.

“I looked toward him, and saw that Eric had seen the
scar; but Eric loved battle.  He shouted to his men, and
even as the great whale fell into the water again, Eric’s
men hauled in till they were alongside the monster, and Eric
drove home his lance.

“The whale, at the prick of steel, redoubled the furious
struggle of the breach; and he rolled away and away from the
boat, upon the surface, in a smother of foam and spray.  The
men were forced to loose the line again to avoid capsizing; but
Eric himself set his hand to it, and by his own strength held the
nose of the boat so near the rolling whale that when the enormous
creature straightened out at last to run, half a dozen pulls
brought them again alongside.

“They were in some fashion safer there than
elsewhere.  The harpoons had struck well behind the fin, and
the whale’s rolling had wrapped the line about him in such
fashion that when the boat pulled alongside it lay safely behind
the fin, and yet safely forward of the flukes.  If the whale
rolled toward them, they would be crushed beneath his bulk; but
short of such a move, the monster could not shake them off.

“And Eric was working his lance like mad.  I had
never seen such frantic energy.  He sent the six-foot steel
to its length into the soft body again and again, not with a long
shove, but with a single stabbing thrust to each attack.
His target was the whale’s greatest girth, and the lower
part of the body; and although the battle seemed an endless
p. 68
flurry and
strife of bloody foam, it was only a matter of seconds before the
whale’s labored spouting crimsoned—sure sign he had
received a mortal wound.

“I caught the sound of an exultant shout from Eric, and
his boat sheered away.  The monster had suddenly halted in
its flight; it lay momentarily motionless, as though testing its
own strength against this attack which had pierced its
vitals.  Then in a desperate and panic stricken flurry it
leaped forward and away, the boat, with line running free,
trailing safely behind.

“They drove past where my boat lay; and Eric turned to
look toward me.  He was a heroic figure in the bow of the
little craft, erect and tall, his bright hair and his naked torso
crimson with the flood from the whale’s bloody spout.
He was gleaming wet with spray and red foam; and he waved his
long lance as he passed and shouted:

“‘The scarred whale, Mark!  I’ve killed
him!’

“Before I could reply, he was beyond the sound of my
voice; and then the great beast whirled and came back toward
us.  He must have seen my boat and supposed it that of his
tormentor; for he charged at us, and only the swiftest swerve
took us out of his path in time.  Beyond me, I saw him
wallow over the third mate’s boat and on; and I hurried to
pick up the men in the water.

“Save for their bruises and their drenching, they were
uninjured.  We dragged them aboard, set a waif in the boat,
tied its oars to keep it afloat, and set out after Eric and the
whale.  The great creature was circling in its last flurry;
and as we drew near, with a tremendous spasm it threw its mighty
bulk in a swift, short circle, and was still.

p.
69
“We drove ahead, toward Eric’s boat; and
Eric’s countenance was burning with a splendid
triumph.  This last moment of victorious pride Fate allowed
him.

“He was ahead; his boat ran alongside the huge carcass,
and Eric bent over the bow with the short boat spade to cut a
hole in the whale’s tail for towing it to the ship.

“The boat spade is a steel blade, razor sharp,
spade-shaped, attached to a stout wooden handle.  Eric
leaned far out and drove it into the tough fiber of the tail.

“And then the right whale’s flukes whirled in a
last, spasmodic struggle; up they whirled, and over, and
down.  They missed the boat by inches; but from Eric’s
strong hands the boat spade was torn.  It twisted in the
air, its steel blade flashing crimson.  Under the blow of
the flukes it twisted and sang, and then chocked home.  The
steel struck Eric squarely in the face; and it split his skull as
you split a walnut.”

The old captain leaned forward to knock the dottel from his
pipe upon the andirons, and settled in his chair again.  For
a little time we sat without speaking; but I asked at last:

“Joan—did she forgive him in the end?”

Cap’n Brackett’s grim old countenance
softened.  “Oh, aye,” he said.
“She’d forgiven him before.  She warned me when
we started on the cruise to watch over him.”  He
filled and lighted his ancient pipe again, then softly finished:
“She’s gone, long since.  But our daughter looks
very like her now.”

Ben Ames Williams
.

p. 70
WHEN
BREATHITT WENT TO BATTLE

“
Bloody
”
Breathitt has been
exempted from the draft
.
So prompt and general was
the response of her fighting men to the call for volunteers
,

that her quota is more than filled
.
There is no
need of conscription
.
Thus does the outlaw mountain
county of Kentucky vindicate herself in the eyes of the
world
,
mocking those who would shame her with a record
more fanciful than true
.

—
News Item
.

Breathitt was at peace.

As the Cumberland sun climbed over the eastern hills, bringing
the rugged flush of morning to each crag and ridge and peak, a
travel-worn rider, astride an even more worn mare, drew up at the
stile in front of a four-room log cabin.  On the
rider’s smooth, strong features were marks of a sleepless
night, emphasized by a tense foreboding.  As he stopped, his
mare heaved a shuddering sigh of exhaustion and lowered her head
in weary relief; the man bent one booted leg over the pommel of
his saddle, and with an expression of pity gazed at the cabin for
some moments before he called.

“Hallo!”  There was no response from within
the chinked walls; only the snarl of a cur, that skulked near the
rickety porch, and the lonesome tinkle of a cowbell from the barn
lot.

Again, “Hallo!”  This time, after half a
minute, the heavy front door opened on its wooden hinges and a
mountaineer, with untrimmed,
p. 71
grizzled mustache, stepped out into
the morning sunshine.

“Wal, if hit ain’t Lawyer
Todd—howdy!”  The old man’s face glowed
with cordiality as he approached the stile.

“Git off yer mare and come in, lawyer,” he
invited.  “We’ve jest ate, but Lizzie’ll
have ye some breakfast in a jiffy.  Leave yer critter right
thar and come on in.”

“Thank you, Seth, but I reckon I won’t for a
while.”  Lawyer Todd tried to smile in answer to the
welcome, but his eyes were grave.

He was a man of middle age and some little refinement of
appearance, in spite of the mud that now besplotehed him.  A
native of the Kentucky Mountains, he had taken his degree at a
college in the Blue Grass, but had returned to the hills to
practice among his own people.  He was one of them: he knew
their ways, their faults, their virtues, their peculiarities, and
of Seth Brannon he was particularly wise.  Ever since
hanging out his shingle at the county seat, Todd had been his
legal adviser whenever Seth had seen fit to waive the local
militant manner of settling disputes and rely upon the
instruments of law and order.  Between the two men there
existed a feeling that was more than professional.  Seth,
while many years his senior, made Todd his confidant, looked up
to him with the deference due superior wisdom, and knew that his
trust was not misplaced.  In return Todd gave sympathetic
understanding to this primitive man of the hills, respected his
traditions, and stood by him in time of trouble.

It was this bond between friend and friend, rather than
between lawyer and client, that had
p. 72
drawn Todd over long, hard miles
through the most isolated and inaccessible part of that Kentucky
county which bears the title “Bloody.”

Todd did not dismount from his mare; and old Seth, squatting
on the stile block, regarded him keenly with eyes much used to
the analysis of their fellow-men.

“What’s on yer mind, lawyer?” he
inquired.  “’Pears like all ain’t good
news ye’ve brung over the hills with ye.”

He took in at a glance the mud-caked legs and belly of the
mare, and the blue clay drops that had sprayed and dried on the
lawyer, from his leather boots to his gray slouch hat.

“Ye must ’a’ come a long piece, from the
looks o’ ye,” Seth resumed with friendly
concern.  “Shorely, now, ye ain’t rid all the
way from Jackson town?”

“Yes,” Todd answered, “that’s what I
have.”

“And what fer?”

The lawyer reached to an inside pocket and drew out a yellow
envelope, the flap of which had been torn open.  With a
slowness that was almost hesitancy, he handed the envelope to the
old man.

“The operator at Jackson gave that to me, Seth,”
said Todd.  “He knew I sorta attended to matters there
in town for you and that I’d see you got it.  It came
just after dark yesterday, and I’ve been riding ever since
to bring it to you—and break the news.”

Seth scratched his mustache with a calloused forefinger,
turning the yellow envelope over and over and looking at it with
curiosity.

“What is hit?” he asked.  “Ye
know—ye know, lawyer, readin’ ain’t one
o’ my strong p’ints, and
p. 73
these here printed things don’t
mean nothin’ to me.  What’s hit all
about?”

“It’s a telegram, Seth, a telegram—about
Jim.”

“About Jim—my Jim?”  The old man groped
for a moment.  “Why, lawyer, Jim knows his pa
can’t neither read or write.  What’d Jim send me
a teleygram fer?”

“Jim didn’t send it.  It came through the
Canadian War Department, at Ottawa.”  Todd braced
himself in his saddle.  “Seth, when Jim went away, did
you ever reckon you mightn’t see him again?”

The old man’s jaw tightened.  “I didn’t
reckon much about hit a-tall,” he said.  “Fact
is, Jim went withouten my lief and agin my best
jedgment.”  He paused, but as the lawyer made no
reply, went on:

“Ye see, Jim ’as plumb crazy to go to war, soon as
he heard hit had broke loose over yan.  But I says, says I,
‘Jim, this ain’t none o’ our war; hit’s
a-happenin’ way outside o’ these mountings whar we
ain’t got no business.  I’m a ole man and
I’ve come to love peace.  Ten year ago, after
we’d fought and fought and finally whopped the Allens, over
on South Fork, I swore thar’d be no more war if I could
help hit.  And I’ve purty well kept my word.
Now, Jim,’ says I, ‘this feller Keeser and his
Germins ain’t hurt we’uns.  I ain’t got
nothin’ agin ’em.  And, what’s more, I
don’t want we or no other Brannon o’ the name to be
startin’ trouble with sech people.’

“‘Pa,’ says Jim, ‘I ain’t
a-goin’ to start trouble.  Keeser’s already
started hit.  He and his Germins done sunk a lot o’
ships and kilt a whole mess o’ wimmen and chil’ren,
some of ’em
p.
74
Amerikin wimmen and chil’ren too.  The
English and the French been a-fightin’ him over thar fer
nigh on two year.  Now hit looks like this country’s
a-goin’ to take a hand.  The army men at Washington
says thar jest ain’t no way o’ our gittin’
’round fightin’ Keeser; either we got to help lick
him over yan in Eurip or he’ll lick us over
here.’

“‘Then let him come on over and try hit,’
says I.  ‘I ain’t shot skunks and Allens and
wildcats all my life fer nothin’,’ says I.
‘The same ole rifle-gun my granddaddy brung up from North
Calliney and kilt Injuns with ain’t so rusty and no
’count that I can’t shoot a few shoots at this Keeser
feller and his Germins.

“‘But, Jim,’ I says, ‘Jim, ye know a
mounting man fights best on his own ground.  Hit ain’t
in nature fer him to go scrappin’ on furren soil amongst
furreners.  Up a hillside, behind a bunch o’ laurel,
is a heap better place fer a mounting man than in them trenches
yer talkin’ about.  Fust o’ all,’ says I,
‘I’m fer peace; but if ye’ve got to fight, then
stay home and fight nigh yer own front door.’

“Them’s exactly the words I spoke to him,
lawyer,” continued Seth, cramming a handful of tobacco into
his mouth.  “Wait till somebody’s hit ye, then
hit back and hit back damn hard.  But don’t go
meddlin’ ’round in a country ye don’t know
nothin’ about, ’mongst folks what ain’t no kin
to ye.  That’s what I says, jest about them very
words.”

“And yet Jim went,” said Todd.  “Those
two years you gave him at Berea College, Seth, made Jim more
thoughtful than most boys hereabouts.  He read war, he
studied war; and, impatient at the delay of his own government in
getting into it, he
p.
75
went up to Canada, enlisted in her armies and shipped to
France—”

“Yas, that ’as the way hit was,” assented
the old man.  “All his ma and me could do
couldn’t keep that boy from goin’ oncet he’d
sot his head on hit.

“That ’as ’most a year ago.  Course we
miss Jim and all that,” Seth added; “but even if he
has gone to war agin’ Keeser and his Germins, the rest
o’ us here ain’t bearin’ no grudge toward
’em so long as they leaves us in peace.”

“They aren’t leaving you in peace, Seth;
that’s just it.”  Todd watched him closely to
see the effect of his words.  “Already when Jim
enlisted Keeser and his Germins’ had killed American
citizens by the score.  Since then they’ve killed
other Americans; helpless, unoffending people who believed as you
do that because they hadn’t harmed the Germans, the Germans
wouldn’t harm them.

“You had some reason for opposing Jim’s
enlistment.  We weren’t at war with Germany
then.  He was under no personal or patriotic obligation to
fight.  He acted mostly from the urge of conscience, I know,
and after much far-sighted deliberation.  But now it’s
different, Seth.  Last week our men in Washington declared
war on Germany.  We’ve got to fight as a nation
whether as individuals we want to fight or not.  Otherwise
your rifle-gun and mine, and all the rifle-guns in these
mountains, won’t save our homes and our women and children
once the Germans land in this country.  Don’t you see
how it is, Seth?  Our boys have to go to war, to save from
war those who are left behind.  Don’t you feel
differently now about Jim’s going the way he
did?”

p. 76
The old
man shook his head stubbornly.  “I tell ye, lawyer,
hit ain’t any o’ our war.  What happens outside
o’ these hills don’t consarn me and my folks.
‘What happens amongst these hills we can take care of when
hit comes.  Let them as wants to fight, fight.
We’uns don’t axe nothin’ o’ other folks
and other folks ain’t got no business axein’
nothin’ o’ us.  That’s whar hit stands
with me, lawyer.”

“Listen, Seth.”  Todd leaned toward him from
his saddle.  “You know, the people outside of
Breathitt don’t think much of us who live here.  Not
only in other parts of Kentucky, but in all the other states and
even abroad, they call us ‘Bloody.’
That’s because we’ve been a bit too handy with our
guns.  We’ve killed too many of our own folks.
We haven’t paid much attention to the law.  Now this
war gives us a chance to show the outside world that
there’s more good than bad in us; that we can leave off
fighting each other and use our lead on the Germans.”

Todd leaned closer to the old man, enthusiasm in his
voice.  “Listen, Seth.  The President wants
volunteers for the army.  He’s got to have soldiers,
lots of them.  And the best soldier material in the country
is right up here in these hills.  We men of Breathitt are
born to the trigger.  Most of us soldier in a manner all our
lives.  Now, I say, we’ve got to stop aiming our
rifle-guns at each other and point ’em toward the
enemy.  I’ve been thinking about it considerably
lately and I want your help in bringing this very thing to
pass.

“You, Seth, have more influence with the people than any
one man in this county.  You’re connected by family to
every big clan in Breathitt.  When
p. 77
you say
peace, they keep the peace; when you say war, they fight.
For years now there’s been no general trouble.
That’s because, as you declared, war don’t pay.
And you’re right, indeed you are, where feud wars are
concerned.  We’ve had enough of them, God
knows!”

Todd continued: “Seth, they’re framing a draft
bill there in Washington.  They’re going to make men
join the army if they won’t join it voluntarily.  Now
our boys never had to be kicked into battle, Seth.
They’ve got the good old Kentucky warrior blood in their
veins; and the better the cause, the harder they fight.
Let’s show the country that Breathitt isn’t as bad as
printer’s ink has painted her.  Let’s not wait
for that draft bill.  Tell your men, Seth, that this is the
worst war and the best war that ever happened.  Tell
’em it’s the most wicked war and the holiest war in
which a Kentuckian was ever privileged to draw a bead.  Say
the word, old friend, and every son of Breathitt will rally to
the flag, to wipe the stains from their own hills and help clean
the world’s slate for the universal writing of the name
Democracy!”

Again old Seth shook his head.  He waved his hand with a
gesture of finality, then brought his fist to his knee with a
dull thud.

“Yer a mighty purty talker, lawyer, and I ’low ye
means what ye says—but, I tells ye, I ain’t got no
consarn in this here war.  Keeser and his Germins
ain’t done nothin’ to me and my folks.  Them men
o’ Breathitt who wants to fight, can fight.  I
won’t stop ’em.  But, lawyer, I ain’t
a-goin’ to call ’em to war till that feller Keeser
makes the fust move agin one o’ us.  That’s what
I says to Jim and that’s what I’m a-sayin’ to
ye,” he added defiantly.

p. 78
Lawyer
Todd said nothing.  He knew the mettle of his people.
He believed in them.  He also knew that old Seth was a
victim of isolation and the teachings of a primitive creed; that
his opposition sprang from ignorance, not disloyalty.  It
was the inborn nature of a mountaineer to prefer battle among his
own hills, whose every rock and peak and cove he had studied with
an eye to offense and defense, rather than wage war in the
enemy’s country where he was a stranger.  Besides, as
Seth himself had said, the Brannons and their kin had not yet
smelled blood.  “Keeser and his Germins” must
first offer direct injury to one of them before they could feel
the personal touch of war and answer the challenge from
oversea.

With this realization Todd broke the silence in a firm voice,
pointing to the yellow envelope in the old man’s hand.

“Seth, that telegram holds bad news for you
folks.”

Seth’s attitude of defiance relaxed.  Taut cords
stood out beneath the dry skin of his throat as the inner man
gripped himself.

“Is Jim hurt?”  There was a tremor of
paternalism in the question.  The yellow envelope fluttered
to the ground near the mare’s feet.

Todd looked Seth steadily in the eyes.  “Worse than
hurt, old friend, yet better than hurt,” he replied.
“Jim is dead.”

Not a cry, not a tear, not a groan, not even a quiver of the
world-worn mouth and brow.  Only an expression of
incredulity that hardened into sternness.

“Dead?—dead!  My Jim dead.”  Then,
after a while, “Hit’ll go plumb hard with his ma, her

p. 79
Jimmy
dead.”  The keen eyes widened and the wrinkled face
was lifted to the hills.

Directly, in a calm, low voice: “Tell me, lawyer, who
kilt him?  How was he kilt, my Jim?”

“He was killed in action, Seth, killed by ‘Keeser
and his Germins’ while bombing an enemy’s
trench.”

“Bombing a trench!  Whar in hell was his
rifle-gun?”

“He wasn’t using it then.”  Todd drew
on his imagination.  “But he sold out at a high
figger, Seth, that boy of yours.  A dozen Germans went down
before they got him.”

The old man’s eyes flashed.  “Ye say they
did?  Jim he kilt a dozen of ’em?”  His
friend nodded.  “Lord!—now don’t that beat
all!”  Seth chuckled an unhealthy chuckle.
“Kilt a dozen of ’em!”

When he next spoke, however, it was briefly and through lips
parched and drawn.

“Wal, I reckon that settles hit.  Yas, lawyer, I
reckon that mighty nigh settles hit.”  And with
shoulders bent forward, his chin in his hand, the old man lapsed
into lonely meditation.

Todd left him there, seated on the stile, and with a sigh of
relief that his mission had been thus far accomplished, rode his
mare around to the barn. The Breathitt country that day vibrated
with a silent but compelling call.  Bare-footed couriers,
wizards of short cut and bypath, slipped through valley and over
ridge, up rocky creek bed and down steep decline, bearing a
message from their chief. The lesser clan heads received the
message; and from beneath their clapboard roofs, they in turn
sent forth couriers to their followers.  Along the waters of
Troublesome, Middle Fork, Quicksand
p. 80
and Kentucky River, the word
flashed.  A hushed suspense closed over the hills.  Men
greeted one another in undertones, sensing rather than speaking
what each had in mind.  Action was the necessity of the
hour; swift, tense action that tarried neither to question nor to
reason, but obeyed.

But little time elapsed after Lawyer Todd left old Seth at the
stile, before the Brannons and their kinsmen began to gather at
the cabin of their chief.  They straggled in by ones and
twos and threes, some mounted and some on foot.  Among them
were grandfathers, with stooped shoulders and snowy beards;
others were mere boys.

Most of the men bore modern rifles and revolvers; a few had
shotguns.  One, on whom the hookworm had set its blight, had
been able to muster only a pitchfork.  Another was armed
with a kitchen knife and a hickory club.  Besides their
weapons all the equipment the men carried was a bundle of food,
done up in a greasy paper, consisting of chunks of corn bread, a
bit of salt and several strips of bacon.

Some of the “neighbor wimmen” had come to
Seth’s cabin to tender their services and sympathies to the
bereaved mother.  Old Seth himself sat alone on the edge of
the weather-warped porch, brooding.  His rifle lay across
his knees, and while one hairy hand stroked the polished stock,
his eyes were fastened on the horizon above the eastern
hills.  The only hint of emotion in his face was the
dumbness of an emotion too deep for expression.

The men stood about the yard in little groups.  Out in
the barn lot several of the younger men pitched horseshoes.
Others played mumble-peg near the stile block, or lounged against
the rail
p.
81
fence, whittling.  The patriarchs of the clan
squatted at a respectful distance from their chief, waiting to be
called to council.

And upon them all poured the warming rays of the afternoon
sun.  The pine-fringed mountains, green with the fresh, soft
green of spring, closed in grim but kindly embrace about the
little army in the valley below.  A dove cooed plaintively
from a near-by hollow; beneath the cabin porch the cur whined and
howled with a sense of approaching crisis.

After a while old Seth arose, steadying himself against the
corner of the porch.  And silently his followers gathered
about him.

“Boys,” he said, “I reckon ye all know why I
sent fer ye.  Jim’s been kilt.  Him that was
o’ my flesh and blood, and o’ yer flesh and blood, is
dead.  Keeser and his Germins kilt him, boys.
Nothin’ on this airth that me or ye can do will bring him
back to life.

“When Jim went to war, he went withouten my lief.
I’d fought a lot in my time and I wanted him to keep outen
sech trouble.  But he went; he got the notion he ought to
go, and all I could say wouldn’t stop him.  Jim says
that Keeser and his Germins ’as killin’ wimmen and
chil’ren over yan.  He says this country’d soon
be at war and that we folks o’ Breathitt ought to git ready
and fight same as the rest o’ the people.  I studied
on hit a heap then—and today I’ve studied on hit some
more.

“As Jim ’lowed hit’d be, boys, this here
country’s at war.  I don’t understand all about
hit myself, about this de-mocracy we’re a-fightin’
fer or what we’re goin’ to do with the thing after we
gits hit.  Lawyer Todd says hit’s jest another name
p. 82
fer freedom
and liberty.  Maybe hit is.  Anyway, boys, since
I’ve thought hit over, thar ain’t been a war yet when
us fellers o’ the hills ain’t took a hand.  Some
fought fer the Union, some fer the South.  Some fought in
Cuby, and some o’ our kin helped whop them sassy niggers in
the Fillerpines.

“Whenever we’ve fought, boys, we’ve had a
reason fer hit, a mighty good reason.  Do ye remember back
thar, several year ago, when Bulger Allen plugged Hal Brannon in
the heart as Hal ’as comin’ home from meetin’
with his gal?  Do ye recollect how hit riled us and how we
got our rifle-guns and went after them Allens?  They’d
kilt one o’ our folks, they’d broke the peace.
But afore we got through with ’em, they seen hit ’as
healthiest to leave our folks alone and keep their lead to
themselves!”

Seth paused, swallowed, then went on:

“Boys, Jim’s been kilt.  Yesterd’y we
weren’t holdin’ nothin’ agin’ Keeser and
his Germins.  They hadn’t hurt none o’
we’uns.  What devilment they’d done,
they’d done outsider these hills whar we ain’t got no
concarn.  But now hit’s different.  Hit’s
jest another case o’ them Allens, boys.  Hit means we
got to draw blood fer blood.  Had Jim been one o’ ye
or yer sons, I’d say the same thing.  A
Brannon’s life has been took: ye and me and all our folks
has got to take lives to pay fer hissen.  That’s the
way we do hit up here in these mountings.  That’s the
way we got to do hit with Keeser and his Germins.”

Lawyer Todd, standing on the edge of the company, frowned and
bit his lip.  He had been listening to the speech.
Inwardly he had rejoiced.  But now he felt a pang of
disappointment.  Seth, he
p. 83
feared, was about to overshoot the
mark in his newly aroused enthusiasm.  He was reckoning on
personal vengeance against “Keeser and his Germins,”
something that could not be but which would be hard for him to
realize.

Todd, trying to attract as little notice as possible, edged
through the crowd until he stood at the old chief’s
elbow.  As he paused in his delivery, the lawyer caught his
attention.

“Seth,” he began in an undertone, “Seth, it
doesn’t pay to be too hasty about this thing you’re
doing.  You know, those people at Washington don’t
believe in fighting exactly the way we do down here.  They
go about it different.  It’s the young men who are
sent to war.  The government takes only those who are in
their prime, and it’s the government that picks out the
guns they’ll shoot and the clothes they’ll wear and
tells ’em how to act and what to do.  Don’t
misunderstand me, Seth.  It’s all right for you to
want to go to Europe and whip ‘Keeser and his
Germins,’ but Seth, you just naturally can’t
go.”

The old man looked at the lawyer in surprise.

“Can’t go?” he repeated aloud.
“Ye mean to say I’m too old to go?”  There
was wrath in the tone.  Those near by moved closer,
listening.  “Why, lawyer, I’m as young in
feelin’s as any boy here.  I can tromp as fer, shoot
as straight and stand as much as any sodjer the
gover’nent’s got.”

“Perhaps so,” replied Todd; “that all may be
very true.  But it’s only the young fellows they
want.  Lead your men down to Jackson, let the recruiting
officers there pick those who are fit: then you and the rest come
back here to your farms, raise more crops, pray for them
that’s gone, and be
p. 84
good citizens.  That’s
your part in the war, old friend.”

“I’ll be damned if hit is!”  Seth threw
up his grizzled head in anger.  “I can fight as well
as the best of ’em.  I reckon I’m an Amerikin
too.  Hit’s my country and my war and my Jim
what’s been kilt.  Won’t they let a pa fight
them as murdered his son?  Won’t they let him shoot
them as shot him?  By Gawd! o’ course they will,
lawyer, and nothin’ in all creation can make me stay
home!”

Todd stepped back.  He saw the futility of further
argument.  He even doubted the wisdom of his speaking as
much as he had.

Seth wrestled with his emotions for some moments in
silence.  Then the passion left his wrinkled features.
He was thoughtful, debating with himself.  Finally, his
selfcontrol regained, he turned to the waiting multitude before
him.

“Maybe Lawyer Todd’s right, boys,” he said
with sudden frankness.  “Maybe hit’s so that we
can’t all go to war agin’ them as kilt our
Jim.”  He flashed a friendly glance of reassurance
over the heads of his followers to where the lawyer stood.
“Hit’s different outsider these hills ’an hit
is here.  We ain’t the only ones a-fightin’
Keeser and his Germins.  The whole nation’s a-got hits
dander up.  Lawyer Todd says that afore the break o’
another spring thar’ll be more’n a million sodjers
’long side o’ us, ready to whop them Germins.  I
reckon I spoke kinda hasty jest now.  We can’t have
hit all our way.  We’ll jest have to fit in with the
rest wharever we can.  Hit may be a close fit and hit may
pinch at times, boys, but hit’s best.  Lawyer Todd and
them army men knows.  We’ll try and make up our minds
to do what they ’lows is fer the good o’ all o’
us.

p.
85
“So we’ll go down to Jackson town, to that
re-cruitin’ office, and axe them sodjer fellers thar to git
us to Eurip.  They’re showin’ others the way and
I reckon they’ll show us.  Some o’ us
won’t come back, boys, like Jim won’t come
back.  Some o’ us is liable to lose a arm or a
leg.  But remember this, boys, wharever ye go or whoever
ye’re fightin’, that ye’re men o’
Breathitt.  Remember ve’re not only goin’ to
kill Germins but to kill the bad name that the world ’as
give us.  Me and Lawyer Todd stands together on that.
We’re goin’ to stop wastin’ powder on our own
folks.  We’re goin’ to show them people in the
Blue Grass and all over the country, that the men o’ these
mountings is men no different from them when hit comes to
shoulderin’ a rifle-gun and pertectin’ their homes
and wimmen and chil’ren.  We’re goin’ to
make Breathitt stand fer somethin’ else besides Breathitt
blood.”

Old Seth picked up his rifle from where he had leaned it
against the porch wall.  His hand was steady; he pressed the
gun over his heart as if to breathe into its lifeless mechanism a
part of his own warrior spirit.

“Boys, time’s up,” he said.
“War’s on.  Jim’s body over yan is
callin’ us to come.  Hit’s a-callin’ us
men o’ the hills, us men o’ Breathitt.
We’re a-goin’”—he raised his voice.
“Wars on, I say, boys, war’s on; and Keeser and his
Germins is goin’ to catch hell—Breathitt
hell—and hell a-plenty!”

As their chief concluded a wild yell burst from ten score
mountain throats, a weird and ringing yell that surged through
the neighboring valleys, beat against the stolid walls of rock
and pine, and
p.
86
bounded upward and beyond, the answer of the Breathitt
folk to humanity’s call to arms.

Lawyer Todd, a smile lifting the weariness from his face, sat
his mare and watched the departure of the little army.
There was no saying of farewells to the women and children; there
were no handclasps or tears.  Old Seth, astride a long-eared
mule, led the way.  The others straggled after him in
irregular order.  Those who had mounts rode them; the rest
followed on foot.  With their packs of food slung over their
shoulders, their guns in the crook of their arms, the men filed
out of the cabin yard and through the valley toward a distant gap
in the hills.

“My people, my people!” softly exclaimed Todd, as
he moved after them.  “Kentuckians all, Americans all,
this day you give the lie to the slander put upon your mountain
race.  My people, my noble people!”

Dry-eyed women, shading their brows with toil-scarred hands,
lingered at their cabin doors, their children clustered about
them, and watched their men go by.  Occasionally one of them
waved, and an answering salute came from among the irregular
ranks.

Beyond the western ridges the sun dropped into a saffron sky,
crowning with a halo of gold the reborn feudland, touching with
mellow light the crags and peaks that stood out proudly in the
dusk.  High above the misty valleys a bald eagle circled,
forward, backward, forward, backward, over the country of warrior
clans; while through the distant gap marched mountain men, men of
soul and heart and brawn.

Breathitt was at war!

Lewis H. Kilpatrick
.

p. 87
THE
FORGIVER

Religion, said the mining man, sometimes puts me in mind of
one of those new blasting powders; there’s no just telling
when it’ll go off or whom it’ll blow up.

I was thinking then of Radway and Billsky: “Bad”
Radway, him that beat up Ellis at Borromeo and shot Fargue
O’Leary.  You will have heard of him.  Every one
was hearing of him at one time, and then all the talk kind of
faded out.  By and by Radway himself faded out.  It was
Billsky that faded him.

Billsky was a little, serious, hairy fellow, not much higher
than Radway’s elbow; a good little fellow, that never gave
any trouble to any one.  He always seemed, in a meek sort of
way, puzzled over existence in general and his own share in it in
particular.  Men liked him.  He was awful kindhearted,
but he’d the same sense of humor as an Apache.
Primitive, that’s what he was.  He was part Russian,
and he’d a primitive sort of name that no one ever tried to
pronounce.  Billsky came near enough.

He scarcely ever came in Rad’s way, though he moved with
the same crowd.  Rad was in the center, you see, Billsky
just wanderin’ on the outskirts.  They got mixed up
pretty close, though, later.

It began with a girl, of course, a girl at
p.
88
Borromeo.  No need for names.  She was a nice
girl, and a nice-lookin’ girl, just one of many, thank
God.  No one so much as guessed Billsky was sweet on her
till she went away suddenly and was seen no more, and her folks
moved away.  It was put down to Rad, and he didn’t
deny it; sort o’ smiled and looked knowin’.  You
know the kind.  Then Billsky heard of it.  He was
working up at the Joyeux then, for that was before the irrigation
was put through, and it was all cattle.  He sent a message
through to Radway.  “I’m coming down to kill
you,” said the message, “soon as I can get my
time.  Don’t go away.”

Well, that was Billsky all over, and most men thought it was a
great joke.  Radway did.  “What does the little
rat take me for?” he said.  “I guess he’s
in no hurry.  I’ll have some time to
wait.”  Most men thought so, too, but not all.

Meanwhile, Billsky stuck to his job till he could quit without
giving inconvenience.  Then he got his time.  He sunk
every dollar of his pay in a fine pony, a quick goer.  And
down he came the eighty miles to Borromeo, like a fire in
grass.

The betting was all on Rad, of course.  It was said he
thought Billsky too good a joke to shoot; he’d just beat
him up a bit if he was troublesome, and let him go.

Twenty miles out of Borromeo, Billsky had to stop at a
preacher’s.  And there he got religion.

Yes, it’s a fact; he got it overnight.  What he
told the preacher, or the preacher said to him, I don’t
know.  I don’t begin to know.  But Billsky went
off afoot into the desert, five miles maybe; and it is pretty
much of a desert round there.  He had nothing with him but
the gun he was going to
p. 89
shoot Radway with, and a Bible.
He laid them both under a sagebush, and all night he knelt in
front of them, and waited for the Lord to begin on him.
There isn’t much in the desert at night, you know, but
stars; and a sky back of ’em that makes even the planets
look cheap.  The Lord must have had His way with Billsky,
without fear or favor, for at dawn he came staggering back to the
preacher, drenched with sweat and dew.  He had only the
Bible with him.

“I believe,” he said to the preacher, “and
as I hope for forgiveness, so I forgive the man it was in my
heart to kill.  Tell him so from me,” he said;
“but it’s laid on me,” said Billsky,
“that I’ll never save my soul till I tell him so
myself.  So tell him, too, to wait for me, for I’m
a-coming to forgive him.”  Then he went down in a heap
at the preacher’s feet.

That old man was a real Christian, and he put Billsky to bed
and looked after him like a father.  He’d never had an
out-and-out hot-on-the-spot convert like that before, and he was
so worked up and excited over it that he saddled his old horse
and rode into Borromeo himself to give Radway the message of
forgiveness.

I was in Duluth’s, with some of the other fellows,
looking at some new saddles he had in; and Rad was there, too,
and there was a good deal of talk going on of one kind and
another.  Some one must have told the old preacher where Rad
was, for he pulled up his old white nag outside Duluth’s,
and “Mr. Radway!” he called, in a high voice,
“Mr. Radway!  I have a message for you.”

“Hello!” said Rad, winking at his cronies,—I
wasn’t one,—“Is Billsky coming with his
gun?  I must get ready to hide.”  And there was
laughing.

p. 90
Sitting
his old horse straight as an Indian, the old preacher raised his
head and took his hat off.  His white hair shone in the
sun.  There seemed to be more than sun shining on his
face.  “Mr. Radway,” says he, “the message
I bring is one of forgiveness.  You have nothing to fear
from Billsky.  He forgives you.  And I was to tell you
that he will never rest until he himself can assure you of that
forgiveness.  And may the Lord have mercy on you,”
said the old man, and put on his hat and rode away.  I give
you my word, I never heard Duluth’s so quiet!  There
wasn’t a sound till Radway caught his breath and began to
curse.

Funny what’ll get a man’s nerve, eh?  It sent
Rad quite wild to think Billsky wanted to forgive him!

Billsky was sick at the preacher’s some time.  He
came into Borromeo looking queerer and hairier than ever, and
simply eaten alive with the longin’ to forgive Rad.
“’Tisn’t him I’m thinking of,” he
explained in his careful way, “he’ll get what’s
coming to him, anyway; it’s me,” he said.
“How’m I to save my soul if I don’t forgive
him?”

“Well, you can’t forgive him just yet,” said
the man he was talking to, sort of soothing.  “He
ain’t here.  He’s on a new job: foreman at the
Llindura, and went out last week.”

“Oh!” said Billsky.  He looked all around
him, kind of taken aback and hurt.  “Oh!
Why’d he do that?”

“He didn’t do it because he was afraid of you, old
sport,” said the other man, laughing fit to hurt himself,
“if that’s what you’re thinking.”

Billsky looked more hurt than ever.  He’d big
collie-dog eyes in his furry face, and now they
p. 91
fairly filled
with tears.  “Why should I think that?” he said
earnestly.  “I only want to forgive him.  I only
want to tell him I forgive him.”  And he went away,
all puzzled at the contrariety of things in general.

He kept pretty small and quiet about Borromeo for a few days;
and then I saw him looking awful pleased with himself.
“Gray Thomas,” he told me, “he’s going
out to the Llindura with some mules, and he’ll take me
along.  So now I’ll be able to forgive Radway,”
he said, “and get it off my mind.”

He went out to the Llindura with the mules.  When he got
there, he found Rad had been sent to Sageville with a bunch of
calves the day before.

He stayed a week at the Llindura, almost too worried to earn
his keep, waiting for Radway.  Radway didn’t
come.  At the end of the week, he lit out for
Sageville.  Halfway there, he met the rest of Rad’s
outfit, coming back.  “Rad’s been bit with the
mining fever,” they told Billsky, “and he’s off
into the Altanero country with a man he met in Sageville.
The boss’ll be mad with him.”  Billsky looked
more grieved than ever.

“Did he know I was waiting for him?” said he.

“No,” said they, “how should he?”

Well, how should he?  But I believe he did.  You
see, Billsky’s forgiveness had got on his nerves.

It was a close call in Sageville that Radway’d get
forgiven in spite of himself.  He actually rode out one end
of the town with his new partner as Billsky came in at the
other.

The fellows laughed at Billsky; but they liked him; and maybe
they began to wonder.  Anyway, Billsky stayed in Sageville a
week, selling his pony
p. 92
and getting an outfit together.
When they asked him what he wanted a prospectin’ outfit
for, he just looked at them in a surprised, hurt sort of way, and
said, “Why, to go after Rad and forgive him, of
course.  What’d you think?”  Pretty soon,
they stopped laughing.  It was the look on Billsky’s
face stopped them.  You know how queer brown and yellow
faces look to us?  That’s because the expression never
changes.  Billsky began to look queer, like a Chink or an
Indian; he’d just one expression in those days, stamped on
his hairy face as if he’d been branded with it.

He got two burros and an outfit of sorts, and off he went at
the end of the week, trailing Radway into the Altanero.
Three days before he went, a mule wagon pulled out for Seear; it
overtook Radway and his partner, and the driver told him his
forgiver was following on.  So, you see, Rad knew.

Have you ever seen the opening of the Altanero: the Gates of
the Altanero?  There’s desert, and there’s
hills, and there’s cañons; and there’s the
Altanero.  This side the Gates, you’re still somebody,
with work to do, and money to get, and girls to kiss: anything,
if you go find it.  Other side the Gates, you’re
nobody, nothing.  You just go out.  Yes, you just go
out.  It’s like dying while you’re alive.
You don’t count at all; and quite often you die dead.

Have you ever seen the Gates?  You go on and on in the
heat, away from Sageville, and Seear, and everything you
know.  They lie flat behind you, lost in the heat.  You
don’t see ’em if you turn and look.  You
don’t see anything.  Even the sage thins out and
goes.  It’s all dust.  Then ahead, ever so far,
you see something gold.  It rises higher, little
p. 93
by
little,—oh so slow! and you see it’s rocks, great
golden rocks.  They lift, and lift, and lift.  One day
you find they’re behind you as well as in front: nothing
but golden rocks; unless it’s red rocks or green rocks or
rocks like clear black glass.  I’ve known some queer
moments, but there’s nothing so queer as when it first
comes home to you that, for miles and miles in every direction,
there’s just nothing but the rocks—like a world
rough-cut from precious stones and left to die.

There’s few wells in the Altanero: few that are
known.  You travel by, and accordin’ to, the
wells.  Radway struck off into the hills from the Seaar
trail, making for the first well.  A week later, there was
Billsky following over the same ground.  Each night
he’d camp by one of Radway’s cold fires; and, each
night, he’d kneel in the ashes and pray.  Sometimes
he’d pray an hour, or two hours, or three, under the
tremendous stars; but it was always that he might catch up with
Rad quick, and forgive him, and get it off his mind.  He
wasn’t worrying.  He was just eager.  He knew he
was bound to come across Rad sooner or later in the
Altanero.  Then he’d sleep, and eat, and off
he’d go, singing hymns to the burros:
“Greenland’s Icy Mountains,” most likely.

Once, in the dead ashes, he found a broke-off saucepan
handle.  He was so pleased he carted it along with him, like
a mascot.  It seemed to put him in touch with Radway: to
bring the happy moment o’ forgiveness nearer.

And Radway?  Well, there you have me.

The Altanero’s a bad country to travel in if
you’ve anything on your nerves.  I passed through a
few miles of it once when I had something on
p. 94
mine: a sick
child two hundred miles away; and I tell you, by the third day I
was seein’ the kid everywhere.  But Radway—I
can’t just explain Radway.  I wonder if he was
seein’ the girl that started it.

Billsky made the first water-hole six days behind Rad;
he’d gained a day.

Rad and company had used considerable of the water in that
hole.  It had shrunk, and there in the margin, baked hard
and white like clay, were footprints of men and burros.
Billsky picked out Rad’s footprints and patted ’em,
he was so pleased.  He rested by the water a few hours, and
freshened up his burros.  Then he went on.

Between the first water-hole and the second the country opens
up.  It isn’t just a huddle of rocks.  It’s
mesas rising from a dead level of dust like the worn foundations
of towers and cathedrals and cities, banded in rose and violet
and gold.  You could no more climb most of ’em than
you could climb the outside of a skyscraper.  But Billsky
found one he could climb, and up he went.  He’d seen
some sort of dry, grassy stuff at the top, and he wanted it for
Sarah, one of the burros that was ailing.  He found more
than the grass on top.  He found a grave.  Didn’t
know whose, of course; nobody knows, nor ever will.  He gave
the grass to Sarah; but next day she died.  Billsky was
terrible hurt and grieved, he was always so careful of
beasts.  He never realized that Sarah was just beat out:
couldn’t stand the pace.

At the second water-hole he was only four days behind Rad.

He rested up a bit, being worried over his burro; and took out
the lost time in prayer.  Then
p. 95
on he went, at that terrible pace,
overhauling Rad by the mile, achin’ to forgive him.
It’s a long stretch to the third hole.  Billsky gained
two days on it.  I can’t guess how.  He told me
he took short cuts through the cañons, and that they
always turned out all right; and that he sang “Hold the
Fort, for I Am Coming,” right along.

He found the third hole fouled and shrunk.  In a stretch
of mud, Rad had written with a stick, “If you follow me any
further, I will shoot you on sight.”  How did he know
Billsky was so near?  Maybe he’d seen his fire the
night before.  Billsky read the writing, and was dreadful
hurt and grieved.  “He doesn’t
understand,” he said, “that I’m going to
forgive him.  It’s what I’m follerin’ him
for.”  He prayed half the night, and went on quicker
than ever next day.

Few have ever been so far into the Altanero as the fourth
hole.  It’s hard to find.  Long before Billsky
made it, he saw a speck in the sky; it was a great bird, sailing
round in little, slow circles.  Under it was the fourth
water-hole.

It was quite a pool when Billsky came to it.  There were
bushes round it, and fibrous grass.  There were three burros
feeding on the bushes, and a small tent pitched.  A man came
out of the tent, and when he saw Billsky he held up his
hands.

“Don’t shoot,” he said, “I’m not
Radway.  You’ve no quarrel with me.”

“Nor with him,” said Billsky.
“I’ve come to forgive him.  Where is
he?”

“Gone,” said the man, “gone mad, I
guess.  He’s pushed on alone.  Day before
yesterday I took sick.  We was to rest up here, and then
cast round careful, always within reach o’ this
water.
p.
96
This morning he went out and climbed them rocks
there.  Then he came back, and said he must go on, he
couldn’t wait.  I went to stop him, and he laid me
out.  See here.”  The man was most cryin’;
he turned his face, and Billsky saw a great black swelling on his
jaw.  “He went on,” he said, “as if the
devil was after him.  And the devil’s you!”

Billsky was the meekest little hairy man; and now he too was
fit to cry.  “He don’t know me,” he said,
very sad, “but it’ll be all right. . .  .
What’s on there?” he said, pointing beyond.

“God knows, who made it,” said the man, “out
of hell’s leftovers.  But no one else does, for no
one’s ever been there.”

“It’ll be all right,” said Billsky
again.  “I’ll go on after him, and forgive him,
and bring him back.”

He started out to do it, taking one of Rad’s burros,
which were fresher than his; and bound he’d come up with
Rad this time.

I don’t rightly know what happened there, beyond the
last water.  One thing, I never been there.  I gather
Billsky just pushed on as usual, following Rad’s
tracks.  He followed ’em easy: the only footsteps
within a hundred miles or so!  As he went he sang
“Glory for Me,” because he was going to be able to
forgive Rad at last.

The big bird in the sky, he swung off from the water-hole and
followed Billsky.  There was just them two moving things for
him to see: Radway on ahead, mad to get away from Billsky, and
old Billsky, mad to forgive him, and singing the glory song.

Billsky couldn’t tell me much about this part of
it.  He just went on, and on, and on.
p. 97
Sometimes, he
said, there were stars.  The place was so still he began to
think he could hear ’em shine: a sort of fizzing, like an
arc-light, which, of course, he knew to be foolishness.
Sometimes there was just the sun, a great fire, like as if it
were fastened to the earth and burning all the life out of
it.  There were the rocks, of course, but he didn’t
remember them much: only one great black cleft, and a glimmer in
the walls of it.  The glimmer was gold-veined turquoise,
just sticking out o’ that cliff so you could have pried it
loose with a toothpick.  Billsky couldn’t tell you
where it was if you paid him.  He wasn’t thinking of
anything but forgiving Rad.

Then, with a noise, he says, like a roll of rifle-fire, that
big bird dropped out of heaven like a stone, and shot past him,
and settled just ahead.  There was a dead burro there, and
an empty water can.  But Radway, he’d gone on.
Billsky went after him, singing powerful; but his voice
didn’t make much noise.

Then there was a little crack ahead.  Something sang past
Billsky, and flipped a tiny flake off of the side of the
cañon.  Billsky stopped and looked at the flake lying
at his feet, just as pretty as a pink rose-leaf.  He knew a
bullet had chipped it off, and that he’d come within
shooting length of Radway.  He let out a yell of joy.
“It’s me, Rad!” he yelled.
“I’m comin’ to forgive you!”  But
Radway didn’t stop.  He went on, as if he was mad; and
behind him came the man that was killin’ him: the man that
only wanted to forgive him.

There were more shots.  Billsky said Rad fired at him all
that afternoon, but owing to the refraction, he wasn’t hit
once.  Besides, Rad was
p. 98
breaking up.  Once your nerve
goes, you break up quick in the Altanero.

It was evening when Billsky came up with him.

You know evening on the Altanero?  The sun’s down
on the edge of things, as big as a burning house.  All the
rocks turn clear as glass for a minute.  It’s as if
the light went clean through them, and came out colored with
their colors: rose, violet, gold.  The air you breathe
glows.  The rosy-red cañon Billsky was in ended
sudden in a wall that hit the sky.  The sunset touched it,
and it became like a veil, says Billsky, a blood-red curtain hung
from earth to heaven.  At the foot of it lay Bad Radway.

Billsky ran at him, trying to yell.  He had his water
flask ready.  All day he’d been saving water to give
to Radway, but he was too late.  Rad just looked at him; and
all that had been inside him: all the remorse, the guilt, the
black fear, the unknown damage of the soul that first drove him
to be scared of Billsky, came out in that look.

It struck Billsky to the heart.  “Rad, Rad,”
he said, “don’t you be scared o’ me!  I
forgive you, Rad!” he said.

But Bad Radway didn’t hear.  He was dead.

Billsky had done his part, but he was all broke up.  He
got back to the water-hole somehow, after burying Rad at the foot
of the cliff.  He and the other man that had been
Rad’s partner lit out for home right away.
They’d had enough of the Altanero.

When I last saw Billsky, he was terrible hurt and grieved
because the other man held him to blame for what had happened to
Radway.  “He seems to think,” said Billsky to
me, “that I done
p. 99
something to him!  Me that
follered him all that way just to forgive him!  He seems to
think, that guy does, that I done something!”

Then, in a puzzled, exasperated kind of way, he laughed.
“But come to think of it,” said Billsky, “it
was funny.”

Well, as I said before, religion’s a queer thing to
handle; but I don’t see anything funny in it.

Marjorie L. C. Pickthall
.

p. 100
TOLD
TO PARSON

A little girl came rushing into the gate of the vicarage at
Postbridge, Dartmoor, and it chanced that she met the minister
himself as he bent in his garden and scattered lime around
upspringing seeds.

“These slugs would try the patience of a saint,”
he said, hearing footsteps, and not looking up.  “They
have eaten off nearly all my young larkspurs.  How can one
fight them?”

Then a small, breathless voice broke in upon him.

“Please, sir, mother sent me, an’ I’ve
runned a’most all the way from our cottage wi’out
stopping once.  ’Tis old Mr. Mundy, please.
He’m dying—so he told mother when her fetched him his
milk this morning—an’ he says he’ve got
something very special to tell anybody as’ll care to come
an’ listen to it.  But nobody don’t want to hear
his secrets in the village; so mother said ’twas your job,
please, an’ sent me for your honor.”

“My job—yes, so it is, little maid.
I’ll come at once.  An’ they’d better send
for the doctor.  It isn’t his regular visiting day
until Thursday, but probably it’s his job, too.”

“Mother axed the old man that; an’ he said as he
didn’t want no doctor, nor his traade [medicine]
neither.  He says h’m nearly a hundred years old,
an’ he won’t be messed about with at his time of
life, but just die easy an’ comfortable.”

p. 101
In
twenty minutes the clergyman had walked a mile and crossed a
strip of the wilderness that stretched round about the little
hamlet on Dartmoor where he labored.  A single cottage
separated from the rest by wide tracts of furze and heather stood
here, and near it lay a neglected garden.  But
“Gaffer” Mundy had long ceased to fight the moor or
care for his plot of land.  His patch of the reclaimed earth
returned fast to primitive savagery.  Brake fern sprouted in
the potato bed; rush, heather and briar choked the currant
bushes; fearless rabbits nibbled every green thing.

“Come in, whoever you may be,” said an ancient
voice.  So the visitor obeyed and entered, to find the
sufferer, fully dressed, sitting by a fire of peat.  Noah
Mundy was once very tall, but now his height had vanished and he
had been long bent under his burden of years.  A bald,
yellow skull rose above his countenance, and infinite age marked
his face.  As the earth through centuries of cooling has
wrinkled into mountains and flattened into ocean beds between
them, so these aged features, stamped and torn with the fret and
fever of long life, had become as a book whereon time had written
many things for those who could read them.  Very weak was
the man, and very thin.  He was toothless and almost
hairless; the scanty beard that fell from his chin was white,
while his mustache had long been dyed with snuff to a lively
yellow.  His eyes remained alive, though one was filmed over
with an opaline haze.  But from the other he saw clearly
enough for all his needs.  He made it a boast that he could
not write, and he could not read.  There was no book in his
house.

“’Tis you, eh?  I could have wished for a man

p. 102
out of
your trade, but it won’t matter.  I’ve got a
thing worth telling; but mark this, I don’t care a button
what you think of it, an’ I don’t want none of your
bunkum an’ lies after I have told it.  Sit down in
that thicky chair an’ smoke your pipe an’ keep
cool.  Ban’t no use getting excited now, for what I be
going to tell ’e happened more’n sixty years
ago—afore you was born or thought about.”

“My smoke won’t trouble you?”

“Bah!  I’ve smoked and chewed an’
snuffed for more’n half a century.  I’m baccy
through and through—soaked in it, as you might say.
An’ as for smoke, if what you tell to church be true, I
shall have smoke, an’ fire too, afore long.  But
hell’s only a joke to frighten females.  I don’t
set no store by it.”

“Better leave that, Mr. Mundy.  If you really
believe your end is near, let us be serious.  Yes,
I’ll smoke my pipe.  And you must feel very, very
sure, that what you tell me is absolutely sacred, unless you wish
it otherwise.”

“Nought sacred about it, I reckon—all t’
other way.  An’ as for telling, you can go an’
shout it from top of Bellever Tor you’m minded to.  I
don’t care a farden curse who knows it now.  Wait till
I’m out of it; then do as you please.”

He drank a little milk, remained silent a moment with his eyes
upon the fire, and presently began to tell his life’s
strange tale.

“Me an’ my brother was the only children our
parents ever had; an’ my brother was five years
older’n me.  My father, Jonas Mundy, got money through
a will, an’ he brought it to Dartymoor, like a fool,
an’ rented a bit of moor from the Duchy of Cornwall,
an’ built a farm upon it, an’
p. 103
set to work
to reclaim the land.  At first he prospered, an’ Aller
Bottom Farm, as my father called it, was a promising place, so
long as sweat of man poured out there without ceasing.  You
can see the ruins of it yet, for when Jonas Mundy died an’
it falled to me, I left it an’ comed up here; an the chap
as took it off my hands—he went bankrupt inside three
year.  ’Tis all falled to pieces now, for none tried
again.

“But that’s to overrun the matter.  When I
was fifteen an’ my brother, John James, was twenty, us both
failed in love with the same maid.  You stare; but though
fifteen in years, I was twenty-five in understanding, an’ a
very oncoming youth where women were concerned.  Nelly Baker
had turned seventeen, an’ more than once I told her that
though a boy of fifteen couldn’t wed a maid of her age
without making folks laugh, even if he could get a parson to
hitch them, yet a chap of three-an’-twenty might very
properly take a girl of five-an’-twenty without the deed
calling for any question.  An’ her loved me truly
enough; for though you only see a worn-out scarecrow afore you
now, yet seventy year agone I filled the eye of more maidens than
one, and was a bowerly youth to look upon—tall, straight,
tough, wi’ hair so black as a crow.

“John James he never knowed that I cared a button for
Nelly.  I never showed it to a living soul but her by word
or look; an’ she kept quiet—for fear of being laughed
at, no doubt.  Her folks were dead on the match with John
James, an’ he pressed her so hard that she’d have
took him but for me.  He was a pretty fellow too—the
Mundys were very personable as a family.  Quite different,
though, from me.  Fair polled, wi’ flaxen hair, an
p. 104
terrible
strong was John James, an’ the best wrastler on Dartymoor
in them days.

“Me an’ her met by appointment a week afore
she’d got to give him a final ‘yes’ or
‘no.’  I mind it very well to this hour;
an’ yet ’tis seventy-odd years agone.  On
Hartland Tor us sat in the heather unseen, an’ I put my
arms around her an’ loved her, an’ promised to make
her a happy woman.  Then I told her what she’d got to
do.  First I made her prick her finger wi’ a thorn of
the furze, an’ draw blood, an’ swear afore the Living
God she’d marry me as soon as I could make her mistress of
a farm.

“She was for joking about the matter at first, but I
soon forced her to grow serious.  She done what I told her,
an’ since she believed in the Living God, I reckoned her
oath would bind her fast enough.  As for me, I laughed out
of sight, for I never believed in nothing but myself—not
even when I was a boy under twenty years old.  Next I bade
her fall out with John James.  I put words in her mouth to
say to him.  ‘I know the fashion of man he
be—short an’ fiery in his temper,’ I told
her.  ‘Be hot an’ quick with him.  Tell him
he’s not your sort, an’ never will be—quarrel
with his color, if you like.  Tell him he’m too pink
an’ white for ’e.  Say ’tis enough that
your own eyes be blue, an’ that you’d never wed a
blue-eyed man.  Make him angry—you ban’t a woman
if you don’t know how to do that.  Then the rest be
easy enough.  He’ll flare an’ flae like a tar
barrel on Guy Fawkes Night.  But he’ll trouble you no
more, for he’m so proud as Satan.’

“Nelly Baker took in all I said; an’ inside a week
she’d dropped my brother.  But ’twas what
p. 105
he done
after that startled folks, for without a word to any living soul,
he vanished, like the dew of the morning, four-an’-twenty
hours after she’d flinged him over.  I was the last
that seed him.  We were working together out ’pon the
land; an’ he was sour an’ crusty wi’ his
trouble, an’ hadn’t a word to fling at me.
Dimpsy light fell, an’ I went in a tool shed to don my
jacket an’ go home.  ’Twas autumn, an’ us
had been spreading manure upon the meadow.

“‘Be you coming, John James?’ I said.

“‘You go to hell,’ he answered.
‘I’ll come when I’ve a mind to, an’ maybe
I won’t come at all!’

“So home I walked wi’out another word; an’
he never comed; an’ nobody ever heard a whisper about him
again from that day to this.  For a soldier he went,
’twas thought; but the after history of un never reached
nobody at Postbridge; an’ whether he was shot or whether he
gathered glory in foreign parts none ’pon Dartymoor can
tell you.

“A nine days’ wonder it was, an’ it killed
my mother; for John James was the apple of her eye.  Her
never cared a button for me, ’cause I was the living
likeness of her brother—my uncle, Silas Bond.  They
sent him to Botany Bay for burning down wheat stacks.  A bad
lot he was, no doubt; an’ a fool to boot, which is
worse.  For he got catched an’ punished.
An’ he deserved all he got—for letting ’em
catch him.

“With John James out of the way, I comed to be a bit
more important in the house, an’ when my mother died,
father got to trust me with his money.  I was old for my
years, you see.  As for Nelly, she kept so true to me as the
bird to her nest—for
p. 106
five years; an’ then I’d
got to be twenty, an’ had saved over three hundred pound
for her; an’ she was twenty-two.  A good many chaps
wanted to marry her; but she kept our secret close, an’
said ‘nay’ to some very snug men, an’ just
waited for me an’ Aller Bottom Farm.

“Then, when I’d reckoned to name the day an’
take her so soon as I comed of age, Oliver Honeywell turned up
from down country an’ rented that old tenement farm what be
called Merripit.  So good land as any ’pon all
Dartymoor goes with it.  An’ he comed wi’ a
flourish of trumpets an’ plenty of money.  He was
going to larn us all how to farm, an’ how to make money
’pon weekdays, an’ how to get to heaven Sundays.

“Rot the devil!  I see him now—a smug, sleek,
fat, handsome, prosperous man, with the insolence of a spoilt
cat!  He’d preach in the open air of a Sunday, for
there was no parson nor church here in them days.  Strong as
a horse,—a, very practical man,—always right.
Did plenty of good, as the saying goes, an’ went about like
a procession, as if he expected angels from heaven to be waiting
for him at every street corner with a golden crown.  His
right hand was generous, but he took very good care his left hand
knowed it.  He didn’t do his good in secret, nor yet
hide his light under a bushel.

“He was a black-haired man, wi’ scholarship
an’ money behind him.  He knew the better-most
folk.  They called upon him, I believe, an’ axed him
to their houses, it was said.  He hunted, and paid money to
help three different packs o’ hounds.  An old mother
kept house for him.  He tried to patronize the whole of
Postbridge an’ play the squire an’ vicar rolled into
one.  Men as owed him
p. 107
nought an’ thanked him for
nought pulled their hair to him.  But there be some fools
who will always touch their hats to a pair o’ horses.
There comed to be an idea in people’s minds that Honeywell
was a Godsend, though if you axed them why, they generally
couldn’t tell you.

“An’ my Nelly falled in love with him.

“At least she said so; though Heaven knows that the
pompous fool, for all his fine linen, weren’t a patch on
what I was at twenty-one.  Anyway, he comed courting her,
for ’twas not known yet that me an’ Nelly was
more’n friends; an’ then when he heard how we had
been secretly tokened for no less than six years, he comed to see
me with a long-winded lie in his mouth.  An’ the lie
was larded wi’ texts from scripture.  Nelly Baker had
misunderstood her feelings about me, he said; her had never
knowed what true love was till she met him; an’ he hoped
I’d behave as honestly as he had—an’ all the
rest of it.  In fact, she’d throwed me over for him
an’ his money an’ his high position; an’ he
comed to let me down gently with bits from the Bible.  As
for her, she always lusted after money and property.

“Us fought hand to hand, for I flew at him, man, like a
dog, an’ I’d have strangled him an’ tored the
liver out of him, but some chaps heard him howling an’
runned along, an’ pulled me off his throat in time.

“He didn’t have the law of me; but Nelly Baker
kept out of my way afterwards, like as if I was the plague;
an’ then six months passed an’ they was axed out in
marriage so grand as you please at Widecombe Church.

“I only seed her once more; but after lying in
p. 108
wait for
her, weeks an’ weeks, like a fox for a rabbit, it chanced
at last that I met her one evening going home across the moor
above Aller Bottom Farm ’pon the edge of the last of our
fields.  Then us had a bit of a tell.  ’Twas only
a fortnight afore she was going to marry Mr. Oliver
Honeywell.

“I axed her to change her mind; I spoke to her so gentle
as a dove croons; but she was ice all through—cold
an’ hard an’ wicked to me.  Then I growed
savage.  I noticed how mincing her’d growed in her
speech since Honeywell had took her up.  She was changed
from a good Devon maid into a town miss, full o’ airs
an’ graces that made me sick to see.  He’d
poisoned her.

“‘Do try an’ be sensible,’ she
said.  ‘We were silly children all them years, you
know, Mr. Mundy.  You’ll find somebody much better
suited to you than I am—really you will.  Have you
ever thought of Mary Reep, now?  She’s prettier than I
am—I am sure she is.’

“Her named the darter of William Reep, a common laborer
as worked on Honeywell’s farm at ten shilling a week.
The devil in me broke loose, an’ quite right too.

“‘We’ve gone up in the world of late
then?  ’Twas always your hope and prayer to come by a
bit of property.  But ’tis a coorious thing,’ I
said.  ‘Do you know that you’m standing just
where my brother, John James, stood last time ever he was seed by
mortal eyes?’

“‘What’s that to me?’ she said.
‘Let me go by, please, Mr. Mundy.  I’m late, as
it is.’

“‘He was never seed again,’ I told
her.  ‘’Tis a coorious thing to me, as you be
stand’—on the same spot at the same time—just
as he did, in the
p.
109
first shadow of night.  His going, you see, made
me my father’s heir, an’ rich enough to give you a
good home some day.’

“Then her growed a thought pale an’ tried to pass
me.

“I went home presently; but from that hour Nelly Baker
was seen no more.  None ever knowed I’d been the last
to speak with her; an’ none ever pitied me.  But there
was a rare fuss made over Oliver Honeywell.  He wore black
for her; an’ lived a bachelor for five year.  Then he
married a widow; but not till his mother died.

“An’ that’s the story I thought would
interest some folks.”

The minister tapped his pipe on the hob, and knocked the ashes
out.  He cleared his throat and spoke.  He had learned
nothing that was new to him.

“It is a strange story indeed, Mr. Mundy, and I am
interested to have heard it from your own lips.  Rumor has
not lied, for once.  The tale, as you tell it, is
substantially the same that has been handed down in this village
for two generations.  But no one knows that you were the
last to see Nelly Baker.  Did you ever guess what
happened?”

The old man smiled, and showed his empty gums.

“No—I didn’t guess, because I knowed very
well without guessing,” he said.  “All the same
I should have thought that you, with your mighty fine knowledge
of human nature, would have guessed very quick.  ’Twas
I killed my brother—broke in the back of his head wi’
a pickax when he was down on one knee tying his bootlace.
An’ me only fifteen year old!  An’ I killed
Nelly
p.
110
Baker—how, it don’t matter.
You’ll find the dust of ’em side by side in one of
them old ‘money pits’ ’pon Bellever Tor.
’Tis a place that looks due east, an’ there’s a
ring of stones a hundred yards away from it.  The ‘old
men’ buried their dead there once, I’ve heard
tell.  Break down a gert flat slab o’ granite
alongside a white thorn tree, an’ you’ll find
what’s left of ’em in a deep hole behind.  So
she never comed by any property after all.”

The ancient sinner’s head fell forward, but his eyes
were still open.

“Good God!  After all these years!  Man, man,
make your peace!  Confess your awful crime!” cried the
clergyman.

The other answered:

“None of that—none of that rot!  I’d do
the same this minute; an’ if there was anything that comed
after—if I meet that damned witch in hell tomorrow
I’d kill her over again, if her still had a body I could
shake the life out of.  Now get you gone, an’ let me
pass in peace.”

The reverend gentleman departed at his best speed, but
presently returned, bringing soups and cordials.  With him
there came a cottage woman who performed services for the
sick.  But when Mrs. Badger saw Noah Mundy, she knew that
little remained to do.

“He’s gone,” she said, “soft an’
sweet as a baby falls to sleep.  Some soap an’ water
an’ a coffin be all he wants now, your honor; not this here
beautiful broth, nor brandy neither.  So you had best go
back along, Sir, an’ send Old Mother Dawe up to help me, if
you please.”

Eden Phillpotts
.

p.
111
IRON

The child Cecily waited until her brother had made a bridge
from a fallen bough, and then clasping her adorably grubby hands
about his neck allowed him to carry her across the stream.

“Which way, little sister?” he asked.

A dragon-fly hovered above the water and then darted away, and
Cecily with a vague idea of following it chose a sunken path that
almost traced the brook in its course.  It was a silent
little stream running through the sleepy meadows, and where it
widened among the pond lilies it almost stopped.  Here and
there it eddied self-consciously about the yellow flowers and
further on it almost rippled in shy haste.  And in the
golden afternoon Cecily knew that the boy, so clever at building
bridges, so capable in the midst of barbed wire, and above all,
so kind to her, was wonderful beyond all telling.

When three tiny aeroplanes flew above the trenches, it
reminded the boy of the dragon-flies over the brook at home, and
once when he crawled through the mud and helped cut away some
barbed wire, the barbed wire made him think of a bit of the brook
which ran through the pasture.  He remembered the wire had
made a breakwater of drifting leaves and that Cecily had thrown
stones at the leaves until they had slowly floated away in a
p. 112
great
clump.  And because he imagined himself a victim of unmanly
sentiment, he detested these memories; so that after a while they
returned no more.

At the training camp he had learned, or thought he had
learned, the trick of withdrawing a bayonet after a supposedly
unparried lunge.  But here as he slipped in the wet snow
trying to release the driven bayonet, the thing caught and tore
and ripped the flesh.  And to keep from falling he crushed
and mangled the face beneath him with his heel. . .

Cecily in the twilight pressed her face against the window
pane.  The gaunt branch of a tree waved and pointed across
the snow, but the little frozen stream was hidden away.

The child thought that when the boy returned he would still be
wonderful.

Randolph Edgar
.

p. 113
THE
PERFECT INTERVAL

The sound of the telephone bell brought the tuner’s mild
blue eyes from his plate.

“F sharp,” he remarked.  “Same pitch as
the bell in my shop.”

“How extraordinary that you can name the pitch of a
sound offhand!” exclaimed the professor, eyeing him with
interest.

“All in the way of business,” replied the tuner
placidly.  “No, thank you, ma’arm, no cream on
the pudding.  I never paint the lily, as father used to say.
. . .  I’d not have been tuning pianos all over the
world with a ‘come again’ always behind me if I
hadn’t had something of an ear, would I, now?”

“But accurate to such a degree!  I thought one
tuned by chords and melodies and—and that sort of
thing.”

“Chords!  Melodies!” repeated the tuner with
professional scorn.  “Of course some do muddle along
that way, but there’s nothing in it.  The octave,
there’s the interval to give the test to a man’s
ear.”

“You’re Greek in your preferences,”
commented the professor with a smile.  “The Greeks,
you know, knew nothing of harmony as we understand it.
Their only interval was the octave—they called it
magadizing.”

“Well now, to think of it!” said the tuner.
“I
p.
114
wish I’d known.  There was a Greek sailor on
the Silvershell, and I might have had a chat with him about his
music.”

“I was referring to the ancient Greeks,” the
professor explained.  “I am not familiar with modern
Greek music, but I imagine it is very much like modern music
everywhere.”

“Of course,” agreed the tuner cynically.
“Comic operas, chords that give all ten fingers something
to do—that’s music as they write it now.  And
I’m not saying that it hasn’t its place,” he
went on.  “It’s human, at least.
Professionally, I admire the octave, but when I sit down in the
evening for a bit of a rest and me daughter Nora plays
‘Vesper Chimes,’ the way those chords pile up on each
other don’t hurt me the way it would some.  After all,
perfection’s apt to be a bit bleak, isn’t it?
There was Cartwright, for instance.  The octave came to be
the only perfect interval for him—poor
Cartwright!”

“Cartwright?” repeated the professor
curiously.

“Haven’t I ever told you about Cartwright?
Hm!  Well!”  He pushed his chair back a little
from the table, fixed his eyes thoughtfully on the antics of a
pair of orioles building a nest outside the window, and meditated
for a moment.  We were too wise to break the silence, for we
knew that the tuner was digging up from the storehouse of a rich
memory some fresh chapter in the Odyssey of his wanderings.
After a little he began his tale.

What the professor here said about the Greeks and their
octaves set me thinking about Cartwright.
p. 115
I
haven’t often spoken of him, for there’s not much to
tell that most people would understand.  Molly, now, she
always speaks of him as that poor crazy Mr. Cartwright.  The
perfect interval is nonsense, Molly says.  Red Wing’s
good enough for her. . . but I’d better begin at the
beginning.

It was the time Molly and I were taking our wedding trip on
the tramp schooner Silvershell, and we were cruising about the
Pacific after copra and vanilla and all those cargoes that sound
so romantic when one’s young.  One of the ports we
were bound for was a place called Taku, down in the Dangerous
Archipelago.  The captain warned us that it would be a bad
trip.

“But you ought to make your fortune there,” he
says, “for I’ll lay a wager you’re the first
tuner that’s ever visited the place.  Whether you get
home to spend your money or not, that’s another
matter.  That’s on the knees of the gods,” says
the captain, who was an Oxford man and had picked up some of his
expressions there.

When we got in among the islands I saw what he meant.
Coral they were, and reefs above water and below.  Molly and
I slept in our life preservers night after night, and daytime we
could scarcely go down to meals for wondering how we’d get
through that boiling sea of breakers and hidden peaks of
coral.  We’d some narrow shaves, too, but we made
Taku, and anchored one evening in a lagoon that looked as if it
might have been painted on a colored calendar, palms and parrots
and native huts and all.

The Silvershell was to be in port some time, and the captain
told us to look about as much as we liked.

p.
116
“There’s an organ up at the mission,”
he says.  “It’s got asthma or something.
If you can cure it, I’ll gladly foot the bill.
I’m a church-going man when I’m ashore,” says
the captain, who liked his joke, “but that organ puts me
clean off religion.”

Well, I made a good job of the organ, and very grateful the
ladies were for it, too.  Then I went up to the British
commissioner’s, where I was told there was a piano needing
attention.  Davidson, the commissioner, was an uncommonly
decent chap, and he put me in the way of two or three more odd
bits of tuning and repairing, besides having his own instrument
put into shape.  The missionary ladies had suggested that
Molly and I stay with them while the Silvershell was in port, so
I could put in a tidy bit of work in a day.  But there were
only twenty white families in the place, and I’d about gone
through the work when one afternoon Davidson stopped me as I was
going back to the mission, and asked me to step up to the house
with him, as a friend of his wanted to talk with me about rather
a large job of repairing he wished done.

The friend was Cartwright.  I shall never forget that
first sight of him, not to my dying day.  He was standing in
the big music room where I’d been working for Davidson two
or three days before, and as we came in he turned and gave us
such a look!

“Oh, it’s you!” he said, as if he’d
expected something terrible to come in the door.  And then,
as Davidson introduced us, he nodded in an offhand sort of
way.  He was the only man I’ve ever called
beautiful.  Beautiful was the only word to describe
him.  “Golden lads,”—I once heard an
p. 117
actor spout
about them at a play, and now, when I remember that expression, I
think of Cartwright.  He was a golden lad, for all his
haunted, unhappy face.

“I’ve a piano at home that wants looking
after,” he says to me after a moment.  “Rather a
large job, but if you are willing to go back with me in the
morning I’ll make it worth your while.”

“If it isn’t too far away,” I said.
“I’m only stopping here while the Silvershell is in
port.”

“Not so far,” says Cartwright.  “I
could have you back here in three or four days.  And
I’ll make it worth your while.”  In spite of his
off-handedness, it was plain he was keen on having me come.

Of course I said I’d go, and then Cartwright nodded and
said something about my being at the wharf about five, and left
us, just like that.

“But he never told me what was needed for the
piano,” I said to Davidson.

“About everything, I fancy,” Davidson answers
gruffly.  “It hasn’t been touched in ten
years.”

“Ten years!” I said.  “He’s no
business having a piano if he cares no more for it than
that.”

“He cared too much for it, perhaps,” Davidson said
in a peculiar tone.  He took out his pipe and fussed with
it, then he went on.  “Perhaps I ought to tell
you.  He hasn’t touched the piano since the night his
wife drowned herself. . . .  I was there at the time.
Cartwright and Charlotte had been singing together.”

“Was Charlotte his wife?”

“His cousin, Sir John Brooke’s daughter.  Sir
John is my chief, you know.  They are expected back from
England almost any day now.”

Davidson’s face had gone quite red at the
p. 118
mention of
the girl’s name, and all at once I guessed why he had been
so keen about having his piano in shape.  I wondered if it
was for this Charlotte’s sake that Cartwright, too, was
preparing.

“Cartwright’s wife was the daughter of old
Miakela, the native chief,” was the surprising information
Davidson offered me next.  “She had been educated at a
convent in Manila, and she was very beautiful in a cold, foreign
way.  I think, though, it was her voice that first attracted
Cartwright.  It was perfect; it made other quite nice voices
sound coarse and shrill.  Cartwright had come out to Taku to
visit his uncle, and he met the girl here the evening she came
back from Manila.  The next day he married her—rode
over the mountains to ask her father’s permission.
That old savage—fancy!  There was a huge row with Sir
John, and Cartwright took the girl and went to live on a little
atoll about forty miles from here. . . .  Miss Charlotte
hadn’t come out from school in England then.  She came
back the next year. . .  That’s how it
happened.”

As a matter of fact he really hadn’t told me how it
happened at all, but he began to talk of other things, and after
a bit I said good-night, and went back to tell Molly about my new
job.

I wish you could have seen the lagoon the next morning when I
went down to meet Cartwright.  The old coral wharf was
flushed with pink that shaded into mauve below the water, and the
mauve went amethyst, and then violet blue out where the
Silvershell slept at her anchor in the middle of the
lagoon.  And still!  Not a ripple anywhere until a
high-prowed native canoe slipped out from a pool of shadow under
the palms along the shore,
p. 119
cutting through the glassy water
like a boat in a dream.  As she neared the wharf the sun
jumped up from the sea, and Cartwright, all in white, stood up in
the stern and shaded his eyes with his hand.  He was a
picture, his haunted beauty above the bronzed backs of the
rowers.

He apologized for bringing me out so early, then seemed to
forget all about me and sat silent, his eyes on the horizon
line.  Not that I minded.  I wanted to be let alone, so
I could look about me as we slipped along over a sea that seemed
to have no end.

Once outside the lagoon, the men bent to their paddles with a
will, breaking into a melody that reminded me of some hymn
tune.  They gave it a foreign twist by ending each line on
the octave.

“Wonderful pitch!” I said.

“What’s that?” asked Cartwright, jerking his
head round.  I repeated what I’d said.  He glared
at me wildly, then seemed to pull himself together, and muttered
some sort of reply.

“Well, if a simple speech has that effect on you, my
lad, I’ll sit silent,” I said to myself, and silent I
did sit the rest of the trip.

About the middle of the morning a bunch of what looked like
feather clusters rose out of the sea in front of us.  Pretty
soon I could see a pinky ridge below, then a line of white.
The men put up a brown sail, and in another hour we slid between
two lines of breakers into the tiniest lagoon I ever saw, lying
in the arms of a crescent-shaped atoll.  The whole thing
could not have been more than four or five miles long and fifty
feet high at the ridge.  There was a group of native huts on
the beach and a rambling house above, set in a grove
p. 120
of
breadfruit and citron and scarlet flame trees.  The rest of
the island was bare except for a brush of pandanus along the
crest and a group of coconut palms on the point, their trunks
leaning seaward, as if they were looking for something on the
horizon.  A lonely spot, yet with a sharp, gemlike beauty of
its own.

“Won’t you come up and rest a bit?”
Cartwright asked.  “You had an early start this
morning.”

I said I’d rather go right to work.  I hadn’t
forgotten the way he glared at me in the boat, and I wasn’t
going to put myself in the way of another look like that.

“Right, then; I’ll show you the piano,” he
says.  But he didn’t move, only stood staring at me
with the look of a small boy that had got himself into some
trouble, and was wondering if I could help him out.

Suddenly he started off almost on a run, and led me around the
shore to the point below the coconut palms, where a pavilion
stood in a thick clump of trees.  The place looked as if it
hadn’t been visited for years.  The path was choked
with undergrowth, and the doorway was almost hidden by twisted
ropes of lianas, growing down serpent fashion from the branches
overhead.

“A sweet place to keep a piano,” I thought to
myself.  I could hardly believe it was the piano he was
bringing me to.  But as we reached the door I saw it in its
wrapping of tarpaulin, half hid under forest rubbish that had
filtered through the broken thatch of the roof.  As I lifted
one corner of the cover, something jumped up with a rush of wings
and went screaming past my head.  It gave me a proper
fright.

p.
121
“Just a parrot,” Cartwright said.
“You’ve upset her nest, you see.  Be careful
when you lift the lid.  There may be centipedes
inside.”

“If you’ll clear the live stock off the outside,
I’ll see to the inside,” I said.  “I
should think a cheaper piano would have done the parrots to nest
in, sir.

“It seems odd to you,” he said meekly, wrinkling
his forehead a little.  “I wish I could
explain—”

He caught himself up, and I answered never a word, but began
examining the piano.  It was a Broadwood grand, but the
state it was in!  I’d hard work not to give him a
further piece of my mind.

For three days I worked at the poor thing.  Hammers eaten
off by the white ants, wires that the sea rust had done for,
cracked keys, nothing really in shape but the sounding
board.  And all the time I was working the parrots kept
screaming over my head, the trades blew through the torn thatch
of palms, the surf beat on the pink and purple reefs beyond the
point, and I kept thinking what a queer start it all was and how
much I’d have to tell Molly when I got back.

Now and again Cartwright would stop a few minutes in the
doorway and make jerky conversation, eyeing the piano like a
starving man the while.  He stopped quite a time the third
morning.  I was busy tuning and hadn’t much to say,
but gradually he came nearer.

“How’s it coming on?” he asked.

“All in shape but one string,” I said.
“Try the tone of it, sir.”

“I mustn’t touch it, I mustn’t touch
it,” he says
p.
122
to himself, but all the time he was coming closer, as
if something was pulling him on.  He put out his hand and
struck B flat octave.

“The upper B is mute!” he cries.

I explained that the string had broken twice, and I
hadn’t got around to putting another in.

“Broken!” he says wildly.  “She’s
not going to have it there.  And now I’ll not get the
sound out of my head again!”

I suppose he saw something in my face that made him recollect
himself.  It was pitiful to see him pull himself
together.

“Do your best with it, old chap,” he says
hurriedly.  “I’m depending on you.  My
uncle and cousin are to be back from England soon.
I—I want everything right when my cousin Charlotte
comes.”

He spoke the girl’s name as if it were a charm.

That evening, as we were smoking, he began to talk of his
cousin again.  She’d stayed with his people while she
was going to school, he told me, and she and Cartwright had been
great friends.

“She was comforting,” he said.  “She
made one feel happy and—and normal.”  Then he
said, in a tone that sounded as if he expected me to contradict
him: “She had a good ear for music, too.  Not perfect,
of course. . . .  Did you ever know any one with an ear so
perfect that only the eighth interval satisfied them?”

“One or two,” I said, wondering what he was
driving at now.  “They were cranks, though.  One
should love music in reason, in my opinion.”

“In reason, that’s it,” Cartwright repeated
in a low tone.  “My cousin loved it in reason.  I
couldn’t.  Perfection—I was tortured with the
idea.”

p. 123
I
waited, and after a little he went on.

“I’ve never been able to care for things in
reason.  I wanted perfection.  Music, love, I longed to
lose myself in them, but couldn’t, because always something
jarred, and then I grew cold.  My cousin Charlotte used to
laugh at me.  She had a sweet voice.  Not perfect,
though, and sometimes it would irritate me to madness to hear the
flaws that most people didn’t even notice.  And yet
even at sixteen Charlotte was dearer to me than any other
creature on earth.

“Then I came out to Taku, and I met Lulukuila.  She
was beautiful beyond anything I had ever dreamed.  She made
other women look clumsy beside her.  She stayed overnight at
my uncle’s, and next day an escort came from the old chief,
her father—six savages in pandanus kilts and
necklaces.  Those creatures came to take the very flower of
womanhood back to uncivilized surroundings.  I can’t
tell you how horrible it seemed to me.  And so I married
her.”

Cartwright jumped up, and began walking up and down.
After a while he switched off on another tack.

“Her voice was as perfect as her face,” he said,
“and her sense of pitch was absolute.  Those first
days we used to go out to the point where the pavilion stands,
and sit looking out over the reefs, and I thought I’d found
happiness at last.  I liked to hear her answer a certain
note that the sea sounds in the reefs yonder when the tide is
right.  She would take up the note an octave higher, and it
was thrilling, the perfection of her pitch.  I sent home for
the piano, imagining that it would be a bond between us.  I
thought I’d teach her the songs Charlotte and I used to
sing together.

p.
124
“But she hated the piano,” Cartwright
brought out in a muffled voice.  “I suppose I was
rather a fool over it at first.  I was so hungry for
familiar music.  Lulukuila couldn’t bear the music
I’d grown up with.  It brought out alien traits in
her, gusts of passion, fits of moodiness.  Octaves, those
she’d listen to.  Once when I filled in an octave she
jumped up and caught my hands.  I remember yet how she
looked.

“‘You are drawn by the many voices,’ she
said.  ‘There should, be only one for you.’

“She went off to the pavilion then, and when I went to
find her she was singing, following that sound the surf made on
the reefs.  The perfection of her pitch made me
shiver.  I began to hate it then.  I saw that Lulukuila
was going to destroy my pleasure in the music I had loved.
She was robbing me—”

I don’t believe Cartwright was talking to any one in
particular by this time.  His voice dropped, and I missed a
lot till I heard him mention his cousin.  He stopped then,
and looked at me for the first time.

“My uncle threw me over when I married Lulukuila,”
he said, “but when my cousin Charlotte came out from
England she made her father come over with her.  She brought
Davidson too—good sort, Davidson.

“I must have been homesick, for the sight of them seemed
to wake me from a nightmare.  I remember we were very jolly
at dinner.  Afterward Charlotte and I sang.  I was
thinking how good it was to hear the music of home again, when I
caught sight of Lulukuila’s face in a shaft of light that
reached out to where the rest were
p. 125
sitting.  Her face was white,
and her teeth were biting her lip.

“Charlotte stopped playing just then, and asked me why I
had broken into the octave.  The chord, she said, was so
much prettier.  I couldn’t tell her that it was
Lulukuila’s interval haunting me.  I hadn’t even
known I was singing an octave,” Cartwright added with a
sudden laugh.  Then he went on.

“We didn’t sing any more, but went out to join the
others.  Lulukuila wasn’t there.  I was just
asking Davidson where she had gone, when I heard a splash down by
the lagoon.  All in a flash I remembered how her face had
looked in the lamplight, and I started off down the path. . .
.  I got there too late.”

After a while he began muttering in a disconnected sort of
way.  “She had her way.  I’ve never touched
the piano since.  Surely I have the right now, though, now
Charlotte’s coming back—a little
happiness.”

“That’s the thing to think of now, sir,” I
says, wondering if I should call his man or leave him to talk
himself out.  “You weren’t to blame for what
happened.  Think of your cousin now.”

“My cousin, yes,” Cartwright murmured.  He
pulled himself up with a sharp breath.

“I’m afraid I’ve been talking an uncommon
lot,” he said in his ordinary tone.  “It’s
late.  You must be wanting to turn in.”

We commented on the sultriness of the night as we
parted.  The stars were hidden in a sort of murk, and the
air had grown so still that the beetles bumping against the
banana leaves overhead startled one like the crack of
artillery.

p.
126
Inside I found Simmons, Cartwright’s servant,
tapping the barometer.

“It’s fallen uncommonly fast,” Simmons said
to me.  “Just as it did before the hurricane five
years ago.

“The hurricane!” I said.  “Did it do
much damage?”

“Not to speak of,” Simmons said.  “Some
of the native huts were swept away when the water backed up into
the lagoon, but the people had time to get up here.
There’s no saying what might have happened if the water had
come up two feet higher.”

“I hope there isn’t going to be a hurricane this
time,” I said, thinking of Molly.

“I hope so, I’m sure,” says Simmons, in an
undertaker’s voice.

It took more than a falling barometer to put me off sleep
those days, and I was off sounder than usual that night.  I
waked at last in a bedlam of sound, wailing of wind, cracking of
branches, and the thunder of surf from the barrier reef.

“It’s the hurricane that owl Simmons was wishing
on us,” I thought.  I struck a match to find my
clothes, but a gust of wind puffed it out.  I was just
trying for the third time, when Simmons came in, carrying one of
the two ship’s lanterns Cartwright kept by the outer
door.

“Do you know where Mr. Cartwright is?” Simmons
says.

“I?  No.  Isn’t he in bed?”

Simmons shook his head.  “I’m afraid
he’s gone down to the pavilion.  He began to worry
about the piano.  I see the other lantern’s
gone.  I must go after him.”

p.
127
“I’ll come with you, then,” I
said.  “Just hold the light while I find my
clothes.”

Ordinarily that Yorkshire face of Simmons had no more
expression than a granite slab, but he looked human enough
now.  If he cared for any earthly creature it was
Cartwright.  I’d not been in the house three days
without finding that out.

I had a start as we passed through the big room, for the floor
was covered with figures stretched out like corpses on the
mats.  “From the huts on the beach,” Simmons
explained.  “That’s what makes me think
it’s going to be a bad storm.”

He braced himself to hold the door open for me, and added in a
sudden shout as the roar of the storm came about us: “A
little harder than last time, and the pavilion would
go.”

The path to the pavilion ran just above the coral shingle
along the foot of the ridge.  Ordinarily it was ten feet
above high tide, but as we struggled on, hugging the bank to keep
from being blown flat by the wind, I could catch a glimpse of
creaming, sullen-looking water not two yards away.  Slipping
up quietly it was, and the soundlessness of its rising was more
uncanny than all the bustle and roar on the reefs outside.

We had a struggle to get on, and Simmons hung on to me to keep
me from being blown into the lagoon.  I began to wish I
hadn’t come, and I thought of the peaceful mission house in
Taku and of Molly.

“Mr. Cartwright’s there,” Simmons says
suddenly in my ear.  “I see his light.  Hang
tight.  The wind’s worse out here.”

And it was.  An awful clap came, driving us to our
knees.  I saw a huge bulk crash down between us and the
pavilion.  The light disappeared.

p.
128
“The breadfruit tree,” said Simmons, in a
hoarse voice.  He clawed his way over the fallen branches
and I managed to follow, shivering to think of what a misstep
would do for me.  At last we made out Cartwright struggling
in the wreckage brought down by the fallen tree.

“You, Simmons?” he cried.
“Quick!  Give a hand with this piano.  We must
get it to higher ground.”

His voice sounded sane enough, but it was the speech of a
crazy man.  The only path up the ridge was a mere goat
trail, fully exposed to the wind.  And Cartwright was
suggesting our carrying the piano up that!  Simmons jerked
his lantern up to Cartwright’s face.  There was
wildness with a vengeance.  But my word!  How beautiful
he looked with his fair, tossed hair, and his eyes purple black
with excitement.

“It’s you we’ve come for, sir,”
Simmons says to him.  “The water’s backing up
fast.  There’s no time to lose.”

“We must save the piano first,” Cartwright says
insistently.  A lull had fallen, and his voice sounded very
clear.  Simmons made a desperate gesture.

“It’s gathering for worse,” he
muttered.  I took a hand.

“If that wind comes up again we’ll have to
scramble to save our skins,” I shouted.  “It
isn’t humanly possible for us to move the piano.
Come, sir, while there’s time!”

“And desert it again?” he asks with a strange
little smile.  “You’re asking too much of me,
old chap.  What about Charlotte?”

“She won’t care a hang about the
piano!”  I could have stamped my foot at him.
“It’s you
p. 129
she’ll be worrying
about.  Don’t be an ass.”  That shows how
beyond myself I was, that I could speak to him that way.  A
long, ominous roll shook the silence.

“It’s the surf coming over the reefs,”
Simmons says in a hushed voice.

“By Jove, you’re right!” Cartwright
exclaims, throwing back his head.  His voice was boyish and
energetic.  “Come on, we must make a dash for
it.”  And jerking up the lantern he fairly herded us
through the tangle to the cliff.

There the gale broke loose on us again.  We lay flat on
our faces, clinging for dear life to the stems of the stout
little pandanus palms.  It was like a beast, that
wind.  It sucked the breath from our mouths, it pounded us
and shrieked at us and mocked us till we were half dead from the
sheer, cruel force of it.  We could scarcely think.
Once I had a vision of those huddled figures on the mats, and
wondered if the house was still standing, and once I thought of
Molly, and hoped she was saying a prayer for me.  Then all
thought was wiped out as, with a shaking of the very cliff, the
surf came racing into the lagoon, sending the spray up fifty
feet, and drenching us where we lay.

“The piano!” Cartwright shouted, struggling to get
up.  Simmons hauled him down, crying to him that it was no
use to think of the piano.  Cartwright staved quiet a moment
till another of those uncanny silences fell.

“Now we can go down,” Cartwright said
pleadingly.  “I can’t lose my chance of
happiness again.  The piano—”

The words died on his lips.  Through the thunder of the
surf came a single long-drawn note, clear and unearthly
sweet.

p.
130
“B flat,” I said, scarcely knowing that I
spoke.  Cartwright gave a wild laugh.

“You hear it?  The voice from the reefs.  Why
doesn’t Lulukuila answer?”

Well, I can only tell you what happened next, and you may
believe it or not.  From below us there came another note,
making a perfect octave.  Never before or since have I heard
anything so exquisite or so horrible.  Then there was a
hideous discord—and silence.

“Lulukuila!” Cartwright cried.  “She is
taking it from me—my only chance of
happiness—”

And before we could stop him he was gone.

We tried to follow him, but the wind caught us again at the
edge of the ridge.  I’d have been over and lost if it
hadn’t been for Simmons.  I think I must have fainted
from the shock of it.  There’s a blank about there,
though the rest of the night seemed centuries long.

The wind stopped at sunrise, and we made our way home along
the ridge, looking down on a beach swept clean of every human
mark, pavilion, grove, native huts and all.  The house was
still standing, but in a wreck of fallen branches and torn
lianas.  Scared servants and ashen-faced women and children
came out to meet us, and began asking for their master.
Simmons, granite faced as ever, did not answer them, but pushed
on down to the beach.

Cartwright had come home ahead of us.  He was lying on
the shore, unscarred except for a faint streak of blue across one
temple.  He looked beautiful as some sleeping creature of
the sea.  The wreck of the piano was just above him.
Simmons’ composure gave way when he saw that.

“You’ve broken the thing he loved, and
you’ve
p.
131
killed him, too.  I hope you’re satisfied at
last!” he snarled, shaking his fist at the lagoon.  I
wondered if he was talking to Lulukuila.  It was a
terrifying outburst—from a man like Simmons.

Next morning they came over from Taku to look for us.
The sea was smiling as ever, and the little launch came dancing
over the rose and amethyst water as if there never had been a
storm to ruffle it.  I caught sight of Molly first, then I
noticed another woman, sitting between her and Davidson.  As
she leaned forward to search the shore I was startled with the
likeness of her face to Cartwright’s.  Yet there was a
difference.  Her beauty was gracious and human,
and—well, comfortable is the only word I can think of for
it.

As they came near the beach she saw just Simmons and me and
the staring natives.  She cried out sharply and swayed a
little.  I saw Davidson put his arm out as if he would
shield her from a blow.  Faithful fellow, Davidson, and he
got his reward at last.

It was Cartwright’s Charlotte, and Cartwright was not
there to meet her.  Lulukuila had seen to that.

Margaret Adelaide Wilson
.

p. 132
THE
ARCHBISHOP OF RHEIMS

It was the Feast of the Assumption, and the archbishop, as he
left his palace and stepped into the summer sunlight, breathed a
prayer of thanksgiving for the brilliance that glowed about
him.  For, during the mass which was about to be celebrated
in the great cathedral, the passion of his life, one of the most
impressive moments occurred when the sun shot its rays with pure
and dazzling radiance for the first time into the middle of the
apse.  With exact calculation the architect had arranged
that this took place on the fête day of St. Remi, the
patron saint of Rheims, and when the day was overcast or rain
obscured the sun it seemed to the archbishop that the Almighty
was expressing His displeasure of some negligence or wrongful act
on the part of the guardian of this, to him, most precious and
wonderful trust in the world.

But today the sun’s effulgence surpassed in warmth and
splendor that of any August fifteenth in the archbishop’s
memory, and brought into his heart an intense calm and peace
which even the knowledge that German guns were despoiling
Belgium, not many leagues away, could not entirely dispel.
Nevertheless, the remembrance cast a shadow over the spirituality
of his broad brow, and his lips moved in silent supplication for
the suffering inhabitants, and that the onward march of the
invaders would be stayed before their presence desecrated the
sacred soil of France.

p. 133
In
rapt contemplation he stood, kindliness and benevolence radiating
from his mild face, crowned with its silver halo of hair.
His large, gentle eyes wandered over the massive pile raising its
lofty steeples in eloquent testimony to the omnipotence of God;
its slender spires, pointed portals, and lancet windows
indicating the heights to which the thoughts and lives of men
must reach before perfection can be attained.

When the archbishop emerged from the sacristy at the end of
the long procession of choir, acolytes and coped priests, and
entered the cathedral, the voice of the mighty organ was rolling
through the edifice in rushing waves of melody, which ebbed and
flowed in and out among the great columns in a wealth of
harmonics, whose exquisite beauty, as they broke around him,
caused a band to tighten about the old man’s throat.

The crossing was filled with a throng of devout worshippers
whose faces wore a look of expectancy, for France, la belle
France, was threatened by a danger greater than even the oldest
among them could recall.  War had always been a horror, but
today it transcended, in the vague reports that reached them from
stricken Belgium, the worst the most imaginative of them could
conceive, and the thought haunted them, in spite of their faith
that the Blessed Virgin would not permit such a calamity to
befall France, that notwithstanding their entreaties, the hand of
the Hun might descend on her as it had on her equally innocent
and unprovoking neighbor.

The procession wound slowly to its place in the choir, and the
organ broke into the great, swelling chords of Gounod’s
mass, Mors et Vita.  The
p. 134
music, inspired by the sublime
grandeur of the sanctuary where it had partly been composed,
proclaimed an unshakable faith in the majesty and power of the
Almighty, whose protecting arm stands between His children and
harm.  Gradually the tense look of alarm on the faces of the
congregation changed to the serenity of souls in the presence of
God.

The organ’s voice subsided to a breath, wafted in and
out among the incense-filled recesses of the cathedral like the
rustling of angels’ wings, and the deep-toned peal of the
great cathedral bell rang through the tense stillness.  All
at once a shaft of pure radiance shot into the center of the apse
from the Angel’s Spire.  Straight as a dart it
descended until it found the jeweled arms of the cross.
Here it rested, throwing out myriad rays of effulgence, as if
through them the Spirit of the Founder of their faith was
renewing His promises of salvation to His flock.

A breathless hush rested on the congregation until, in an
ecstasy of triumph, the organ burst once more into a pæan
of praise.  The procession receded into the remote spaces of
the cathedral, and the worshippers passed out into the sunlit
square.  As they walked by the statue of Joan of Arc, who
sits on her charger before the cathedral, many paused and spoke
in low, reverent tones of the sacrifice she had made for France,
and wondered if the same spirit of loyalty would spring into life
if the land of their adoration stood in need of defense.

Through the great western rose window of the cathedral the sun
was casting quivering masses of rubies, topazes, emeralds,
sapphires and amethysts
p. 135
to the floor below, where they lay
in gorgeous profusion, melting one into the other in extravagant
richness of beauty.

An old man stood in contemplation of the splendor of that
mighty work of the ages which for a century and a half had been
the especial care of his forefathers, and to which end, with
reverent preparation, each succeeding generation of his family
had been trained.  To the old
vitrier
the windows in
the sacred structure were not only a holy trust, but a prized
heritage, each separate particle to be watched and studied, as a
mother guards its offspring from possible injury, and passed on
to posterity in as perfect a condition as it was received.

So deep was his absorption in the magnificence of the
spectacle before him that he did not notice the approaching step
of the archbishop.  The ecclesiastic laid his hand on
Monneuze’s shoulder.

“Exquisite, is it not,
mon vieux
?” he asked
in his resonant voice.  “I have never seen the colors
more superb than they are this afternoon.”

The old glass-maker started, and turned toward him.  The
expression of ecstatic wonder still lingered on his lined face,
from which, behind his heavy glasses, peered eyes round and
childlike in their unquestioning trust.

“The beauty of it passes belief, Monseigneur,” he
murmured fervently.  “Oh, that I knew the art of
reproducing those marvelous colors!  It is the sorrow of my
life that, try as I may, I can never duplicate the depth, the
richness—” he shook his head dejectedly, and fixed
his eyes once more on the flaming window.

“Ah, Jean,” answered the archbishop a little
p.
136
sadly.  “So it is with all of us; no matter
how hard we strive, we never reach the goal to which we are
pressing.  Our attainments are ever a disappointment to
us.  We can only labor on, and live in the hope that on the
Last Day, when we see our endeavors through the eyes of the
Blessed Redeemer, we may find that His estimate of them, graded
on the knowledge of our limitations, will be higher than
ours.  It may be that our efforts and the sincerity of our
motives will be judged instead of the results we were able to
achieve.  We must remember that no man can do bigger things
than his capacity allows.”

The
vitrier
did not reply.  His eyes wavered from
the magnificence above him to the spiritualized countenance at
his side.  It surprised him that the archbishop, renowned
alike for his piety and good works, should speak so slightingly
of his life.

The ecclesiastic had turned and was gazing at the
representation of the Almighty on the great rose window of the
south transept.  Something of the sublimity of the
conception and execution of the masterpiece was reflected on his
face, over which still hovered an expression of humility.
His eyes left the window and swept up the vast stretches of the
cathedral, over mighty pillars, great misty aisles, glorious
choir, its beauty half shrouded in the encroaching shadows, until
they reached the very penetralia of the Lady Chapel.

“Ah, Jean,” he went on in a deep, vibrant voice,
“great is God’s goodness that He has seen fit to
confide this marvelous structure to our keeping.  May we so
live that, when we are called to give an accounting of our
stewardship, we may hear the wondrous words: ‘Well done,
good and faithful servant!’”

p. 137
The
lips of the aged
vitrier
moved in a murmured
“Amen,” and they watched in silence the sun, as it
threw its dying rays through the window to their feet.  They
fell in a great splash of red, like blood, on the pavement, and a
shudder shook the archbishop’s frame.  He passed his
hand over his forehead, and the shadow that had clouded his face
in the morning settled once more on it.  Bidding the old
glass-painter good night, he moved up the dusky nave.

Days and weeks slipped by, and the gray waves of the invaders
rolled nearer to Rheims.  Notwithstanding the heroic, almost
superhuman, efforts of her sons, the vandals swept across her
borders into France, ravishing, desecrating, destroying in a
frenzy of frightfulness so terrible that the world, shocked
beyond belief, stood aghast and incredulous at the reports that
reached it.

The archbishop of Rheims, with others who believed that there
was good in the worst of men, at first resolutely declined to
credit the rumors that reached him.  But when, at last,
driven before the attacking force, the refugees, with
terror-stricken faces, came breathlessly into the city, the
mothers clutching their babies to their breasts, with little tots
scarce able to toddle clinging to their skirts and, throwing
themselves on his mercy, recounted with white lips, in a dull
monotone, the horrors that had befallen them and theirs, the
hopeful trust in the old priest’s face turned into a
crushed look of sadness as the knowledge came home to him that
his faith in man was an illusion of which, at the end of his
life, he was to be bereaved.

He lent such aid as lay in his power to the stricken peasants,
and when the wounded, friend
p. 138
and foe, were brought in and,
overflowing hospital and private dwelling, still clamored for
succor, he threw open the great sanctuary to the Germans with the
thought that here they would at least be safe from the shells
that were beginning to fall on the outlying districts of the
city.

Then one night, when the foreboding chill of autumn had
replaced summer’s golden warmth, the archbishop was
awakened by a noise, apparently in his bedroom, which shook the
house to its foundations.  He rose hurriedly and, going to
the window, saw that the east was ablaze with light.
Although the dawn was approaching, he realized that the
refulgence that flared across the horizon was man-made, for the
rumble of mighty guns which, when he had retired the night
before, had been louder and more resonant than before, had risen
to a threatening roar that forced a sickening sense of impotence
upon him.

Startled by the sudden proximity of the enemy, the archbishop
dressed hurriedly and made his way to the Square, already half
filled with people.  An old woman approached him and, with
blanched face, asked whether he thought the city would be shelled
and destroyed, as were the Belgian towns.  He shook his head
despairingly, and his lips framed the words:

“God forbid!”

As she turned away he prayed fervently that, even though the
pillaging hordes might, in their fury against the inhabitants,
devastate the city, the fact that they claimed the same God as
their Savior to whose glory the cathedral had been erected would
prove its safeguard and protection.  But, even as he prayed,
a great bomb blazed a trail
p. 139
through the gray light, and hurled
itself on the roof of the sacred edifice.  It exploded with
concentrated fury, tearing off great pieces of the roof and
casting them at his feet.

“They’ve found the range!” excitedly
exclaimed a man who stood near the archbishop.  “Can
it be possible that they intend to destroy the
cathedral?”

The archbishop was staring with incredulous eyes at the gaping
wound the shot had made.

“No,” he declared firmly, without removing his
eyes.  “It is not possible.  This injury is an
unfortunate mistake.  Sacred edifices are protected by human
and moral laws, and, besides, the Cathedral of Rheims, because of
its perfection, belongs to all time and all peoples.  No one
destroys his own heritage.”

Nevertheless, the remembrance of the destruction of Louvain
and the desecration of many churches by the Germans since their
treacherous entrance into Belgium, when they cast aside
men’s faith in their honor, seared itself across his
mind.  Their acts had disproved their vaunted belief in God
which, had it existed, would have shown itself in a reverent
solicitude for His dwelling place.

The words had hardly left his lips when a shower of explosives
fell on and about the massive structure, hewing out huge lumps of
the masonry, which descended in a deluge of stone on the roofs of
the adjacent houses.

A glare of light flared behind the great rose-window, throwing
for the last time a blaze of glory into the horror-stricken faces
below; then it burst into a thousand fragments that shivered to
pieces on the pavement of the Square.

Surrounded by the gleaming bits of imprisoned
p. 140
sunshine,
Jean Monneuze gazed with wide, unbelieving eyes at the yawning
space in the façade.  The thought took shape in his
mind that this act of profanation could not be true, that it must
be some hideous nightmare at which he would scoff in the morning,
and he prayed aloud that the awakening would be soon, that he
might be relieved of the torture he was undergoing.  A voice
at his elbow roused him.

“May God curse the Kaiser, and the rest of his breed,
for this sacrilege!”

The old
vitrier
turned quickly, the fury of a mother
for her ravished young in his working face.
“Amen!” he exclaimed harshly.

A group of people near him parted, and out of it Jean saw the
archbishop slowly advance.  The look of intense suffering on
his face had driven away the peace that formerly rested there,
but his countenance was untinged by venom or desire for
revenge.  His sunken eyes met the glass-maker’s, and
Jean, a sob clutching at his throat, fell on his knees and began
gathering up the gems of shattered glass that lay at his
feet.  He rose as the archbishop reached him, and held out
the fragments to him.  For a moment they gazed into each
other’s eyes without speaking, then a wistful little smile
flitted across the archbishop’s face.

“The Lord hath given—the Lord hath taken
away.”  There was a pause while he waited for the
response; but the old
vitrier’s
chin had sunk on his
breast, and his eyes, swimming with tears, were fastened on the
gleaming bits of glass.  Once more the archbishop’s
voice fell on his ears:

“Blessed be the name of the Lord.”  There was
an accent of surprised reproach in the patient
p. 141
tones, but
only pity shone on the gentle countenance as he noted the
quivering face of the old man who, turning abruptly away,
disappeared into the crowd.

A chorus of voices rose shrilly above the shrieking of the
shells:

“The roof is on fire!  It’s
burning!”

The words galvanized the archbishop into action.

“The wounded!” he exclaimed.  “They
will perish if they remain where they are!”

“Let ’em!” retorted a thick-set

ouvrier
.  He thrust his hands deep into the pockets
of his trousers.  “They deserve to die, and
they’re not fit to live!”  He turned brusquely
away, and stared with sullen eyes at the smoking roof from which
jets of flame were spurting.

A look of anguish crept over the archbishop’s
face.  Could it be that his flock had caught so little of
the spirit of his teaching that, when it was put to the test, it
collapsed as the mighty edifice was crumbling under the
demolishing shells?  If this were so, it explained the
destruction of the cathedral as the retribution for the failure
of his ministry.  His life work, as well as his life trust,
was disintegrating before his eyes.  Even Jean Monneuze, the
spirituality of whose life, in daily contact with the inspiring
sanctuary they both adored, had faltered under the supreme test,
and if Jean, for whom he would have vouched under all
circumstances, would succumb, how could he expect that the
others, with so incomparably less sustaining spiritual strength
in their lives, would respond to the call.  The bitterness
of Gethsemane fell on him, and his face, lighted by the glare
from the burning structure, was drawn with pain.

p. 142
A
shell hurtled through the air, and fell against the portal.
Rending from its place the head of the Angel with the Smile, it
flung it into the Square.  Angry mutterings rose from the
crowd as the
ouvrier
picked up the head and held it aloft
for every one to see.

The archbishop stepped up on the base of the pedestal of the
statue to the Maid of Orleans.  He raised his hand
impressively.

“My children,” he began in a voice tremulous with
emotion.  “The Master admonishes us to love our
enemies, to do good to them that hate us, to pray for them that
despitefully use us and persecute us.  If we do good only to
those who love us, how much better are we than the heathen?
Did you not see that, despite its destruction, the Angel of
Rheims smiled on?”  He spread out his arms in an agony
of entreaty.  “Oh my children,” he pleaded,
“do not fail me now!”

The rays of the rising sun shone on his face and illumined it
with unearthly radiance.  The people stood spellbound before
him.

Once more he raised his hand and, pointing to the burning
cathedral, cried in a resonant voice that rang like a
clarion:

“The wounded!  Who helps me rescue them?”

Still that tense silence hung over the motionless throng which
the crackling of the flames, and the moaning and singing of death
as it whistled through the air, only served to accentuate.

The old
vitrier
elbowed his way through the crowd and,
laying his hand on the base of the statue, said in a clear, loud
voice:

“Monseigneur, I will assist.”

In the uncertain light the two old men stood
p. 143
scanning
the quivering, upturned faces.  Then a sudden change swept
over the mass.

“
Au secours
!
Au
secours
!”  The voice of the crowd rose as from one
man in a cry, increasing in volume with each repetition until, in
the archbishop’s ears, it sounded like a shout of
victory.  The men turned, and surged toward the entrance of
the cathedral.

The archbishop’s face went white, and he grasped the
spurred foot of the Maid for support.  He closed his eyes,
and his lips moved spasmodically.  Then they parted in a
smile of such celestial beauty that the old
vitrier
,
standing at his feet, averted his eye as though unable to bear
the sight.

The large central door of the cathedral swung open, and four
men, carrying a litter on which lay a gray, motionless form,
emerged.  They were followed by others in what seemed an
endless procession, gently bearing their burdens through the
showers of flying pieces of granite statuary and structure stone
which the shells were cleaving from the façade.

The flames that were devouring the roof rose in a dull roar; a
great bomb crashed through the hallowed walls, and fell on the
palace, where it exploded with terrific force.

The archbishop looked silently at the ruin of his home, then
he concentrated his attention on the stream of wounded still
flowing from the mutilated pile, and directed and guided the
movements of the rescuers.  When the last of the sufferers
had been removed to a place of safety, he stepped down from the
pedestal and, entering a little house on the other side of the
Square, mounted the stairs until he reached a small room which
faced the east.

p. 144
He
entered and, softly closing the door, walked to the window, from
which the glass had fallen.  Kneeling down in the chill
morning air he gazed out at the blackened, smoking husk, his soul
in his eyes, as one kneels by the bedside of all that life holds
dear, waiting with bated breath for the final dissolution of soul
from body with the dull knowledge that, with the passing of that
spirit, the light of the world is extinguished.

Still he watches, noting day by day the destruction by wanton
shells of one of man’s most glorious tributes to God, ever
with the patient look of suffering on his face, as though the
prayer from ceaseless repetition had crystallized on his
brain:

“Father, forgive them, for they know not what they
do!”

Emily W. Scott
.

p. 145
THE
TRAWNBEIGHS

The Trawnbeighs were the sort of people who “dressed for
dinner” even when, as sometimes happened, they had no
dinner in the house to dress for.  It is perhaps unnecessary
to add that the Trawnbeighs were English.  Indeed, on
looking back, I often feel that to my first apparently flippant
statement it is unnecessary to add anything.  For to one who
knew Mr. and Mrs. Trawnbeigh, Edwina, Violet, Maud and Cyril, it
was the first and last word on them; their alpha and omega,
together with all that went between.  Not that the statement
is flippant, far from it.  There is in it a seriousness, a
profundity, an immense philosophic import.  At times it has
almost moved me to lift my hat, very much as one does for reason
of state, or religion, or death.

This, let me hasten to explain, is not at all the way I feel
when I put on evening clothes myself, which I do at least twice
out of my every three hundred and sixty-five opportunities.
No born American could feel that way about his own dress
coat.  He sometimes thinks he does; he often—and
isn’t it boresome?—pretends he does.  But he
really doesn’t.  As a matter of unimportant fact, the
born American may have “dressed” every evening of his
grown up life.  But if he found himself on an isolated,
played out Mexican coffee and vanilla
finca
, with a wife,
four children, a tiled roof that
p. 146
leaked whenever there was a norther,
an unveiled
sala
, through the bamboo partitions of which a
cold, wet wind howled sometimes for a week at a time, with no
money, no capacity for making any, no prospects and no
cook—under these depressing circumstances it is impossible
to conceive of an American dressing for dinner every night at a
quarter before seven in any spirit but one of ghastly humor.

With the Trawnbeighs’ performance of this sacred rite,
however, irony and humor had nothing to do.  The Trawnbeighs
had a robust sense of fun (so, I feel sure, have pumpkins and
turnips and the larger varieties of the nutritious potato
family), but humor, when they didn’t recognize it,
bewildered them, and it always struck them as just a trifle
underbred, when they did.

Trawnbeigh had come over to Mexico—“come out from
England,” he would have expressed it—as a kind of
secretary to his cousin, Sir Somebody Something, who was building
a harbor or a railway or a canal (I don’t believe
Trawnbeigh himself ever knew just what it was) for a British
company down in the hot country.

Mrs. Trawnbeigh, with her young, was to follow on the next
steamer a month later; and as she was in mid-ocean when Sir
Somebody suddenly died of yellow fever, she did not learn of this
inopportune event until it was too late to turn back.
Still, I doubt whether she would have turned back if she
could.  For, as Trawnbeigh once explained to me, at a time
when they literally hadn’t enough to eat (a hailstorm had
not only destroyed his coffee crop but had frozen the roots of
most of his trees, and the price of vanilla had fallen from ten
cents a
p.
147
bean to three and a half), leaving England at all had
necessitated “burning their bridges behind
them.”  He did not tell me the nature of their bridges
nor whether they had made much of a blaze.  In fact, that
one, vague, inflammatory allusion was the nearest approach to a
personal confidence Trawnbeigh was ever known to make in all his
fifteen years of Mexican life.

The situation, when he met Mrs. Trawnbeigh and the children on
the dock at Vera Cruz, was extremely dreary, and at the end of a
month it had grown much worse, although the Trawnbeighs
apparently didn’t think so.  They even spoke and wrote
as if their affairs were looking up a bit.  For, after a few
weeks of visiting among kindly compatriots at Vera Cruz and
Rebozo, Mrs. Trawnbeigh became cook for some English engineers
(there were seven of them) in a sizzling, mosquitoey, feverish
mudhole on the Isthmus of Tehuantepec.

The Trawnbeighs didn’t call it cook!  Neither did
the seven engineers.  I don’t believe the engineers
even thought of it as cook.  What Mrs. Trawnbeigh thought of
it will never be known.  How could they, when that lady,
after feeding the four little Trawnbeighs (or rather the four
young Trawnbeighs; they had never been little) a meal I think
they called “the nursery tea,” managed every
afternoon, within the next two hours, first, to create out of
nothing a perfectly edible dinner for nine persons, and,
secondly, to receive them all at seven forty-five, in a
red-striped, lemon satin ball gown (it looked like poisonous wall
paper), eleven silver bangles, a cameo necklace, with an ostrich
tip sprouting from the top of her head?

p.
148
Trawnbeigh, too, was in evening clothes; and they
didn’t call it cooking; they spoke of it as “looking
after the mess” or “keeping an eye on the young
chaps’ livers.”  Nevertheless, Mrs. Trawnbeigh,
daughter of the late, the Honorable Cyril Cosby Godolphin Dundas
and the late Clare Walpurga Emmeline Moate, cooked—and
cooked hard—for almost a year; at the end of which time she
was stricken with what she was pleased to refer to as “a
bad go of fevah.”

Fortunately they were spared having to pass around the hat,
although it would have amounted to that if Trawnbeigh
hadn’t, after the pleasant English fashion, “come
into some money.”  In the United States, people know
to a cent what they may expect to inherit; and then they
sometimes don’t get it.  But in England there seems to
be an endless succession of retired and unmarried army officers
who die every little while in Jermyn Street and leave two
thousand pounds to a distant relative they have never met.
Something like this happened to Trawnbeigh, and on the prospect
of his legacy he was able to pull out of the Tehuantepec mudhole
and restore his wife to her usual state of health in the pure and
bracing air of Rebozo.

Various things can be done with two thousand pounds, but just
what shall be done ought to depend very largely on whether they
happen to be one’s first two thousand or one’s
last.  Trawnbeigh, however, invested his
(“interred” would be a more accurate term) quite as
if they never would be missed.  The disposition to be a
country gentleman was in Trawnbeigh’s blood.  Indeed,
the first impression one received from the family was that
everything they did was in their blood.  It never
p. 149
seemed to
me that Trawnbeigh had immediately sunk the whole of his little
fortune in the old, small, and dilapidated coffee
finca
so
much because he was dazzled by the glittering financial future
the shameless owner (another Englishman, by the way) predicted
for him, as because to own an estate and live on it was, so to
speak, his natural element.

He had tried, while Mrs. Trawnbeigh was cooking on the
Isthmus, to get something to do.  But there was really
nothing in Mexico he could do.  He was splendidly strong,
and, in the United States, he very cheerfully and with no loss of
self-respect or point of view would have temporarily shoveled
wheat or coal, or driven a team, or worked on the street force,
as many another Englishman of noble lineage has done before and
since, but in the tropics an Anglo-Saxon cannot be a day
laborer.  He can’t because he can’t.

There was in Mexico no clerical position open to Trawnbeigh,
because he did not know Spanish.  It is significant that
after fifteen consecutive years of residence in the country none
of the Trawnbeighs knew Spanish.  To be, somehow and
somewhere, an English country gentleman of a well-known, slightly
old-fashioned type was as much Trawnbeigh’s destiny as it
is the destiny of, say, a polar bear to be a polar bear, or a
camel to be a camel.  As soon as he got his two thousand
pounds he became one.

When I first met them all he had been one for about ten
years.  I had recently settled in Trawnbeigh’s
neighborhood, which in Mexico means that my ranch was a hard
day-and-a-half ride from his, over roads that are not roads but
merely ditches full of liquefied mud on the level stretches, and

p. 150
ditches
full of assorted bowlders on the ascents.  So, although we
looked neighborly on a small map, I might not have had the joy of
meeting the Trawnbeighs for years if my mule hadn’t gone
lame one day when I was making the interminable trip to
Rebozo.

Trawnbeigh’s place was seven miles from the main road,
and as I happened to be near the parting of the ways when the off
hind leg of Catalina began to limp, I decided to leave her with
my
mozo
at an Indian village until a pack train should
pass by (there is always some one in a pack train who can remove
a bad shoe), while I proceeded on the
mozo’s
mule to
the Trawnbeighs’.  My usual stopping place for the
night was five miles farther on, and the Indian village
was—well, it was an Indian village.

He put me up not only that night, but as my
mozo

didn’t appear until late the next afternoon, a second night
as well.  And when I at last rode away, it was with the
feeling of having learned from the Trawnbeighs a great
lesson.

In the first place they couldn’t have expected me; they
couldn’t possibly have expected any one.  And it was a
hot afternoon.  But as it was the hour at which people at
“home” dropped in for tea, Mrs. Trawnbeigh and her
three plain, heavy looking daughters were perfectly prepared to
dispense hospitality to any number of mythical friends.

They had on hideous, but distinctly “dressy”
dresses of amazingly stamped materials known, I believe, as
“summer silks,” and they were all four tightly
laced.  Current fashion in Paris, London and New York by no
means insisted on small, smooth, round waists, but the Trawnbeigh
women
p.
151
had them, because (as it gradually dawned on me) to
have had any other kind would have been a concession to anatomy
and the weather.  To anything so compressible as one’s
anatomy, or as vulgarly impartial as the weather, the Trawnbeighs
simply did not concede.  I never could get over the feeling
that they all secretly regarded weather in general as a kind of
popular institution, of vital importance only to the middle
class.

Cyril, an extremely beautiful young person of twenty-two, who
had been playing tennis (by himself) on the
asoleadero
,
was in “flannels,” and Trawnbeigh admirably looked
the part in gray, middle-aged riding things, although, as I
discovered before leaving, their stable at the time consisted of
one senile burro with ingrowing hoofs.

From the first, it all seemed too flawless to be true.  I
had never visited in England, but I doubt if there is another
country whose literature gives one as definite and lasting an
impression of its home life.  Perhaps this is because the
life of families of the class to which the Trawnbeighs belonged
proceeds in England by such a series of definite and traditional
episodes.

In a household like theirs, the unexpected must have a devil
of a time in finding a chance to happen.  For, during my
visit, absolutely nothing happened that I hadn’t long since
chuckled over when making the acquaintance of Jane Austen,
Thackeray, George Eliot and Anthony Trollope; not to mention
Ouida (it was Cyril, of course, who from time to time struck the
Ouida note), and the more laborious performances of Mrs. Humphry
Ward.  They all of them did at every tick of the clock
precisely what they ought to have done.  They were a
p. 152
page, the
least bit crumpled, torn from “Half Hours With the Best
Authors,” and cast, dear Heaven! upon a hillside in darkest
Mexico.

Of course we had tea in the garden.  There wasn’t
any garden, but we nevertheless had tea in it.  The house
would have been cooler, less glaring, and free from the venomous
little
rodadoras
that stung the backs of my hands full of
microscopic polka dots; but we all strolled out to a spot some
fifty yards away where a bench, half a dozen shaky, home made
chairs and a rustic table were most imperfectly shaded by three
tattered banana trees.

“We love to drink tea in the dingle-dangle,” Mrs.
Trawnbeigh explained.  How the tea tray itself got to the
dingle-dangle I have only a general suspicion, for when we
arrived it was already there, equipped with caddy, cozy, a plate
of buttered toast, a pot of strawberry jam and all the rest of
it.  But, try as I might, I simply could not rid myself of
the feeling that at least two footmen had arranged it all and
then discreetly retired; a feeling that also sought to account
for the tray’s subsequent removal, which took place while
Trawnbeigh, Cyril, Edwina and I walked over to inspect the

asoleadero
and washing tanks.  I wanted to look back;
but something (the fear, perhaps, of being turned into a pillar
of salt) restrained me.

With most English speaking persons in that part of the world,
conversation has to do with coffee, coffee
and—coffee.  The Trawnbeighs, however, scarcely
touched on the insistent topic.  While we sat on the low
wall of the dilapidated little
asoleadero
, we discussed
pheasant shooting, and the best places for haberdashery and
“Gladstone
p.
153
Bags.”  Cyril, as if it were but a matter of
inclination, said he thought he might go over for the shooting
that year; a cousin had asked him “to make a
seventh.”  I never found out what this meant, and
didn’t have the nerve to ask.

“Bertie shoots the twelfth, doesn’t he?”
Edwina here inquired.

To which her brother replied, as if she had shown a
distressing ignorance of some fundamental date in history, like
1066 or 1215: “Bertie always shoots the twelfth.”

The best place for haberdashery, in Mr. Trawnbeigh’s
opinion, was “the Stores.”  But Cyril preferred
a small shop in Bond Street, maintaining firmly, but with good
humor, that it was not merely, as “the pater”
insisted, because the fellow charged more, but because one
didn’t “run the risk of seeing some beastly bounder
in a cravat uncommonly like one’s own.”
Trawnbeigh, as a sedate parent bordering on middle age, felt
obliged to stand up for the more economical “Stores,”
but it was evident that he really admired Cyril’s exclusive
principles and approved of them.  Edwina cut short the
argument with an abrupt question.

“I say,” she inquired anxiously, “has the
dressing bell gone yet?”  The dressing bell
hadn’t gone, but it soon went, for Mr. Trawnbeigh, after
looking at his watch, bustled off to the house and rang it
himself.  Then we withdrew to our respective apartments to
dress for dinner.

“I’ve put you in the north wing, old man;
there’s always a breeze in the wing,” my host
declared as he ushered me into a bamboo shed they used apparently
for storing corn and iron implements of an agricultural
nature.  But there was
p. 154
also in the room a recently made up
cot with real sheets, a tin bath tub, hot and cold water in two
earthenware jars, and an empty packing case upholstered in
oilcloth.  When Trawnbeigh spoke of this last as a
“wash-hand-stand,” I knew I had indeed strayed from
life into the realms of mid-Victorian romance.

The breeze Trawnbeigh had referred to developed in the violent
Mexican way, while I was enjoying the bath tub, into an
unmistakable norther.  Water fell on the roof like so much
lead, and then sprang off (some of it did) in thick, round
streams from the tin spouts; the wind screamed in and out of the
tiles overhead, and through the north wing’s blurred window
the writhing banana trees of the dingle-dangle looked like
strange things one sees in an aquarium.

As soon as I could get into my clothes again—a bath was
as far as I was able to live up to the Trawnbeigh ideal—I
went into the
sala
, where the dinner table was already set
with a really heartrending attempt at splendor.  I have said
that nothing happened with which I had not a sort of literary
acquaintance; but I was wrong.  While I was standing there
wondering how the Trawnbeighs had been able all those years to
“keep it up,” a window in the next room blew open
with a bang.  I ran in to shut it; but before I reached it,
I stopped short and, as hastily and quietly as I could, tiptoed
back to the “wing.”  For the next room was the
kitchen, and at one end of it Trawnbeigh, in a shabby but
perfectly fitting dress coat, his trousers rolled up half way to
his knees, was patiently holding an umbrella over his
wife’s sacred dinner gown, while she—be-bangled,
p. 155
be-cameoed,
be-plumed, and stripped to the buff—masterfully cooked our
dinner on the
brassero
.

To me it was all extremely wonderful, and the wonder of it did
not lessen during the five years in which, on my way to and from
Rebozo, I stopped over at the Trawnbeighs’ several times a
year.  For, although I knew that they were often financially
all but down and out, the endless red tape of their daily life
never struck me as being merely a pathetic bluff.  Their
rising bells and dressing bells, their apparent dependence on all
sorts of pleasant accessories that simply did not exist, their
occupations (I mean those on which I did not have to turn a
tactful back, such as botanizing, crewel work, painting horrible
water colors and composing long lists of British sounding things
to be “sent out from the Stores”), the informality
with which we waited on ourselves at luncheon and the stately,
punctilious manner in which we did precisely the same thing at
dinner, the preordained hour at which Mrs. Trawnbeigh and the
girls each took a bedroom candle and said good night, leaving
Trawnbeigh, Cyril and me to smoke a pipe and “do a whisky
peg” (Trawnbeigh had spent some years in India), the whole
inflexibly insular scheme of their existence was more, infinitely
more, than a bluff.  It was a placid, tenacious clinging to
the straw of their ideal in a great, deep sea of poverty,
discomfort and desolation.

And it had its reward, for after fourteen years of Mexican
life, Cyril was almost exactly what he would have been had he
never seen the place; and Cyril was the Trawnbeighs’ one
asset of immense value.  He was most agreeable to look at,
he was both related to and connected with many of the
p. 156
most
historical sounding ladies and gentlemen in England, and he had
just the limited, selfish, amiable outlook on the world in
general that was sure (granting the other things) to impress Miss
Irene Slapp, of Pittsburgh, as the height of both breeding and
distinction.

Irene Slapp had beauty and distinction of her own.
Somehow, although they all needed the money, I don’t
believe Cyril would have married her if she hadn’t.
Anyhow, one evening in the City of Mexico he took her in to
dinner at the British Legation, where he had been asked to dine
as a matter of course, and before the second entrée Miss
Slapp was slightly in love with him and very deeply in love with
the scheme of life, the standard, the ideal, or whatever you
choose to call it, he had inherited and had been brought up,
under staggering difficulties, to represent.

“The young beggar has made a pot of money in the
States,” Trawnbeigh gravely informed me after Cyril had
spent seven weeks in Pittsburgh—whither he had been
persuaded to journey on the Slapps’s private train.

“And, you know, I’ve decided to sell the old
place,” he casually remarked a month or so later.
“Yes, yes,” he went on, “the young people are
beginning to leave us” (I hadn’t noticed any signs of
impending flight on the part of Edwina, Violet and Maud).
“Mrs. Trawnbeigh and I want to end our days at home.
Slapp believes there’s gold on the place—or would it
be petroleum?  He’s welcome to it.  After all,
I’ve never been fearfully keen on business.”

And I rode away pondering, as I always did, on the great
lesson of the Trawnbeighs.

Charles Macomb Flandrau
.

p. 157
THE
LIFE BELT

Out of doors, darkness and sleet; within the cottage parlor, a
grand fire and a good supper, the latter, however, no longer in
evidence.

Four people sat round the hearth: a woman not so old in years
as aged in looks by what the war had done to her; a burly,
bearded, middle-aged man, her brother; a young, rather
stern-visaged fellow, the last of her sons; and a girl of twenty
or so, with a sedate mouth and bright eyes, her daughter-in-law
to be.  The two men were obviously seafarers.  As a
matter of fact, the uncle was skipper of an ancient tramp which
had somehow survived those three years of perilous passages; the
nephew, a fisherman before war, afterwards and until recently in
the patrol service, was now mate on the same old ship, though he
had still to make his first trip on her.

Said Mrs. Cathles, breaking silence, to her brother:
“Did ye see any U-boats comin’ home,
Alick?”  Possibly she spoke then just to interrupt her
own thoughts, for it was not like her to introduce such a
subject.

The skipper was busy charging his pipe.  “Is it
U-boats ye’re askin’ about, Maggie?” he said
slowly, in his loud voice.  “I’m tellin’
ye, on that last home’ard trip, the peeriscopes was like a
forest!”

David Cathles winked to his sweetheart; then
p. 158
perceiving
that the answer had scared his mother, he said:

“Come, come, Uncle!  Surely ’twasn’t
quite so bad as that.  ‘A forest’ is a bit
thick, isn’t it?”

“Well, there was room for the Hesperus to get through,
I’ll allow,” the skipper said, striking a match
extracted from his vest pocket, “otherwise I wouldn’t
be settin’ here tellin’ the blessed truth every
time.”  He lay back and puffed complacently, staring
at the fire.

“Never you mind him, Mother,” said the young
man.  “’Tis me he’s seekin’ to
terrify: he’d just as soon I didn’t sail wi’
him, after all; ’fraid o’ me learnin’ what a
poor skipper he is!”

Now David ought to have known better.  People who are
good at giving chaff are seldom good at taking it.  The
girl, however, was quick to note the stiffening of the burly
figure.

“Captain Whinn,” she remarked promptly, but
without haste, “ye must be a terrible brave man to
ha’ come through all ye ha’ come through, since the
war started.”

“Not at all, my dear,” was the modest reply;
“I’m no braver’n several cases I’ve heard
on.”

David, who had seen his own blunder, was grateful to Esther
for the diversion, and sought to carry it further.

“Well, Uncle Whinn,” he said respectfully,
“I think we’d all like to hear what yourself
considers the pluckiest bit o’ work done by a chap in the
Merchant Service durin’ the—”

“Haven’t done it yet.”  With a wooden
expression of countenance, the skipper continued to stare at the
fire.

Mrs. Cathles spoke.  “Ah, David, ’tis little
use
p.
159
tryin’ to pick the bravest when all is so
brave.  But I do think none will ever do braver’n what
that fishin’ skipper did—him we was hearin’
about yesterday.”

“Ay, that was a man!” her son agreed.

“What was it?” the girl inquired, with a veiled
glance of indignation at Captain Whinn, who appeared quite
uninterested, if not actually bored.

“You tell it, David,” said the mother.
“Big moniments ha’ been put up for less.”

“Go on, David,” murmured Esther.

“’Twas something like this,” he began.
“They had hauled the nets and was makin’ for port in
the early mornin’, in hazy weather, when a U-boat comes up
almost alongside.  I reckon they was scared, for at that
time fishin’ boats was bein’ sunk right and
left.  Then the commander comes on deck and asks, in
first-class English, which o’ the seven was skipper.
And the skipper he holds up his hand like as if he was a little
boy in the school.  ‘All right,’ says the
’Un, ‘I guess you can navigate
hereabouts—eh?’  The skipper answers slow that
he has been navigatin’ thereabouts ’most all his
life.  ‘Very well,’ says the ’Un,
‘there’s a way you can save your boat, and the lives
o’ them six fine men, and your own.’  He waits
for a little while; then he says: ‘This is the way.
You come on board here, and take this ship past the defenses and
into —.  That’s all.  I give you three
minutes to make up your mind.’

“’Tis said the skipper looked like a dyin’
man then, and all the time one o’ the U-boat’s guns
was trained on the fishin’ boat.  ‘Time’s
up,’ says the ’Un; ‘which is it to
be?’  And the skipper says: ‘I’ll do what
ye want.’ I never heard what his
p. 160
mates said;
and I should think their thoughts was sort o’ mixed.
But they puts him on board the U-boat and clears out, as he told
them to do; and the last they see of him was him standin’
betwixt two ’Uns, each wi’ a revolver handy.
And then him and the ’Uns goes below, and so does the
U-boat.”

“He was surely a coward!” the girl exclaimed.

“Wait a bit,” said David.  “Can’t
ye see that he saved the lives o’ his mates?”

“And his own!” she cried.  “And he took
the U-boat in!”

“Ay, he did that—and her commander, too!  Oh,
he took her in right enough—safe into the big steel net! .
. .  They found him there wi’ the dead ’Uns,
later on—only he had been murdered.”

Esther clasped her hands.  “None braver’n
that!” she said in a whisper.

Mrs. Cathles turned to her brother, who had not altered his
attitude, though he had let his pipe go out.

“Alick,” she said, “what do ye say to
that?”

“’Twasn’t so bad,” he said softly,
“’twasn’t so bad, Maggie.  Ha’ ye
any matches?”

Shortly afterwards he took his departure, and then David saw
Esther home.

On the way she broke a silence by remarking: “David, I
wish ye wasn’t sailin’ wi’ that man.”

“How so?”

“He’s not natural.  Something’s wrong
about him.”

“Oh, I wouldn’t be sayin’ that,
Esther,” said David.  “I allow I can’t
make anything o’ Uncle Whinn nowadays, but the war has
turned many a man queerish.  Still, I never heard him so
boastful-like afore tonight—”

p.
161
“‘’Twasn’t so
bad,’” she quoted resentfully,
“‘’twasn’t so bad!’—and it
the bravest thing a human man could do?  Oh, David, I do
wish ye wasn’t sailin’ wi’ him, though he is
your uncle.  He’s a coward—that’s what he
is, I’m sure.”

“I wouldn’t be sayin’ that, neither,”
the young man gently protested.  “He’s maybe
feared—I surely doubt he is—but that’s not the
same as bein’ a coward—not by a long
chalk.”

“He’s got neither wife nor family, and he’s
oldish,” she persisted.

“But I s’pose life’s sweet even when a
man’s oldish.  As for bein’ feared—out
yonder wi’ the patrol, I was seldom anything else,”
said David quietly.

“David Cathles, I don’t believe ye!”

“I’m feared now; I’ll be feared all this
comin’ trip.  Uncle Whinn has got more to be feared
o’ ’n me.

“I don’t see that.”

“Well, if a U-boat gets the better o’ the old
Hesperus—and she hasn’t got a gun
yet—’tis ten to one the ’Uns make a prisoner
o’ Uncle Whinn.  ’Tisn’t cheerful to
ha’ that on your mind all the time—is it now,
Esther?”

“I grant ye that, David,” she said, with
unexpected compunction.  “Only he shouldn’t be
so big about hisself and so small about the pluck o’ other
men.  I’d ha’ said he was feared o’ the
very sea itself.”

“A common complaint, my dear!  But now ye ha’
touched on a thing which is maybe only too true, for I could
’most allow my uncle is feared o’ death in the
water—not that his fear is aught to be ashamed
on.”

p.
162
“Not if a man be modest about hisself!”

“Uncle Whinn used to be modest enough, and careless
enough, too, about what happened to him,” said David.
“But when I was on board wi’ him, this mornin’,
I see a thing so queer and strange, it makes me creep
yet.”

“David, I knew there was something wrong!”

“And ’twas only a simple matter, after all,”
he proceeded.  “’Twas all about a life belt
hangin’ above his bunk, in the chart room, where he berths
nowadays.  ’Twas an ordinary, everyday life belt, but
all the time we was settin’ there smokin’ an’
chattin’, I noticed he never hardly took his eyes off
o’ it.  And at last I gets up and goes over, just to
see if there was anything extra about it.  Well, he was
after me like a tiger!  ‘Don’t ye put finger on
that, my lad!’ he says, not so much as if he was angered as
feared.  And then he draws me back to the table, and says,
as if he was a bit ’shamed o’ hisself:
‘Ye’ll excuse me, David, but I can’t bear to
see that there life belt touched.  T’other day, I was
as near as near to killin’ the cook—the poor sinner
said it needed dustin’.  ’Tis my foolishness, no
doubt, but we’ve all got our fancies, and I don’t
want the belt to be missin’ or unhandy when the time
comes.  So there it hangs, an’ I’ll thank ye for
your word, here and now, David, that ye won’t never touch
it.’  Of course I give him my word, but wi’ no
great feelin’ o’ pleasure. . . .  What do ye
think about it, Esther?”

“’Tis terrible that a great big man should be so
feared.  Now I’m sort o’ sorry for him.  I
daresay he needs ye badly on his ship, and so I’ll say no
more about it, David.”

“Ye always see things right, once ye let your
p. 163
kind heart
go,” he said tenderly.  “And I can’t think
that Uncle Whinn’ll play the coward if ever he’s
really up against it. . . .  And now, what about us two
gettin’ married on my next leave?”

The Hesperus sailed a couple of days later.  The outward
voyage was completed without mishap or adventure, and she was
within a day’s run of the home port when her end came.

After a brief but havoc-working bombardment, her helpless
skipper gave orders to abandon ship, and signaled the enemy
accordingly.  There were two lifeboats,—the third had
been smashed,—and in the natural course of things David
would have been in charge of one of them.  But Captain Whinn
decreed otherwise.

“I want ye wi’ me,” he said to his nephew,
as they came down from the tottering bridge.  “Cast
off!” he bawled at the boat whose crew included the second
mate.

He drew David into the chartroom.

When they emerged, a couple of minutes later, he was wearing
the belt, and his countenance was pale.  But the young
man’s was ghastly.

Now there were blurs of smoke on the horizon.  Captain
Whinn indicated them, remarking:

“A little bit too late.  Poor old
Hesperus!”

The blurs had evidently been observed from the U-boat also,
for a “Hurry up!” came in the form of a shell aimed
just high enough to clear the deck.

Skipper and mate went down the ladder, and the boat was cast
off.  At a safe distance, the rowers, at a sign from the
skipper, lay on their oars.  Speedily the U-boat put her
victim into a sinking
p. 164
condition.  During the
operation Whinn neither moved nor spoke; seemingly he did not
hear the several remarks softly addressed to him by his
nephew.  His face was set; all the skin blemishes stood out
against the tan of many years, upon which had come a grayish
pallor; there was moisture on his brow.

Then through the slightly ruffled sea the U-boat, her
gunners’ job over, moved toward them.  A hail came
from the commander, a tall young man with an unslept, nervous
look on his thin face.

“Come alongside, and look sharp about it.  I want
the captain,” he called.

None of the boat’s crew moved, but all at once the
elderly cook broke forth in a voice of grievous exasperation:

“Godalmighty, Cap’n, whatever made ye put on your
best duds?  Why the hell didn’t ye get into some old
slops?—an’ then I could ha’ passed for ye
easy!”

The glimmer of a smile appeared in the skipper’s eyes,
and his mouth quivered pathetically just for an instant.
Then he said briefly:

“Get alongside.”

“Maybe they would take me instead,” said David,
but again his uncle seemed not to have heard.

Whinn did not speak again until he was standing on the
submarine’s deck.  Then steadily he addressed his
nephew:

“Kind love to your mother, David; best respects to your
young lady.”

To the crew: “So long, lads,” he said, and gave a
little wave of the hand.

Then he was hurried below, and almost before
p. 165
the
Hesperus’ boat was clear, the great engine of destruction
began to submerge.

David sat with his face bowed in his hands, and now and then a
shudder went through him.

Two nights later he was back in his mother’s house,
seated with Esther at the parlor fire, which burned as grandly as
on that night a month ago.  Mrs. Cathles had gone to the
kitchen to make the supper.

There had been a long silence.  Suddenly David’s
clasp of the girl’s hand tightened almost painfully.

“Why, what is it, lad?” she exclaimed.

“Esther, I don’t know what to do. . . .  Ye
see, when I was telling you an’ mother about Uncle Whinn, I
kept back something—a lot.  I couldn’t think how
to tell the whole tale—to mother, anyway.”

“Is it—dreadful, David?”

“Ay, dreadful—in a way.  Well, I’ll try
and tell yourself now, an’ then, perhaps—
’Sh!  I bear her comin’!  ’Twill have
to wait.”

Mrs. Cathles came in, but without the expected laden
tray.  She crossed to her accustomed place and seated
herself.  Presently she looked over at her son.

“David, I was thinkin’ just now, and it came on me
that ye hadn’t told me everything about your uncle, my own
brother, Alick.  Now, dearie, ye must not keep aught
back.  ’Tis my right to know, and I can bear a lot
nowadays.”  She wetted her lips.  “David,
tell me true, what happened to my brother when they got him on
board the U-boat.  Did they—shoot him?”

p.
166
“No, Mother”—David cleared his
throat—“‘’twas far finer’n that! .
. .  Ah, well, now I’ll tell everything.
’Twas this way.  You—we’ll never see Uncle
Whinn again, Mother, but he was a great man.  He stepped on
board that U-boat as brave as a lion, and when the ’Un
commander spoke to him, polite enough, too—he looked at him
as if he was dirt.  And then he give me the messages I
ha’ told ye.  And then they took him below.  And
then the U-boat started for to dive—  Now don’t
ye be too upset, Mother.”

“Go on, David.”

“Well, then, the U-boat, as I was tellin’ ye,
started for to dive. . . .  But she wasn’t half under
when—when she blowed up—all to smash—exploded
into little bits, it seemed—our boat was near to
bein’ swamped.”  David ceased abruptly.

In the silence the girl rose and went to the woman, and put
her arm about the bent shoulders.

David spoke again, in little more than a whisper.
“’Tis not all told; and now comes the worst—and
the best, too. . . .  When all was over on the old Hesperus,
and we was makin’ ready to leave her, Uncle Whinn draws me
into the chartroom.  Without sayin’ anything he takes
off his old coat and cap and puts on split new ones.  After
that, he takes down the life belt that hung above his bunk, and
puts it on very careful.  Then, at last, he speaks to
me.  ‘David,’ he says, ‘they’re
nailin’ us skippers in these times, so maybe you and me
shan’t meet again.’  And he holds out his
hand.  Hardly knowin’ what to say, I says: ‘Even
if they do take ye prisoner, the war won’t last for ever
and ever, and maybe ye’ll escape afore long.’
He shakes his head, smilin’ a little.  ‘If they
takes
p.
167
me, they takes the consequences, and so does
I.’  And then he tells me his secret—  God!
to think o’ the man’s pluck!”

David wiped his face.

“My Uncle Whinn says to me: ‘My lad, I thought to
tell nobody, but ’twould be too lonesome-like for me to go
like that.  But ye needn’t make a story about it. . .
.  This here life belt,’ says he, ‘was my own
idea.  ’Tisn’t made o’ corks.
T’is made o’ high, powerful explosive—enough to
wreck a battleship.  And all I ha’ got to do is just
to pull this little bit o’ string.’ . . .”

J. J. Bell
.

p.
168
AMINA

Waldo, brought face to face with the actuality of the
unbelievable—as he himself would have worded it—was
completely dazed.  In silence he suffered the consul to lead
him from the tepid gloom of the interior, through the ruinous
doorway, out into the hot, stunning brilliance of the desert
landscape.  Hassan followed, with never a look behind
him.  Without any word he had taken Waldo’s gun from
his nerveless hand and carried it, with his own and the
consul’s.

The consul strode across the gravelly sand, some fifty paces
from the southwest corner of the tomb, to a bit of not wholly
ruined wall from which there was a clear view of the doorway side
of the tomb and of the side with the larger crevice.

“Hassan,” he commanded, “watch
here.”

Hassan said something in Persian.

“How many cubs were there?” the consul asked
Waldo.

Waldo stared mute.

“How many young ones did you see?” the consul
asked again.

“Twenty or more,” Waldo made answer.

“That’s impossible,” snapped the consul.

“There seemed to be sixteen or eighteen,” Waldo
reasserted.  Hassan smiled and grunted.  The consul
took from him two guns, handed Waldo his, and they walked around
the tomb to a point
p. 169
about equally distant from the
opposite corner.  There was another bit of ruin, and in
front of it, on the side toward the tomb, was a block of stone
mostly in the shadow of the wall.

“Convenient,” said the consul.  “Sit on
that stone and lean against the wall; make yourself
comfortable.  You are a bit shaken, but you will be all
right in a moment.  You should have something to eat, but we
have nothing.  Anyhow, take a good swallow of
this.”

He stood by him as Waldo gasped over the raw brandy.

“Hassan will bring you his water bottle before he
goes,” the consul went on; “drink plenty, for you
must stay here for some time.  And now, pay attention to
me.  We must extirpate these vermin.  The male, I
judge, is absent.  If he had been anywhere about, you would
not now be alive.  The young cannot be as many as you say,
but, I take it, we have to deal with ten, a full litter.  We
must smoke them out.  Hassan will go back to camp after fuel
and the guard.  Meanwhile, you and I must see that none
escape.”

He took Waldo’s gun, opened the breech, shut it,
examined the magazine and handed it back to him.

“Now watch me closely,” he said.  He paced
off, looking to his left past the tomb.  Presently he
stopped and gathered several stones together.

“You see these?” he called.

Waldo shouted an affirmation.

The consul came back, passed on in the same line, looking to
his right past the tomb, and presently, at a similar distance,
put up another tiny cairn, shouted again and was again
answered.  Again he returned.

p.
170
“Now you are sure you cannot mistake those two
marks I have made?”

“Very sure indeed,” said Waldo.

“It is important,” warned the consul.
“I am going back to where I left Hassan, to watch there
while he is gone.  You will watch here.  You may pace
as often as you like to either of those stone heaps.  From
either you can see me on my beat.  Do not diverge from the
line from one to the other.  For as soon as Hassan is out of
sight I shall shoot any moving thing I see nearer.  Sit here
till you see me set up similar limits for my sentry-go on the
farther side, then shoot any moving thing not on my line of
patrol.  Keep a lookout all around you.  There is one
chance in a million that the male might return in
daylight—mostly they are nocturnal, but this lair is
evidently exceptional.  Keep a bright lookout.

“And now listen to me.  You must not feel any
foolish sentimentalism about any fancied resemblance of these
vermin to human beings.  Shoot, and shoot to kill.  Not
only is it our duty, in general, to abolish them, but it will be
very dangerous for us if we do not.  There is little or no
solidarity in Mohammedan communities, but on the comparatively
few points upon which public opinion exists it acts with amazing
promptitude and vigor.  One matter as to which there is no
disagreement is that it is incumbent upon every man to assist in
eradicating these creatures.  The good old Biblical custom
of stoning to death is the mode of lynching indigenous
hereabouts.  These modern Asiatics are quite capable of
applying it to any one believed derelict against any of these
inimical monsters.  If we let one escape and the rumor of it
gets about,
p.
171
we may precipitate an outburst of racial prejudice
difficult to cope with.  Shoot, I say, without hesitation or
mercy.”

“I understand,” said Waldo.

“I don’t care whether you understand or
not,” said the consul.  “I want you to
act.  Shoot if needful, and shoot straight.”  And
he tramped off.

Hassan presently appeared, and Waldo drank from his water
bottle as nearly all of its contents as Hassan would
permit.  After his departure Waldo’s first alertness
soon gave place to mere endurance of the monotony of watching and
the intensity of the heat.  His discomfort became suffering,
and what with the fury of the dry glare, the pangs of thirst and
his bewilderment of mind, Waldo was moving in a waking dream by
the time Hassan returned with two donkeys and a mule laden with
brushwood.  Behind the beasts straggled the guard.

Waldo’s trance became a nightmare when the smoke took
effect and the battle began.  He was, however, not only not
required to join in the killing, but was enjoined to keep
back.  He did keep very much in the background, seeing only
so much of the slaughter as his curiosity would not let him
refrain from viewing.  Yet he felt all a murderer as he
gazed at the ten small carcasses laid out arow, and the memory of
his vigil and its end, indeed of the whole day, though it was the
day of his most marvelous adventure, remains to him as the broken
recollections of a phantasmagoria.

On the morning of his memorable peril Waldo had waked
early.  The experiences of his
p. 172
sea-voyage, the sights at Gibraltar,
at Port Said, in the canal, at Suez, at Aden, at Muscat, and at
Basrah had formed an altogether inadequate transition from the
decorous regularity of house and school-life in New England to
the breathless wonder of the desert immensities.

Everything seemed unreal, and yet the reality of its
strangeness so besieged him that he could not feel at home in it,
he could not sleep heavily in a tent.  After composing
himself to sleep, he lay long conscious and awakened early, as on
this morning, just at the beginning of the false-dawn.

The consul was fast asleep, snoring loudly.  Waldo
dressed quietly and went out; mechanically, without any purpose
or forethought, taking his gun.  Outside he found Hassan,
seated, his gun across his knees, his head sunk forward, as fast
asleep as the consul.  Ali and Ibrahim had left the camp the
day before for supplies.  Waldo was the only waking creature
about; for the guards, camped some little distance off, were but
logs about the ashes of their fire.

When he had begun camp life he had expected to find the
consul, that combination of sportsman, explorer and
archæologist, a particularly easy-going guardian.  He
had looked forward to absolutely untrammeled liberty in the
spacious expanse of the limitless wastes.  The reality he
had found exactly the reverse of his preconceptions.  The
consul’s first injunction was:

“Never let yourself get out of sight of me or of Hassan
unless he or I send you off with Ali or Ibrahim.  Let
nothing tempt you to roam about alone.  Even a ramble is
dangerous.  You might lose sight of the camp before you knew
it.”

p. 173
At
first Waldo acquiesced, later he protested.  “I have a
good pocket compass.  I know how to use it.  I never
lost my way in the Maine woods.”

“No Kourds in the Maine woods,” said the
consul.

Yet before long Waldo noticed that the few Kourds they
encountered seemed simple-hearted, peaceful folk.  No
semblance of danger or even of adventure had appeared.
Their armed guard of a dozen greasy tatterdemalions had passed
their time in uneasy loafing.

Likewise Waldo noticed that the consul seemed indifferent to
the ruins they passed by or encamped among, that his feeling for
sites and topography was cooler than lukewarm, that he showed no
ardor in the pursuit of the scanty and uninteresting game.
He had picked up enough of several dialects to hear repeated
conversations about “them.”  “Have you
heard of any about here?”  “Has one been
killed?”  “Any traces of them in this
district?”  And such queries he could make out in the
various talks with the natives they met; as to what
“they” were he received no enlightenment.

Then he had questioned Hassan as to why he was so restricted
in his movements.  Hassan spoke some English and regaled him
with tales of Afrits, ghouls, specters and other uncanny
legendary presences; of the jinn of the waste, appearing in human
shape, talking all languages, ever on the alert to ensnare
infidels; of the woman whose feet turned the wrong way at the
ankles, luring the unwary to a pool and there drowning her
victims; of the malignant ghosts of dead brigands, more terrible
than their living fellows; of the spirit in the shape of a wild
ass, or of a gazelle, enticing its pursuers
p. 174
to the
brink of a precipice and itself seeming to run ahead upon an
expanse of sand, a mere mirage, dissolving as the victim passed
the brink and fell to death; of the sprite in the semblance of a
hare feigning a limp, or of a ground-bird feigning a broken wing,
drawing its pursuer after it till he met death in an unseen pit
or well-shaft.

Ali and Ibrahim spoke no English.  As far as Waldo could
understand their long harangues, they told similar stories or
hinted at dangers equally vague and imaginary.  These
childish bogy-tales merely whetted Waldo’s craving for
independence.

Now, as he sat on a rock, longing to enjoy the perfect sky,
the clear, early air, the wide, lonely landscape, along with the
sense of having it to himself, it seemed to him that the consul
was merely innately cautious, over-cautious.  There was no
danger.  He would have a fine, leisurely stroll, kill
something perhaps, and certainly be back in camp before the sun
grew hot.  He stood up.

Some hours later he was seated on a fallen coping-stone in the
shadow of a ruined tomb.  All the country they had been
traversing is full of tombs and remains of tombs, prehistoric,
Bactrian, old Persian, Parthian, Sassanian, or Mohammedan,
scattered everywhere in groups or solitary.  Vanished
utterly are the faintest traces of the cities, towns, and
villages, ephemeral houses or temporary huts, in which had lived
the countless generations of mourners who had reared these
tombs.

The tombs, built more durably than mere dwellings of the
living, remained.  Complete or ruinous, or reduced to mere
fragments, they were everywhere.  In that district they were
all of one type.
p. 175
Each was domed and below was square,
its one door facing eastward and opening into a larger empty
room, behind which were the mortuary chambers.

In the shadow of such a tomb Waldo sat.  He had shot
nothing, had lost his way, had no idea of the direction of the
camp, was tired, warm and thirsty.  He had forgotten his
water bottle.

He swept his gaze over the vast, desolate prospect, the
unvaried turquoise of the sky arched above the rolling
desert.  Far reddish hills along the skyline hooped in the
less distant brown hillocks which, without diversifying it,
hummocked the yellow landscape.  Sand and rocks with a lean,
starved bush or two made up the nearer view, broken here and
there by dazzling white or streaked, grayish, crumbling
ruins.  The sun had not been long above the horizon, yet the
whole surface of the desert was quivering with heat.

As Waldo sat viewing the outlook a woman came round the corner
tomb.  All the village women Waldo had seen had worn
yashmaks or some other form of face-covering or veil.  This
woman was bareheaded and unveiled.  She wore some sort of
yellowish-brown garment which enveloped her from neck to ankles,
showing no waist line.  Her feet, in defiance of the
blistering sands, were bare.

At sight of Waldo she stopped and stared at him as he at
her.  He remarked the un-European posture of her feet, not
at all turned out, but with the inner lines parallel.  She
wore no anklets, he observed, no bracelets, no necklace or
earrings.  Her bare arms he thought the most muscular he had
ever seen on a human being.  Her nails were pointed and
long, both on her hands and her feet.  Her
p. 176
hair was
black, short and tousled, yet she did not look wild or
uncomely.  Her eyes smiled and her lips had the effect of
smiling, though they did not part ever so little, not showing at
all the teeth behind them.

“What a pity,” said Waldo aloud, “that she
does not speak English.”

“I do speak English,” said the woman, and Waldo
noticed that as she spoke, her lips did not perceptibly
open.  “What does the gentleman want?”

“You speak English!” Waldo exclaimed, jumping to
his feet.  “What luck!  Where did you learn
it?”

“At the mission school,” she replied, an amused
smile playing about the corners of her rather wide, unopening
mouth.  “What can be done for you?”  She
spoke with scarcely any foreign accent, but very slowly and with
a sort of growl running along from syllable to syllable.

“I am thirsty,” said Waldo, “and I have lost
my way.”

“Is the gentleman living in a brown tent, shaped like
half a melon?” she inquired, the queer, rumbling note
drawling from one word to the next, her lips barely
separated.

“Yes, that is our camp,” said Waldo.

“I could guide the gentleman that way,” she
droned; “but it is far, and there is no water on that
side.”

“I want water first,” said Waldo, “or
milk.”

“If you mean cow’s milk, we have none.  But
we have goat’s milk.  There is to drink where I
dwell,” she said, sing-songing the words.  “It
is not far.  It is the other way.”

“Show me,” said he.

p. 177
She
began to walk, Waldo, his gun under his arm, beside her.
She trod noiselessly and fast.  Waldo could scarcely keep up
with her.  As they walked he often fell behind and noted how
her swathing garments clung to a lithe, shapely back, neat waist
and firm hips.  Each time he hurried and caught up with her,
he scanned her with intermittent glances, puzzled that her waist,
so well-marked at the spine, showed no particular definition in
front; that the outline of her from neck to knees, perfectly
shapeless under her wrappings, was without any waist-line or
suggestion of firmness or undulation.  Likewise he remarked
the amused flicker in her eyes and the compressed line of her
red, her too red, lips.

“How long were you at the mission school?” he
inquired.

“Four years,” she replied.

“Are you a Christian?” he asked.

“The Free-folk do not submit to baptism,” she
stated simply, but with rather more of the droning growl between
her words.

He felt a queer shiver as he watched the scarcely moved lips
through which the syllables edged their way.

“But you are not veiled,” he could not resist
saying.

“The Free-folk,” she rejoined, “are never
veiled.”

“Then you are not a Mohammedan?” he ventured.

“The Free-folk are not Moslems.”

“Who are the Free-folk?” he blurted out
incautiously.

She shot one baleful glance at him.  Waldo
p. 178
remembered
that he had to do with an Asiatic.  He recalled the three
permitted questions.

“What is your name?” he inquired.

“Amina,” she told him.

“That is a name from the ‘Arabian
Nights,’” he hazarded.

“From the foolish tales of the believers,” she
sneered.  “The Free-folk know nothing of such
follies.”  The unvarying shutness of her speaking
lips, the drawly burr between the syllables, struck him all the
more as her lips curled but did not open.

“You utter your words in a strange way,” he
said.

“Your language is not mine,” she replied.

“How is it that you learned my language at the mission
school and are not a Christian?”

“They teach all at the mission school,” she said,
“and the maidens of the Free-folk are like the other
maidens they teach, though the Free-folk when grown are not as
town-dwellers are.  Therefore they taught me as any townbred
girl, not knowing me for what I am.”

“They taught you well,” he commented.

“I have the gift of tongues,” she uttered
enigmatically, with an odd note of triumph burring the words
through her unmoving lips.

Waldo felt a horrid shudder all over him, not only at her
uncanny words, but also from mere faintness.

“Is it far to your home?” he breathed.

“It is there,” she said, pointing to the doorway
of a large tomb just before them.

The wholly open arch admitted them into a fairly spacious
interior, cool with the abiding
p. 179
temperaturc of thick masonry.
There was no rubbish on the floor.  Waldo, relieved to
escape the blistering glare outside, seated himself on a block of
stone midway between the door and the inner partition-wall,
resting his gun-butt on the floor.  For the moment he was
blinded by the change from the insistent brilliance of the desert
morning to the blurred gray light of the interior.

When his sight cleared he looked about and remarked, opposite
the door, the ragged hole which laid open the desecrated
mausoleum.  As his eyes grew accustomed to the dimness he
was so startled that he stood up.  It seemed to him that
from its four corners the room swarmed with naked children.
To his inexperienced conjecture they seemed about two years old,
but they moved with the assurance of boys of eight or ten.

“Whose are these children?” he exclaimed.

“Mine,” she said.

“All yours?” he protested.

“All mine,” she replied, a curious suppressed
boisterousness in her demeanor.

“But there are twenty of them,” he cried.

“You count badly in the dark,” she told him.
“There are fewer.”

“There certainly are a dozen,” he maintained,
spinning round as they danced and scampered about.

“The Free-people have large families,” she
said.

“But they are all of one age,” Waldo exclaimed,
his tongue dry against the roof of his mouth.

She laughed, an unpleasant, mocking laugh, clapping her
hands.  She was between him and the doorway, and as most of
the light came from it he could not see her lips.

p.
180
“Is not that like a man!  No woman would
have made that mistake.”

Waldo was confuted and sat down again.  The children
circulated around him, chattering, laughing, giggling,
snickering, making noises indicative of glee.

“Please get me something cool to drink,” said
Waldo, and his tongue was not only dry but big in his mouth.

“We shall have to drink shortly,” she said,
“but it will be warm.”

Waldo began to feel uneasy.  The children pranced around
him, jabbering strange, guttural noises, licking their lips,
pointing at him, their eyes fixed on him, with now and then a
glance at their mother.

“Where is the water?”

The woman stood silent, her arms hanging at her sides, and it
seemed to Waldo she was shorter than she had been.

“Where is the water?” he repeated.

“Patience, patience,” she growled, and came a step
nearer to him.

The sunlight struck upon her back and made a sort of halo
about her hips.  She seemed still shorter than before.
There was a something furtive in her bearing, and the little ones
sniggered evilly.

At that instant two rifle shots rang out almost as one.
The woman fell face downward on the floor.  The babies
shrieked in a shrill chorus.  Then she leapt up from all
fours with an explosive suddenness, staggered in a hurled,
lurching rush toward the hole in the wall, and, with a frightful
yell, threw up her arms and whirled backward to
p. 181
the ground,
doubled and contorted like a dying fish, stiffened, shuddered and
was still.  Waldo, his horrified eyes fixed on her face,
even in his amazement noted that her lips did not open.

The children, squealing faint cries of dismay, scrambled
through the hole in the inner wall, vanishing into the inky void
beyond.  The last had hardly gone when the consul appeared
in the doorway, his smoking gun in his hand.

“Not a second too soon, my boy,” he
ejaculated.  “She was just going to spring.”

He cocked his gun and prodded the body with the muzzle.

“Good and dead,” he commented.  “What
luck!  Generally it takes three or four bullets to finish
one.  I’ve known one with two bullets through her
lungs to kill a man.”

“Did you murder this woman?” Waldo demanded
fiercely.

“Murder?” the consul snorted.
“Murder!  Look at that.”

He knelt down and pulled open the full, close lips, disclosing
not human teeth, but small incisors, cusped grinders,
wide-spaced, and long, keen, overlapping canines, like those of a
greyhound: a fierce, deadly, carnivorous dentition, menacing and
combative.

Waldo felt a qualm, yet the face and form still swayed his
horrified sympathy for their humanness.

“Do you shoot women because they have long teeth?”
Waldo insisted, revolted at the horrid death he had watched.

“You are hard to convince,” said the consul
sternly.  “Do you call that a woman?”

p. 182
He
stripped the clothing from the carcass.

Waldo sickened all over.  What he saw was not the front
of a woman, but the body of a female animal, old and
flaccid—mother of a pack.

“What kind of a creature is it?” he asked
faintly.

“A Ghoul, my boy,” the consul answered solemnly,
almost in a whisper.

“I thought they did not exist,” Waldo
babbled.  “I thought they were mythical; I thought
there were none.”

“I can very well believe that there are none in Rhode
Island,” the consul said gravely.  “This is in
Persia, and Persia is in Asia.”

Edward Lucas White
.

p. 183
THE
SILVER RING

Calderon stopped abruptly in the middle of that long road
across the moor.  Something had caught his eye as he
walked—the slightest possible glitter at the side of the
road, where the heavy sunlight was making even the stones throw
tiny, dense shadows.  He went back a step, intent upon
discovering what it was that had disturbed his casual
glance.  There, half raised by a small mound of hardened
dust, was a ring, a plain silver ring, the sight of which struck
him as a dagger might have done.  As he picked it gently
from the roadway, and dusted it with his handkerchief, his
fingers trembled.  It was his wife’s ring.  He
had given it to her before their marriage, a memento of an
exquisitely happy day.  All the time they had been together
she had worn it constantly: there had never been a time when she
had not borne it upon her finger.  The ring was full of
memories for him—of memories that were painful now in their
happiness because they belonged to a broken time.  And these
memories pressed upon his heart, stabbing him, as he stood
thoughtfully in the roadway among the purple heather, gazing at
the ring.  His face had grown quite gray and hard, and his
eyes were troubled.

For a moment he could do nothing but gaze at the ring, busy
with his urgent thoughts.  He could not yet wonder how the
ring had come there, upon
p. 184
this lonely road from dale to
dale.  Behind him the road was white, narrowing through the
heather, unshadowed by any tree.  To right and left of him
the moor stretched in purple masses until it darkened at the sky
line.  In front, the road began already to decline for the
steep descent into Wensleydale.  The grass could be seen
ahead of him; and beyond it, far in the burning mist of the late
afternoon, he saw gleaming, like quicksilver, a sheet of
water.  The wind came at that great height in powerful
gusts, freshening the air, pressing warmly against his face and
hands as pleasantly as water presses against the swimmer.
No other person was in sight upon the moor: he was alone, with
Evelyn’s ring in his hand, and poignant memories assailing
him.

Calderon’s love for his wife had been as intense and as
true as any love could be.  Her love for him, more
capricious, more ardent, had been as great.  Yet in the
fifth year of their marriage, such was the conflict of two strong
personalities, they had quarreled vehemently, and had
parted.  Both had independent means, and both had many
activities.  Calderon had been working very hard for two
years since the quarrel, and they had not met.  The two or
three letters exchanged early in their estrangement had never
suggested a continued correspondence; and although he knew that
his wife had been living in the eastern counties, Calderon had
now no idea at all of her whereabouts.  How strange that he
should find upon this lonely road that precious ring!
Engraved within it he read: “Evelyn:
Maurice”—the inscription she had desired.
Calderon sighed, slipping the ring into his pocket, and
thoughtfully continuing upon
p. 185
his way.  Was Evelyn before
him, or behind him?  Who could tell?  They had never
been together to Yorkshire.  He most go as a blind man.

Then the question came to him: if they met, what had he to say
to her?  He knew no more of his journey down into
Wensleydale, for the passionate unreasonings that overwhelmed
him.

And then, when he was arrived in the little village to which
the road over the moor leads, he again hesitated.  So much
depended upon his action.  He must find Evelyn this evening,
for his return to London was urgent.  Already the shadows
were growing long, and the evening was heavy.  Which way
should he go?  Upon his choice might depend the whole course
of his future life.  For a few moments he halted,
irresolute.  Then he went slowly forward to the first inn he
saw, his fingers playing in his waistcoat pocket with the little
ring that had suddenly plunged him into the past.  He
thought it certain that the loss of it was accidental.  She
would not have kept the ring for so long, and she could not have
brought it with her to Yorkshire, if she had intended to throw it
away forever.  And yet how came it upon the moorland
road?

Calderon stopped outside the comfortable inn.  It
attracted him; but, as though he had put some kind of reliance
upon telepathy, he felt sure that Evelyn was not there.
Should he enter, make inquiry?  No; he knew she was not
there.  His steps led him forward.  As if he were
trying to follow some invisible thread, he went onward, pausing
no more, through the village, over to the other side of the dale,
marveling at the heavy outline of Mount Caburn, silhouetted
against the sky.  He
p. 186
found himself upon a good road, with
hedges on both sides.  It was an adventure.  He was
following the bidding of his instinct.  He did not really
believe in it, Calderon told himself; it was too silly.
There would be a disappointment, a sense of having been
“sold”; and the morning would find him unsatisfied,
with his single opportunity gone.  Yet even while his
thoughts poured doubt upon his action he was pursuing his way at
a regular pace.  How curious it was!  It was as though
there were two Calderons—one brain, the other overmastering
instinct.

“You’ll see,” he warned himself.
“Nothing will happen.  You’ll have an
uncomfortable night, and a trudge back in the morning.
It’s no good.  No good!”

Yet he continued upon his way beside the silent hedges, his
knapsack upon his shoulder, his arms swinging, and the silver
ring hidden in his waistcoat pocket.

It was quite dark when he reached Bainbridge.  He knew
well the aspect of the open common, because he had passed through
it a dozen years before, and the place is unforgettable.
There was a large green, he remembered, and the houses hedged the
green, as they did at East Witton.  He smiled at the memory
and at the comparison.  Yorkshire held such variety of
scene, from east to west, that he could pick from among old
associations a pleasant thought of every part of it.  And
here at Bainbridge he knew there was an old inn, quiet and
spacious, where he might find Evelyn.  She was not one to
seek the smaller inns such as he would himself have chosen: she
would endure the discomforts of loquacious companionship rather

p. 187
than
those of primitive bathing arrangements.  Had it not, then,
been instinct which had led him here?  Had it perhaps been a
subconscious guessing at her inclinations?  Calderon could
not discuss that now.  He was here; it was too late to go
farther; he must endure whatever disappointment might be in store
for him.

A bedroom was available; he was supplied with hot water, and
he groomed himself as well as his small store of belongings
allowed.  Whimsically he foresaw a number of women in
semi-evening dress, one or two men in suitably dark clothes,
himself the only palpable “tourist.”  There
would be a solitary meal, as dinner time was past; and he would
then seek among the company the owner of the silver ring.
Calderon found himself laughing rather excitedly, even trembling
slightly.  Well, he would see what happened.  He
ventured down the stairs, nervously grinning at the thought that
Evelyn might appear from any one of the doors along that silent
passage.

When he reached the foot of the stairs he went instinctively
to the door, to watch the two or three faint, sudden lights that
started across the green out of a general blackness.  It was
a very dark night; clouds had come swiftly from the southwest,
and the sky was entirely hidden.  There was a wind, and he
thought that as soon as it dropped the rain might begin to
patter.

And then, while he was thus prophesying the weather, Calderon
was held to the spot by a new sensation.  Within, from some
room which he had not entered, came an unknown voice,
singing.  The voice was sweet, but he did not listen; only
the air that was sung made him follow the voice, words
p. 188
forming in
his mind, as though he were himself singing:

“The little silver ring that once you gave
to me

Keeps in its narrow band every promise of ours. . . . ”

Surely he was dreaming!  He could not move.  The
clouds hurried; the darkness enwrapped him.  He could not
smile at a coincidence, because he could not believe that the
song was really being sung.  It was too much for him to take
in.  If Evelyn were there, what could she be feeling,
thinking?  Calderon was a very honest man, and was
considered generally a very cool, unsentimental one; but he was
easily moved by the one love of his life.  Evelyn was the
only woman for him; they were parted; he had found a ring which
held just such associations, “memories of the past,”
as the song pictured.  The ring was more than a ring.
It was not merely an ornament; it was the material sign of their
love.  Calderon was deeply stirred.

Even as he stood there, not daring to move, he felt that he
was not alone.  Another figure, a woman’s, stood in
the doorway.  He could see her light dress, the whiteness of
her neck; and he found himself breathless, suffocated by the
sudden dénouement to his dream.

“Evelyn!” he whispered, moving at last.

There was a quick recoil.  For a moment it seemed to
Calderon that everything was lost, and that he was alone.
Then the woman in the doorway stood quite still, breathing
quickly, half hidden from him by the doorpost, her face wholly
invisible in the murk of the night.

“I didn’t see anybody,” she said
unsteadily.
p.
189
“Who are you?”  It seemed an
unfamiliar voice, rather strangled and more than a little
scared.

“Ah!  You’re not Evelyn!” Calderon
cried.  Still he could not see her: only the whiteness
glimmered before him.  “I’m—  My
name’s Calderon.  I beg your pardon.  I thought
it was my wife.”

“Calderon!” said the voice; and it seemed to him
that it was suddenly filled with a new warmth, as of
gayety.  Then: “How funny!” said the
unknown.  He seemed to see her head quickly lowered and
averted.  Was she smiling?  Who could have told, in
that foglike darkness?  It was as much as he could do to see
that she was still before him.  But funny?  What did
that mean?

“Funny?” he exclaimed eagerly.
“Is—”  He pulled himself up.  Here
was a complication!  If he asked any question, might he not
make a new difficulty?  He could not ask whether Evelyn was
here.  He could guess how quickly a story would run through
a mischievous party of tourists, unrestrained by any real
understanding of the situation, and bent upon canvassing among
themselves, merely to beguile gaps in a mealtime conversation,
the history of an unhappy marriage.  He could not expose
Evelyn to such a company.  So he went no further with his
speech.

“Perhaps you’ve heard—” said the
voice.  “Perhaps you’ve heard of Alice
Bradshaw.”  She was quite recovered from her shock,
and was ready, it appeared to Calderon, to hold him flirtatiously
in the doorway.  “I’ve known Evelyn for some
time—two years.”

“I’ve got an idea—” hesitated
Calderon, racking his brains and lying.  It was getting
worse and worse!  How could he go on without showing how
p. 190
little he
knew about Evelyn’s recent movements?  He frowned, and
smiled nervously on the darkness.  He was rather glad of the
darkness.  “I—it’s
possible—”

“But not probable!” said the laughing voice.
“Don’t pretend to remember me, if you
don’t!”

“Well, I don’t!” admitted Calderon.
“And that’s quite true.”

“Honest man!” said the voice.  Something made
him move forward quickly.  The figure disappeared.
Calderon, putting his hand instinctively forward to stop her,
allowed the little ring to jerk from it.

“Oh!” he cried.  “Here, I
say!”

He was down upon his knees, fumbling on the ground.  A
match flickered on his fingers.  He looked quickly up,
hoping to see the unknown’s face; but the match was blown
out instantly by the strong wind that was pressing and fluttering
about him as he knelt.

“What have you dropped?” asked the voice.
The mysterious one had reappeared in the doorway.

“A ring!” Calderon said sharply.

“A ring!”  There was sympathy in the
voice.  “What a pity!  Let me look.”

He struck another match, and groped about.  It was
unavailing.  The match went out, and beyond a sudden glimpse
of the trodden earth he had seen nothing.

“It’s really your fault,” Calderon said to
the unknown, “for starting away.”

“Was it on your finger?”

“No.  It isn’t mine.  It’s a
silver ring.”

“A silver—”  There was a moment’s
startled pause.  “Did you hear the song just
now?”

p.
191
“Yes—Ah!”  With the third match
he had detected the ring.  “Good!”

“Is it your ring?” asked the voice.  “I
mean . . .  Evelyn . . . wears one, doesn’t
she?”

“Does she?” Calderon asked drily.  “She
did.”

“Oh, she—”

“I found it on the moor.  This is hers.  I
brought it—”

Calderon checked himself again.  He was rubbing the ring
with his handkerchief, in case it had been dirtied.

“How did you know we were here?” said the voice,
in a tone of piquant curiosity.

“Then—!” cried Calderon, feeling his face
get very hot.  He could have shouted at this confirmation of
his most rosy hopes.  It was with a terrible effort that be
restrained himself.  “Oh,” he said vaguely,
“one does know.”  He heard a real laugh this
time, but smothered, as though the unknown were holding a
handkerchief to her mouth.

“Evidently,” she said.  “But how does
one know?”

“How do you know that Evelyn didn’t tell
me?” he parried.  He felt it was a master
stroke.  “You don’t seem to have exhausted the
possibilities.”

“No, of course.  She might have,” admitted
the mysterious voice.  There was the tiniest silence.
“But I don’t think she did.  Of course, I
don’t know.”

“No, of course,” Calderon politely agreed.
“Is she quite well?”

“Oh!” cried the voice, shaking with
amusement.  “Don’t you know that?
Hasn’t she told you that?  It’s too bad to keep
it from you!”

p.
192
“What!” Calderon moved nearer.
“She’s not ill!”

“No.  I meant that she was well.”

“She tells me very little about herself—very
little,” he explained ingeniously.
“You’ll have noticed that she doesn’t think of
herself at all.”

A dryness came into the tone of his companion.

“You still idealize her, then?” Calderon
heard.

“Yes.  You see . . . it’s an odd
thing,” he went on, “and one doesn’t talk about
it.  But you see I’m in love with her.”

There was another pause.  A significant pause.
“I think you’re very forgiving,” at last said a
muffled voice.  “I—”

“What I should like to know,” Calderon answered,
as if weighing his words, “is whether she’s also very
forgiving.”

“Oh,” said the voice, now very low.
“You must ask her that.”

“I do,” Calderon ventured.  “Are
you?”

“Oh, Maurice, you’re crushing me!” cried the
unknown suddenly.  “There . . .  Alice has
finished singing.  She’ll be coming. . . .  Give
me my ring. . . .  Oh, my dear; of course I do!”

The ring was restored, to rest in its old position until
memory’s course should be run.

Frank Swinnerton
.

p. 193
THE
SURGEON

“You fellows outside the medical profession have
absolutely no conception of the terrors confronting a prominent
physician and of the traps and snares and pitfalls laid for him
at every turn.”

The great surgeon lolled back in his chair, and, raising a
glass of champagne in those delicately formed, yet steel-strong
fingers that had resolved the intricacies of life and death for
many a sufferer, he gazed thoughtfully at the whirling torrent of
tiny bubbles and then touched it lightly to his lips.  It
was one of those rare times when the wheel of Fate had brought
together a group of men united by the strongest bond that
friendship can tie, the bond of the college life and love of auld
lang syne.  It was heart to heart here, even as it had been
with us a quarter century before, ere we had parted to go our
several ways in the broad fields of life.

Of us all, Harrington had become the one pre-eminently famous,
and his remark came in reply to a bit of the congratulatory
flattery that only the intimacy of the college chum dare venture
with impunity.

“What do you mean, Harrington?” asked Dalbey, the
banker.  “Perplexities of diagnosis, the nervous
strain of responsibility, and the like?”

“I think I can say without conceit,” replied the
surgeon, “that diagnosis has become with me almost
p. 194
an
intuition.  In that field I have absolute confidence in
myself.  As for nerves, I haven’t any.  I can cut
within the fiftieth of an inch of certain death as coolly as you
pare your nail.  No; I mean deliberate wickedness, malice,
blackmail.  We are never free from this danger.  Let me
give you an instance, if it won’t bore you.”

There was a chorus of calls, “Go on, go on,” and
Jenkins cried, “Never heard it!” for which he was
promptly squelched.

It was just two years ago (Harrington began), and my five gray
hairs date from that night.  I was sitting in my office just
after my evening office hour had ended, and I was pretty well
tired out.  The bell rang furiously, and I heard the
attendant saying that my hour was over and that I could see no
one.  There was some very vigorous insistence, and I caught
the words “urgent,” “imperative,” and a
few more equally significant, so I called to the man that I would
see the belated visitor.  He entered quickly.  He was
evidently a man of wealth and breeding, and as evidently laboring
under great excitement.

“Is this Dr. Harrington?” he asked as he seated
himself close by my desk.

“It is,” I answered.

“Dr. James Y. Harrington?”

“Yes.”

In the next second I found myself looking into the muzzle of a
revolver.  They say that when a man is in imminent danger,
the mental strain is relieved automatically by trivialities of
thought; and, do you know, the first thing that flamed
p. 195
through my
head was, “How many turns does the rifling take in a barrel
of that length?”

“I have come to kill you,” said my visitor in a
tone as cold as camphor ice, yet with a dignified courtesy I
could not but admire.  Was I face to face with a
crank?  This question I decided in the negative, and the
situation became so much the more—piquant, shall I
say?  Well, I can say it now, at least.  Perspective
adds piquancy, very often.

“Sir,” I said as quietly-as most men could when a
very earnest gentleman has the drop on them, “sir, there is
certainly some mistake here.”

It may have been an inane remark; but at least he didn’t
pull the trigger, and that gained time.

“There is none, I am equally certain,” he
replied.

“You have me at a decided disadvantage,” I
continued, “and as any movement of attack or alarm on my
part would precipitate fatalities, may I request that before you
kill me, you at least tell me why you propose to do so.  I
make this request because, as a physician, I can see that you are
perfectly sane and not the crank I at first thought
you.”

I was regaining my nerve, you see; if there is one thing in
this world to give a man nerve and coolness, it’s to put it
right up to him to avoid the next one.  At any rate, the
fairness of my request must have appealed to my visitor, for he
said, “Certainly I will tell you, doctor.  That is
only just.  I kill you because you performed a critical
operation on my wife, and she is dying.”

“This is all a fearful error,” I exclaimed
eagerly.  “I do not even know you, have never seen you

p. 196
nor your
wife, much less operated upon her.  Surgeons of my standing
in the profession—I say this advisedly, sir—usually
know whom they treat.”

“Usually they do, I grant you,” he assented, but
he emphasized the wrong word quite unpleasantly.
“This has been an exception,” he added.

“Why do you believe it was I who operated?” I
urged.

“My wife said so; that is sufficient for me.”

“She must surely have made the charge in
delirium,” I said.

“She is not delirious, nor has she been.”

“Where was the operation performed?”

“She refuses to tell me.”

I thought very bard for a minute.  What kind of a
predicament was this?  I then said to him, “This is a
serious and vital matter, sir, for both of us.  Any mistake
could not fail to have momentous consequences.  Suppose you
take me to confront your wife.  It is probably a case of
mistaken identity, and when she sees me, she will most certainly
be able readily to rectify this awful blunder.  And so sure
am I of the result that I pledge you my word to accompany you
without violence or outcry.”

After a moment’s reflection he said, “I accept
your proposition.”

His carriage was waiting at the door.  Evidently he had
been desperate when he came, and fully prepared to face the
consequences of his desperation.  We drove together to his
home.

In my complete certainty of my position I feasted my eyes on
the luxurious furnishings, the costly rugs—I’m a
lover of rugs, you know, and a bit of a connoisseur—and the
exquisite
p.
197
bric-a-brac and paintings.  Moreover, I now knew
with whom I was dealing, though that fact I concealed.

We went up to the sickroom.  A beautiful woman,
desperately ill and pale as death itself, lay motionless upon the
pillows.  As we softly entered the room, she turned her eyes
toward us, too weak to move her head.

The eyes were dull and listless, but when their glance fell on
me, they literally flashed fire and a hard, determined look came
into them.

“Dear,” said her husband, bending tenderly down to
her, “who did you say performed that operation?”

“Dr. Harrington,” she whispered.

“I have brought him here.  Is that the person who
operated?”

“Yes.”

My heart just at that moment went as cold as a snowball.
I saw myself ruined, broken on the wheel of Fate.  The death
phase of the situation didn’t matter.  Worst of all, I
now saw the motive.  She was shielding some bungler, near,
or more probably dear, to her—I was the victim selected by
mere horrible chance.

I crossed softly to the bed.  “Madam,” I said
to her as gently as my tumult of feeling would permit, “I
implore you to tell the truth.  Did I perform this
operation?”

With absolute self-possession she whispered, “Doctor,
you did.”

I was helpless; it was a fine illustration of the terrible
power of the lie as a weapon against right and honor.

“I assure you, before God,” I declared, turning to
the husband, “that I was not the
p. 198
operating
surgeon in this case.  You know, possibly, my reputation for
professional skill.  Will you then permit me to take your
wife’s temperature and to make a very brief examination
with a view to determining the probable effect of her condition
upon her rational faculties?”

To my delight, he consented.  With careful formality I
prepared a thermometer, taking and noting the temperature both at
mouth and armpit.  The woman exhibited none of the repulsion
she ought to have shown, by all principles of psychology, to
being examined by the author of her misfortune.

I then seated myself by the bed and felt the pulse.
Taking my watch and detaching it from the chain, I placed it on
the white cover of the bed beside her, where she could not fail
to hear the ticking.  I lifted her hands and applied my
finger tips lightly to the arterial beat at the wrist.  I
looked her steadily in the eyes, and apparently gave the most
minute attention to the really faint beating of her pulse.

“Madam,” I said after a long wait, “it is my
solemn and painful duty to inform you that you have but fifteen
minutes to live.  My whole professional life is at stake
here.  Ruin, disgrace, and even death stare me in the face
as a result of what you may say.  But I do not urge this
upon you.  I urge you merely for God’s sake to tell
the truth.”

“Doctor, you know you did it,” she whispered
wearily.

I had expected that.  My bit of work in experimental
psychology was just beginning.  I kept perfectly silent, my
fingers still resting upon the patient’s wrist.  The
tomb itself is not more still
p. 199
nor more solemn than was that
room.  I let full five minutes pass without word or
movement.

Do you know how long five minutes can be?  Did you ever
try a silent wait of five little minutes, even though life and
death were not in the balance?  Try to guess at five
minutes; and if you are not skilled in counting seconds, you will
call time in two.  Five minutes can be an eternity.
They were so then.

“Madam,” I said again, “you have but ten
minutes to live.  I implore you to right the great wrong you
have done.”

Why that man did not throw me out of the room I will never
know.  He seemed fascinated by the fearful experiment.

Again she calmly murmured, “Doctor, it was
you.”

I acknowledge that then the room turned black; but I was
myself in an instant.  I resumed my solemn death
watch.  This time I deliberately allowed eight minutes to
add themselves to the eternal past.  Then I knew I was
playing my last card.

“Madam,” I said as solemnly and impressively as I
could speak the words, “in two minutes you will be before
your God.  Are you willing that your soul should face its
Maker with the black stain upon it of the dreadful lie you have
told?  For your own immortal soul’s sake, I implore
you to tell the truth.”

A feeble gesture called her husband to her side.  I rose
and retired across the room.  He bent over her, shaken by
great sobs.  She drew him down to her, kissed him and
whispered, “It was not he.”

p. 200
I
almost fell.  The revulsion of feeling was too great.
Mastering myself by a supreme effort, I stood to hear the
colloquy to the end.

“Who was it?” he asked.

She told him.

“You swear to this?”

“With my dying breath.”

He turned to me with a face of ashen paleness.
“Doctor,” he gasped, “pardon.”

I snapped shut the case of my watch.
“Madam,” I said, “you will recover,” and
left the room and house unmolested.

No one spoke for a moment.  Then Carvill ejaculated under
his breath, “My God!”

B. W. Mitchell
.

p. 201
THE
’DOPTERS

“Lemmy—oo-hoo—Lemmy—”

Lemmy stopped short in his game of jack-stones, and looked
fearfully over his shoulder.  All about him were the rest of
the children, unconcerned, playing none the quieter for the
reposeful afternoon shadow of the gray cloister-like walls.
At the edge of the yard where the grass was worn off most he saw
the “biggest boys,” now suspending their game of ball
to call to him.  In the general cry he recognized the
leading, raucous voice of Gus Chapman.  Lemmy did not
answer.  He turned his back and tried to fling his
jackstones indifferently.  Out of the corner of his eye he
could see Gus approaching.

“The ’Dopters, Lemmy—the ’Dopters are
coming!” Gus warned him.

In an instant Lemmy was on his feet.  Panic-stricken, he
fled, leaving his jackstones upon the ground.  He put his
hands over his ears to shut out the hooting, derisive cries of
the boys who did not understand his fear of the
’Dopters—that horde of individuals who lurked about
the Home, a constant menace to his happiness.  They looked
harmless enough, to be sure, in their varied disguises.
Some came as jolly, oldish ladies with much candy and sometimes
fat bunches of raisins in their pockets.  Others looked for
all the world like hearty farmers who might raise apples, both
red and
p.
202
yellow—a very deceptive sort, these farmers, who
laughed a great deal and poked the boys’ muscles and
pinched the girls’ cheeks.  Most to be feared were the
’Dopters in black who hung round more than any of the
rest.  They brought toys hardly worn at all, but they never
seemed to want to let them go at the last minute.  They made
a show of crying over Gracie Peeler and Nannie Bagget, who had
curls and knew how to do a curtsey.  The ’Dopters in
black always made off with some one.

Despite the endless variety, it was not hard to tell a
’Dopter if you saw him in time.  There was something
about them.  Most of the children recognized them
instinctively.  Gus was particularly expert at picking out
the ’Dopters from the casual visitors at the Home.
Watching for them never interfered with his play in the
least.  He always saw first.  Lemmy had learned to
trust Gus’s signals of danger, and although he was
overwhelmed by the accompanying teasing, he felt very
grateful.  Gus was his savior—his methods were not to
be criticized.  Times innumerable Gus had saved him from
being adopted.

Who knew what it meant—being adopted?  Lemmy could
not understand why most of the children thought that it was
something nice.  None of them seemed to realize that there
was any reason to be afraid.  They were always talking about
Tommie Graham, who had been borne off by the
’Dopters.  His friends at the Home had not seen him
since his disappearance, but stories had started somehow about
Tommie’s having a dog with a schooner back and a train of
cars which whizzed around when he pressed a button.  It was
also said that there was another button which Tommie could
p. 203
press and
some one would come to take him for a ride in a sailboat.
But all this was mere hearsay.  There was no telling what
had really befallen Tommie, all because he was foolish enough to
sing in the hearing of the ’Dopters his song about three
frogs that sat on a lily pad.

Lemmy was certain that when a ’Dopter threw off his
disguise he was a dragon of the very worst kind.  It was
Simple Simon to believe when they talked about this and that you
could have if you would only come along.  Lemmy knew, for
once from behind the office door he had heard them talking to
Miss Border, who wore the white of authority.  Their remarks
about “parental history” and “hereditary
instincts” and “psychological effects of
environment” had betrayed them.  Lemmy remembered how
ominous these things had sounded mixed with whoop and halloo from
the playground.  And the queer feeling which had shivered
through him!  The sensation from eating a mouthful of green
gooseberries was nothing in comparison.

How could the other children believe that likely as not those
words meant something nice?  Lemmy knew better.  After
he had overheard that secret conference with Miss Border, he
thought that he understood the ’Dopters pretty well.
Theirs was a sticky-fly-paper method; there was no end to the
ways they had of fooling you.  They had named him
“among the least promising”—this, Lemmy
gathered, on account of his skinny legs, the result of something
“subnormal”; and because of his habit of going off
alone into corners, termed “sulkiness and
uncompanionability”; his big ears had something to do with
it too.  One tall lady had said that they were “not
exactly Grecian.”  Altogether he
p. 204
was
“undesirable.”  This classification even Gus
took to be aboveboard.

“They don’t wantcha, Lemmy,” Gus repeatedly
assured him.  “Yuh needn’t be so
scarey.”  But Gus didn’t fathom the duplicity of
the ’Dopters—they hatched up all sorts of schemes to
make you feel easy and then got you unawares.  Likely as not
they knew all the time that he was the littlest boy in the Home
who could hang by his heels, and that he could hold his breath
longer than Gus—and, though it was a secret, that he had a
pet toad named Nippy in the broken wall where it was green and
wet.  They seemed to know everything—the
’Dopters.

The thought of these things made Lemmy’s heels fly
faster.  He whisked behind the spirea bushes and drew from
underneath the widespreading branches a short ladder which he had
constructed laboriously from the odds and ends of dry-goods
boxes.  He set up the rickety support and climbed nimbly to
the top of the high, broad wall, where the low elm trees hid him
from view.  He drew the ladder up carefully after him, and
with a breath of relief stretched himself at full length, safe
from the ’Dopters for a little while at least.  It was
comfort to have such a place where he could hide, unless the
’Dopters came at mealtime, when no one could escape.
He would not soon forget the time when Lucy Simmons was dragged
away just as she had started to eat her piece of blackberry
pie.  She never came back to finish it.  One could
never be really safe from the ’Dopters.  There was no
let-up to looking out for them.  And there would always be
’Dopters as long as the Outside remained.  Lemmy was
afraid
p.
205
of the Outside.  He liked to look at it from the
top of the wall; it appeared fascinatingly full of mystery, but
it always terrified him.  There was no place really safe,
even bed.  Lemmy sighed and squinted through the fluttering
leaves at a bit of cloud.  After a while it would be getting
pink, as it did when supper time came—baked potatoes and
milk, and maybe jam from the long, dark shelves in the vegetable
cellar.  Lemmy’s thoughts flew to the empty barrel in
which he intended to hide when winter came on and the elm leaves
fell to the ground.  It would be hard to get by Mrs.
O’Gorman, who was always puttering about the basement with
a pad and pencil, muttering unintelligible things under her
breath.  Perhaps the linen closet would be safer, only they
might come when Gerda and Lou were putting away the ironed
things.

Lemmy’s speculations were interrupted by a deep
“Ho-ho-hum” from the other side of the wall.
The exclamation had a luxurious sound, as if some one was
treating himself to a good rest.  Lemmy peered over the edge
of the wall, and gave a little gasp.

There on the bench beneath was some one who had undoubtedly
stepped out of book covers.  He was a big man, a very big
man, with a brown skin lined with fine wrinkles which told all
sorts of things without his saying a word.  His hair was
gray, but he looked somehow very young and up to anything
lively.  His old trousers were turned up, and his coat with
its big buttons, flung wide apart, disclosed a faded
blouse.  From his belt dangled a heavy chain, and from his
pocket the end of a jolly colored handkerchief.  His cap had
the look of a cap which had been through things.  Slowly
p. 206
and
comfortably he stretched his long arms, and as his sleeve slipped
back Lemmy caught sight of a tattooed bird, green and blue and
red, above his left wrist.  And then he flung his head back,
and his blue eves twinkled up at Lemmy without a sign of
surprise.

“A-hoy, mate,” he called companionably.

“A-hoy, Cap’n,” returned Lemmy, laughing in
delight.

“How’s the wind?”

“Southwest,” Lemmy gave back promptly.
“And that’s what stirs the water up all purply
pink—”

“Right-o—”  The Cap’n slapped his
knee in approval.

“Wind that makes the lake look like that must come from
a place where a fellah could find out about magic,” Lemmy
speculated.

“Magic?  You want to find out about magic, young
man?”  The Cap’n sat up with a great show of
interest.  His eyes were very friendly.

“Oh, more’n anything else in the world,”
Lemmy burst out impulsively.  “I want to find out how
to make a rosebush pop out of a stovepipe hat and how to pull
fuzzy little chickens out of people’s sleeves and how to
pick gold pieces out of the air the way I saw a man do once to
make the lumbermen laugh at Camp Cusson—that’s where
I lived when my Daddy used to run the lumber camp until he died,
and so did my mother of epidemick—”  Lemmy
caught his breath.  “I want to learn how to do magic
so I can have fun and make people laugh.”

The Cap’n chuckled and spread his jolly colored
handkerchief across his knees.  From an old,
p. 207
brown
wallet he took a coin which he twirled merrily in his nimble
fingers.

“Have a look at this,” he said, reaching up to put
the coin into Lemmy’s hand.

Lemmy looked curiously at the strange piece of money which lay
in his palm.  It was not at all like the dimes and nickels
which the ’Dopters often slid into a fellow’s
pocket.  It was shiny and yellow, the color of the pin which
always fastened Miss Border’s collar.  It was
gold!  And there were figures of dragons upon it guarding
words which Lemmy could not read at all, though they were very
short.

“Heave it into the hanker,” directed the
Cap’n.

Plump into the jolly colored handkerchief Lemmy dropped the
coin.  Wide-eyed, he watched the Cap’n tie the
handkerchief into a knot and twist it smartly to make certain
that it was secure.  With a fine flourish he flung it high
into the air, caught it again deftly and untied the tight
knot.  Smiling broadly, he spread the handkerchief out upon
his knees again.  Lemmy stared unbelievingly—the gold
coin had vanished and in its place lay a silver dollar.  He
blinked at the air in a daze.  Very quickly the Cap’n
retied his handkerchief and tossed it up once more.  When he
opened it again, wonder of wonders, there was the gold coin!

A cry of discovery burst from Lemmy’s throat.

“You’re a Majishun!”

The Cap’n beamed and drew from his pocket, one, two,
three oranges.  He took the gold coin again, and carelessly
balancing it upon his nose, at the same time tossed the oranges
one after the other into the air, juggling them with fine
precision so that they rose and fell rhythmically in time to
music which the Cap’n alone could hear.

p.
208
“They’re majicked!” Lemmy whispered
spellbound as he eyed the oranges flashing in the air while the
coin remained apparently affixed to the Cap’n’s
nose.

His eyes grew wider yet when suddenly the Cap’n ended
his performance by gathering in oranges and coin with one grand
sweep, not dropping a thing.

“Now hold your hands,” the Cap’n
invited.

Before Lemmy could say Jack Robinson, there right in his own
hands was one of the magician’s golden balls.

“Shiver my timbers, did you never see an orange
before?” the Cap’n cried as he watched Lemmy’s
face.

“Not a Majishun’s orange,” Lemmy answered,
fingering his treasure reverently.

“Taste it, young ’un—”

“O-oh, I couldn’t!”  Lemmy’s
voice carried agony.

“The Cap’n’s orders.  Eat it and you
get another.”

Still Lemmy hesitated.

“I’ll have one along with you,” the
Cap’n urged sociably.  “I can beat you
peeling!”

The Cap’n started to peel one of the erstwhile magic
balls.  Lemmy dug his teeth quickly into his own
orange.  The race was on.  Lemmy’s squeal of
victory as he threw down the last bit of rind surprised the
Cap’n amazingly.

“And mine only half peeled,” he exclaimed.
“You are a quick-un.”

Then, quite naturally, Lemmy fell to eating oranges along with
the Cap’n.

“Eating oranges with a Majishun—what’d Gus

p.
209
say?” Lemmy murmured, half in a trance.
“What if I hadn’t run away from the
’Dopters?”

“The ’Dopters?”  The Cap’n put
his head on one side and raised his eyebrows very much puzzled
indeed.  “Who are they?”

“Oh, the ’Dopters are always hanging round the
Home, trying to carry us off.  A fellah has to watch out all
the time.  They’re sharp as tacks, always trying to
fool us by looking something diff’rent.  Ev’ry
time they come they change their clothes to put us off the
track.”

“Oh-ho—so you don’t like ’em,
eh?”

“Oh, I’m afraid of ’em, they scare me
so!” Lemmy’s voice quivered pitifully.
“All the time I have to think of ’em.  I’m
never, never safe from the ’Dopters.  I bet
they’d poke a fellah’s eyes out once they got him, or
starve him maybe.  Oh, I don’t know what a
’Dopter wouldn’t do!”

The Cap’n listened gravely.  Never once did he
laugh as Lemmy poured forth his miserable fear of the
’Dopters.  The Cap’n understood.  Lemmy
could tell that.  By the time the oranges had disappeared,
Lemmy had told the Cap’n all about the ’Dopters and
even confided the existence of Nippy.

“I’ll show him to you,” Lemmy offered,
hustling down the ladder to return with his pet toad upon a wet
leaf for exhibition.

The Cap’n was a gratifying sort.  He saw at once
Nippy’s good points—the beautiful brightness of his
eyes, the fine spots upon his back, the superiority of his
intellect.  Nippy in turn winked his approval at the
Cap’n as if they had many a joke in common.

“As fine a toad as ever sat a rock or sailed the
sea,” avowed the Cap’n enthusiastically.
“By the
p.
210
bye, young man, how’d you like to take Nippy on a
cruise with me?”

Lemmy clutched the wall and gazed for one electrical second
into the Cap’n’s eyes.  It wasn’t a
joke!

“Can we start now?” Lemmy asked breathlessly.

The Cap’n bestirred himself instantly.

“It’s high time to be off.  Swing yourself
down and I’ll catch you.”

Lemmy ensconced Nippy quickly in the little perforated box
which he always kept in his pocket for him; then he swung himself
from the wall straight into the Cap’n’s arms.
It seemed so natural and safe to be walking along Outside, ahold
of a Majishun’s hand.

Lemmy’s legs took on a fine stride.

Down the hill they went with never a look behind at those gray
walls, for their eyes were fixed upon the great lake, Superior,
pulsing now under the wonder touch of the southwest wind,
shimmering all the colors of the opal.  There lay the boats
poking up their brightly painted smokestacks for folks to
see.  Down, down, and down, such a short way, and yet, the
wonderful farness of it!

“Here we are at the docks—the Northern Star
waiting for us,” the Cap’n announced presently.

Lemmy swung along a little faster, for there in full sight
were the high ore docks stretching far, far into the water.
Of course they had been “majicked” there.  Thus
the wonder of them was explained.

The Cap’n lifted him to his shoulder and walked along
the abutment to one of the biggest freighters nosing the end of
the dock.

p.
211
“All aboard the Northern Star,” the
Cap’n said, giving him a lift up the ladder.

Lemmy climbed like a little monkey, as fast as he could, for
fear he wouldn’t really get aboard.

Straight up to the bridge the Cap’n took him.
“You can see us load up from here.  Keep your eyes
open and many a sight you’ll see.”  Lemmy heard
the Cap’n’s words as if in a dream.  He looked
wonderingly about him.

On top of the high dock he could see cars full of reddish,
yellowish chunks which the Cap’n called iron ore.
Hurrying about everywhere were the dock workers, smudged from
head to foot with pigment which gave them the look of
pirates.  With quick calls these men loosened the doors in
the bottoms of the cars to let the ore rattle down into the big
pockets in the dock.  But nearer at hand something more
engrossing was happening.  Deck-hands aboard the Northern
Star were opening the hatches.  All along the deck of the
freighter the hatchways yawned ready for the load of ore.
There was a great rattle of cables from above, and down came the
chutes into the hatchways.  Lemmy could see the men on the
dock poking long poles into the pockets to set the ore
sliding.  The first chunks struck the bottom of the hold
thunderingly and then heavy masses came sliding down the chutes
with a steady, rushing sound which thrilled Lemmy like nothing he
had ever heard before.  It was not long before the big
freighter was loaded full of the ore, and one after another the
long chutes were drawn back into place against the dock.
When the men set about closing the hatchways, the Cap’n
took Lemmy below to see his quarters.

p. 212
What
Lemmy saw first when he entered was an old sea chest.

“Have a look in,” the Cap’n suggested,
following Lemmy’s gaze.  “It’s chock-full
of stuff from everywhere.”

He threw back the lid, and Lemmy had a whiff of tar and
tobacco and salt, an indescribable smell, suggesting untold
adventure.  “Chock-full” the chest was of all
manner of wonderful things: compasses and shells, quadrants and
gaudy strips of silk, battered old books, squinty-eyed monkeys
carved out of ivory, long strings of many-colored beads, chains,
silver and copper and gold all strung with bangles—there
was no end to the treasure store.

The Cap’n took a cutlass from the chest and balanced it
upon his nose as easily as he had poised the coin there.

“See here, young ’un,” he said
suddenly.  “You’re old enough to start learning
magic.”

A golden mist swam before Lemmy’s eyes.

“You—you mean to learn to be a
majishun?”

“A sort of A-B-C magician, yes.  Here, take
this!”  He thrust into Lemmy’s hand a carved
ebony ring.  “I’ll show you how to make it
disappear.”

Very patiently, the Cap’n initiated Lemmy into the
rudiments of magic, teaching him how to exhibit with a flourish
before imaginary spectators, then with an adroit pass to make it
disappear until he chose by a swift movement to hold it once more
in full view between his thumb and finger.  The mastery of
the old trick, dependent only upon a little dexterity in
sleight-of-hand, filled Lemmy with enormous pride.  He
glowed with delight at the
p. 213
Cap’n’s applause,
mingled with the easily imagined handclapping from the invisible
audience.  He was lifted far, far away from commonplace
things.  He was a novitiate in a new world of unending
mystery and delight.  He tried to say “thank
you” to the Cap’n, but his gratitude overwhelmed
him.  He could only press the ring back reverently into the
Cap’n’s hand.  There were no words for a thing
such as this.

Then came a noise at the door.  At the
Cap’n’s bidding in walked a burly fellow as big as
the Cap’n himself.

“Look at the young ’un, Andy
McDonald—he’s off with us tonight,” the
Cap’n informed him.

“Bless my soul,” Andy McDonald exclaimed, tousling
Lemmy’s hair, “the Northern Star’s in
luck.”

“Now Andy’ll find you a proper place for Nippy and
I’ll be off on a bit of business before we set
out.”  The Cap’n left him with Andy McDonald,
who knew exactly where to catch flies for Nippy and where to get
pebbles to his liking and where to find just the sort of safe,
dampish corner where he could voyage happily.  And McDonald
was very ingenious at devising quarters which would give Nippy
plenty of room and yet keep him in bounds.

“He might jump overboard in his sleep, you know,
dreamin’ like,” Andy McDonald remarked as he screened
Nippy in.

As soon as Nippy was settled, Andy gave a shrill whistle which
brought Chink, the rat terrier mascot of the boat, tearing to
make Lemmy’s acquaintance.

“He’s got a collar with spikes on it,” Lemmy

p. 214
cried
excitedly.  “And a piece of his ear’s nipped
off!”

“He gets scarred up, Chink does, but he never gets
licked.  Don’t let him get in a row with
Nippy.”

How could Lemmy know that during these enchanted moments with
Andy McDonald the Cap’n was talking with Miss Border about
“parental history” and “hereditary
instincts” and all the rest of the ’Dopters’
secrets?

It was at table that Lemmy saw the Cap’n again—the
head of a feast befitting a Majishun such as he.  Lemmy
tried hard not to gobble, but the chicken was oh, so tender, and
he had never before tasted what the Cap’n called
“kumquats.”  There was so much he couldn’t
possibly eat it all.  He finally gave up trying when the
Cap’n assured him that there would be more tomorrow.

Up on the bridge again Lemmy watched the busy engine haul in
the cables which held the freighter to the dock.  A capable
little tug, which the Cap’n called familiarly
“Sultana,” came to help them head the boat into the
channel.

“We’re off,” cried the Cap’n as the
Sultana chug-chugged away, while with slow majesty the Northern
Star made its way out into the lake.

“Look behind at the Diamond Necklace,” Andy called
to him.  Turning to look back, Lemmy saw the Allouez ore
docks glittering, palpitating, in the fast gathering purple of
the night.  Upon the hill electric signs blazed out
fantastically; here a red sun rising over a green hill, and
farther on a multicolored fan opening and closing with a
bewildering flash; then came a comical, twinkling bucket of shiny
paint which would bubble over.  Past the
p. 215
signs came
rows and rows of lights set regularly like soldiers.

The Northern Star was moving faster now, passing between the
big piers of the canal under the Aërial Bridge past the
lighthouse with revolving signals.

A big passenger boat coming into the harbor passed them
swiftly, giving two long whistles by way of greeting.  Lemmy
caught the tinkle of music and the sound of people laughing on
board—then suddenly they were gone.

Out—out—past all the lights went the Northern Star
straight into the silver white moon path stretching endlessly
across the water.

Lemmy looked up at the winking stars and leaned comfortably
back against the Cap’n’s arm.

“I’m safe now from the ’Dopters,” he
whispered exultantly.

“We’ve given them the slip,” the Cap’n
assured him.  “They’ll never get you
now.”

Dreamily, with his head upon the Cap’n’s shoulder,
Lemmy happily fingered the ebony ring which had somehow
“got majicked” into his pocket.

Aileen Cleveland Higgins
.

p. 216
PREM
SINGH

Prem Singh had company.  When I went in the gathering
dusk to feed the cow I noticed, instead of the usual solitary
figure crouched above the little camp fire in the open, two lean
forms silhouetted against the dancing flames, while a flow of
guttural conversation that broke occasionally into seemingly
excited treble argument mingled with the fragrant smoke from
burning greasewood roots.

“He probably has a letter from India,” I told the
Lady of the Castle, when I went back into the little stone house,
“and has rung in a chap from the gang below to read it to
him.”

“From his brother, probably,” said the Lady.
“He’ll be all excited over it.  You’ll
have to do the milking.”

Her surmise as to the letter was correct, though I
didn’t have to do the milking.

“Letter come China country!  My brother!”
Prem Singh announced exultantly, when he came for the milk
pail.  “Pretty good!”  He ducked his head
sideways in a delighted nod.  “I go milk
now.”

We had known of this brother ever since the Hindu had become
our devoted and isolated adherent.  He was Prem
Singh’s family, the only relative he had in the world.

“My father, mammy, been die,” he had explained to
me.  “Both.  My father, my mammy,
p. 217
two my
sister, my little brother: all one time die.  Too much
sick.  All my uncle, my auntie, everybody die.  Too
many people.  Just me, my big brother, live.  Thass
all.”  From which we gathered that a cholera epidemic
had left the two boys orphans: Prem Singh, now our vassal, and
Kala Singh, half a dozen years older, at present a British
policeman at Shanghai.

It was a poor life, this brother’s, but highly treasured
by the younger brother, who, curiously enough, proved to be the
stable member of the family.  Kala Singh had left a bad
record behind him in India, including a year’s jail
sentence for knifing a co-conspirator in a bank robbery.

“My brother pretty much been marry,” Prem Singh
told me one time, his face clouding over.  “One time
twelve hundred, one time fifteen hundred, dollar—my country
rupee.  All go.”  He snapped his fingers to
illustrate the disappearance of the marriage money into thin
air.  “Too much drink.  Too much
gambler.”

Evidence that the black sheep had never mended his ways was
furnished abundantly in the repeated requests that came for
money, which Prem Singh never refused.

“Mester,” he would usually ask me on the day
succeeding the arrival of a letter from “China
country,” “you two hundred dollar today bank take
off, mice.”  I had never been able to teach him the
use of the possessive “mine”; it was invariably
mice.  “I send money China country.  My
brother.”  Once or twice I remonstrated with him about
this, to no purpose.  After all, it was his own money: the
two dollars a day which, with practically no outgo, added up
month by month in the
p. 218
bank.  A letter from India,
which he told me came from one of his brother’s deserted
wives, proved equally futile, though troubling him for several
days.  Its only ultimate result was to prejudice his young
mind still further against womankind and the institution of
marriage.

“Me?  Not any been marry!” he assured me, his
eyes flashing.  “Never!  All time too much
trouble!  No good.”

Yet he was engaged, one of those betrothals arranged in
infancy by Hindu parents, binding till death.  It hung over
Prem Singh like a sword of Damocles, exiling him forever from his
native land.

“This country pretty good,” he told me
often.  “Girl wait all time my country.  Twenty
year old now, I guess, maybe.  I stay America!  Pretty
good.  Not any go back!”  He shook his head
emphatically.  “Maybe some time my brother come this
country.  Thass good!”  His eyes gleamed at the
pleasant vision.

It was this dream of a reunion with his beloved black sheep of
a brother in the great and good land of America, far from the
cloudy danger of marriage that overhung all India, that more than
any other illumined his long days and lonely evenings on the
California mesa.  He kept aloof from the other Hindus, from
the large camps where they congregated, twenty and thirty
together, for the clearing work that in time was to transform
mesa into orchard land.  He preferred to remain alone,
apart, as my man.

“You pretty good man, Mester,” he told me.
“I all time stay here, please.  I your man.  My
life!”  Then he smiled.  “Maybe some time
my brother come; then two your men!  Both.  Thass
pretty good!”

p. 219
And
now the dream seemed likely to materialize.  When he
returned with the full milk pail, Prem Singh had a question to
ask.  He fidgeted awkwardly about it, remaining in the
kitchen an unconscionable length of time, resting one foot and
then the other.  It came out at last with a rush.

“Mester, how much you think cost ticket, Shanghai this
country?”

“I don’t know, Prem Singh.  I’ll find
out in Los Angeles, if you want.  Steerage?”

“No, Sair!”  He was indignant.
“Not any!  Maybe my brother come this country.
Second class, sure.  Thass pretty good.”

I learned the amount, and it went forward on the next boat by
money order to Kala Singh, care Sikh Temple, Shanghai.  Then
followed for Prem Singh a protracted period of pleasant
anticipation that ended dismally two months later when another
letter arrived from China country, announcing that the money was
gone.

“Too much gambler, my brother,” Prem Singh
confided to me sadly.  “I guess ticket more
better.”

It was a good idea; and the next registered letter carried no
additional money order, but instead a one-way ticket, second
class, from Shanghai.

This was efficacious; and when, six weeks later, another
letter arrived from Shanghai, Prem Singh came to the house in a
tremble of excitement.

“Mester, you know Salina Cruz?  This country?
Canada?  I guess not.  Meeseeco?  I guess
maybe!  My brother come Salina Cruz.  English
read.”  He always used the word “read”
indiscriminately for read or write, reading or writing.

Inclosed with the sheet covered with Indian script was a small
slip bearing a message in
p. 220
English.  “Arrive Salina
Cruz November 29,” it read.  “Send
money.”

“I guess my brother read maybe, himself,”
announced Prem Singh, scanning it closely.  “Pretty
smart man, my brother.  English pretty good speak.  My
country read easy, English read little.  Me not any.
Not smart, me.”  Then he shook his head.
“I guess this not any my brother read.”

I guessed not either.  It was a very fair handwriting
indeed.

“You think all right send money Salina Cruz,
Mester?”

I did not think so, emphatically not.  Prem Singh was in
doubt.  His natural caution warned him against such a
move.  On the other hand his affection for his brother, his
instinctive generosity, his desire to hasten in any way possible
his brother’s approach to the land of promise, urged him
on.  In the end he decided to wait for a more definite
request.

It was not long in coming, arriving in the form of a telegram
almost on the heels of the letter.  “Send seventy
dollars, Kala Singh, care British Consul, Salina Cruz,
Mexico,” the message ran.  Evidently this brother was
no fool.

Prem Singh immediately dispatched a hundred by registered
mail, bemoaning only the fact that the telegraph company would
not transmit money to that point.

Followed another period of waiting—anxious this time,
for why should there be so much delay?—and then the
end.

It is no easy matter for Hindus to enter this country, though
there is as yet no definite Hindu exclusion act.  The
immigration laws already in
p. 221
existence can be so construed, in
accordance with the desires of a certain rabid element of whites
on the Pacific Coast, that it is almost impossible for a turbaned
citizen of Great Britain to enter the United States.  For
the most part those that now drift into this country of ours land
in Canada or Mexico, and straggle across the international line,
running the gauntlet to escape detection.

This Kala Singh attempted.  It was at Christmas time, we
learned through a Hindu who had made the voyage from Shanghai
with him.  Landed at Salina Cruz, they had taken boat again
for Ensenada; thence, working overland, had come to the American
border in the vicinity of Yuma.  The pair had been detected
by the border patrol, pursued, captured, and locked up for the
night in a small jail.  Participating, before daylight, with
men held for greater offenses, in a general jail break, they had
been ordered to halt, and fired upon in the darkness.  Kala
Singh had been found by a chance bullet, and killed
instantly.

“Isn’t there anything we can do?” the Lady
of the Castle asked me when I told her about it.
“Isn’t there anything?”

I went out to where Prem Singh crouched alone over his little
fire of greasewood roots under the great vault of heaven.

“Hello, Mester!” he called listlessly, as I
approached awkwardly.

“Hello, Prem Singh!” I answered.

There was a pause.  “I make my country
bread,” he announced at length, clearing his throat,
obviously manufacturing conversation in order to put me at my
ease; and then, after a little: “I think maybe go back my
country pretty soon.”

p.
222
“Go back to India, Prem Singh?” I was
genuinely surprised.

He nodded affirmation.  “Next month, maybe, I
go,” he said wearily.  “America not very
good.  My country more better.  Maybe bime-by been
marry.”

John Amid
.

p. 223
EVEN
SO

It all happened a century ago.  “On this
day,” the village minister of those other years wrote in
his slow, regular hand—the pages of his journal are yellow
as saffron now, and the ink is faded brown—“on this
day did Captain Hastings sail in command of the Amaryllis, taking
with him as hitherto, poor Christine Widmer, concerning whom
there has been so much talk.  For my own part I cannot be
properly scandalized by their relation.  Certainly the
thought of marriage with one in her condition is not to be
tolerated, and I believe her to be happier with him than
elsewhere.”  Christian charity, indeed!

There have always been men of the Hastings name in the
village.  They came in the days of its first
settlement.  There are a score of them living here at this
very minute.  And, like the most of them in the early years
of the republic, Donald Hastings followed the sea.  Holiest,
impetuous, young, as were so many of those sea captains in that
golden era of the early nineteenth century, he left but one
shadow on his memory—perhaps not altogether a shadow.
Therein lies the story.

Above the junk the masts and spars of a ship loomed in the
moonlight.

Singsong voices swelled to a wild chatter, and
p. 224
the
steering sweep was swung hard over.  But the old junk,
clumsy and slow to obey her helm, remained in the center of the
channel.  For a moment, collision was imminent.  Then
from the deck of that Chinese vessel on the Chu Kiang, one of
thousands as like as their yellow masters, came the sharp
call:

“Ahoy there!  Bear off!”

“Who’s there below?”  A deep voice from
above roared the words in a tone of amazement.

A rattle of commands came down to the junk, hoarse and loud on
the night air.  The Chinese clamored in ducklike harshness
of speech.  Then the slowly turning junk and the veering
ship passed by a margin of inches.  And as they passed,
seven men came scrambling over the bulwarks of the ship to a deck
filled with shadowy figures that gathered in a silent
circle.  Then the circle opened and one man, standing out
from the rest, confronted the seven in the near darkness.

“Well,” said he, in a low, deliberate voice,
“who and what are you?”

“This,” replied the leader of the seven, with a
quick gesture, “is all that is left of the crew of the
Helen of Troy.”

“Ah!”  The voice was cool and
noncommittal.  “Of the Helen of Troy.  Do you
know what ship this is?”

“Who are you?” the man from the junk demanded
suddenly.

The other laughed shortly.  “I—” he
began.

“You are Amos Widmer!”

And Amos Widmer it was.

“Yes, I am Amos Widmer—and you are . . . all that
is left of the crew of the Helen of Troy!”

p. 225
There
was a suggestion of irony in his tone.  He stood there for a
time, smiling queerly in the dusk, and looking past the other,
who faced him with folded arms.  His was not a pleasant
smile.

“Boy,” he said at last in a soft, gentle voice,
“Captain Hastings, of the Helen of Troy, will have the
unoccupied stateroom.  Show him down, and put yourself at
his service.”

There was one porthole to the stateroom, iron gray it seemed,
and a lantern swung from an overhead beam.  When the boy had
gone, Hastings leaned back and surveyed darkly the narrow
confines of the little room.

Then he heard a woman laughing somewhere in the ship, as if a
long way off, and was swept by a flood of conflicting
emotions.

In a way, it had all begun long before, when the Helen of Troy
slipped through the narrows of my old New England port on a day
in early June, the wind abeam, and was passed by a ship outward
bound under full press of canvas.  The scene came back to
Hastings there in the dim light of the stateroom; the New England
shore dark against the yellow sunset; the ship, phantom-like, her
sails barred by shadows of spar and rigging; then the rumbling
voice of the mate of the Helen of Troy: “The Winnemere, as
I’m alive!  It ain’t in nature to be meeting
with her always.  Nagasaki!  Batavia!
Sumatra!  Aye, she sang another tune, though, the night we
passed her in Macassar Strait.”

It seemed to Hastings that he could hear again his own reply,
faint and far off: “There were light winds that
night.  But she’s an able craft in coarse
weather.”  Training his glass at the tall figure on
p. 226
the deck of
the outgoing vessel, he had muttered, “Grin, damn ye,
grin!” and flung back his head with an air of
elation.  Not in ships alone were Donald Hastings and Amos
Widmer rivals.

So the Winnemere had sailed to meet the oncoming dusk, and the
Helen of Troy had come bravely into port.  And there Donald
Hastings had heard an old story, and like many a better man
before him, had gone back to the sea to forget that he ever had
loved.  But one thing he had not been able to forget.

After a time that faint laughter, breaking the pregnant
silence of the little stateroom, came again to Hastings’
ears.  There was in it a strange note that puzzled him, an
unfamiliarity that overbore the lingering familiarity of its
tone.  Presently, as he stood with parted lips, the boy
came, knocking, and asked him to the captain’s cabin.
As he traversed the narrow passage he heard the laughter yet
again, louder now, and more than ever was puzzled by it.
For though it reminded him of Christine Duncan’s voice, it
had a penetrating wildness like no laughter he had heard
before.  He entered the door with his hands half raised, as
if to guard against an unexpected attack.  But the gesture
was needless.  Amos Widmer, calm as Buddha, was seated
already at the oak table.

Smiling softly when his guest appeared, Widmer motioned him to
a chair.  “Now then, boy,” he murmured,
“what has that black scoundrel in the galley got ready for
us?”

And the boy vanished, flinching in the door.

“I did not expect this honor,” Hastings began.

“The honor is mine.”  Unstopping the decanter
on the table, Widmer filled two wine glasses.  “Your
health, sir!” he said.

p.
227
Hastings fingered the stem of his own glass.
Young and hot-headed, versed in rough courtesies and frank
enmities, he was placed at a singular disadvantage by this quiet
man with the eyes of a devil.  “I did not expect this
honor, sir,” he repeated, “or this pleasure.
Your—” his pause was almost
imperceptible—“wife?”

“She is ailing.”

Of the two, Hastings was the less mature, although perhaps
physically the stronger.  Certainly his face, frank,
impetuous, fearless, was the more wholesome.  But lacking
the easy grace and the calm assurance that characterized the
other, he realized a certain want in his own hard schooling that
left him almost powerless in the duel of wits, baffled by a
bewildering subtlety, like a young fencer drilled in the
rudiments, blade to blade, meeting for the first time an opponent
who refuses contact.  There was the same sense of
helplessness, the same mental groping for possible parries and
thrusts, without the comforting rasp of steel on steel, that to
the trained hand and wrist reveals more than sight itself of an
antagonist’s intent.  Once an enemy always an enemy,
unless there were reason otherwise, he had supposed.  He
breathed deeply.

“I am sorry,” he replied.

Self-possessed, yet watching his uninvited guest between
almost imperceptibly narrowed eyelids, Widmer continued casually,
“Yes, she is ailing.  But of yourself?  How came
you here?”

“Our masts were carried away in a typhoon.  The
natives came out, apparently to plunder the waterlogged hull,
but, by the grace of God, human compassion was stirred in their
yellow bellies.  The
p. 228
Helen of Troy was an able
ship—” Hastings eyed Widmer with a touch of patronage
that passed apparently unnoticed “—and a rich cargo
was under her hatches, but there was no way to save
her.”

“I see.”

Hastings fingered the stem of his glass.  Silence filled
the cabin.  Then the boy appeared with a great tray.

“For some reason,” Widmer began after a time,
“I am reminded of a garden, a garden with honeysuckle in
bloom.  There’s a white house by the garden, three
stories high and square as a cube.  Do you remember the
house?  A door with oval-paned side lights?  And the
little pillars?”

Hastings’ face whitened, except for a red spot on each
cheek.  Shoving back his chair, he half rose.
“If you—” he cried.

“Ha! ha!  I see you remember the garden.
Surely you would not resent a mere pleasantry.  That
garden!  How many times we have avoided meeting there, you
and I.  Well, it’s all over now.  Don’t
hold ill will toward me, even though I carried off the queen of
the garden.  Men have loved and lost and laid resentment
aside before now.  It is a bond between us that we have
loved Christine Duncan.  If only she were stronger, how
gladly she would join me in welcoming you.  It is long since
she has been able to receive guests.”  Widmer’s
voice fell, perhaps a trifle more than was natural.
Certainly his eyes never left the flush on Hastings’
face.  But his voice rose again, lightly, as he
resumed.  “Allow me!”  And he proffered the
decanter.

Again the adversary had withdrawn his blade.  Again that
baffling sense of nothing to contend with.

p. 229
When,
late, Hastings returned to his quarters, he heard, in the still
watches of the night, a woman laughing faintly.

Already in the far interior of China the cold fingers of
winter were reaching toward the south, and the northeast monsoon
had settled on the sea.  But where now innumerable
steamships are to be met,—tramps, their iron flanks
streaked with rust; trim liners of Japan, the almost
untranslatable Maru coupled with their names; dingy coasters,
slattern traders, and men of war from half the navies of the
world, a hundred years ago there were only the slow junks and the
white-sailed ships of the Occident, with now and then a
high-sided, square-sterned Dutchman.

The next evening Hastings came on deck and, standing by the
taffrail, gazed long toward Hainan and the sunset.  No boat
was in sight.  Save for a small island that lay a point
abaft the beam, the Winnemere was running before the wind through
an unbroken expanse of water.  Hearing steps, he turned.

It was Widmer.  “A fine evening,” he remarked
in his singularly restrained voice.

“It is, indeed.”

Silence followed.  Since the seven survivors of the Helen
of Troy had come tumbling over the bulwarks of the Winnemere
there had been many such silent moments.  Always the words
exchanged by the two captains were like those tentative thrusts
with which the fencer tries the mettle of his opponent.

“It is a pleasure to be able to bring home the crew of
the Helen of Troy,” Widmer said, slowly, covertly watching
the other’s face.  “I remember
p. 230
when you
left us in Macassar Strait.  The Winnemere was always a slow
craft in light winds.  Your men like to tell the story of
that race.”

Hastings, red of face, made no reply.

“Yes, there was much talk of that race.  You beat
us on the run up from the Horn another time—that story,
too, became well known.  Remarkably well known.”

Looking off at the single island, a dark blot on the shining
sea, Widmer laughed softly.

“There was another race, however: a race by land.
There was a prize for that race, such a prize!”
Facing about at Hastings, he bit his mustache angrily.
“Well, though the prize was rotten at the heart, I won it,
by God!” he whispered.

Hastings turned, his fists clenched, but Widmer, the tension
of his face departing like a shadow, raised his hand and stepped
two paces back.  “Be careful, Captain Hastings.
A single blow, and you would find yourself in the
lazarette.  You have the freedom of the ship,
but—merely a hint, Captain Hastings, as from friend to
friend—guests on this ship have found it unwholesome to
leave the straight path from their stateroom to the deck.
Ships have many eyes.”  Widmer paused.  “It
will be a rare pleasure to bring home the captain of the Helen of
Troy, but if necessary—”  Leaving the sentence
unfinished, he smiled and strolled away.

And that night, when he should have been asleep, again
Hastings heard the woman laughing.

The breath of the monsoon stirred the sea from Hie-che-chin to
Vanguard Bank, and leagues and leagues beyond.  In the
moonlight the waves came rolling up in mountains of silver,
vanishing again
p.
231
into the farther darkness, in never-ending
succession.  They swept past the Winnemere as, with all sail
set, she bore down the China Sea, past her and away into the
distance like shoals of fish tumbling in the water, and when they
had gone a long journey they came to a derelict hull, and tossed
it and turned it, and bore it on.

When Widmer had gone on deck, Hastings emerged from his narrow
quarters and made his way swiftly through the now familiar cabin,
through the captain’s own stateroom, to the single door
beyond.  He heard, indistinctly from behind the closed door,
only a confusion of small sounds, the rustle of skirts, the faint
noise of some wooden object pushed along the floor, then the
murmur of a voice.  “Hush,” it said, very
softly, “little one, . . . little one . . . ”
Then it broke and rose suddenly to a small, plaintive cry.
“He isn’t here, . . . where can he be? . . . little
one! . . . little one!”

With shaking hand Hastings fumbled for the latch, found it,
and pushed, then pulled, but the oaken door did not yield.

Then from within came that low, strange laughter, and the
voice, singularly restrained now, “little one . . . little
one!”

Startled by footsteps on deck just outside the companionway,
Hastings turned back through the darkness to his stateroom, and
closed the door very gently as the companionway was shadowed by
the form of some one descending.

Almost stifled by the confinement of the room, he went on
deck, when the way was clear, and leaned over the weather rail,
with the wind and the flying spray beating hard against his
face.
p.
232
But even so, he felt, strangely, that the air was close
and that he was restricted by something at once vague, yet
paradoxically definite.  By and by, wandering amidships, he
found the second mate, late promoted from the forecastle, smoking
comfortably by the mainmast, and glad of a chance to beguile the
watch with friendly conversation.

So foreign to Hastings’ blunt directness was the finesse
of intrigue that even the unsuspecting mate was not drawn off his
guard.  Coming, as he thought, adroitly to the subject that
filled his mind, Hastings was surprised by the sudden change in
the second officer’s attitude.

“I suppose,” he had remarked, in a voice carefully
casual, “Captain Widmer has no children.”

The officer’s attitude seemed all at once a little less
friendly.  Raising his eyes to the dark heavens, he
remarked, “It’s a raw night, for all there’s no
great of a wind.”

“I suppose,” Hastings repeated, more loudly,
“Captain Widmer—”

“It’s al’ays seemed hard lines to me that
the Lord didn’t put monsoons in the north Atlantic.
Think o’ the good they’d do thereabouts!  To be
sure, typhoons is a curse.  But there’s the trades,
say.  Now, if the Lord had only seed fit—”

“Damn the trades, I say.  Did Captain Widmer ever
have a child?”

The other took his pipe from his mouth and eyed the master of
the Helen of Troy speculatively.  “It don’t do,
sir,” he replied, with a cautious glance about, “to
ask questions aboard this vessel.  A child, you say?
There was a child.  But—” again glancing aft,
the man lowered his voice to a whisper, “I mistrust it
warn’t his’n.”

p. 233
The
next day the two captains met for the first time at dinner in the
cabin, Hastings silent, Widmer smiling with his lips, in spite of
mirthless eyes.

For a time neither spoke.  The boy, in mute testimony to
the fit of ill temper that had beset Widmer, scurried hack and
forth in obvious terror.  As the ship rolled, the water in
the glasses and the wine in the decanter rocked this way and
that.  It was Widmer, as usual, who broke the silence.
“I have heard,” he said in his low voice, “that
some one was listening outside my door last night.  If any
man in my crew were caught there, I’d have him pitched to
the sharks.”

“Do you mean that I—”

“Yes, sir, I’d have him pitched to the
sharks.  There is no occasion for excitement.
Certainly no guest of mine would be guilty of anything like
that.  I should not like to be under the necessity of
sending a guest of mine forward.  But as sure as my name is
Amos Widmer, if it comes to action I’ll act with the best
of them—or the worst.”

Then Hastings smiled.  “It would indeed be a
singular circumstance that would force a gentleman—”
the stress on the word was ever so slight—“to take
such measures with a guest.”

So deep the silence, as they finished the meal, that each
heard twice the faint ripple of a woman’s laugh.

With all her canvas set, the Winnemere swept on down the long
line dotted on the charts, to Singapore and Malacca Strait; and
off among the islands, with the stumps of her broken masts rising
from the seas that washed her decks, lay the hull of the Helen of
Troy.

Evening came, and again the two sat opposite
p. 234
each other
at the cabin table.  But this time Hastings was the more
taciturn.  After the manner of many an outspoken man who
becomes all at once aware that he has been made game of, he
withdrew into a silence that, half unwittingly, met Widmer at his
own game.  And Widmer, with that unpleasant light in his
eyes, again masked himself with exaggerated courtesy.

“Who would have thought—” his voice was
unnaturally smooth as he repeated the sentence for the twentieth
time, lingering over the irony of each phrase, “—who
would have thought that I should have the honor of bringing home
Captain Hastings, of the Helen of Troy!”  Then he
laughed shortly.

Hastings raised his glass, as if unaware that he had been
addressed.

“Such an honor!” Widmer continued.
“Think of it.  More than once I’ve raced the
Helen of Troy and been beaten.  And a good many times more
than once I’ve seen Donald Hastings sitting in the garden
by the white house, and have gone away and left him there.
But there was a time when Donald Hastings found the gate open and
the garden empty.  And now the time is come when all that is
left of the crew of the Helen of Troy is right glad of passage on
the Winnemere.”

If there was any indication that Hastings was listening to the
other’s words, it was only in the tension of his fingers as
they pressed the table top, and in the whiteness of his
knuckles.

But Widmer, speaking at intervals as if to probe for some most
sensitive nerve center, went on, his eyes fixed on
Hastings’ forehead: “An empty garden—and now
the Helen of Troy is gone—it would be an honor indeed to
bring him home,
p.
235
but an empty honor, after all—what if he never
came home—if—!”  Suddenly he lowered his
eves until they looked into Hastings’ own.  “My
wife, sir,” he said with fierce intensity, “cried the
day I married her, cried at her wedding, shed a bucket of
tears.  Tears are no wedding flummery, sir.  I
didn’t know then why it was.  But I know now.  Do
you hear?  I
know
, damn it,
know
.”

Once again Hastings felt the rasp of steel, and closed to the
combat in a manner worthy of his opponent’s saner
moments.  “If you mean to imply—”

Before his slow speech was past his lips, Widmer interrupted
him, changing his expression so facilely that Hastings felt again
that sense of losing all touch with the blade that maneuvered for
his weakness: “I beg you to pardon me.  I was
excited.  Of course I imply nothing.  Nothing that you
would be guilty of.”

And Hastings, quicker of hand than of brain, tried again to
follow that baffling change of front.  He was gaining
experience in that other school of fence, and was not so easily
evaded now.

Throughout the meal he studied Widmer cautiously.  Thin
mouth, cold eyes, an outward politeness itself threatening by the
suggestion of what lay behind it.  He had known the
man’s reputation of old; the ever-present apprehension of
the cabin boy, the servility of the mate, the silence of the
crew, all went to bear it out.

Yes, each knew; and each knew, unconfessed, that the other
knew.  All night the thought haunted Hastings.  He
recalled numerous half-spoken sentences fraught with scarcely
concealed meaning, and others, outspoken and direct, that made no

p. 236
pretense
of concealment.  He had come back to the sea to forget that
he ever had loved, but, after all, he could not forget.  He
even doubted if the girl had forgotten.  Such dreams as they
had dreamed together do not vanish overnight.  He saw her on
the porch of the old house, by the slim, white pillars.  He
remembered her in the garden sweet with honeysuckle.  On the
wharf, by the church door, here, there, everywhere, among the
familiar scenes of the old town, she appeared in the eyes of his
memory.  Then like a dark cloud came the memory of a certain
night—and the strange laughter, the locked door, and the
words he had heard her say.

At noon next day Widmer was gay.  He laughed and joked,
and seemed unaware of Hastings’ silence.  At night he
gave himself up again to a politeness elaborate and
artificial.  But through it all Hastings felt a certain
threatening undertone.  And Widmer, taking no chances, gave
secret orders, quite as if he had not fathomed Hastings and found
him shallow to the lead.

The sun set in a blaze of fire, shooting great beams of light
far into the heavens, and the moon rose in a pale halo.  A
junk in the offing tossed on the long swell that rolled away into
the distance, and the WVinnemere, her braces rattling as they
ran, leaned easily before the wind that swept the gray sea.
The sky changed from blue to scarlet, from scarlet to flaming
gold, and from gold, as the night set in, to sea green and steel
blue.  The ship’s lanterns twinkled in the dusk; the
stars came out thickly overhead; and presently, as the moon
climbed above the horizon, its wan light thinly illuminated the
decks of the ship and the towering structure of masts and spars
and canvas and cordage.

p. 237
Late
at night, when all was quiet, Hastings crept out of his
berth.  For a time he could hear only the straining of
ropes, the creaking of blocks, and the whisper of the sea.
Then he heard the sound of some one sobbing.  Then the sound
changed to that low laugh.

That laugh!  He had half expected, half feared, to hear
it.  He felt within himself the sharp palpitation stimulated
by quick, intense emotion, that for want of a better name we call
leaping of the heart.  With a quick motion he started
forward in the darkness, but his feet struck something
soft.  It was the little cabin boy, asleep on a folded
blanket.  Uttering a cry, the lad scrambled to his feet and
fled up the companionway.

For a moment there was silence, heavy and suspicious, then,
out of the dark, came Widmer’s calm challenge.
“What does this mean?”

Again silence ensued.  The slow opening of a shutter,
through which a few rays of light had been struggling feebly,
suffused the scene with a dim, yellow glow.  Hastings, his
knees slightly bent, his hands raised as for attack or defense,
his lips parted, was confronted by Amos Widmer, who stood with
folded arms, smiling softly.

“What does this mean?” he repeated, in the same
low, calm voice.

Taken at an overwhelming disadvantage, Hastings’ mind,
groping, could summon no reply.

Down the companionway came only the familiar sounds of a ship
at sea, the creaking of blocks and braces, the low voices of the
watch, the whisper of the ocean.

“So, sir, you presume upon my hospitality!”

“There are laws—” Hastings’ voice was
thick—“that override the laws of
‘hospitality.’”

p.
238
“I fear, sir, you are little versed in the
customs of gentlemen.”  And Widmer, measuring the
effect of the retort, let the smile creep to his eyes.

Drawing himself erect, Hastings stepped forward until the
shadow of the casement fell across his face and masked it, but
although he said nothing, Widmer persisted.

“Gentlemen have a code of their own.  And when a
man fails to meet that code, it is sometimes necessary to teach
him a painful lesson.”

Another pause followed, then, clearly and distinctly, a shrill
laugh from somewhere beyond the cabin sounded on the night
air.

“Gentlemen—” Widmer’s sneering voice
began again, but the sentence was not finished.

An outthrust hand flung back the shutter.  There was a
quick movement in the sudden darkness, a hoarse gasp, a strange
sound that frightened the little cabin boy, who had thrown
himself, belly down, by the open hatch overhead, then from above
came the lookout’s voice, sharp with warning.

“Sail ho!”

“Where away?”

“Dead ahead!  Something afloat under the
bows!”

“Where—”

“Wear ship—put down your helm!”

A third voice broke into the dialogue: “What’s all
this?  There’s nothing there.”

“I tell you, sir, I see it—  There it lifts,
by heaven!”

All at once came a crash and shock that sent the
mizzen-topmast by the board, and hurled men from their
feet.  For a moment there was silence, then that shrill yell
sounded, that wrings hearts:

“Man overboard!”

p. 239
The
trample of feet was broken by the voice of the mate:

“All hands on deck!”  Then the voice came
down the hatch into the darkness below: “Captain
Widmer!  Captain Widmer!  For God’s sake, come
up!  We’ve run afoul a derelict!”

But from Amos Widmer there was no reply.

Instead, as the boats were launched by the pale light of the
crescent moon, and the Winnemere, listing heavily to port,
settled rapidly, the captain of the Helen of Troy appeared by the
after port davits, with a woman wrapped in a loose cloak.

And when the boats were in the water Donald Hastings and the
woman in the loose cloak sat in the sternsheets of the third to
be launched.  And the men, as they rowed, heard snatches of
the woman’s talk, which was about a child; how some one had
cursed it and its father, and how the child was gone now.
Sometimes the woman laughed a strange laugh that the men did not
like, but they were only sailors, so they rowed on into the night
and asked no questions.

By and by they rested on their oars and, looking back, saw an
extraordinary sight.  Revealed in the faint moonlight, the
Winnemere, sinking by the head, set at defiance the natural laws
of ships upon the sea.  At first it seemed as if her masts
were being raked forward, then her stern rose, then, without
sound or sign, she went under with all sail set.  And from
somewhere came a whisper that the derelict with the two
upstanding stumps of masts, which went rolling down the wind, was
all that was left of the Helen of Troy.  All—but
victorious.

The first sunrise coming slowly on the track
p. 240
of daylight
found the boats, a little group of dark spots in the vast plain
of the sea, held together, apparently, by something of that same
magnetic power that leads two bits of cork to adhere each to
each.  When the sun rose again, they were scattered over
miles of gray ocean.  When the third day broke from a sky
banked with clouds, only two boats were to be seen—two
boats and a single sail small on the horizon.

The sail grew and took shape.  Out of the borderland
between sea and sky came a bark flying the flag of England.
Presently, as she headed into the wind, the woman, lying in
Donald Hastings’ arms, saw dimly the faces lined above the
rail, then was lifted on board and carried into the cabin.

“Donald,” she whispered in quiet happiness,
“Oh, Donald!”  Her voice changed.
“But the baby!  He was angry about the baby: your
baby—our baby.”  And she laughed that strange
laugh.

The sun, forcing its way through the clouds, touched the dark
brown paneling with golden light.  In the silence of the
cabin the voices on deck were distinctly audible.  “He
was that cruel to his wife!” some one was saying.
“All of us was glad enough to see him left.”
But only a fragment of the narrative came to the little group
below.

The woman, oblivious to all but Donald Hastings, raised
herself on her elbow:

“I waited—oh, so long!  And you never
came!”

“Don’t!  I came—too late.”
He dropped on his knees beside the berth in which she had been
laid.  “I will!  I will marry you!”

Again she laughed that strange, low laugh.  The captain
of the bark, his medicine chest open before him, shook his
head.  “You’ll not
p. 241
marry her,” he muttered.
“It’ll not be allowed.  You’ve but to hear
her to know that.”

“I will,” Hastings cried, wildly.
“There’s little enough a man can do to atone for
great wrong.”

“You’re overwrought, sir.  You don’t
know what you’re saying.”

And Christine Widmer laughed again.

There was indeed no wedding.  Not often is the path of
atonement made broad and easy.  Instead, the story of my old
New England town came to pass, the story of a man who provided
for his enemy’s wife as if she were his own.  For in
the years to come there sailed with Donald Hastings a woman who
laughed strangely at times, and talked of something other people
pretended to have forgotten.  And Donald Hastings, the
marriage forbidden, gave her the rest of his life, covering her
lapses of speech by quick wit and ever-remembering kindness,
making her seem almost like other women, and placing out of his
own reach forever the fellowship of those who called themselves
honest folk.

It all happened a hundred years ago.  Stories, good and
bad,—mostly bad,—were told of them then, and have
been told ever since.  Such is the world’s way.
And of Amos Widmer it was known only that he was lost at sea when
the Winnemere went down.  Who of us can say what accountings
are to be made on that day when the good and evil are balanced,
when things forgotten are remembered, and things unknown are
brought to light?

“On this noon,” wrote the village minister in that
rare old diary of his, “did Captain Hastings
p. 242
sail in
command of the Amaryllis, taking with him, as hitherto, poor
Christine Widmer.”  Then, in the intimate privacy of
the book, he adds—wise, rash, cautious old man: “I am
almost of a mind, since things are as they are, that it is for
the best,—even so.”

Charles Boardman Hawes
.

p. 243
THE
CASK ASHORE

At the head of a diminutive creek of the Tamar River, a little
above Saltash on the Cornish shore, stands the village of
Botusfleming, or Bloflemy, and in early summer, when the cherry
orchards come into bloom, you will search far before finding a
prettier.

The years have dealt gently with Botusfleming.  As it is
today, so, or nearly so, it was on a certain sunny afternoon in
the year 1807, when the Rev. Edward Spettigew, curate in charge,
sat in the garden before his cottage and smoked his pipe while he
meditated a sermon.  That is to say, he intended to meditate
a sermon.  But the afternoon was warm; bumblebees hummed
drowsily among his wallflowers and tulips.  From his bench
the eye followed the vale’s descent between overlapping
billows of cherry blossom to a gap wherein shone the silver
Tamar: not, be it understood, the part called Hamoaze, where lay
the warships and the hulks containing the French prisoners, but
an upper reach seldom troubled by shipping.

Parson Spettigew laid the book face downward on his knee while
his lips murmured a part of the text he had chosen: “A
place of broad rivers and streams . . . wherein shall go no
galley with oars, neither shall gallant ship pass thereby. . .
.”  His pipe went out.  The book slipped from his
knee to the ground.  He slumbered . . .

p. 244
The
garden gate rattled, and he awoke with a start.  In the
pathway below him stood a sailor, a middle-sized, middle-aged
man, rigged out in best shore-going clothes: shiny tarpaulin hat,
blue coat and waistcoat, shirt open at the throat, and white duck
trousers with broad-buckled waistbelt.

“Beggin’ your reverence’s pardon,”
began the visitor, touching the brim of his hat, and then upon
second thought uncovering, “but my name’s Jope, Ben
Jope—”

“Eh?  What can I do for you?” asked Parson
Spettigew, a trifle flustered at being caught napping.

“—of the Vesoovious bomb, bos’n,”
pursued Mr. Jope, with a smile that disarmed annoyance: so
ingenuous it was, so friendly, and withal so respectful;
“but paid off at eight this morning.  Maybe your
reverence can tell me whereabouts to find an embalmer in these
parts?”

“A—a what?”

“Embalmer.”  Mr. Jope chewed for a moment or
two upon a quid of tobacco, and began a thoughtful
explanation.  “Sort of party you’d go to
supposin’ your reverence had a corpse by you and wanted to
keep it for a permanency.  You take a lot of gums and
spices, and first of all you lays out the deceased, and
next—”

“Yes, yes,” the parson interrupted, hurriedly;
“I know the process, of course.”

“What—to practice it?”  Hope illumined
Mr. Jope’s countenance.

“No, most certainly not. . . .  But, my good man,
an embalmer!—and at Botusfleming, of all places!”

The sailor’s face fell.  He sighed patiently.

p.
245
“That’s what they said at Saltash, more or
less.  I got a sister living there—Sarah Treleaven her
name is—a widow woman, and sells fish.  When I called
on her this morning, ‘Embalmer?’ she said; ‘go
and embalm your grandmother!’  Those were her words,
and the rest of the population wasn’t scarcely more
helpful.  But as luck would have it, while I was
searchin’, Bill Adams went for a shave, and inside o’
the barber’s shop what should he see but a fair-sized otter
in a glass case.  Bill began to admire it, careless like,
and it turned out the barber had stuffed the thing.  Maybe
your reverence knows the man?  ‘A. Grigg and
Son’ he calls his-self.”

“Grigg?  Yes, to be sure; he stuffed a trout for me
last summer.”

“What weight?—making so bold.”

“Seven pounds.”

Mr. Jope’s face fell again.
“Well-a-well,” he suggested, recovering himself,
“I daresay the size don’t matter, once you’ve
got the knack.  We’ve brought him along, anyway;
an’ what’s more, we’ve made him bring all his
tools.  By his talk, he reckons it to be a shavin’
job, and we agreed to wait before we undeceived him.”

“But—you’ll excuse me—I don’t
quite follow—”

Mr. Jope pressed a forefinger mysterious to his lip, then
jerked a thumb in the direction of the river.  “If
your reverence wouldn’ mind steppin’ down to the
creek with me?” he suggested, respectfully.

Parson Spettigew fetched his hat, and together the pair
descended the vale beneath the dropping petals of the
cherry.  At the foot of it they came
p. 246
to a creek,
which the tide at this hour had flooded and almost
overbrimmed.  Hard by the water’s edge, backed by tall
elms, stood a dilapidated fish store, and below it lay a boat
with nose aground on a beach of flat stones.  Two men were
in the boat.  The barber, a slip of a fellow in rusty top
hat and suit of rusty black, sat in the stern sheets face to face
with a large cask: a cask so ample that, to find room for his
knees, he was forced to crook them at a high, uncomfortable
angle.  In the bows, boathook in hand, stood a tall sailor,
arrayed in shore-going clothes, similar to Mr.
Jope’s.  His face was long, sallow, and expressive of
taciturnity, and he wore a beard, not where beards are usually
worn, but as a fringe beneath his clean-shaven chin and lantern
jaw.

“Well, here we are!” asserted Mr. Jope,
cheerfully.  “Your reverence knows A. Grigg and Son,
and the others you can trust in all weathers, bein’ William
Adams, otherwise Bill, and Eli Tonkin: friends o’ mine
an’ shipmates both.”

The parson, perplexed, stared at the tall seaman, who touched
his hat by way of acknowledging the introduction.

“But—but I only see one!” he protested.

“This here’s Bill Adams,” said Mr. Jope, and
again the tall seaman touched his hat.  “Is it Eli
you’re missin’?  Eli’s in the
cask.”

“Oh!”

“We’ll hoick him up to the store, Bill, if
you’re ready.  It looks a nice cool place.  And
while you’re prizin’ him open, I’d best explain
to his reverence and the barber.  Here, ship out the shore
plank; and you, A. Grigg and Son, lend a hand to heave. . .
.  Aye, you’re right; it weighs more’n
p. 247
a
trifle—bein’ a quarter-puncheon, an’ the best
proof sperrits.  Tilt her
this
way. . . .
Ready? . . .  Then w’y-ho! and away she
goes!”

With a heave and a lurch that canted the boat until the water
poured over her gunwale, the huge tub was rolled overside into
shallow water.  With a run and a tremendous lift they
hoisted it up to the turfy plat, whence Bill Adams steered it
with ease through the ruinated doorway of the store, while Mr.
Jope returned, smiling and mopping his brow.

“It’s this-a-way,” he said, addressing the
parson.  “Eli Tonkin his name is, or was; and, as he
said, of this parish.”

Here Mr. Jope paused, apparently for confirmation.

“Tonkin?” queried the parson.  “There
are no Tonkins surviving in Botusfleming parish.  The last
of them was a poor old widow I laid to rest the week after
Christmas.”

“Belay there! . . .  Dead, is she?”  Mr.
Jope’s face exhibited the liveliest disappointment.
“And after the surprise we’d planned for her!”
he murmured ruefully.  “Hi, Bill!” he called to
his shipmate, who, having stored the cask, was returning to the
boat.

“Wot is it?” asked Bill Adams,
inattentively.  “Look ’ere, where did we stow
the hammer an’ chisel?”

“Take your head out o’ the boat an’
listen.  The old woman’s dead!”

The tall man absorbed the news slowly.
“That’s a facer,” he said at length.
“But maybe we can fix her up, too?  I’ll stand
my share.”

“She was buried the week after Christmas.”

p.
248
“Oh!”  Bill scratched his head.
“Then we can’t—not very well.”

“Times an’ again I’ve heard Eli talk of his
poor old mother,” said Mr. Jope, turning to the
parson.  “W’ch you’ll hardly believe it,
but though I knowed him for a West-country man, ’twas not
till the last I learned what parish he hailed from.  It
happened very curiously—Bill, rout up A. Grigg and Son,
an’ fetch him forra’d here to listen; you’ll
find the tools underneath him in the stern sheets.”

Bill obeyed, and, possessing himself of a hammer and chisel,
returned to the shore.  The little barber drew near and
stood at Mr. Jope’s elbow; his face wore an unhealthy
pallor and he smelt potently of strong drink.

“Brandy it is,” apologized Mr. Jope, observing a
slight contraction of the parson’s nostril.  “I
reckoned ’twould tauten him a bit for what’s ahead. .
. .  Well, as I was sayin’, it happened very
curiously.  This day fortnight we were beatin’ up
an’ across the Bay o’ Biscay, after a four
months’ to-an’-fro game in front of Toolon
Harbor.  Blowin’ fresh it was, an’ we
makin’ pretty poor weather of it—the Vesoovious
bein’ a powerful wet tub in anything of a sea, an’ a
slug at the best o’ times.  Aboard a bombship
everything’s got to be heavy.

“Well, sir, for a couple of days she’d been
carryin’ canvas that fairly smothered us, an’
Cap’n Crang not a man to care how we fared forra’d,
so long’s the water didn’ reach aft to his own
quarters.  But at last the first mate, Mr. Wapshott, took
pity on us an’—the Cap’n bein’ below,
a-takin’ a nap after dinner—sends the crew o’
the maintop aloft to take a reef in the tops’l.  Poor
Eli was one. Whereby the men had scarcely reached the top
p. 249
afore
Cap’n Crang comes up from his cabin an’ along the
deck, not troublin’ to cast an eye aloft.  Whereby he
missed what was happenin’.  Whereby he had just come
abreast o’ the mainmast, when—sock at his very feet
there drops a man!  ’Twas Eli, that had missed his
hold an’ dropped clean on his skull.
‘Hallo!’ says the cap’n, ‘an’ where
the deuce might you come from?’  Eli heard
it—poor fellow—an’ says he, as I lifted him,
answerin’ very respectful, ‘If you please, sir, from
Botusfleming, three miles t’other side of
Saltash.’

“‘Then you’ve had a mighty quick passage,
that’s all I can say,’ answers Cap’n Crang,
an’ turns on his heel.

“Well, sir, we all agreed the cap’n might
ha’ showed more feelin’, specially as poor
Eli’d broke the base of his skull an’ by eight bells
handed in the number of his mess.  Five or six of us talked
it over, agreein’ as how ’twasn’ hardly human,
an’ Eli such a good fellow, too, let alone bein’ a
decent seaman.  Whereby the notion came to me that as
he’d come from Botusfleming—those bein’ his
last words—back to Botusfleming he should go; an’ on
that we cooked up a plot.  Bill Adams bein’ on duty in
the sick bay, there wasn’ no difficulty in sewin’ up
a dummy in Eli’s place; an’ the dummy, sir,
nex’ day we dooly committed to the deep,—as the
sayin’ goes,—Cap’n Crang hisself readin’
the service.  The real question was what to do with
Eli.  Whereby, the purser an’ me bein’ friends,
I goes to him an’ says, ‘Look here,’ I says,
‘we’ll be paid off in ten days or so, an’
there’s a trifle o’ prize money, too.  What
price’ll you sell us a cask o’ the ship’s
rum?—say a quarter-puncheon for choice?’
‘What for?’ says he.  ‘For shore-going
p.
250
purposes,’ says I; ‘Bill Adams an’ me
got a use for it.’  ‘Well,’ says the
purser,—a decent chap, an’ by name
Wilkins,—’I’m an honest man,’ says he,
‘an’ to oblige a friend you shall have it at store
valuation rate.  An’ what’s more,’ says
he, ‘I got the wind o’ your little game, an’ll
do what I can to help it along, for I al’ays liked the
deceased, an’ in my opinion Cap’n Crang behaved most
unfeelin’.  You tell Bill to bring the body to me,
an’ there’ll be no more trouble about it till I hands
you over the cask at Plymouth.’  Well, sir, the man
was as good as his word.  We smuggled the cask ashore last
evenin’, an’ hid it in the woods this side o’
Mount Edgcumbe.  This mornin’ we reshipped it, as you
see.  First along we intended no more than just to break the
news to Eli’s mother an’ hand him over to her; but
Bill reckoned that to hand him over, cask an’ all, would
look careless; for, as he said, ‘’Twasn’t as if
you could bury ’im in a cask.’  We allowed your
reverence would draw the line at that, though we hadn’ the
pleasure o’ knowin’ you then.”

“Yes,” agreed the parson, as Mr. Jope paused;
“I fear it could not be done without scandal.”

“That’s just how Bill put it.  ‘Well,
then,’ says I, thinkin’ it over, ‘why not do
the handsome while we’re about it?  You an’ me
ain’t the sort of men,’ I says, ‘to spoil the
ship for a ha’porth o’ tar.’
‘Certainly we ain’t,’ says Bill, ‘and
we’ve done a lot for Eli,’ says I.  ‘We
have,’ says Bill.  ‘Well, then,’ says I,
‘let’s put a coat o’ paint on the whole
business an’ have him embalmed!’  Bill was
enchanted.”

“I—I beg your pardon?” put in the barber,
edging away a pace.

p.
251
“Bill was enchanted.  Hark to him in the
store, there—knockin’ away at the chisel.”

“But there’s some misunderstanding,” the
little man protested, earnestly.  “I understood it was
to be a shave.”

“You can shave him, too, if you like.”

“If I th-thought you were s-serious—”

“Have some more brandy.”  Mr. Jope pulled out
and proffered a flask.  “Only don’t overdo it,
or it’ll make your head shaky.  Serious?  You may
lay to it that Bill’s serious.  He’s that set on
the idea, it don’t make no difference to him—as you
may have noticed—Eli’s mother not bein’ alive
to take pleasure in it.  Why, he wanted to embalm her,
too!  He’s doin’ this now for his own
gratification, is Bill; an’ you may take it from me when
Bill sets his heart on a thing he sees it through.
Don’t you cross him—that’s my
advice.”

“But, but—”

“No, you don’t!”—as the little man
made a wild spring to flee up the beach Mr. Jope shot out a hand
and gripped him by the coat collar.  “Now, look
here,” he said very quietly, as the poor wretch would have
groveled at the parson’s feet, “you was
boastin’ to Bill, not an hour agone, as you could stuff
anything.”

“Don’t hurt him,” Parson Spettigew
interposed, touching Mr. Jope’s arm.

“I’m not hurtin’ him, your reverence,
only—Eli?  What’s that?”

All turned their faces toward the store.

“Your friend is calling to you,” said the
parson.

“Bad language, too?—that’s not like Bill, as
a rule.  Ahoy, there!  Bill!”

“Ahoy!” answered the voice of Mr. Adams.

p.
252
“What’s up?”  Without waiting
for an answer, Mr. Jope ran the barber before him up the beach to
the doorway, the parson following.  “What’s
up?” he demanded again, as he drew breath.

“Take an’ see for yourself,” answered Mr.
Adams, darkly, pointing with his chisel.  A fine fragrance
of rum permeated the air of the store.

Mr. Jope advanced and peered into the staved cask.
“Gone?” he exclaimed, and gazed around blankly.

Bill Adams nodded.

“But where? . . . You don’t say he’s
dissolved?”

“It ain’t the usual way o’ rum.  And it
is rum?”  Bill appealed to the parson.

“By the smell, undoubtedly.”

“I tell you what’s happened.  That fool of a
Wilkins has made a mistake in the cask . . . ”

“An’ Eli?—oh Lord!  Eh?” gasped
Mr. Jope.

“They’ll have returned Eli to the
Victuallin’ Yard before this,” said Bill,
gloomily.

“I overheard Wilkins sayin’ as he was to pass over
all stores an’ accounts at nine-thirty this
mornin’.”

“An’ once there, who knows where he’s got
mixed?  He’ll go the round of the Fleet, maybe.
Oh, my word! an’ the ship that broaches him!”

Bill Adams opened his mouth and shut it, finding no speech;
opened it again, and: “They’ll reckon they got a
lucky bag,” he said, weakly.

“An’ Wilkins paid off with the rest, an’ no
address.  Even if he could help, which I doubt.”

“Eh?  I got a note from Wilkins, as it
happens.”  Bill Adams took off his tarpaulin hat and
extracted a paper from the lining of the crown.
p. 253
“He
passed it down to me this mornin’ as I pushed off from the
ship.  Said I was to keep it, an’ maybe I’d find
it useful.  I wondered what he meant at the time, me
takin’ no particular truck with pursers ashore. . . .
It crossed my mind, as I’d heard he meant to get married,
that maybe he wanted me to stand best man at the
weddin’.  W’ich I didn’ open the note at
the time, not likin’ to refuse him after he’d behaved
so well to us.”

“Pass it over,” commanded Mr. Jope.  He took
the paper and unfolded it, but either the light was dim within
the store, or the handwriting hard to decipher.

“Would your reverence read it out for us?”

Parson Spettigew carried the paper to the doorway.  He
read its contents aloud and slowly:

“To Mr. Bill Adams,

Capt. of the Fore-top H.M.S.
Vesuvius,

“Sir: It was a dummy Capt. Crang buried.  We cast
the last E. Tonkin overboard the second night in lat. 46-30,
long. 7-15, or thereabouts.  By which time the feeling
aboard had cooled down and it seemed such a waste of good
spirit.  The rum you paid for is good rum.  Hoping that
you and Mr. Jope will find a use for it.

“Your obedient servant,

“S.
Wilkins
.”

There was a long pause, through which Mr. Adams could be heard
breathing hard.

“But what are we to do with it?” asked Mr. Jope,
scratching his head in perplexity.

“Drink it.  Wot else?”

“But where?”

“Oh,” said Mr. Adams, “anywhere!”

p.
254
“That’s all very well,” replied his
friend.  “You never had no property, an’
don’t know its burdens.  We’ll have to hire a
house for this, an’ live there till it’s
finished.”

Sir Arthur T.
Quiller-Couch
.

***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BELLMAN BOOK OF FICTION***

***** This file should be named 57322-h.htm or 57322-h.zip******

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/5/7/3/2/57322

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.