The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Sufferings and Escape of Capt. Chas. H.
Brown From an Awful Imprisonment by Chilian Convicts, by Chas. H. Brown

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Sufferings and Escape of Capt. Chas. H. Brown From an Awful Imprisonment by Chilian Convicts

Author: Chas. H. Brown

Release Date: July 7, 2018 [EBook #57456]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ESCAPE OF CAPT. CHAS. H. BROWN ***

Produced by David E. Brown and The Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:

The cover image for this eBook was created by the transcriber from the title page of the original and is placed in the public domain.

Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.

SOUTH AMERICA.

1. Front gate.     2. House in which Cambiaso and Garcia lived.

3. Rooms where Mr. Shaw and myself were first confined.

4. The room I was afterwards removed to.

5. Where Mr. Dunn, Capt. Avalos, and others were confined.

6. Where my crew were confined.     7. Gallows.

8. Tree where the woman and others were shot.

9. The platform.     10. Flag-staff.     11. Guns.

12. Officers’ house.     13. Cook and bake houses.

14. Gate to the yard where the cattle were kept.

15. Trees where Mr. Shaw, Capt. Talbot, and the passenger were shot.

16. Where they were burnt, with the governor.

17. Where the vessels’ papers were burnt.

18 to 44. Houses or huts for the soldiers and prisoners.

45. Calaboose.     46 to 49. Store houses.

50. Gate.     51. Sometimes used for calaboose.

52. Dog house.

THE

SUFFERINGS

AND ESCAPE

OF

CAPT. CHAS. H. BROWN

FROM

An Awful Imprisonment

BY

CHILIAN CONVICTS.

BOSTON:

HIGGINS AND BRADLEY,

20 Washington Street
.

1855.

Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1854,

BY CHAS. H. BROWN,

in the Clerk’s Office of the District Court of the District of

Massachusetts.

GEO. C. RAND, PRINTER, CORNHILL, BOSTON.

[Pg 7]

PREFACE.

The
preface to a book is very often nothing
more than a respectable cloak, allowed by the
conventionalities of literature, in which an author
may wrap his excuses and apologies for troubling
the public with his lucubrations. This dressing
up of excuses in order to introduce them into
notice under another name, is a thing so tempting
to poor human nature, such a pleasant little offering
to self esteem and vanity, that it would be
very hard if authors were to be debarred from
a luxury in which all their fellow mortals indulge.
Yet, if it be true that a good wine needs no
bush, it is equally true that a good book needs
no excuse; and in this age of ready writers, it
is very certain that no excuse or apology can
justify the publishing a bad one. To apologise
for poor or careless writing, because there has
not been time or opportunity to make it better,
provokes the question, “What necessity was there
for writing at all?”—a question not always easily
answered.

But this is not an apology for my own book;
it is simply a preface to the narrative of another
person, in which I can claim no part except that
[Pg 8]

of collecting the facts from different sources, of
arranging and compiling them. If in performing
this task, I have in any way “come tardy off,”
my excuses are due to both captain Brown and
his readers.

In writing out this account, I have labored under
the disadvantage of being able to hold no
communication with captain Brown, except by
letters. His legal papers connected with his claim
for salvage, and his own concise narrative of his
sufferings and escape, drawn up for Mr. Webster’s
information at the time the claim for salvage was
first made, were put into my hands; and his
letters from time to time have supplied me with
the details. I have, in every case where it was
possible, retained his own spirited language; but
I feel that had it been possible for me to have
seen and heard him, the narrative as taken down
from his lips might have been, not, I believe,
more correct as to facts, but perhaps more graphic
and life-like as to detail.

Still, I am convinced that the simple account
of his adventures, his sufferings, his unquenchable
spirit, and the manner in which he sustained and
did honor to the reputation of our American
seamen, amid dangers before which the bravest
might shrink, cannot be without its interest to
his countrymen, and especially to those of his profession;
while every American must feel that his
services to the Chilian government were received
by them without even an acknowledgement of
their value; his just and legal claims being refused
[Pg 9]

almost with contumely. Had captain Brown’s
demand for salvage on the treasure rescued by
him been backed by the presence of an American
frigate, commanded by such a man as captain
Ingraham, we should not have seen the British
admiral allowed to carry it off from under the
eyes of the Chilian authorities, while they feared
to serve the process of detainer issued according
to the law of the country; nor should we have
seen an American citizen brow-beaten by an English
officer, while in the discharge of his duty to
his owners and to the government in whose employ
he was sailing. An American frigate would
have taught captain Stewart that no orders from
the Chilian government could give him power to
seize a vessel sailing under the American flag,
commanded by an American citizen.

Such outrages and such injustice to our citizens
will never occur when that can be said of the
American navy, which one of our own authors
has lately said so well of the British. “An English
man-of-war seems to be always within one
day’s sail of every where. Let political agitation
break out in any port on the globe, if there be
even a roll of English broadcloth or a pound of
English tea, to be endangered thereby, within
forty-eight hours an English steamer or frigate is
pretty sure to drop anchor in the harbor with an
air which seems to say, ‘here I am; does any
body want any thing of me?’”
[A]

[Pg 10]
Our country should be the guardian of her
children, wherever the rights of civilized society
are respected, that our citizens may be in danger
of outrage and injustice only among savages and
outlaws; and we may be assured that in such
extremities, they will, for the most part, like captain
Brown, be found fully able to protect themselves.

To return to my preface or apology: in offering
this narrative to the public, let me repeat my
assurance, that captain Brown is answerable only
for the facts; for whatever literary defects there
may be, I alone am responsible.

E. H. APPLETON.

Cincinnati.

[Pg 11]

CONTENTS.

CHAPTER I.

Valparaiso—The barque Florida—Chartered by the Chilian
government—Prisoners for convict colony put on board—Captain
Avalos and soldiers sent for protection—We set
sail—Arrangement of the vessel—Mr. Shaw’s sickness—Attempted
insurrection among the prisoners—Prompt
conduct of Captain Avalos—All quiet again—We reach
the Straits of Magellan—Williwaws—We anchor in
Sandy Bay
15

CHAPTER II.

Sandy Bay Colony—Governor Benjamin Munoz Gamero—Insurrection
of Cambiaso—Forged Message from the Governor—Landing
of Captain Avalos—Escape of Governor
Gamero—Boat sent on shore—Return of the boat—Capture
of the Florida—Mr. Shaw and myself seized—Taken
on shore—Our imprisonment at the barracks—Privations—Mr.
Shaw removed
30

CHAPTER III.

[Pg 12]

My prison—My guards—An English hymn book—A fellow
prisoner—Capture of the Eliza Cornish—Fears of the
English mate—Death of Mr. Shaw—Of Captain Talbot
and boy—Barbarity of their execution—The Chilian prisoners
sympathize with us—Cambiaso’s bravado—Captain
Avalos and others led out to view the dead bodies—Treacherous
betrayal of Governor Gamero—Execution
of the traitor—My walk
51

CHAPTER IV.

Capture of the Governor—His execution—I am led out of
my prison—The burning of the bodies—Governor Gamero’s
character—His intercourse with the native tribes—The
Priest Acuna—Arrival of H. B. M. war steamer
Virago—Mr. Dunn, the Secretary—Cambiaso plans the
capture of the steamer—He fears her force and discipline—The
officers invited on shore—No suspicions aroused—The
Virago sets sail
71

CHAPTER V.

We are better treated—Captain Avalos again—His privations—The
sergeant shot—Mr. Buela—Cambiaso’s discipline—His
code of laws—Personal appearance—His
vanity—Threats of poison—Improved fare—The coffee—The
[Pg 13]

mate secures the E. Cornish—Cambiaso and
Garcia visit me—I go on board the Florida—My steward
94

CHAPTER VI.

Comparative comfort—The American ensign—Christmas
day—My visit to the barracks—The Indian boys—Cambiaso’s
rage—Execution of the Indian woman—The
cattle slaughtered—Escape of the Indians—Fears of the
rebels—Preparations for leaving—The Florida re-christened—Interview
with Cambiaso—The embarking of the
colonists—Prisoners sent to the Florida
123

CHAPTER VII.

Cambiaso’s orders—We set sail—Wood’s Bay—The old
French ship—A drunken riot—The officer condemned—Garcia’s
interference—Men deserted at Wood’s Bay—The
Eliza Cornish left behind—Stormy weather—Sandy Bay
again—The Indians—Cape Gregory—Interview with
Cambiaso—His promises—Conversation with Mr. Dunn—My
determination
145

CHAPTER  VIII.

The re-taking of the vessel planned—Mr. Dunn—Captain
Avalos—Preito—The corporal—Three bells—The struggle—Cambiaso
[Pg 14]

overpowered—Garcia—Cheers for victory—The
crew swear fidelity to me—Our course—Cambiaso
put in irons—His cowardice—The prisoners from the
hold—River Gallegos—Voyage round Cape Horn—Attempted
outbreaks—Our danger—We reach San Carlos
169

CHAPTER IX.

Reports of the revolt reach San Carlos—American Minister
sends assistance—Chilian Government despatches forces
to the Straits—The Virago—Fears of the inhabitants of
San Carlos—I deliver the Florida to the Chilian authorities—Arrival
of the E. Cornish—The Virago takes the prisoners
and treasure—Passage to Valparaiso—Protest and
claim of salvage—Mr. Duer—Don Antonio Varas—Injustice
done me by the Chilian government—The British
Admiral claims the treasure—I protest again—Compromise—Don
Antonio denies all claim—My claims put into
the hands of the United States Authorities
191

CHAPTER X.

Cambiaso’s trial—His execution—His character—Garcia—My
interview with him—The officer saved by Garcia—His
wife’s gratitude—Mr. Duer’s kindness—Mr. Dunn—Captain
Avalos—Conclusion
220

[Pg 15]

INSURRECTION AT MAGELLAN.

CHAPTER I.

Valparaiso—The barque Florida—Chartered by the Chilian
government—Prisoners for convict colony put on board—Captain
Avalos and soldiers sent for protection—We set
sail—Arrangement of the vessel—Mr. Shaw’s sickness—Attempted
insurrection among the prisoners—Prompt
conduct of Captain Avalos—All quiet again—We reach
the Straits of Magellan—Williwaws—We anchor in
Sandy Bay.

In
the latter part of October, 1851,
I was at the port of Valparaiso, Chili,
having command of the barque Florida,
of New Orleans, of about two hundred
tons burden. My orders from my owners
were to take the Florida through
the Straits of Magellan to Rio Janeiro,
where we were to take in freight for
[Pg 16]

the United States; and my first business
was to secure my officers and crew.
One of my owners was now at Valparaiso,
and would accompany me on the
voyage.

To a sea-faring man like myself, such
a voyage was no new thing, and I
looked forward with some interest, but
with no excitement, to the prospect of
many days’ tiresome battling with the
wind and waves, to the annoyances of
clearing, and to the perils and labors
of a tedious navigation through the
Straits. Had I known what perils and
sufferings awaited me, with what different
feelings should I have left the beautiful
city where I had received much kindness
and hospitality, and trusted myself
to the treacherous elements, and to men
far more treacherous than they! But,
happily, Providence has given to us only
[Pg 17]

a knowledge of the present, and the
blessing of hope for the future, without
any foreshadowing of coming evil.

The barque Florida was a long, low,
straight-built vessel, and a fast sailer.
She had been employed formerly in sailing
between Panama and San Francisco,
conveying passengers to and fro, and
was well fitted up for that purpose, with
a large cabin, extending as far forward
as her mainmast, and fourteen well furnished
state rooms. She was also
furnished with four brass cannon, four
pounders, and one iron swivel mounted
forward. Her owners were Capt. John
Lovett, of Beverly, Mass., and his brother-in-law,
Mr. Benjamin G. Shaw; Mr.
Shaw being the principal owner. On
board of her were Mr. Shaw, the owner,
and one cabin passenger, Mr. Ramon
Buela, belonging to New Orleans.

[Pg 18]
The vessel having at that time no
cargo, we were applied to by the government
of Chili, to convey certain
State prisoners, charged with political
offences, to the penal colony established
by that government at Sandy Bay, Straits
of Magellan. This was at the time when
the Chilians, disaffected to the government
at Santiago, had risen, under
General Cruz, and had seized the Province
of Conception; and the political
offenders whom we were to convey to
Sandy Bay, were, some of them, implicated
in that rebellion.

After some consideration, Mr. Shaw
determined to accept the offer of the
government, and to allow it to charter
the Florida for the conveyance of the
prisoners to Sandy Bay, where we were
to leave them, and proceed on our
voyage.  The authorities were to send
[Pg 19]

with the prisoners a sufficient number of
troops to secure us against any disturbance
during the voyage, and accordingly,
Captain Pedro Avalos, with a
corporal and twelve soldiers were drafted
on that service.

On the morning of October 30, I took
command of the vessel, with the intention
of getting her ready for sea the
same evening, that I might be prepared
to receive the prisoners, who were to be
sent on board of her the same night.
By hard work on my part, and plenty
of pushing up my men, we were all
ready by night, and at eleven o’clock,
P. M., the prisoners began to come on
board.

Hard featured, desperate looking men,
some of them were, with the downcast,
heavy look of criminals. Men were
among them who had set law at defiance,
[Pg 20]

whose hands had been against every
man, and in whose hearts the kindly
affections had long been deadened; and
I felt as I looked at their countenances,
made, perhaps, more repulsive to me by
the dark, foreign cast of features which
my early education and prejudices had
taught me to associate with men of
desperate fortunes, that there was no
easy task before me. There were, however,
among them men of high rank,
who, for having joined in one of those
political struggles which so constantly
shake the South American Republics,
were now condemned to a long imprisonment
on the savage shores of Patagonia,
in the society of convicts and
felons of the worst kind; some sentenced
for a tedious term of three years,
some doomed to a life-long imprisonment.

On the evening of Sunday, November
[Pg 21]

3d, I received a notice from Commodore
R. Simpson, acting Intendente of Valparaiso,
by the captain of the port, that
all the prisoners were now on board,
the notice being accompanied by an
order for me to proceed to sea at once,
without any further communication with
the shore. The Intendente evidently
feared the escape of some of our prisoners,
or perhaps some communication between
them and their political associates.

The evening being calm, the sea breeze
having died away, and no appearance of
the land breeze springing up, I asked
the captain of the port, to whom the
regulation of all the shipping in the
harbor belongs, for the assistance of two
boats from the Chilian man-of-war which
was lying in the harbor at the time, to
tow my vessel out to sea. They were
sent, and assisted us till midnight, when
[Pg 22]

a land breeze springing up, they left
us, and returned to the harbor.

I had made every preparation to insure
order and security during the
voyage, had mounted two of the four
pounders upon the poop deck, pointing
forward so as to rake the whole deck,
and kept them constantly loaded. The
prisoners, about eighty in number, were
put into the hold of the vessel, and
were only allowed to come on deck for
air and refreshment, in small detachments.
A sentinel was stationed at the
gangway, and the deck was constantly
guarded by seven soldiers and half my
crew. The crew consisted of eight men
before the mast, part Americans and
part foreigners, first and second mate,
cook, and cabin boy. Mr. Shaw, Captain
Avalos, Mr. Buela, the first and second
mates, and myself shared the cabin.

[Pg 23]
The wind continued light until the
afternoon of Monday, the 4th, when a
fresh breeze sprung up from the south-west,
right ahead: which head wind
and rough sea continued through the
first part of our voyage. Our little
vessel was a fast sailer, but with these
obstacles in our way, we made but slow
progress, and our passengers began to
feel the tediousness of a sea voyage.
For my part, my responsibility was too
heavy, and my avocations somewhat too
numerous, for time to hang heavily upon
my hands, for my officers were neither
very efficient or entirely to be depended
upon.

My anxieties and responsibilities were
increased when we were some days out,
by the sickness of Mr. Shaw, who was
seized with a relapse of the Panama
fever.  My relation to Mr. Shaw was
[Pg 24]

something more than the mere business
connection between the owner and master
of a vessel. We had been thrown
together very closely, and I had always
found him ready and prompt with advice
and sympathy in every difficulty that
might arise, and most considerate in all
business arrangements. We were Americans,
from the same State, away from
our families and friends, and bound
together by many common subjects of
interest; subjects which grow in importance
when men are far away from
their homes. His sickness, where so
little could be done for his comfort,
was a source of considerable anxiety to
me, and deprived me of almost all society,
for Captain Avalos talked very
little English.

We had been out about a fortnight,
when, as Captain Avalos and myself
[Pg 25]

were sitting in the cabin, we were
startled by word being brought from the
sentinel at the gangway, that one of
the prisoners had informed him that
there had been a proposition among the
prisoners to rise and take the vessel.

I sprang upon the deck and called up
all hands, while Captain Avalos ordered
up the soldiers who were not on duty.
The soldiers were all under arms, and
the captain proved himself soldier-like
and efficient in any emergency; for his
first order was, that in case of any
disturbance among the prisoners, the first
man that made his appearance was to
be shot down. We waited in some
anxiety, but all was quiet; then, ordering
the soldiers and the crew to
remain on their guard, Captain Avalos
and myself went to the gangway and
inquired into the cause of the alarm.
[Pg 26]

It seems that the proposition to take
the vessel had been made by one of
the prisoners,—one of those confined for
political offences. His plan had probably
been to run the vessel into land,
and join General Cruz and the revolutionary
party in the province of Conception;
but few of the prisoners were
ready to join him, and one of them had
found an opportunity to communicate the
design to the sentinel at the gangway.

We had no further difficulty, and I
was glad that this little disturbance had
occurred, as it gave me confidence in
the promptitude and courage of my own
crew, and in the presence of mind and
soldier-like character of Captain Avalos.

On the morning of November 24th, the
weather was thick and foggy, and the
running became difficult. I run till
about eleven o’clock, and then, judging
[Pg 27]

myself near the western entrance of the
Straits, I hove the main-top-sail aback,
waiting for clear weather, so that I
could see land. At twelve, the sun
came out, clear and glorious, and I
found myself within ten miles of the
entrance, Cape Pillar bearing east from
us. Mr. Shaw and myself congratulated
each other on being near the end of
the disagreeable part of our voyage, for
there was something repugnant to us, in
the idea of standing jailors, as it were,
to men for some of whom our sympathies
were enlisted; for the freedom
of our political institutions makes the
idea of imprisonment for political offences
repulsive to an American; and, indeed,
no free man likes to stand jailor to
another, be his offences what they may.

We were, however, not so near our
destination as we supposed, for the
[Pg 28]

weather continued very much against
us. I put the vessel before the wind,
intending that afternoon to anchor in
the harbor of Mercy, but on account of
the thick, squally weather, I was unable
to make the harbor, and ran past the
entrance, which is so small that it may
easily be overlooked. I was therefore
obliged to run all night, and as the
wind was blowing fresh, and the weather
thick, I took in sail, and put her under
double-reefed top-sails. At daylight on
the morning of the 25th, I set all
sail, and during the day we had a
fine, pleasant breeze from the westward.
In the evening, not being able to make
a harbor, we hove-to, for the night, a
short distance from Cape Froward, a
high point of land within the Straits.
These high lands I had learned to dread,
as from off them, and out of the valley
[Pg 29]

come fresh, fitful winds, called by the
Indians “williwaws,” blowing sometimes
with such violence as to take the masts
out of vessels. These williwaws give
you no warning, when your vessel is
near shore, and require constant watchfulness.

The morning of the 26th broke, however,
with a light breeze from the
west, under favor of which I run along
the shore until noon, when the wind
suddenly canted to the northward, and
blew so fresh and hard that at 3. P.
M., the main-top-sail split, and we were
obliged to reef it. At six in the afternoon
we were glad to drop anchor
in Sandy Bay, and to give notice of
our arrival by a salute of two guns,
which was answered from the shore.

[Pg 30]

CHAPTER II.

Sandy Bay Colony—Governor Benjamin Numoz Gamero—Insurrection
of Cambiaso—Forged Message from the Governor—Landing
of Captain Avalos—Escape of Governor
Gamero—Boat sent on shore—Return of the boat—Capture
of the Florida—Mr. Shaw and myself seized—Taken
on shore—Our imprisonment at the barracks—Privations—Mr.
Shaw removed.

Sandy Bay Colony lies on the Patagonian
side of the Straits of Magellan,
on a level spot of ground which slopes
down gently towards the water on the
south-east. The settlement had formerly
been made at Port Famine, at a short
distance to the south-west of the present
colony; but that situation was found to
be very bleak, the site of the buildings
being on a hill somewhat higher than
the surrounding country, and exposed to
[Pg 31]

the sweep of the williwaws. The change
had been made under the direction of
Don Benjamin Numoz Gamero, governor
of the colony, and the new site had
been selected with great judgment. The
land proved very fertile, being well
fitted to raise all the crops which the
short summers of that latitude will allow
to come to maturity; and the governor
had cleared a good deal of ground
around the barracks, and laid out many
gardens, which were cultivated by the
convicts. A street ran in front of the
barracks, towards the water, and on the
slope of the shore were some very good
houses. These houses were made of
boards that had been sawed from logs
by the convicts. They used hand-saws,
and usually sawed about twelve or fourteen
boards a day.

As I looked towards the shore from
[Pg 32]

the vessel, as the sun went down, on
the evening of the 26th, there was all
around the quiet and peace of early
summer, and the barracks shone out with
the neatness that belongs to all buildings
for military purposes. How little did
I guess the violence and mutiny that
were going on within!

There had been an insurrection in the
colony about five days before, headed by
one Cambiaso, second lieutenant of the
troops stationed there; who, as I learned
afterwards, had committed some offence
and been imprisoned a short time before
by the order of the governor. At his
liberation, he had declared that he would
have his revenge, and I have some
reason to suppose that he was instigated
to seize the place by some of the political
offenders confined there, who were
adherents of General Cruz, and who still
[Pg 33]

held some communication with the revolutionists
in the province of Conception.
Cambiaso had been joined by most of
the convicts and prisoners. This attack
on the troops had been successful, but
the governor, priest, some soldiers, and
one woman, a wife of one of the soldiers,
had escaped outside of the fort,
and were then hiding in the woods.
Cambiaso was in possession of the fort
when we anchored in the bay, but of
this, of course, I knew nothing.

Early in the evening, indeed as soon
as it was dark, a boat put off from
shore and came alongside, with five men
in her, bearing a letter purporting to
be from the governor of the colony,
and signed Numoz Gamero, desiring me
to keep the prisoners on board until
the next day, when I should receive
assistance from the shore, in landing them.
[Pg 34]

I showed the letter to captain Avalos,
who, tired of his confinement on ship
board, determined to go on shore for
the night, taking with him some twelve
prisoners in the boat which had been
sent from the land, and leaving the remainder
of the prisoners and the troops
under my charge.

About twelve at night, I was aroused
by the firing of cannon from the shore,
and I sprung upon deck, but I found
all quiet in the vessel. In a few moments,
however, the watch gave the
alarm that a boat was coming near us,
and crying for assistance. The wind
blew so very fresh that it was impossible
to hear what was said from the
boat, (the voices being blown away from
us,) but I conjectured that the prisoners
who were landed the evening before,
and about whose security I had some
[Pg 35]

doubts, had made their escape from
captain Avalos, and had probably stolen
a boat and were trying to get on board,
where, with the assistance of the other
prisoners, they could seize the vessel
and make their escape. I immediately
ordered a gun to be fired in answer to
those from the shore, to show that we
were on the lookout, and then had the
larboard quarter boat lowered away and
sent her out with five men, armed with
cutlasses, with orders to seize the shore
boat.

After being gone for a whole hour,
they returned, saying that they had not
been able to find her. Soon after, the
noise of firing from the shore ceased.
In the boat were the governor, priest,
some soldiers, and a woman, who had
escaped from the barracks, and, seizing
a boat, had put off, in hopes to reach
[Pg 36]

me and warn me of the insurrection on
shore. Having but one oar, however,
and the wind blowing very fresh, they
were unable to make the vessel, but
drifted across the Straits and attempted
to land on the Terra del Fuego side.

As soon as captain Avalos reached
the barracks, he was seized, his papers
taken from him, the prisoners who landed
with him set at liberty, and himself put
into double irons and thrust into a
calaboose, as the buildings for confining
the soldiers are called. During the
evening, he could hear the prisoners
whom he had brought on shore, in the
full enjoyment of a drunken frolic. He
told me afterwards that no answer was
made to his inquiries as to the reason
of his seizure, but that he obtained
some idea of what was the real state
of the colony, by overhearing the conversation
[Pg 37]

of the drunken prisoners. Late
in the evening, the door of the calaboose
was opened, and five men, double
ironed, were thrust into the room.
These, he found, were the Secretary of
the colony, a Brazilian by birth, the
captain and first lieutenant of the troops
of the colony, the apothecary, and governor’s
steward.

The escape of governor Gamero had
been discovered by Cambiaso, and these
men were thrust into the calaboose with
captain Avalos, a guard of eighteen men
stationed on the outside, with lighted
torches in their hands, and with orders
to set fire to the four corners of the
building, and burn them alive, in case
the Florida made her escape during the
night. But the morning came, and the
Florida, fortunately for them if not for
us, was still at anchor.  It would be
[Pg 38]

inquiring somewhat too curiously of weak
human nature, to ask if the prisoners
felt any thing but joy at hearing of
our fatal security. Captain Avalos and
Mr. Dunn (the secretary) told me afterwards,
that during the night their guards
were cursing their tiresome watch, and
wondering why Cambiaso did not shoot
them at once, or burn them, without
waiting to know the result of the governor’s
escape. But Cambiaso was not
so daring a villain as not always to
remember the possibility of the re-taking
of the fort.

Early in the morning of the 27th, I
sent my boat on shore, with the first
mate, Mr. Buela, the passenger, (he understanding
Spanish,) three seamen, and
one soldier, with orders to bring off
captain Avalos, and to obtain from the
governor orders with regard to the landing
[Pg 39]

of the rest of the prisoners. These
also were seized the moment they arrived
at the barracks, and thrust into a little
building about six feet square.

The firing and disturbance during the
night had roused some sense of uneasiness
in my mind, lest all should not be
right on shore; and early in the morning
I had gone into the cabin to consult
with Mr. Shaw. He was then quite
unwell, and most anxious to reach the
shore, where he supposed he would be
able to obtain medical advice; while I
hoped to land all the prisoners during
the day, and be able to proceed that
afternoon on our way to Rio Janeiro.

We waited very anxiously, therefore,
for the return of the boat, and at about
nine o’clock she came alongside, but to
my surprise, manned with six or seven
men dressed as officers, who handed me
[Pg 40]

a letter purporting to be from governor
Gamero, stating that my men were drunk,
and not able to row the boat back to
the ship. The letter also requested me
to commence landing the prisoners. All
this seemed to me very singular. I had
never seen any disposition to drunkenness
among my crew, and even if the
seamen had been incapable of returning
in the boat, the first mate and captain
Avalos would have been on board of
her. I went into the cabin, and, holding
out the letter to Mr. Shaw, said “Depend
upon it, there is something wrong
here.  My men are not drunk, and if
they are, where are Mr. P——n and
captain Avalos?” While I was speaking,
a voice was heard on deck, the cabin
door was burst open, and four of the
officers rushed in, two of them with
drawn swords. Mr. Shaw, who was
[Pg 41]

sitting down, was seized at once. One
of the officers struck at me with his
sword, but his arm was caught by one
of the prisoners, who rushed between
us. In a few minutes I was secured,
in spite of my struggles, and we were
told that we were prisoners. I asked to
whom, and by whose authority we were
taken, but to this I received no answer.
We were carried on deck, and I found
that the prisoners had been freed. The
struggle with the troops and the crew
was still going on, but as the prisoners
rushed up from the hold, it became
every moment more unequal. The prisoners
being unarmed, wrested the guns
from the hands of the soldiers, and
overpowered them by force of numbers.
As I came on deck, the corporal called
out that he would not give up his gun
unless I ordered him to, for it seems
[Pg 42]

the guns had at first been demanded of
the soldiers by the officers who came
from the shore, and in the confusion
some of them had given them up. As
the corporal called to me, three of the
officers threw themselves upon him, and
after a long struggle he was disarmed,
and put in irons. The whole attack
was so unexpected, the rush of the
prisoners from the hold so overwhelming,
and the confusion so great, that I do
not wonder that the soldiers and crew
were overpowered.

Preparations were soon made for sending
Mr. Shaw and myself on shore, and
a sufficient guard was detached to accompany
us in the boat. While rowing
to the shore, our captors were continually
firing off their muskets, with shouts
of “Viva la Cruz!” These cries gave
[Pg 43]

happened in the colony, for they were
the same which had met my ear during
the insurrection, (previous to my leaving
Valparaiso,) of which struggle I had
been a witness. On leaving, we were
met by several soldiers on foot and
horseback, one of whom seemed to be
of some authority. This was Garcia,
one of the officers in the service of the
governor, Gamero, who had joined Cambiaso
in his revolt, being compelled to
do so, as he afterwards pleaded, by
fear of his life. However that may be,
I certainly found him much more gentle
and humane in his actions and expressions
than Cambiaso, and was indebted
to him for several kindnesses.
From him I gained the first idea of
what had occurred in the colony.

As we left the boat, I noticed Mr.
Shaw’s extreme weakness, and feared
[Pg 44]

that if we were to be taken far from
the shore, he would not be able to
stand the fatigue. I therefore appealed
to general Garcia, as I afterwards
learned to call him, and, calling his attention
to Mr. Shaw’s state of health,
asked him if some arrangement could
not be made by which he could ride.
Garcia ordered one of his soldiers to
dismount, and Mr. Shaw took his place.
We were taken up the slope from the
water, towards the barracks, and passing
by the platform, under the mouths of
the cannon which were mounted upon it,
entered the great gate of the fortification.
As I looked around, military
preparations met my eye on every side,
but there was none of the order of a
regular garrison; on the contrary, the
shouts of drunken rioters, the quarrelling
and swearing of the soldiers, the shrill
[Pg 45]

screams of the women which struck my
ear, gave me a tolerably correct idea
of the sort of people into whose hands
we had fallen. Conspicuous among them
all, was their leader, Cambiaso, who cast
contemptuous glances upon us as we
passed, and who might be heard giving
his orders, mixed with oaths and threats
of punishment and death to those who
did not obey him implicitly. He let us
pass on, however, without addressing us,
and it was only from his officer’s dress
and authoritative manner that we were
able to guess at his rank.

Very little time, however, was given
us for observation; for we were hurried
across the open space, and thrust into
one of the largest buildings used as
barracks. My crew, the remainder of
whom were brought away from the vessel
at the same time with Mr. Shaw and
[Pg 46]

myself, were put into one of the smallest
of the barracks, where they, with Mr.
Buela, were confined in a room about
six feet square, which was so crowded
that they were obliged to take turns in
lying down to rest. Mr. Shaw and
myself were at first put into the same
apartment, but we were not allowed to
speak to each other; several soldiers
standing guard over us the whole time.
In about two hours, however, I was
taken from this room, and put into a
smaller one adjoining it. The apartment
into which both Mr. Shaw’s room and
mine opened, was occupied by our guard,
who ate and slept there, and who forbade
all intercourse between us.

I looked around the room, which I
felt would be my prison until I was led
out to death, for I knew now into what
hands we had fallen; and, on my way
[Pg 47]

up from the shore to the barracks, had
been threatened with death if I did not
at once inform them what treasure I
had on board the Florida; and on my
saying there was none, one of the
officers said “he would soon find a way
to make me find some.”

The room was without a floor, with
a board nailed to the wall, looking like
a shelf, but serving for a seat; the
table was a board, supported by sticks
driven into the ground; and these, with
my mattrass, formed the furniture. I
had with me a small pocket looking
glass about the size of my hand, and
the miniatures of my wife and children,
which I managed to hide within my
shirt bosom. I had also in my pocket
a pencil and a small piece of paper,
which I used for the purpose of keeping
my dates. My guards, however, always
[Pg 48]

came and watched me when they saw
me writing, and at last told me I must
desist, as some harm might come of it.
After this, I put down my dates when
I was unobserved. This was not often.
For the next two days I was near
starving, nothing being given me to eat,
except two ship biscuit, or “hard bread,”
as we sailors call them; and my only
drink was the water which I helped
myself to from the guard room.

On the morning of the 29th, two days
after our capture, I was taken out by
my guard, for a walk around the yard
and on the platform which ran along
the west side of the fort, and on which
the cannon were mounted. I made the
best use of my eyes and ears during
my walk, and managed to speak to one
or two of the prisoners who had been
on the Florida with me, and whom I
[Pg 49]

had made some acquaintance with during
the voyage. It was by these prisoners
that I was afterwards kept informed of
what occurred outside of my prison.
They would talk to me during my walks,
and sometimes would come to my window
and tell me what had occurred;
sometimes in bravado, and with great
exultation, and sometimes with expressions
of sympathy.

On returning from my walk, I met
Mr. Shaw, leaving his room with his
guard by his side; taken out, I supposed,
for a similar purpose. I saw he
was not looking well, and spoke to him,
saying, “how do you feel this morning?”
His answer was, “pretty miserable;”
and he seemed about to say something
more, but my guard pushed between us,
saying, with an oath, “We can’t have
any talking, captain; we have the general’s
[Pg 50]

orders against it.” I was hurried
into my room, and Mr. Shaw led away.
This was the last time I ever saw him;
for, for some reason which I never
could learn, he was not brought back
to the barracks, but confined in a
building outside the fortification. It
seemed to me, that with the sense of
his nearness to me, I had lost my last
friend; so lonely and miserable did I
feel when he had left.

[Pg 51]

CHAPTER III.

My prison—My guards—An English hymn book—A fellow
prisoner—Capture of the Eliza Cornish—Fears of the
English mate—Death of Mr. Shaw—Of Captain Talbot
and boy—Barbarity of their execution—The Chilian prisoners
sympathize with us—Cambiaso’s bravado—Captain
Avalos and others led out to view the dead bodies—Treacherous
betrayal of Governor Gamero—Execution
of the traitor—My walk.

I now began to feel for a few days,
some of the monotony of a prisoner’s
life. Shut up alone, without occupation,
within hearing of the riotous conversation
of my guard, but forbidden to
speak to them, with hard fare, and no
arrangements for my personal comfort or
even cleanliness, except when I could
take water enough from the guard room
[Pg 52]

to wash my face, using my pocket handkerchief
for a towel.

Three or four days had passed, and
I had lost the fear of immediate death,
but my suspense and anxiety to know
what Cambiaso’s intentions with regard
to us were, were very great. There
seemed to me no motive that he could
have for keeping us prisoners, after he
had satisfied himself that we had no
treasure on board the Florida, except
the fear that we would carry the news
of his revolt back to Valparaiso; and
that danger to himself, it seemed to me,
could be obviated only by putting us to
death. It was in vain that I applied
to my guards; they were evidently
under orders to hold no communication
with me, and the prisoners who visited
me from time to time, knew nothing of
Cambiaso’s plans. To my entreaties to
[Pg 53]

be allowed to see Mr. Shaw, no answer
was given, except that it could not be
allowed, that he had been sick, and was
now very unwell.

A few days after my imprisonment,
an English book, containing prayers and
hymns, was handed me by one of my
guard, a man named Preito, who probably
could make no use of it himself.
The hymns had little poetical merit, and
probably at another time would scarcely
have aroused my attention; but now the
promises and consolations of religion
which breathed through them, the spirit
of Christian resignation and faith of
which I was then so much in need, and
which to me shone out in every part
of them, were an unspeakable comfort.
The first hymn to which I opened, seemed
so very applicable to my situation, that
it impressed itself upon my memory;
[Pg 54]

and I insert it here, thinking that it
may be interesting to my readers to see
how the promises of Christianity are
the truest consolation in all trials.

To my complaint, O Lord, my God,

Thy gracious ear incline;

Hear me, distressed and destitute

Of all relief but thine.

Do thou, O God, preserve my soul

That does thy name adore;

Thy servant keep, and him whose trust

Relies on thee, restore.

To me, who daily thee invoke,

Thy mercy, Lord, extend;

Refresh thy servant’s soul, whose hopes

On thee alone depend.

To my repeated, humble prayer,

O Lord, attentive be;

When troubled, I on thee will call,

For thou wilt answer me.

Some few days after Mr. Shaw’s removal
from the barracks, one evening,
the exact date of which has escaped me
[Pg 55]

entirely, I was aroused by a great confusion
in the fort, a noise of shouting,
and, apparently, of rejoicing. While I
was standing at my window, trying to
discover the meaning of the uproar, my
prison door was opened, and a man put
in. He was in sailor’s dress, was apparently
an American, and looked terrified
and bewildered.

I accosted him immediately, in English—asked
who he was, saying that he
was probably a prisoner, like myself.
The guards in the next room were in
such a state of excitement that they
allowed us to converse unchecked.

He told me that he was the mate of
an English brig, the Eliza Cornish, of
Liverpool, bound from Valparaiso to
Liverpool; that the vessel had anchored
in Sandy Bay, intending to lay over for
the night; that the captain, Capt. Talbot,
[Pg 56]

of Liverpool, had landed in the brig’s
boat, with a boy, a son of his owner,
who was passenger on board, and one
or two seamen; that they had been
seized and put in irons the moment
they were out of sight of the brig.
The boat was then sent back to the
vessel, with five or six men in her, who
came on board and told the mate that
the captain wanted him to come on
shore; but that while he was hesitating
what to do, they, seeing the small number
of the crew, attacked and overpowered
them, and took possession of
the brig. They then demanded of him
whatever money was on board, threatening
him with instant death if he did
not give it up at once. The brig had
on board about ninety or one hundred
thousand dollars, in bars of gold and
silver, which they seized and brought
[Pg 57]

on shore, together with the mate and
crew. Some of the bars of gold were
cut up before his eyes, and distributed
around among the soldiers; and their
exultation at the sight of their booty
had raised the general shout which I
had heard. This man was kept in my
room during all the rest of our imprisonment.
He was a well meaning fellow,
but evidently not much accustomed to
depend upon himself, and very much
intimidated by the dread of approaching
death, by these rebels. I constantly
found it necessary to encourage him,
and prevail upon him to show a bold
face before our captors, were it only to
command their respect. For myself, I
was not really much afraid of them. I
was afraid of dying, for my danger
made me realize how unfit I was for
another world; and my dread of death
[Pg 58]

was such as a man might have during
a dangerous illness.

At midnight, on December 2d, I was
aroused from my sleep by the report of
muskets, of which they seemed to me to
number about ten or twelve. A short
time afterwards there was another report,
and our guards began to run out of
the next room. The whole encampment
seemed in great confusion, and I became
alarmed, thinking some of our companions
had been shot, and that our turn
was coming next. I dared not ask
any questions of the guard, some of
whom I saw looking through the door
of our room, which always stood open
at night. The mate of the E. Cornish
spoke to me, and said, “That is foul
play, captain Brown; something desperate
is going on. I am afraid my captain
and Mr. Shaw are gone for it.” Then,
[Pg 59]

throwing himself upon his face, he began
to cry.

His manner gave me a feeling of impatience,
and I answered him pretty quickly
that I did not doubt he was right, and
that I supposed our turn would come
next, but I did not want to hear the
thing talked about; and at any rate, he
might as well show as bold a face as
possible, for the guard were watching
us, and listening to our conversation.
This roused him, and he sat up, and
during the rest of the night we remained
in anxious suspense. I believe
I was too proud to ask any questions
of my guard, nor would I allow the
mate to ask any.

Soon after sunrise, some of the men
who had come down with me as prisoners,
came into our room and whispered
to me in Spanish, “Your poor
[Pg 60]

owner! poor English captain! poor
English boy!” I questioned them closely,
and learned that Mr. Shaw and captain
Talbot, with the young passenger, had
been taken from their beds just before
midnight, put in irons, both hands and
feet, led out to a short distance from
the barracks, and there tied to a tree,
and shot. I afterwards gathered some
particulars of their execution, which, for
the sake of clearness, I will insert
here.

Mr. Shaw had been very sick ever
since we were separated; and I was told
that on the 2d December he sent to
Cambiaso, to ask if he might have some
medical advice. Cambiaso’s brutal reply
was, “Pass him out and shoot him, for
we have no time to attend to the sick!”
When they were led out, captain Talbot
entreated most earnestly that the boy’s
[Pg 61]

life might be spared, saying that he had
been put under his care by his parents,
that he was a mere boy, and could do
no harm; but his prayers were not even
listened to. He never asked once for
his own life. The boy was about
eighteen years old, a son of one of the
owners of the E. Cornish, and had
made the voyage as a pleasure excursion.

The first volley killed captain Talbot
and the young man, leaving Mr. Shaw
standing unharmed, not a shot having
touched him. Then a whole volley was
fired into him, killing him instantly.
One of the soldiers was attracted by
the glitter of a diamond ring on Mr.
Shaw’s finger, and as soon as he was
shot, the soldier went up to him, trying
to remove it; but finding that difficult,
he cut off the finger with his cutlass.
This ring I afterwards heard of, as
[Pg 62]

being seen on the finger of one of the
women about the fort, and on my return
to Valparaiso, I offered twenty-five dollars
to recover it, thinking it would be a
gratification to Mr. Shaw’s friends to
obtain even so slight a remembrance of
him, but I was not able to procure it.
The bodies were afterwards taken down
and hung by the neck to a tree, exposed
to all the passers by.

I never knew why Mr. Shaw was shot,
but I have every reason to suppose that
what I was told of Cambiaso’s reply to
his request for medical advice was the
truth. It would have been too much
trouble to take care of a sick man.
The same fear of trouble probably decided
the poor boy’s fate. Why captain
Talbot was executed, while I was reserved,
is also a mystery to me. I never saw
captain Talbot, but from his mate’s remarks
[Pg 63]

about him, I felt that he was a
man of some spirit and character. Perhaps
his high spirit led him to say
things that exasperated Cambiaso. He
gave some expression of this spirit at
the time he was seized. Two officers
(Chilians,) were handling him rather
roughly, when he indignantly told them
they need not look so surly, and at the
same time drew a dirk knife from the
waist of his pantaloons. But it was
immediately taken from him.

Mr. Shaw’s death was a great shock
to me, and is still a matter of deep
grief. We had been friends for some
time, and I had the highest respect for
him. He was indeed a young man of
great promise, and his loss to his family
and friends is one which cannot
easily be replaced. I grieved for them,
even there in my prison, while I expected
[Pg 64]

each day to be my last, and
while I remembered the agony of my
own family, when the news of our sad
fate should reach them; and now that
a kind Providence has restored me to
them, I grieve to remember him who
met so cruel a death from such barbarous
hands, on a desert and far distant
shore.

I was told by one of the men who
came into my cell that morning, that
the bodies were to be left hanging until
we had all seen them. Accordingly,
about one o’clock that afternoon, three
of the prisoners (I think they were
captain Avalos, with the captain of the
regular troops, and Mr. Dunn,) were
taken from their prison, their irons
knocked off, and, when they were unshackled,
Cambiaso walked up to them,
and with much mock politeness asked
[Pg 65]

them to accompany him for a walk.
They were in no situation to refuse,
but accompanied him in silence, followed
by a file of soldiers as guard. He led
them out of the barracks, toward the
vessels. As they passed under the trees
on which hung the bodies of Mr. Shaw,
captain Talbot, and the young lad,
Cambiaso pointed to them, and laughing,
said, “You see what happens to
such villains when they fall into my
hands; it will be your turn next.”
After compelling them to pass round
the tree, so as to view the bodies from
every side, he conducted them back to
the barracks and to their crowded prison.

The mate of the E. Cornish and myself
spent that morning in a state of
anxiety, expecting every moment to be
called for—perhaps to be led out to
death, perhaps to be shown the dead
[Pg 66]

bodies of our friends, and to be conscious
that any emotion we might show would
be watched by eyes that would interpret
it into an expression of unmanly fear.
My feeling was a sort of indignant
pride; my own honor and the honor
of my country seemed to me to depend
upon my bearing before these pirates
and desperate men; and I repeatedly
requested the mate, whose power of self
control I began to doubt, to be bold,
whatever might happen to him. I remember
thinking that if he did not, all
around him would attribute it to a
cowardly disposition. Towards three
o’clock we heard the report of fire-arms,
and a general hurry and bustle in the
yard. At the report, the mate sprung
to his feet, saying, “Good God, captain!
who has gone now?” We listened
anxiously, but all was quiet again, and
[Pg 67]

I ventured to ask our guard what the
disturbance was. They answered, carelessly,
“it is only a soldier who was
shot; he is a traitor.” In about two
hours my guard called me out, saying
that the mate and I were to walk in
the yard. I refused, at first, telling
them that I did not need a walk, I
was well enough as I was, and so
forth; but one of the soldiers, with an
oath, exclaimed that they had the general’s
orders, and that I had better
come, or worse might happen to me. I
rose, and walked out quietly with the
mate. The first thing that struck my
eyes, as I reached the door of the
guard room, was a temporary gallows,
on which was suspended the body of a
poor soldier. Near it was a tree, the
bark of which was torn with bullet-holes,
and the ground below, which was
[Pg 68]

soaked with blood. I turned sick at
the sight; but, summoning up all my
resolution, I walked quietly up to the
body, and asked who it was. One of
my acquaintances, a Chilian prisoner
who came with us, and who was sauntering
around, walked up to my side,
and said, “You need not feel pity for
him, captain Brown; he was a traitor,
not worth caring for. Our general has
served him right.”

I questioned the man further, and
found that this was the body of one of
the soldiers who had escaped from the
barracks with the governor, and who,
worn out by suffering and the fear of
starvation, had appeared at the gate
that morning, and delivered himself up,
offering to give Cambiaso information of
the governor’s hiding place, if he would
promise him safety, and the sum of five
[Pg 69]

hundred dollars. Cambiaso promised,
and as soon as he had gained what he
wanted from him, had him ironed, and
led out and shot. I felt that he had
deserved his fate, but remembering the
proverb, “honor among thieves,” could
not but think that it was not at Cambiaso’s
hands that he should have met
it.

His story was, that after the boat in
which they had left the shore on the
night the Florida arrived, had drifted
past our vessel, and they had found it
impossible to make us understand what
they wanted, they drifted on through
the night, paddling as well as they
could till they reached the Terra del
Fuego shore, soon after daylight. There
they attempted to land, but were prevented
by a party of Indians, who fired
on them, and wounded one of the soldiers.
[Pg 70]

The weather then being calm,
they paddled to the westward, and
crossed the Straits again to Port Famine,
the former site of the colony. There
they had concealed themselves in the
bushes, and for the last week had been
living on nothing but roots, and were
now in a state of starvation.

All this I gathered from my guards
and visitors, after I returned to my
room from my walk, in company with
the mate, although we had never expected
to see it again.

[Pg 71]

CHAPTER IV.

Capture of the Governor—His execution—I am led out of
my prison—The burning of the bodies—Governor Gamero’s
character—His intercourse with the native tribes—The
Priest Acuna—Arrival of H. B. M. war steamer
Virago—Mr. Dunn, the Secretary—Cambiaso plans the
capture of the steamer—He fears her force and discipline—The
officers invited on shore—No suspicions aroused—The
Virago sets sail.

On the afternoon of the day of
these executions, Cambiaso sent out two
or three parties of soldiers, well armed,
under one of the chief officers, and
all on horseback, with directions to
take the governor and his party, and
bring them in, dead or alive. They
had accurate information of their hiding
place from the traitor, and by
[Pg 72]

surrounding the bushes, and gradually
beating in, they succeeded in capturing
them, and about sunset brought them in,
and they were soon heavily ironed.

I heard that they were terribly emaciated,
and scarcely able to stand, from
weakness, having lived for nearly a week
on nothing but roots and berries. Cambiaso
ordered them to be served with
a good dinner, saying that they should
go with a belly-full, and then thrust
them into the calaboose, where captain
Avalos and the other prisoners were
confined. Captain Avalos told me afterwards
that neither the governor or the
priest showed any signs of fear, but
when he asked them if they knew their
fate, they answered coolly, “Oh, yes!”
Cambiaso seemed to intend to surround
this execution with all the pomp and
solemnity that he could command. About
[Pg 73]

nine, in the evening, there was a general
rush through the camp. The bugles
sounded the death march, the drums
beat, the soldiers were all ordered under
arms, and governor Gamero and the
priest Acuna were led out of the barracks.
All was still in the yard after
they left, and in a short time I heard
the report of their death shots. They
were shot under the same trees to which
Mr. Shaw and captain Talbot had been
tied.

In about an hour I was called out of
my room, and told that I was wanted
in the yard. I went out doggedly, for
this day of excitement had worn me
down into a sort of indifference as to
my fate; but the scene that lay before
me when I reached the platform, which,
raised above the rest of the yard, commanded
a view of the land beyond the
[Pg 74]

fortification, roused me at once from my
indifference. In the field north of the
barracks, was dug a deep hole, in which
a large fire was kindled, which threw
its red light on all around. On the
trees, to the right, hung the dead bodies
of Mr. Shaw, captain Talbot, and the
boy, and beneath them were dimly seen
the bleeding corpses of the governor
and priest. The rebels were busied
around the fire and the bodies, and
Cambiaso, with some mounted officers,
were to be seen giving directions. Soon
I saw a cart driven up to the fire, and a
dead body thrown from it into the flames,
with as little ceremony as one would
treat a dog. One of my guard standing
by me, said, “There goes the governor.”
The bodies of Mr. Shaw, captain Talbot,
and the poor English boy were one by
one cut down, and thrust into the fire.
[Pg 75]

The women of the camp had pleaded
with Cambiaso to allow the body of
the priest to be buried, and he, having
perhaps some feelings of reverence
for his sacred office, had allowed it
to be given into their hands. More
fuel was now heaped on the flames,
and their lurid light showed me a scene
which makes me shudder as I recall it.

The soldiers danced round the fire,
singing the national hymn of Chili, and
mingling with it shouts and curses, imprecations
on the governor, and threats
of vengeance against the remaining prisoners;
especially against captain Salas,
the commander of the troops under
Gamero, and against captain Avalos,
whose rank as an officer under the
government of Chili seemed to be his
only crime. The darkness of the night,
the lurid glare of the flames, the fantastic
[Pg 76]

dancing of the soldiers, the mingled
shouts and curses that met my
ear, made every thing appear to me like
some revelry in hell, where the souls
of the damned make merry over their
fellow sufferers. On this evening the
barque’s papers, also my private papers,
were burnt, with shouts of joy.

I was kept on the platform until the
flames had died down, when three cheers
were given by the soldiers around the
fire, and answered by those within the
yard; and soon after, I was ordered
back to my prison, to endure another
night of anxiety.

The mate eagerly asked me what I
thought was going to happen next, but
I answered him shortly, and turned
from him, for I felt the necessity of
calming my mind, after such excitement.

That night I passed in close communion
[Pg 77]

with myself, strengthening my
soul to meet whatever might be before
me, and rousing my energies to seize
every opportunity to escape from the
hands of such blood-thirsty fiends. The
morning found me calmer, and more full
of energy and determination, than any
moment since my captivity. If Cambiaso
ordered me to be brought out on
the platform in order to intimidate me,
he did not know his man. The sight,
instead of depressing me, roused in me
a spirit of revenge, and determined me
to retaliate the wrongs which I had
seen inflicted on my friend.

Governor Gamero was a post captain
in the Chilian army; his name, Benjamin
Numoz Gamero. I afterwards
heard him spoken of as a man of fine
character, and of excellent judgment.
Under his directions, the colony had
[Pg 78]

grown in prosperity and in discipline.
He had built some very comfortable
barracks for the soldiers, and some good
houses for the officers. The convicts
had been employed in clearing and cultivating
the ground, and intercourse and
trade with the Indians of the country
had been encouraged.

The native tribes around the colony
had always shown themselves friendly to
the settlement; and, as I learnt, had
been in the habit of coming down to
the barracks about once a month, bringing
with them game, and other articles,
which they were anxious to exchange
for flour, bread, and so forth. They
generally formed themselves on a line,
on the north side of the barracks, and
the governor would range his troops
upon the platform, above the fence, and
put in their view the two cannon, the
[Pg 79]

noise of which they had often heard,
and of which they had a superstitious
dread. The chiefs would then come
forward and meet the governor outside
the fence, and arrange their terms of
barter.

Of the clergyman, Acuna, I know but
little. The reverence of the women of
the colony for him, certainly speaks in
his favor.

The morning of the 4th of December,
while the mate and myself were eating
our scanty allowance of hard bread,
washed down by the water which we
had taken from the dirty buckets in the
guard room, a shout rose in the yard,
“A steamer! a war steamer, with the
English flag!” My heart leaped to my
mouth, as I sprung to my feet, and the
mate seemed to gather courage from the
very sense of the vicinity of his countrymen,
[Pg 80]

and from his confidence in the
protection of his flag. One moment’s
glance showed me that even amidst their
excitement, some of the guards were
watching us from the other room; and
managing to caution the mate by a
glance, I endeavored to assume as natural
an air as possible, listening and asking
questions as if from mere curiosity. I
gathered from the guard and from the
idlers round the camp who flocked in,
that Cambiaso had expressed his determination
to attempt to capture the
steamer; that the Chilian flag had been
run up at the flag-staff, and a gun fired
to attract the attention of the steamer,
and induce them to come into the harbor
and drop anchor. At last, she was
seen to make for the harbor, and to be
evidently making preparations to anchor.
Her name, they told me, was the Virago.

[Pg 81]
During the last hour, the mate and
myself had been forming a thousand
plans by which we hoped to attract the
attention of the officers or men of the
steamer, when they landed, and warn
them of their own danger, and of our
situation; but our plans were quickly
frustrated; for no sooner had the steamer
come to anchor, than the mate and myself
were hurriedly taken from our room,
and led across the yard towards a smaller
building. In vain I questioned those
who were leading me, as to where I
was going; my only answer was a
hasty oath, and an order to be quiet.
The door of the little calaboose was
opened, and we were pushed into a room
about eight feet square, and the bolts
drawn behind us. Before me, sitting or
lying on the floor, were six haggard
looking men, heavily ironed.  I spoke
[Pg 82]

to them in Spanish, but was answered
by one of them in good English, who
said, “You are the captain of the American
barque?” I started with surprise,
for I immediately thought him an American;
and I saw that he was a gentleman,
or something beyond a common
sailor. And what American could be
confined there, not belonging to the
Florida? Could there have been another
vessel captured by these pirates, of which
I had heard nothing? “Who are you?”
I eagerly asked; “are you an American?
How came you in this wretched place?”

He answered that his name was Dunn,
and that he was a Brazilian, who had
been employed by governor Gamero as
his secretary. That he had been seized
by Cambiaso’s orders, at the time of
his insurrection, and confined in that
filthy den ever since.

[Pg 83]
While he was speaking, one of our
guard knocked on the door, and ordered
silence, saying that he would shoot down
the first one of us who troubled him
again.

The next three hours we spent in
anxious listening to what was going on
without; Mr. Dunn and myself now and
then exchanging a word in a whisper.
Every attempt that we made to look
from our little window was prevented
by our guard, who stood closely gathered
about both door and window, every
now and then looking in upon us. Without,
all was very still and orderly; no
noisy rioting to be heard, nothing, save
every now and then the tread of soldiers,
or the usual noises attending the
regular military duty of a barrack yard.
We expected every moment to hear the
noise of firing, or some shout of exultation,
[Pg 84]

if the officers of the Virago were
entrapped as we had been; but all was
quiet.

Towards the middle of the afternoon,
the English mate and myself were taken
out, and conducted to our old prison.
All was quiet in the yard, and as I
glanced around, I saw no new faces, no
change in the arrangement of the soldiers,
no building guarded but those
which I had been accustomed to recognize
as prisons for my crew, the crew
of the E. Cornish, and the room where
captain Avalos, and the prisoners with
him, were confined.

Arrived at our old home, the guard
became more communicative, and told
me that our prison had been changed
to keep us out of sight of the English
officers, who had come on shore, visited
the barracks,  and  the  Florida, and had
[Pg 85]

left the harbor without having their
suspicions excited. This chance of escape
was lost to us then. I felt very
indignant at what seemed to me the
unparalleled stupidity of the officers of
the Virago, and yet it is very possible
that had their suspicions been excited,
we might all have fallen victims to the
revengeful spirit of the rebels, before
any thing could have been done for
our rescue.

During that evening and the next day,
I managed to extract from my guard
and from one or two of my fellow
voyagers, the Chilian prisoners, who had
now become almost regular visitors to
my room, an account of all that had
occurred during the visit of the Virago
to the colony.

On the steamer’s casting anchor, Cambiaso
had manifested a great desire to
[Pg 86]

capture her; probably expecting something
of a prize on board of her, and
perhaps wishing to have in his hands so
powerful a vessel. He had called a
meeting of his officers, to consult upon
the most advisable plan to pursue, to
accomplish the capture. The first plan
proposed, was that which had been so
successful in our case and that of the
English brig: to seize the officers as
they came on shore, and kill them at
once, to avoid the necessity of employing
men to guard them; then to board
the steamer and take her, having first
enticed away as many of the officers
and crew as possible. The sight of the
big guns, which showed their teeth all
along the side of the steamer; their
knowledge of the excellent discipline on
board a British man-of-war; of the capability
of even the smallest midshipman
[Pg 87]

to take command of the crew in case
of the absence of the superior officers,
all deterred the pirates from attempting
this plan of capture.

The difficulties in the way of the
capture were, I heard, discussed very
freely; general Garcia being most earnest
in insisting upon them. The chief, or
rather the first difficulty suggested by
him, was that the officers might come
on shore so well attended that a fight
might be necessary, to overcome them;
and that the noise of the struggle might
excite the suspicions of those on board,
when the whole colony would be at the
mercy of the guns of the Virago. This
plan was put to the vote among the
officers, and after voting upon it nine
times, it was rejected. Once, I was
told, it came within one vote of being
accepted.

[Pg 88]
The next proposition was worthy of
the blood-thirsty wretches. It was that
such officers should be invited to dine
with Cambiaso, he supporting the character
of governor of the colony; and
that poison should be mingled with
some of the dishes of which the officers
were to partake; but this plan also was
rejected. The rebels must have felt
that it was too uncertain, even if human
nature did not make them feel something
revolting in it. It was then proposed
that some of the officers of Cambiaso
should be sent on board the
steamer, with an invitation to the captain
to land, and that they should, on their
return, report the appearance of things.
This was agreed to, and the spies were
sent; but their report of the order and
discipline on board, the well manned
guns, the well drilled marines, determined
[Pg 89]

Cambiaso to give up all hopes of
capturing the vessel, and to confine himself
to attempting to elude suspicion.
The officers of the Virago landed, and
were shown through the fortification and
the colony, Cambiaso attending them.
I was told that one of the prisoners,
Mr. Dunn, who talked both English and
Spanish, was taken from his prison, and
after being threatened with instant death
if he revealed the true state of things,
was employed to interpret for Cambiaso;
while at the same time two of the rebels
who had some knowledge of English,
were ordered to watch him, and report
any thing which might sound suspicious.

The captain of the Virago asked what
vessels those were lying at anchor.
Cambiaso answered that they belonged
to him; remarking that the brig had
prisoners on board of her—some of the
[Pg 90]

convicts whom he had not the conveniences
for keeping in close confinement
on shore; and that as the vessel was
only used as a prison, there would be
nothing interesting to them in going on
board of her.

The captain and officers afterwards
visited the Florida, from which all my
crew had been removed except the steward,
a negro man, and on board which
were living five or six of Cambiaso’s
followers. How the English officers could
be so blind as not to read on the
stern of the barque the name, “Florida,
of New Orleans,” and on the brig,
“Eliza Cornish, of Liverpool,” or not to
have their suspicions excited, if they did
read those names, is incomprehensible to
me. It would seem that their own
common sense would have told them
that such a colony could not hold vessels;
[Pg 91]

or if it did, that the vessels would
be Chilian—not American, or English.
I was told that Cambiaso made the
captain a present of eighty or ninety
tons of coal, of which the Virago was
in need; but I could not but think
there must be some mistake about this.
The coal was perhaps bought by the
Virago. Surely, Her British Majesty’s
vessels do not accept such presents as
that from the governor of a small penal
colony, on the shores of Patagonia. So
large a quantity of coal would be a very
valuable gift in such a place as that,
where all the fuel, except the brush-wood
from the scrubby forests around, must be
brought from abroad.

Cambiaso told the captain, whose name
I afterwards learnt was Stewart, that
several of his prisoners had escaped,
and were now lurking about the woods
[Pg 92]

at Port Famine; and if, on the steamer’s
anchoring there to take in some of this
coal, which lay on the shore, any of
these prisoners should wish to be taken
on board the Virago, he wished captain
Stewart to order his men to drive
them away, and to hold no communication
with them. Some of the soldiers
who escaped with the governor, had, it
appears, never been re-taken, and Cambiaso
feared their report to the English
vessel.

It seems to me another instance of
stupidity in captain Stewart, that he
should have swallowed unsuspiciously this
story of Cambiaso’s. Would it not have
been much more probable that Cambiaso
would have asked their assistance in recapturing
his prisoners, and requested
the Virago to retain them until he
could send for them?  I could not but
[Pg 93]

feel that all these things, or indeed,
half of them, would have been enough
to have opened the eyes of even a
moderately “cute” Yankee. But perhaps
some allowance for my impatience
at the blindness of the English officers
is to be made, when we consider how
much this chance of escape was to me,
and how bitterly I lamented its loss.

My fellow prisoner and myself were
sad enough during the rest of that evening,
as we heard that the Virago had
left Port Famine, and was now out of
sight.

[Pg 94]

CHAPTER V.

We are better treated—Captain Avalos again—His privations—The
sergeant shot—Mr. Buela—Cambiaso’s discipline—His
code of laws—Personal appearance—His
vanity—Threats of poison—Improved fare—The coffee—The
mate secures the E. Cornish—Cambiaso and
Garcia visit me—I go on board the Florida—My steward.

After the departure of the steamer,
the severity of our imprisonment was
very much relaxed. The prisoners were
allowed to walk about every day, accompanied
by a guard, and were even
allowed some communication with each
other. I saw captain Avalos again, and
shook hands earnestly with him. He
told me that he had thought that I had
been shot with captain Talbot and Mr.
Shaw.  Captain Avalos had been confined
[Pg 95]

in the same building with captain
Salas, and with the first lieutenant of
the troops under Gamero, of whom Cambiaso
had been second lieutenant. He
told me that captain Salas had made
several attempts to hold communication
with some of the soldiers under his
command, but that they had been strictly
watched by Cambiaso, who feared treachery.
One morning, before the execution
of Mr. Shaw and the governor, a sergeant
who had formerly been a convict,
but had been promoted for good conduct
was detected receiving a bottle of
brandy from captain Salas, and was
immediately seized, tried by a summary
court martial, and put to death as a
traitor, under the sanguinary code established
by Cambiaso. After this, the
officers in confinement had been more
strictly watched, and forbidden to hold
[Pg 96]

any communication with the soldiers on
duty.

Mr. Dunn, the secretary, I often met
in my walks, and we generally managed
to exchange a greeting, and to convey
some information to each other in English,
as we passed. Mr. Buela I also
saw again at this time. He had suffered
much privation, being confined in the same
room of six feet square in which he
was first put with my crew, where they
were so crowded that they were obliged
to stand up most of the time.

It was good policy in me to cultivate
all friendly relations with my captors;
and for this reason, I began, at this
time, to mingle in their sports, at least
as a spectator. In the evenings, the
men and women would often collect
under a large tent, and dance the Fandango,
the so well known Spanish dance.
[Pg 97]

They danced it with handkerchiefs, waving
them as each couple separated and
retired to the right and left. One
evening Cambiaso came up to me as I
was standing by the tent ropes, and
asked me to join the dance. I had no
heart to do this, but pleaded in excuse
my American ignorance of the figures.
These evenings generally ended with a
feast—a pig or calf barbecued.

One night’s rude and cruel amusement
I cannot even now think of without a
shudder. All the dogs of the encampment
were driven into a circle, and
then chased with clubs. The cries of
the poor frightened animals, the howlings
of those who were knocked down, rang
in my ears all night; and next morning
their carcasses could be seen lying
around on every side.

I also did my best, during my walks,
[Pg 98]

to keep up my friendly intercourse with
the prisoners I had brought down to
the Straits with me, and who had been
allowed their liberty, on swearing allegiance
to Cambiaso. Some of them were
very friendly, and brought me such information
as they thought would interest
me. From them I learnt much of the
discipline which Cambiaso had established,
and of the sanguinary code of
laws which he had drawn up.

Immediately after the escape of the
governor, and the success of the insurrection,
Cambiaso was proclaimed Commandante
by the rebels. Afterwards
his title was Major General, and Garcia’s,
General, or
little
general, as he was
called by most of the soldiers, by way
of distinction. On the same day, by
order of Cambiaso, the hospital, chapel,
with all the sacred vessels on the altar,
[Pg 99]

the house and robes of the priest, were
burnt; Cambiaso declaring that he would
have nothing to do with any religious
rites. A red flag was hoisted, having
upon it a scull and cross-bones, with
the motto, “I give no quarter;” and
upon it the soldiers and released convicts
all swore fidelity. This flag I
often saw raised in the colony, on
parade days, during my imprisonment.
I give below the code of laws, a copy
of which I afterwards obtained at Valparaiso.
Of its atrocity I need say
nothing, as it speaks for itself.

MILITARY CRIMES,

AND THEIR CORRESPONDING PUNISHMENTS.

Article I.

Every inferior who speaks disrespectfully
of his superior officer, shall be
immediately shot.

[Pg 100]

Art. II.

Every inferior who should raise his
hand against his superior officer, shall
be immediately hung.

Art. III.

If an inferior strikes his superior
officers, with or without arms, he shall
be burnt alive.

Art. IV.

He who should be a traitor to the
flag we have sworn, shall be cut in
pieces, alive, and afterwards burnt.

Art. V.

He who is guilty of perjury, incurs
the same punishment.

Art. VI.

He who communicates with the enemy,
incurs the same punishment.

[Pg 101]

Art. VII.

He who speaks against the service,
incurs the same punishment.

Art. VIII.

Robbery.
He who steals any object,
money, or any article whatsoever, shall
be hung.

Art. IX.

Want of Punctuality.
If any person
in the military service, (no matter in
what capacity,) be wanting in his duty,
and does not present himself in the
place and at the hour at which he has
been ordered to appear, he shall be
tried and shot.

Art. X.

Cowardice.
Every man who, for want
of courage, flies from the enemy, shall
be put to death by the bayonet; and
[Pg 102]

his eyes shall be taken out to prove
the fact. The body of a coward shall
be burnt.

Art. XI.

If any traitor be seized, his tongue
shall be cut out, it being the instrument
of his falsehood. He shall be
burnt with a red hot iron, and he shall
afterwards suffer the punishments he has
incurred, according to Articles 4th, 5th,
and 6th.

Art. XII.

Sentinels found asleep at their posts,
shall be immediately hung; they being
the only persons responsible for said
post’s security. Therefore, the sergeants
are requested to visit the posts every
ten minutes, for the observation of this
article.

[Pg 103]

Art. XIII.

He who in battle gives quarter to an
enemy, out of pity, or any other consideration,
shall be immediately shot.

Art. XIV.

The officer, sergeant, or soldier who
is not vigilant when on guard, shall be
tried and shot.

Art. XV.

The infractor of any of these laws, if
an officer, shall be hung; if a soldier, shot.

Art. XVI.

All military persons are charged with
the fulfilment of the preceding articles.
This is particularly recommended to superior
officers: and they are requested
to inform their troops that want of information
on this head will not excuse
them from undergoing the punishments
expressed.

[Pg 104]

Art. XVII.

He who should steal or hide (or abet
another in so doing,) any powder, balls,
or article of war, shall be burnt alive.

Art. XVIII.

He who in battle or on march should
throw away the cartridges given him,
desirous of not injuring the enemy, or
of relieving himself of their weight,
shall be cut in pieces alive, joint by
joint, beginning in preference with the
fingers of the right hand. His remains
shall afterwards be burnt.

Art. XIX.

If, on arriving in any province, a

Montista
be discovered, his house shall
be sacked, and the owner or tenant
thereof shall be burnt in the said
house.

[Pg 105]

Art. XX.

If any person in the troops under my
command sells any article with usury,
he shall receive one hundred lashes.

Art. XXI.

The chiefs of this division, desirous of
preventing all fraud, prohibit, under pain
of the gallows, any attempt to give money
on gage, or with any kind of interest.

Art. XXII.

He who, from this time forward, should
lend money on gage, shall lose all right
to the gage given him; losing also what
he gave on it, and receiving two hundred
lashes in punishment.

Art. XXIII.

The sentinel or advanced post who
on seeing the enemy approach, does not
give the alarm, shall be cut in pieces
[Pg 106]

alive; considering that from his omission
great danger may arise.

Art. XXIV.

The chief, officer, sergeant, or soldier
who shall not defend his post unto
death, shall be burnt alive; no excuse
to be admitted on account of the greater
force of the enemy, the bad state of
the armament, or any thing else tending
to cover his cowardice.

Art. XXV.

Any officer ordered to assault a post,
shall take it, or lose his life in the attempt;
if he returns unsuccessful, though
he have lost all his soldiers, he shall be
immediately shot.

Art. XXVI.

If any sentinel gives the “
qui vive
”
and does not receive in answer, “General
[Pg 107]

Cruz,” he shall immediately fire at the
person interrogated.

Art. XXVII.

This government, desirous that every
individual shall preserve his money, and
employ it for useful objects, prohibits
all kinds of hazardous games; and if
any is resorted to in order to while
away time, it must be lottery, and
without interest. He who infringes this
article, shall be hung.

Art. XXVIII.

An ounce of gold shall be given to
every body who gives information of
the infringement of the preceding Article.

Art. XXIX.

Any sentinel who abandons the post
committed to his care, shall be pinched
[Pg 108]

with red hot tongs until he expires.
After this, his body shall be exposed
publicly during eight days; after which
it shall be burnt, and its ashes cast
into the air.

Given in the camp of Punta Arena,
December 13, 1851.

On reading over this code of laws
and punishments, many proofs may be
seen of either present or intended communication
with the insurgents in the
province of Conception, under general
Cruz. Articles 18, 19, and 25 would
indicate that Cambiaso had in contemplation
a march through the country, to
join his forces with those of the revolutionists.
By “a Montista,” is meant
an adherent of the government at Santiago,
under President Monté.

At this time, I very frequently saw
[Pg 109]

Cambiaso; sometimes on horseback, surrounded
by his aids; sometimes walking
on the parade ground. He rode well,
and generally on a very spirited horse;
and always went armed with sword,
dirk knife and pistol. His personal
appearance was fine;—an open forehead,
a fair complexion, with a profusion of
dark hair, an ample moustache, and
heavy beard. His nose was aquiline,
and his profile finely marked, and what
an artist would call the coloring of his
face, was admirable; the bright red
lips, fair forehead, and dark hair, softened
down by the lighter colored beard
and moustache, gave a beauty to his
face that would have been a study for
a painter. But his eyes revealed the
evil passions hid under that fair exterior.
They were long, and dark, and
hid under their lashes, from beneath
[Pg 110]

which he cast sudden and covert glances.
When he was talking to me, he never
looked steadily at me, but after ending
his remarks, would give me a sideway
glance, as if marking the effect of what
he said; and in that glance there was
something to me stealthy and cat-like.
After I observed this, I always took
care, during our conversations, to look
him directly in the eye, as if afraid I
might lose a word, but in fact because
I felt and knew that he could not endure
any look, much less one so intently
given.

From my observation of his character,
I should not have called him a brave
man. He was very vain, very fond of
being admired, and often to gain the
applause of his own men, would assume
an air of bravado; and doubtless the
same love of admiration would have led
[Pg 111]

him into daring acts; but he talked too
much of his valor, to impress me with
any strong belief in it. He doubtless
had the animal courage which belongs
to an uneducated man, and one brought
up in the profession of arms; but I am
convinced that in any situation calling
for self reliance and presence of mind,
his boasted courage would have failed
him. But I am giving now rather the
conclusions I drew from all I ever knew
of him, than any opinion I could form
at this time.

Cambiaso was a young man, not more
than twenty-five or six years of age; in
person, rather thin than stout, and of
not more than middle size. He was
vain of his beauty, and fond of ornaments.
The day after my capture, he
sent word to me that he wanted my
watch and chain.  I handed them to
[Pg 112]

the officer who brought the message.
The watch I never saw again; but the
chain I sometimes recognized among the
ornaments on Cambiaso’s person.

Indeed, it was no uncommon thing for
me to recognize my own pistols, cutlasses,
and so forth, carried by the
officers and guards who surrounded me.
And I am conscious of a singular feeling
of indignation,—or, to use a more
accurate word, of impatience—which would
cross my mind whenever I reflected that
I might at any moment receive my
death-wound from a stroke or a shot
from one of my own weapons. At this
time I was destitute of even a change
of clothing; my trunks, with those of
all my passengers, being left on board
the Florida, and soon broken open and
rifled of their contents, by Cambiaso and
his men.

[Pg 113]
In my conversations with Cambiaso,
which now occurred very frequently, I
often begged permission to go on board
my vessel, and be under guard there,
knowing that some of his followers, with
their wives, were living on board the
Florida; but his answer constantly was,
“No: I am making up my mind what
to do with you all.” At times he would
threaten to shoot us at once; this was
when he was made angry by reports of
the trouble which the care of us gave.
These threats were reported to me by
the Chilian prisoners; but during his
conversations with me, he never broke
out into violent expressions, but seemed
rather to keep a control over himself,
as if to impress me with a sense of
his self command.

A few days after the visit of the
Virago, I was told that Cambiaso had
[Pg 114]

been heard to say that he had made up
his mind to poison me. This seemed
to me so idle a threat, when he had
me so completely in his power, that it
did not make much impression upon me,
until I found that a great difference
was made in our fare. We were allowed
to eat with the guards in the
outer apartment, instead of having our
food brought to our own room; and
the dishes put before us were much
better than I had formerly seen served
to the soldiers.

I told my suspicions to the mate, and
we determined to taste only those dishes
which we saw the soldiers eat of. This,
however, it was difficult to do when
any new dish was sent to us, for the
guard being first served, would eat ravenously
of the delicacy, and often leave
nothing for us.

[Pg 115]
One morning, a cup of coffee was
sent to me, and to me alone, from Cambiaso’s
own table. I put it down before
me, and hesitated; for the conviction
flashed across me that the poison was
in this coffee; but looking up, I saw
the eyes of all the soldiers and the
mate fixed upon me. They had all
heard of Cambiaso’s threat, and probably
the same idea was in their minds as in
mine. Their fixed gaze roused my pride,
and reflecting that I might as well drink
it first as last, and indeed, that my
death by Cambiaso’s hands in one way
or other was almost certain, I raised
the cup and drank the coffee at one
draught. No evil consequences followed,
and from that time a cup was sent me
every morning; but I never could divest
myself of the idea that into some of
them the poison would be put.

[Pg 116]
The weather throughout the time of
our imprisonment had been very warm,
but interrupted by heavy north-west
winds, which swept from between the
hills, and sometimes drove across the
harbor. The E. Cornish and the Florida
had been anchored by the rebels, with
two anchors each; but this was done in
a very unseamanlike manner, and in one
of these high winds the E. Cornish
began to drag her anchors. This was
reported to me by some of the friendly
Chilians, who had been on board, and
I began to fear that we should lose the
brig. Not that I had any definite idea
of any succor which could arise to us
from Cambiaso’s retaining the vessels, but
they seemed a tie between ourselves and
our homes; and as long as they were
safe, we had at least the means by
which we could leave the place, in case
[Pg 117]

it was ever in our power so to do. I
therefore advised the mate to send word
to Cambiaso by one of his guards, that
if he was allowed to go on board his
vessel, he could remedy the difficulty;
and at the same time I told all our
visitors, who were quite plenty at this
time, that they should use their influence
with the general, to allow the mate to
secure the brig for them.

Cambiaso immediately sent an order
for the mate to be sent off to the E.
Cornish in one of the shore boats, accompanied
by three or four of his soldiers,
as guards. This was in the
evening; and after he left, I was visited
by several of the officers, and at last
by Cambiaso himself. I fancied I saw
some anxiety amongst them, with regard
to the mate’s proceedings. They were
so ignorant of all that pertained to
[Pg 118]

navigation, that I believe they thought
it possible for one man to navigate a
vessel by himself, and had some idea
that the mate’s request to go on board
was part of a concerted plan between
us, by which he could make his escape,
and bring succor to the other prisoners.
The next morning the wind shifted, and
blew directly in shore very fresh, with
a heavy sea. Cambiaso at once ran up
a flag on the flag-staff, as a signal for
the boat to return to shore. I was
walking on the platform at the time,
and saw her leave the vessel, with four
men in her; but the distance was too
great for me to distinguish whether or
no the mate was among them. As the
boat neared the shore, and got among
the breakers, I could see that she was
rowed very unsteadily, as if by landsmen.
Suddenly she was capsized, and
[Pg 119]

the men in the water. Three of the men
struggled to the shore, but the fourth was
drowned. He never rose after the first
struggle. As the remainder came into
the barracks, I pressed eagerly forward,
to see if my fellow prisoner was with
them, and learned that he had remained
on the brig. The circumstance of his
remaining, added to their half formed
suspicions, and during the rest of that
day, I was obliged to calm the hourly
increasing excitement, by assuring each
new visitor to my prison, that the mate
was doubtless doing his best to make
the brig hold to her anchors; that it
was not yet safe for him to leave her,
and so forth. That evening, to my
great relief, he made his appearance,
and I immediately gave him his cue as
to what account he should give of his
delay.  I felt, however, that I had run
[Pg 120]

a great risk, which nothing but the
strongest necessity should make me incur
again.

During the third week in December,
I had frequent visits from Cambiaso and
Garcia, during which they questioned
me very closely in regard to my knowledge
of navigation, sometimes turning
to the English mate, and comparing his
answer with mine. They asked what I
knew of the navigation of the Straits;
and would often seem to be cross-examining
me with regard to the lay of the
shore, and the appearance of the headlands.

I took advantage of their visits, to
beg for more indulgence to my crew,
who were still shut up in the crowded
place where they had first been put,
and deprived of almost the necessaries
of existence; but it was evident, from
[Pg 121]

Cambiaso’s answers, that he had not
yet determined what course to take with
regard to us.

About the 20th of the month, I received
permission from Cambiaso to go
on board my vessel, and remain there;
and on the same day my crew were
released from their prison, and allowed
to run at large in the yard, and cook
for themselves. After my long confinement
in the barracks, under the constant
supervision of the guard, never allowed
to eat or sleep without being watched,
the Florida seemed like home to me,
and the face of my steward like that
of an old friend. He had been
kept on board to cook for the men
who were living in the Florida, at the
head of whom was an officer by the
name of Tapia, (the one who brought
my first and second letters to me,) and
[Pg 122]

his wife. My steward had often asked
for me while I was on shore, and Tapia
would sometimes tease him, by telling
him that I was shot or hung, that he
would never see me again, and so forth;
at which he would cry like a child;
and when he saw me come on board,
he danced and skipped around me with
a true negro-like expression of delight.

I asked him if he wanted to stay in
that country with those rebels and pirates.
“No, massa; no, massa Captain,”
he replied, “I want to be with you; I
feel safe while you are by me.”

[Pg 123]

CHAPTER VI.

Comparative comfort—The American ensign—Christmas
day—My visit to the barracks—The Indian boys—Cambiaso’s
rage—Execution of the Indian woman—The
cattle slaughtered—Escape of the Indians—Fears of the
rebels—Preparations for leaving—The Florida re-christened—Interview
with Cambiaso—The embarking of the
colonists—Prisoners sent to the Florida.

After my removal to the Florida, I
made myself comparatively comfortable,
with the help of my steward Tom, who
seemed as if he could never do enough
for me. I was allowed to take possession
of my state-room, and found some
few of my personal effects lying about
the vessel, which I took the liberty of
taking possession of. Tom had two of
my shirts, which he had washed in his
[Pg 124]

best manner, and hid for me. The
luxury of a change of clothes and a
good bath, was delightful to me. Tom
was allowed to do my cooking at the
same time that he did Tapia’s, our rations
being brought from the barracks.
I used to eat my meals, sitting on the
deck, it being then the height of summer,
and very warm most of the time,
in the cabin.

One morning, in loitering on the deck,
I saw the American ensign, which had
been ignominiously thrown behind a coil
of rope. I glanced around, and finding
that no one was observing me, raised
it, and hurried with it to my state
room, concealing it beneath my mattrass.

I found the Florida much injured by
the neglect and rough usage she had
undergone. Many of her sails were
destroyed, her running and standing gear
[Pg 125]

cut up, and one of her quarter boats
lost. This grieved me very much; and
with Tom’s aid, I endeavored gradually
to repair such of the injuries as it was
in my power to mend, thinking that
the time might come when the vessel
might enable us to make our escape.

The morning of Christmas Day dawned,
bringing to me so many sad recollections
that I became nervously restless, and
unable to remain quietly on board my
vessel. Every thing seemed to remind
me of home, by the very force of contrast;
the wild, foreign faces around
me; the strange language, made harsh
by oaths and curses, which greeted my
ear; the summer vegetation; the heat—all
so opposed to every thing associated
with the season in my mind; the recollection
of the terrible scenes I had
passed through; of my present danger,
[Pg 126]

and of what might be still before me—all
pressed upon me, until some change
of place seemed to me absolutely necessary.

I determined to go on shore; so,
taking a boat, accompanied by Tapia
and some of his men, we rowed ashore,
and soon reached the barracks.

Here, every thing was in confusion—such
confusion, that I quickly wished
myself back again on board the barque.
The soldiers were mostly under arms,
the released prisoners and my crew
standing in groups on the parade ground;
and, looking towards Cambiaso’s house,
which was in the middle of the yard,
I saw him standing at the door, talking
to Garcia, and apparently in a state of
great excitement. Not willing to come
under his notice in his present mood,
I passed quietly around the yard, looking
[Pg 127]

for somebody from whom I could
obtain information. Mr. Dunn I could
not see, he being still under guard,
confined with captains Avalos and Salas;
but I soon met my old fellow-prisoner,
the English mate, and from him and
some of the Chilians I gathered the
cause of the uproar.

There had been several visits from
the Indians during the last week or two,
and there was some reason to suppose
that some of these late visitors had
come as spies. The herdsmen who had
the charge of the cattle belonging to
the colony, had reported that they had
of late seen Indians, armed, lurking
around the cattle, and hanging about
the woods which surrounded the cantonment.
This had roused Cambiaso’s
suspicions, and on the day after I removed
to the Florida, he had seized
[Pg 128]

two Indian boys who had been living
some time in the barracks, and, apparently
with the design of intimidating
the Indians, had ordered them to be
conveyed to a point about two miles
distant, at a place where the Indians
were accustomed to pass, on their way
to the barracks. There they were hung
by the neck to the trees, and lanced
to death, their cheeks and noses being
cut off.

On Christmas morning, an Indian woman
had appeared at the gate, requesting
to enter and visit her son, who
was in the barracks. She was carried
before Cambiaso, and being questioned
by him as to the movements of the
Indians, and when they were coming to
make another visit for barter, she contradicted
herself continually. She confessed
that she had seen the bodies of
[Pg 129]

the Indian boys, but being asked who
was with her when she saw them, she
at first said, “No one;” then said she
had been sent to the yard by one of
the chiefs,—then that he was angry
about the death of the boys. While
she was being questioned, the herdsmen
came hurrying into the camp, with the
news that the Indians were killing the
cattle, and carrying them off.

Cambiaso mustered his mounted troops
hurriedly, arming them with muskets
and clubs; and then, leaving the Indian
woman under guard, he hastened out
with his men in pursuit of the marauders.
The Indians soon took the alarm,
and mounting their swift horses, were
off before him, leaving the slaughtered
cattle lying on their pasture ground.
He, however, soon put his men on the
track, and leaving them to follow the
[Pg 130]

Indians, returned on the gallop to the
barracks, terribly exasperated. He rode
in and called to the guard to bring out
the Indian woman, crying, “Drag her
out! kill her! shoot her down, she
shall tell me no more lies!” She was
dragged out before him, resisting with
all her might, and pleading for her life,
asking for her son, praying for his help.
Her prayers were useless, and were not
even listened to. Cambiaso himself collected
a file of soldiers, and ordered
her to be dragged to a tree and tied
there. He gave the order to fire himself.
Six or eight bullets struck her,
but still she writhed in agony, and continued
her shrieks for help. One of
the soldiers, at a nod from Cambiaso,
walked up to her and struck her on
the head with a club, which silenced
her for ever.  Her dead body was hanging
[Pg 131]

to the tree when I entered the
yard.

The English mate, from whom I got
most of this information, and who had
been suffered to go at large almost unwatched
since I left the barracks, told
me that he had never seen Cambiaso in
such a fiendish passion; that Garcia
had tried to quiet him, but without the
least effect.

The troops were still out, following
the Indians, and great anxiety was expressed
in the yard that they might
overtake and capture them. The general
opinion seemed to be that the
Indians, seeing the weakened and disorderly
state of the colony, had formed a
plan to make a sudden attack upon
them, and massacre them all, for the
sake of the booty which they would
secure.  From what I gathered, I concluded
[Pg 132]

that a party of Indians had come
down the pass on their way to visit
the barracks, when, finding the dead
bodies of the boys on their road, they
had sent the woman on as a spy. Why
they had commenced slaughtering and
driving off the cattle, without waiting
for her return, I could not tell, unless
the herdsmen were so few and so easily
to be overpowered that the temptation
was too great for them.

At about one in the afternoon, I succeeded
in persuading Tapia and his men
to put off again for the barque, and
happy indeed was I to find myself again
on board of her.

I determined not to go ashore again
unless I was compelled to, and to keep
as much out of Cambiaso’s way as possible.
Fifty plans of escape had crossed
my mind. Sometimes to leave the vessel,
[Pg 133]

and strike across the country among
the Indians—but from that, the fear of
starvation deterred me; sometimes to
get enough of my crew and of the
prisoners friendly to me on board the
vessel to navigate her, and make our
escape in that way; but the Florida
lay right under the guns of the fort,
and the impossibility of getting her
under weigh was too evident. Besides,
I felt a great reluctance to any plan
of escape which would leave my fellow
sufferers, Mr. Dunn, captain Avalos, and
so forth, still in the hands of the pirates.
There seemed to be nothing but
to wait the course of events, and avail
myself of any favorable circumstance
that might occur.

On the morning of the 26th, several
men from the barracks came on board
to visit us, as they sometimes did, and
[Pg 134]

from them we learned that the soldiers
sent after the Indians had returned without
being able to overtake them, after
following them for twelve hours; and
that there was a good deal of anxiety
on shore, lest the Indians should come
up in force and attack them in the
night.

I had felt some desire to see one of
the native Patagonians, having still my
school-boy belief that they were giants,
as our geographies generally inform us.
During my imprisonment at the barracks,
one or two of the men had visited the
yard, and I had seen them from my
window. They were certainly large in
stature, but by no means came up to
the measure of my boyish imagination.
They had heretofore shown themselves
friendly towards the colonists, being
probably kept in awe by governor Gamero,
[Pg 135]

and the strict discipline which he
enforced; but they were said to be very
far from cowardly, and very savage and
inhuman when roused by the excitement
of fighting. I had often thought that
Cambiaso had some dread of them, judging
from two or three remarks about
them which he had made to me from
time to time.

For two or three days after this disturbance
by the Indians, a sharp lookout
was kept by Cambiaso, and every
visit to the Florida from the shore gave
me accounts of the alarm of the rebels.
At last, I heard that we were all to
leave the place, and the settlement was
to be abandoned. I eagerly asked Tapia,
from whom I heard this, if he would
tell me where we were going; but I
found he knew no more of our destination
than I did: indeed, it was only
[Pg 136]

from what he had observed on shore,
and from the surmises of the men around
him, that he had drawn his conclusion.
I felt very anxious to go on shore and
try to discover for myself how much
truth there was in this report, but the
remembrance of my last visit and its
risks deterred me. I could only question
Tapia, who went to the fort very often,
and who seemed as anxious as myself
to know what was to be done. It was
evident that the men did not trust Cambiaso;
that they feared his securing the
treasure and one of the vessels, and
abandoning them to the mercy of the
Indians or to the Chilian government,
when the news of the insurrection should
reach Valparaiso. This seemed not improbable;
but for myself, I judged it
more likely that Cambiaso was making
some preparation to join the insurgent
[Pg 137]

party under general Cruz, in the province
of Conception, for I was convinced
that he had in some way held communication
with them before he rose against
governor Gamero. He had several times
in his conversations with me, declared
himself a sworn partisan of general
Cruz; and once, in answer to my complaint
of the outrages committed against
my vessel and myself, he had said that
if general Cruz succeeded in overthrowing
the government at Santiago, everything
connected with my case should be
satisfactorily adjusted, and that I should
have no reason to complain. In speaking
thus, he must of course have referred
to my pecuniary losses. No reparation
could be made to me or to his friends,
for the barbarities inflicted upon my
friend, Mr. Shaw; but in Cambiaso’s
scale of injuries, the loss of property
[Pg 138]

probably stood highest. Somewhere about
the 29th or 30th of December, several
workmen were sent on board the Florida,
evidently for the purpose of making
preparation for her departure. Her name,
which was beautifully painted on her
stern, was smeared over, a fresh coat of
paint put on, and the word “Inesperado,”
(
the unexpected
,) inserted in its place.
Wood, water and provisions in great
quantities were sent to the Florida and
the Eliza Cornish, and the two vessels
were put in as good order as could be
expected from such unseamanlike workmen.

These workmen took the opportunity
to ransack the two vessels, secreting
everything of value that they could lay
their hands on, and throwing overboard
what they thought useless. Among other
things, they came across some bags of
[Pg 139]

silver ore which had been overlooked
in the former searching of the Eliza
Cornish, and doubtless would have appropriated
this treasure to the deep, if
the English mate had not been standing
by them at the time of the discovery,
and threatened to inform against them.
The bags were worth about two hundred
dollars apiece.

On the morning of the last day of
the year, Cambiaso himself came on
board, attended by his aids, fully armed,
and evidently intending to surround himself
with all that could impress us with
an idea of his authority. He went into
the cabin, and then sent for me to come
to him. When I entered, he was seated
by the table, with his pistols lying
before him, and dressed in his full regimentals.
He received me with much
politeness, and offered me a seat; then
[Pg 140]

commenced by telling me that the marks
of hostility shown to the colony by the
Indians, and the difficulty of obtaining
supplies for his followers, had determined
him to abandon the place, and
that he had made up his mind to keep
me with him, to navigate the vessel;
and that he expected me to use my utmost
skill, and to obey his orders to
the letter, with regard to the course of
the vessel. I answered him very coolly,
that he had left me no choice; since I
was entirely in his power, I must perforce
obey his orders; that with regard
to using my utmost skill, I had too
much regard for my own life and the
lives of my crew in that perilous navigation,
not to do my best. My coolness
did not seem to offend him, for he
smiled as I spoke, and rising, said,
“You shall be well watched, Sir Captain,
[Pg 141]

and it will go hard with you if you
give any cause for suspicion.” After
going through the vessel and giving
some orders to his workmen, he prepared
to leave, when I said to him that
if he would give me authority, I would
give directions to the workmen in regard
to such repairs as the vessel might
need to render her sea-worthy. To this
he assented, apparently with much satisfaction,
and entering the boat, his men
pushed off for the shore.

New Year’s Day dawned, clear, bright,
and summer-like, and early in the morning
the boats were all busily engaged
in bringing off the colonists to the two
vessels. My crew and the crew of the
Eliza Cornish were sent on board their
respective vessels, and my old companion,
the English mate, was put in command
of the E. Cornish.

[Pg 142]
We had a busy time of it on that
New Year’s Day. Men, women, children,
provisions, water, camp furniture, and so
forth, were crowded on board our vessels,
and my ingenuity was taxed to the
utmost to make stowage for them all.
About two hundred of the colonists were
put on board the Eliza Cornish, and
nearly two hundred and sixty on board
the Florida. Cambiaso, with Garcia,
and his other officers, took possession of
the cabin and state-rooms, taking with
them Mr. Dunn, captain Avalos, and
some others. The rest were crowded
into the hold with the common soldiers.
I was allowed to retain my state-room,
as captain of the vessel, and my mates
and crew were put under my command.
The treasure was stored in Cambiaso’s
state-room, or near there, nailed up in
heavy wooden boxes.  I found that all
[Pg 143]

the prisoners of any importance were to
be put in the Florida, probably to retain
them under Cambiaso’s own supervision.
Captain Salas, however, was
sent to the E. Cornish.

Among our passengers were about a
hundred goats; and as we had no pens
to confine them in, a few dogs were
sent with them as guards, whose duty
it was to keep them within bounds.
Two dozen hogs were to share the
privileges of the deck with the goats.

On the evening of the 1st of January
I managed to exchange a few words
with captain Avalos and Mr. Dunn, who
had been sent on board just before
dark. They told me that everything of
value had been taken from the fort,
what was portable sent to the vessels,
and any things too heavy to carry away,
and too valuable to be left to the
[Pg 144]

Indians, had been buried in different
spots around the cantonment and in the
yard of the barracks, by order of Cambiaso.
It seemed to them that he meditated
a return to the colony, in case
he met with any difficulties in navigating
the vessel, and that therefore he
was unwilling to abandon any thing to
the Indians. We were not able to talk
long, as some of the officers were standing
by, and evidently watching us.

[Pg 145]

CHAPTER VII.

Cambiaso’s orders—We set sail—Wood’s Bay—The old
French ship—A drunken riot—The officer condemned—Garcia’s
interference—Men deserted at Wood’s Bay—The
Eliza Cornish left behind—Stormy weather—Sandy Bay
again—The Indians—Cape Gregory—Interview with
Cambiaso—His promises—Conversation with Mr. Dunn—My
determination.

The 2d of January saw us all ready
for sea, and early in the morning Cambiaso
came on board. He called me
into his state-room, and after renewing
his threats, in case he saw any signs
of my disobeying his orders, he gave
me a written paper, on which were my
directions for navigating the vessel. I
opened it before him, thinking that if I
saw the necessity of making any remarks
[Pg 146]

about them, it would be better
to do it at once. The paper directed
me to go westward through the Straits
to Cape Pillar; thence west-by-north
1-4 north to 82 deg. west longitude;
then northerly to the latitude of the
island of Marica; thence for that island,
coming to anchor on the east side, and
waiting for further orders. The Eliza
Cornish was to follow the Florida, and
at night both vessels were to display a
signal lantern at mast head.

He remarked, when I had finished
reading, that these were only my general
directions; that I must look to him
for more particular orders from day to
day; and that while the vessels were
within the Straits, he should often want
to anchor at different points.

At about ten o’clock in the morning,
a signal gun was fired from the Florida,
[Pg 147]

and both vessels weighed anchor and
got under way for the westward. We
made but slow work and little progress,
both vessels being somewhat out of repair
from a month’s neglect, and the
standing and running rigging being very
much chafed and worn. On Saturday,
the 3d, we reached Port Famine, and
there were ordered to lay over till
Monday morning, during which time the
men were employed in getting in more
wood and water, while I was fully occupied
in stowing our numerous passengers
more closely, and if possible, more
comfortably. In this labor I received
much assistance from Mr. Dunn and captain
Avalos, whose situation I endeavored
to render as comfortable as possible,
and whose fare I supplied from my own
mess.

Sunday evening, as I was standing on
[Pg 148]

the deck, one of the men from the hold
passed me with a bundle under his
arm, and approaching the side of the
vessel, was about to throw it over. I
stopped him, asking what it was. He
carelessly turned down the covering and
showed me the body of a child who
had been born the evening the colonists
came on board, and who had died that
morning. The brute, who I suppose was
the father, had attached pieces of iron
to the cloth which covered the poor
little thing, to insure its sinking. I
compelled him to go on shore and bury
it, ordering him by my authority as
captain of the ship. I took every occasion
to exercise this authority, thinking
it might be of advantage to me in
the future. The mother died during
our voyage.

We got under way again on Monday
[Pg 149]

morning, and reached St. Nicholas Bay
by the evening of the 6th. Here we
lay over all night, and on Wednesday
morning continued our course westward
until Thursday afternoon, when we came
in sight of Wood’s Bay, Cape Holland.
Cambiaso sent for me as we neared the
harbor, and informed me that he intended
to lie in this anchorage for some
time. His object was to get some
liquor out of an old French ship which
had been wrecked there some time ago,
and which still lay with the greater
part above water. We came to anchor
in the evening, and the next morning
the soldiers were sent on shore to unload
the wreck, and rescue what liquor
was still untouched by the water.

Some barrels and casks were brought
out whole, and immediately transferred
to the Florida; but many were stove
[Pg 150]

in, either purposely or by accident, and
then commenced a scene of drunken
rioting and disorder which lasted for
three or four days. Officers, men, sailors,—all
were intoxicated; and Cambiaso
and Garcia seemed to have as little
control over them as I had. Indeed,
the temptation sometimes proved too
strong for Cambiaso himself; and Mr.
Dunn, Garcia, and myself were almost
the only men who preserved full possession
of our senses.

I remember one case in which I used
my authority as master of the ship
somewhat rashly. The occupant of one
of the state-rooms, the doctor of the
colony under governor Gamero, and a
Frenchman, had drank enough to make
him noisily troublesome, both in the
cabin and on deck. At last he went
out on the jib-boom, hallooing and shouting.
[Pg 151]

I called to him to come in, but
finding he paid no attention to me, I
sent the only seaman I had on board
out after him. This proved equally unavailing,
and, losing all patience, I
sprang out myself, collared him, and
thrust him into his state-room. I fully
expected that he would complain of me
to Cambiaso, and that I might have to
suffer for my rash assumption of authority;
but I never heard from him
again.

By Sunday night the rioting seemed
to have worn itself out, and the men,
having slept off their intoxication, began
to return to their duty. That night,
however, Cambiaso was in a terrible
humor, swearing at all around him, and
giving most contradictory orders, which
it was impossible to observe. One of
his officers unluckily offended him by
[Pg 152]

venturing to remonstrate, when Cambiaso
in his half drunken passion, ordered him
to be put in irons and sent on board
the Eliza Cornish, accompanied by a file
of soldiers, and at twelve at night to
be tied to the mast and shot down.
The men obeyed; but I noticed the
muttered indignation of the other officers,
and general Garcia, after Cambiaso had
retired to the cabin, stepped forward to
the officer under whose direction the
removal was made, and who was to
control the execution, and, under the
plea that Cambiaso was under the influence
of liquor and might alter his
order, he gave the officer authority to
delay the execution for an hour or two,
or at least till he heard again from
himself. I watched the countenance of
the condemned man as he went towards
the boat, but could read nothing on it
[Pg 153]

but sturdy, obstinate defiance and indignation,
until, just as he was leaving
the deck, a woman’s scream was heard.
It was his wife, who, occupied in the
hold of the vessel, had heard nothing
of what was going on until this moment,
and now rushed on deck with her
children hanging round her. The man’s
face twitched as she flung herself into
his arms, crying most piteously; but the
soldiers quickly took her away from
him, and hurried him on board the boat.
I went up to the woman and endeavored
to console her, by telling her of general
Garcia’s interference, but between my
broken Spanish and her sobs, I am
afraid very little of what I said reached
her mind.

Garcia had left the deck and gone to
Cambiaso’s state-room, where he remained
for about two hours, soothing Cambiaso
[Pg 154]

and pleading for the officer’s life. At
last he came out successful. A boat
was sent to the Eliza Cornish, the
officer brought back and restored to his
wife. This and other humane actions
of general Garcia, made much impression
on me at the time, and inclined me to
believe his assertions made afterwards,
that he had only joined Cambiaso on
compulsion, and from fear for his life.

Monday, the 12th, a terrible storm
raged; but in the afternoon, Cambiaso
began to send some of the men on
shore, as he said, to wash their clothes.
This seemed to me a strange proceeding,
and I watched his movements in some
anxiety. By night about forty-four were
landed, and on the last return of the
boat, it was hoisted up and put in its
place. Cambiaso then, under his own
directions, had our four-pounders and
[Pg 155]

swivel gun loaded with two balls each—the
swivel gun pointed towards the
stern. When this was accomplished,
orders were sent to the Eliza Cornish
to weigh anchor and go in shore. The
Eliza Cornish had but two guns on
board, and was not utterly defenceless.
It was said by Cambiaso that if the
poor mate should attempt to follow the
Florida, his brig should be fired into
and sunk, while I was ordered to get
under way and go to the eastward.
I understood his plans now. The men
landed at Wood’s Bay were to be left
behind to starve or fall a prey to the
Indians; the Eliza Cornish and her two
hundred passengers were to be left to
their fate; while the Florida, (on board
of which was all the treasure and Cambiaso’s
chief followers,) was to be used
to convey the pirates to some place of
[Pg 156]

security. I shrank from being even
compelled to be accessory to such cruelty,
and ventured to remonstrate with Cambiaso;
not, however, on his barbarity,—that,
indeed, would have been useless,—but
on the risk the Florida would run
in attempting such dangerous navigation
on a night so thick and murky, with
the wind blowing heavily in shore. I
told him that it was not safe to start,
that I could not answer for our not
being ashore before morning; but he
would not even listen to me, saying he
believed I was a coward, and angrily
commanded me to obey orders.

It was, indeed, as much as I could
do to keep the vessel from the shore
that night, the storm continuing till daylight,
and I expected every moment that
we should be driven in shore. I do
not know that I dreaded it much. It
[Pg 157]

seemed to me as well to fall into the
hands of the Indians, as to remain with
these fellows, and our chances of escape
were as good on land as at sea.

Tuesday morning, however, saw us
again opposite Sandy Bay, and at nine
o’clock I hove-to off the harbor, by Cambiaso’s
orders. The boat was then
cleared away ready for lowering, and
some of the men were ordered to go
ashore to bring off some provisions
which had been left behind; but they,
perhaps mistrusting Cambiaso’s intentions,
and fearing that they would be abandoned,
as their companions had been at
Wood’s Bay, refused to land, declaring
that they saw some Indians prowling
about the barracks. I saw, by the help
of my spy-glass, that what they took,
or pretended to take for Indians, were
only barrels and stumps of trees, but I
[Pg 158]

prudently said nothing. Cambiaso stormed
and threatened, but the men were stubborn
and immovable, and Garcia again
interfering, he sullenly ordered me to
proceed, and retired to his state-room.
That evening I anchored under Cape
Gregory.

Towards ten o’clock, when the night
watch was set, and all was quiet on
the vessel, Mr. Dunn and myself were
sent for to Cambiaso’s state-room. Mr.
Dunn had of late always been called
upon to accompany me when Cambiaso
sent for me to deliver orders; my broken
Spanish seeming to irritate him, and Mr.
Dunn serving as interpreter to render
my orders more clear to me. Cambiaso
received us very cordially, asked
us to be seated, and began by expressing
himself very well satisfied with the
skill I had shown in navigating the
[Pg 159]

vessel. He was even jocose, asking me
if I was a good shot with a pistol,
since he had an idea of fighting a duel
with me; then, pointing to a bottle of
champaigne which stood on the table,
he said, “That is the pistol I mean we
shall exchange shots with;” and drawing
the cork, he made us both drink with
him. Then turning to Mr. Dunn, he
said, “My good friend Sir Captain is
troubled about the rascals I left at
Wood’s Bay; he does not know, as you
and I do, that there’s only one way to
get along with such men. They are
devils, and nothing is too hard for
them. One must take care of himself
in this world.”

Mr. Dunn told him that I had hesitated
about putting out from the harbor
because the night was so murky, and
the navigation intricate; and that I was
[Pg 160]

afraid of running the vessel on the
shore. Cambiaso shook his head: “No,
no; you are both of you tender-hearted
as women. I suppose you would be
frightened now, if you saw blood shed,
but one can’t always get along without
it.”

I answered that I could fight as well
as another man, when I saw need for
it; but that I did not like leaving the
English mate and crew, nor even
his

followers to starve, or fall into the
hands of the Indians. This made him
laugh heartily; but suddenly changing
the subject, he asked me if I had a
wife and children. “Yes,” I said, “in
my own country.” “How many little
ones?” he rejoined; “and I suppose
you would like to see them again?
Well, you must do without that for
some time yet; but if you will follow
[Pg 161]

my orders, you shall go home with
money enough to stay with them always.”

I answered that I had obeyed his
orders since I had agreed to, and that
I should continue to navigate the vessel
as well as I could, if that was what he
wanted from me. “Yes,” replied he,
when my friend had interpreted this
answer to him, “Yes, yes, that is what
I want of you for the present, and I
promise you both that I will not give
you any fighting to do; all I ask of
you is to stand by, and not be frightened
if you see any blood spilled.” We
made no reply to this; when, after
pausing a moment, and glancing at us
from under his long, veiling lashes, he
said, “I will make it worth your while,
captain Brown, to follow me, and yours
too, Sir Secretary.  If you obey my
orders, and land me safe at my destination,
[Pg 162]

you shall go home to your wife
and little ones with twenty thousand
dollars, captain; and you (to Mr. Dunn,)
shall have six thousand, if you interpret
for me faithfully.” He rose as he said
this, and pointed out of the cabin, saying
as we left him, that all he wanted
was that we should be true to him.

It was then late into the night, but
instead of retiring, Mr. Dunn and myself
walked to the side of the vessel,
out of hearing of the watch and the
few soldiers listening about the deck, to
talk over our interview with the general.
We knew that those around us
were aware that we had been sent for
by Cambiaso, and had been with him
for some time; therefore it would be
natural for them to suppose that we
would wish to talk of what we had
heard from him, and it was very seldom
[Pg 163]

that we had an opportunity of exchanging
even a few words without feeling
that we were suspected by our watchful
jailors.

I told Mr. Dunn at once that I did
not like Cambiaso’s conversation; I did
not trust his apparent friendliness for a
moment; indeed, I believed that it was
all assumed to deceive us, and hide his
real intentions.

“But,” replied Mr. Dunn, “he cannot
do without you as long as he remains
on board the Florida, and now that he
has abandoned the colony and left the
brig behind, he must have some port in
view.” “Yes,” said I, “he will use us
as long as he wants us; but depend
upon it, he will never let us escape
alive to any place where we can put
the officers of justice on his track. Depend
upon it, all this was to blind us;
[Pg 164]

he has some devilish plan in his head;
he will do something with us very
soon.”

Mr. Dunn looked anxiously serious as
he said, “I more than half agree with
you; the villain was half intoxicated
this evening, and let out more than he
meant to. Did you see his face when
he promised us the money? But what
plans can he have? What port does
he intend to make?”

This brought to my mind a conversation
I had held a few days before with
one of the officers, Cambiaso’s chief adviser
and confidant, and a man who
before this had scarcely exchanged a
word with me. He, through the help
of one of the sailors, a Chilian, but
who talked English tolerably well, had
questioned me about the lay of the
shore around Rio Janeiro, and the approach
[Pg 165]

to that port, the landing, and
so forth. This I repeated to Mr. Dunn,
and putting that conversation with Cambiaso’s
entire change of orders since we
first left the colony, his evident intentions
of continuing his course eastward,
the amount of food which he had stored
in the Florida, and other slight indications
of the same sort, we felt that Rio
Janeiro was his destination, and that
we had some clue to his plans.

Still, I was convinced, and at last
succeeded in convincing Mr. Dunn, that
his friendly expressions towards us, and
his offers of money were entirely insincere;
his bids were altogether too
high. I knew that all the treasure on
the vessel did not amount to more than
eighty thousand dollars, and of that he
would hardly give twenty-six thousand
to men whom he had entirely within
[Pg 166]

his power; and give it, too, when he
had no longer any further use for them.
Long afterwards, and on my return to
Valparaiso, I found that my suspicions
were correct; for I learned from Garcia
and the other officer of Cambiaso, both
of whom were pardoned by the Chilian
government, that Cambiaso’s plan had
been to take the Florida to some part
of the Brazilian coast that was uninhabited,
probably on the inhospitable
shores of the province of Santa Catharina,
there to compel most of his followers
and prisoners to land and shift
for themselves; using some such stratagem
as that which had been so successful
at Cape Holland; and to keep on
the vessel only his intimate friends, and
myself and crew. On reaching the
harbor of Rio Janeiro, and coming near
enough to gain the shore in the boats,
[Pg 167]

he and his companions were to murder
myself and crew, scuttle the vessel, and
with the treasure, make their escape
to the port; there, dividing the booty,
they were to disperse, Cambiaso himself
intending to take passage in the steamer
for Europe, and his officers to seek
whatever foreign country might please
them and seem a safe refuge for them.

Mr. Dunn and myself parted, with our
distrust of Cambiaso confirmed, and with
a renewed determination to strain every
nerve to escape from his hands. After
I reached my berth, and as I lay tossing
and revolving our perils, the thought
struck me that it might be possible to
re-take the vessel. A thousand difficulties
and dangers started up to intimidate
me, but the possibility of success
seemed to overbalance all uncertainties,
and I spent the rest of the
[Pg 168]

night in laying my plans, in measuring
the chances of resolution and fidelity
amongst my crew, and in estimating the
probability of our being joined by any
of the released prisoners.

By the morning, I had made up my
mind to the attempt, and rose with a
determination to lose no time, but to
effect it, if possible, that very day.

[Pg 169]

CHAPTER  VIII.

The re-taking of the vessel planned—Mr. Dunn—Captain
Avalos—Preito—The corporal—Three bells—The struggle—Cambiaso
overpowered—Garcia—Cheers for victory—The
crew swear fidelity to me—Our course—Cambiaso
put in irons—His cowardice—The prisoners from the
hold—River Gallegos—Voyage round Cape Horn—Attempted
outbreaks—Our danger—We reach San Carlos.

Wednesday, the 14th of January, we
left Cape Gregory behind us, and continued
our course eastward, towards the
eastern entrance of the Straits. I sought
Mr. Dunn early in the morning, and
communicated my determination to him.
I found him ready and willing to sustain
me in the attempt, and that he
agreed with me that the sooner it was
made, the better; so, determining to
hurry things on, we parted—he to
[Pg 170]

sound such of the prisoners and soldiers
as we thought would join us.

There were several of my crew in
whom I could not put confidence, they
being too frequently seen holding confidential
conversations with Cambiaso’s
followers; so that after some deliberation,
I determined not to entrust our
plans to any of the men, lest those
whose fidelity we doubted should hear
of them, and betray us to Cambiaso;
but in the course of the morning I
spoke to those whom I could trust, and
asked them separately if they would
stand by me in trouble, and obey my
orders. They all answered that they
were ready; and one of them, with an
oath, added, “Till death, captain!” Captain
Avalos we managed to speak to
during the morning, and found him as
ready as we were.

[Pg 171]
The day wore on anxiously enough
for us, for we felt that the struggle that
was approaching was a matter of life
and death with us; one false step, and
we were lost; one careless or treacherous
word breathed by those whom we
were compelled to trust, and we were
at the mercy of those villains, whom no
sense of humanity could restrain. The
weather was fine, and the wind favorable;
and, between eight and nine o’clock
in the evening, we passed Cape Possession,
leaving it to the north-west. I
was on deck with the larboard watch,
when Mr. Dunn told me that he had
secured the assistance of twelve besides
myself. These were some of the soldiers
under captain Avalos; some prisoners
who had come down with us, and who
had proved themselves so friendly during
our confinement at Sandy Bay; and one
[Pg 172]

or two of Cambiaso’s own followers,
who had expressed dissatisfaction at his
tyranny, and to whom Mr. Dunn had
held out the prospect of pardon, if
we should succeed in our undertaking.
Among them was my former guard,
Preito, to whom I was indebted for the
hymn book, which proved so great a
source of consolation. We laid our
plans most cautiously. Captain Avalos
and his soldiers were to secure the officers
in the cabin, while Mr. Dunn and
myself were to guard the deck. To
the corporal who had defended himself
so bravely at the time the Florida was
seized, and who refused to deliver up
his gun except to my order, I gave the
attack on Cambiaso himself; for during
our whole imprisonment, he had manifested
such a detestation of him that I
really believed he would have eaten
[Pg 173]

him up alive, if he could have got at
him.

During the evening, Cambiaso and his
officers sat around the table in the after
cabin, engaged in their usual occupation
of gambling; and every glance which I
cast in upon them showed me their dark,
fierce countenances, while the sound of
their oaths and laughter struck my ear.
Without, all was still and peaceful; the
barque gliding swiftly through the water,
with a free wind and a pleasant
breeze. I watched the strange looking
southern stars which looked down upon
us from their quiet skies, with a strange
impatience at their peaceful calmness.

By eleven, the gamblers began to rise
from the table, and one by one retired
to their state-rooms; and when the
sound of eight bells proclaimed midnight,
all was still and quiet around us. I
[Pg 174]

sent the larboard watch below, telling
them only that they must be prepared to
come on deck if they heard me call.
The starboard watch then came up, but
I did not inform them of my plans
then. The signal was to be three bells,
or as a landsman would say, the striking
of half-past one in the morning. The
forward hatch was closed, and the
guarding of the after hatch was to be
given to Mr. Dunn and myself. Two
bells told us that one o’clock had arrived,
and all were at their posts,—captain
Avalos and his men ready at
the cabin door. Not a sound was to
be heard save the ticking of the watch
in the cabin, and the rustling of the
water as it broke round the bows of
the vessel. Both sounds struck on my
ear with painful acuteness. At last,
three bells rung out, and the rush was
[Pg 175]

made in the cabin;—at the same moment
I shouted, “All hands tumble up!”
and in a moment my crew was around
me. Mr. Dunn and myself were at the
after hatch, and as the noise of the
struggle reached the men between decks,
we shouted that we were armed, and
had the vessel, and that the first one
who appeared at the gangway should be
shot down.

The struggle in the cabin went on.
Avalos had stationed his men so that
each state-room door was broken in at
the same moment, and some of the occupants
were secured before they were
well awake. Cambiaso struggled hard,
but was at last overcome and bound
with cords, for irons we had none.
During the fifteen minutes that the
struggle below lasted, we were in suspense
on deck, not daring to leave our
[Pg 176]

posts, but knowing that all depended on
captain Avalos’s success. At last he
appeared, with a shout; all were secured
without the loss of a life—not
even a drop of blood spilled. Then
rose three times three cheers for our
victory, which rung through the vessel,
and announced our success to the prisoners
below.

But our work was not over. Captain
Avalos and his men collected all the
pistols, cutlasses, guns, and so forth,
which could be found, and carried them
into the cabin, loading the muskets and
pistols, while I called my men aft, and
asked them if they would stand by me
in defending the vessel and taking her
into port. They promised with most
eager anxiety; and Mr. Dunn and captain
Avalos coming forward, added to
their enthusiasm by pledging their lives
[Pg 177]

to sustain me in holding the vessel,
and putting themselves entirely under
my orders.

I then hove the main-top-sail to the
mast till our course was decided, and
called a council as to our best course.
Some of the party proposed returning to
Sandy Bay, where we could defend ourselves
in the barracks; others to push
on for the coast of Brazil and make
the first port there; but I told them
we had not water enough to go very
far, and suggested that we should make
for the nearest watering place, the river
Gallegos, lying in lat. 51° 39´ S.—lon.
69° W., on the east coast of Patagonia;
there take in a fresh supply of
water, and shape our course round Cape
Horn for Valparaiso. To return to
Sandy Bay seemed to me to put ourselves
directly into the hands of the
[Pg 178]

pirates who were behind us, and who
could easily overpower us, and release
their leaders and companions. If we
attempted to reach the coast of Brazil,
it seemed to me impossible that we
should be able to hold the vessel during
so long a voyage, as we had no irons
to secure our prisoners, and no men to
spare to guard them; whereas, the telling
them that we were taking them to
Valparaiso would probably satisfy all but
the ringleaders.

My plan was adopted; and as we
had a fair wind, I squared the yards
and started at once for the river.

The whole forenoon of the 15th was
spent in preparing irons for Cambiaso,
Garcia, and others confined in the state-rooms.
When they were finished, the
corporal and some others entered Cambiaso’s
state-room to put them on his
[Pg 179]

hands and feet. He lay on his bed,
bound hand and foot with cords, and
as we entered and commenced putting
on the irons, he said, “Are you going
to shoot me? Let me have fifteen minutes
to prepare.” They gave him no
answer; but after securing him they
left the state-room, and placed his enemy
the corporal, with another soldier,
well armed, at his door, with orders to
shoot him at once if any disturbance
should break out amongst the prisoners.
We took care that he should hear our
order, which captain Avalos repeated
aloud in Spanish.

Cambiaso showed more cowardice than
I expected in his fear of death; but
even before us he seemed to keep his
courage up by a sort of bravado.

From his room, which was one of the
after state-rooms, we went to Garcia’s
[Pg 180]

whom we found lying very quiet. He
said nothing, but held his hands so as
to make it easier to adjust the handcuffs.
The other officers were ironed
and locked into their state-rooms, and
as heavy a guard as we could spare,
detached for the cabin.

After the officers were secured, we
opened the hatchway, and allowed the
prisoners below to come up in small
detachments at a time. We continued
this during the voyage, as they were so
crowded below that we felt this was
necessary to escape the danger of sickness
and contagion; but we never did
it without great risk and great anxiety.

Before noon on this day, the 15th, the
wind shifted ahead, and we made slow
work all that day and night, and barely
reached the mouth of the river Gallegos
by noon of the 16th.

[Pg 181]
As we came off the mouth of the
river, I found the wind well to the
eastward, blowing fresh on shore; and
I hesitated about attempting to land, especially
as there was likely to be considerable
sea on shore. After some
consideration, I determined to tack ship
and go south, trusting to finding some
watering place along the coast which
we could make in more favorable weather.
As we tacked ship, this seeming to me
the starting for home, we fired as a
salute, the guns which had been loaded
with double balls by Cambiaso, and
hoisted the American ensign which I
had kept so long concealed. I had
great hopes of meeting some American
or English vessel in my passing round
the cape, from which I might obtain
some assistance.  It was not so very
long since the Virago had left Sandy
[Pg 182]

Bay, and I hoped that she or some
other armed vessel might be cruising in
these seas.

After the salute, I had my guns carefully
re-loaded again, and the strictest
discipline maintained on board. In this
I was admirably aided by captain Avalos,
whose soldiers were kept constantly
on the alert; and by Mr. Dunn, who
worked with me heart and hand. Cambiaso
was strictly confined to his state-room,
and allowed no communication
with any one. The other officers we
sometimes allowed to come on deck for
air and exercise for a short time, attended
by a guard; but never when
any of the prisoners from below were
up. The odds against us were fearful:
two hundred and two prisoners, to about
twenty-two men to guard and provide
for them, and navigate the vessel.

[Pg 183]
The cleaning of the steerage I was
obliged to compel the prisoners to attend
to, by constant threats of punishment
for neglect. The stench which came up
from the hold was sometimes insupportable.
The whole care of providing for
the crew and prisoners I left in the
hands of my faithful steward, and he
performed his task well, laboring with
unwearied diligence. Sometimes the women
among the prisoners were allowed
to come up and cook for their husbands.

The treasure which was in Cambiaso’s
state-room was transferred to the cabin
for safe keeping, under the guardianship
of Mr. Dunn and captain Avalos.

During our passage round the cape, we
had rather pleasant weather, with but
few exceptions; but very few fair winds.
This increased the length of our voyage,
[Pg 184]

and every day saw us more worn out
with anxiety and watchfulness. For myself,
I never had my clothes off during
the whole passage; nor did I ever venture
to retire to my state-room for a
night’s sleep,—taking what rest I could
snatch sitting on a chair in the cabin,
where I could be roused at any moment.

In passing Cape St. Johns, at the
eastern extremity of the Straits, on the
evening of January 20th, we encountered
a heavy gale of wind from the west-south-west,
which continued, with a rough
sea, for some days. During the gale
we lost the head rails.

On February 1st, another gale, far
heavier than the last, caused us to ship
a great deal of water in the cabin.
There was no real danger, but I never
saw fellows more frightened than were
our prisoners, as the water came dashing
[Pg 185]

through their state-room windows.
For Cambiaso, he was a perfect coward
when he was sea-sick. Nine days afterwards
we were in real danger; as a
sudden squall struck the vessel, and
broke the main-yards in the slings.
When the gale abated, we got a spare
yard ready, and were soon in sailing
order again.

We were disappointed in our hopes
of meeting with any vessels from which
we could obtain relief; and we had
experienced great difficulty in finding a
watering place; so that by the time we
reached the western extremity of the
Straits, I found myself so short of water
that I determined to abandon my intention
of going to Valparaiso, and to
make San Carlos, the port on the northern
extremity of the island of Chiloe.
This course seemed to me more necessary,
[Pg 186]

as I doubted our ability to keep
the prisoners under for many days longer,
there having been already two attempts
to rise among them, only kept down by
our prompt watchfulness. The most desperate
among them were either fearful
of coming within the reach of the arm
of the law, or were tempted by the
treasure which lay almost within their
grasp. I think nothing had so much
effect in restraining them as the perfect
fearlessness with which I moved about
among them, and the apparent confidence
with which I issued my orders—directing
the prisoners in the hold to come
on deck, to go to the galley for their
mess, to clean out their quarters, and so
forth—as if I were perfectly sure that
I should be obeyed.

During the last few days of our passage,
I had been alarmed by noticing
[Pg 187]

words passing between some of the soldiers
who were on guard, and the
prisoners, as they came up on deck for
their daily walk. There was evidently
another outbreak in contemplation. I
communicated my suspicions to my friends,
and we redoubled our vigilance.

On the 13th of February, in the
evening, as the altered course of the
vessel must have informed some of them
that we were nearing port, a larger
party than usual made their appearance
on deck, armed with whatever weapons
they could collect from below. Some
of the cutlasses and other weapons belonging
to the rebels we had never been
able to obtain, they having secreted
them.

My crew were stationed at their posts
on deck, and armed; and captain Avalos
ordered his men to load up their
[Pg 188]

muskets in the presence of the prisoners.
About ten o’clock, three of our own
men deliberately left their places and
walked over to the ranks of the prisoners.
We withdrew to the cabin, and
stood with our loaded pistols and muskets
in our hands, and our drawn
swords, with other loaded pistols, lying
on the table within our reach. Under
the table was the box in which the
treasure was nailed up.

About eighteen of the rioters advanced
to the entrance of the cabin; but seeing
our strong position and our formidable
weapons, they paused irresolute. Among
them were the three deserters from our
party. One of them I called by name,
opening the door of my state-room and
beckoning him in. He stepped forward
much agitated, and entered with me.
His agitation showed me that I had
[Pg 189]

little to fear from him; and a few
words of surprise at his conduct and of
promises to forget it, brought him over
to our side. As he left the door of
the state-room and joined our party, the
rioters fell back, evidently cowed, and
one by one slunk again into their places
in the hold. By eleven o’clock all was
quiet, and we breathed freely again.

I have no reason to believe that
Cambiaso, Garcia, or any of the officers
were concerned in this outbreak; it was
concerted entirely among the men, who
were probably instigated by their desire
to obtain possession of the treasure.

That night was an anxious one to us.
We were nearing the port, and our approach
to land was known to the crew,
and probably to many of the prisoners;
every moment we were liable to another
outbreak more desperate than the last,
[Pg 190]

as the ringleaders among the prisoners
must have been sensible that their last
chance of escape was fast passing away;
but all was quiet; and the morning of
the 14th of February, 1852, dawned, to
show us the port of San Carlos almost
within our reach.

Before dark we were beating into the
harbor with the American ensign flying
at the spanker gaff.

[Pg 191]

CHAPTER IX.

Reports of the revolt reach San Carlos—American Minister
sends assistance—Chilian Government despatches forces
for the Straits—The Virago—Fears of the inhabitants of
San Carlos—I deliver the Florida to the Chilian authorities—Arrival
of the E. Cornish—The Virago takes the prisoners
and treasure—Passage to Valparaiso—Protest and
claim of salvage—Mr. Duer—Don Antonio Varas—Injustice
done me by the Chilian government—The British
Admiral claims the treasure—I protest again—Compromise—Don
Antonio denies all claim—My claims put into
the hands of the United States Authorities.

Early in January, about a month before
our arrival, the news of the insurrection
in the Straits had spread some alarm
through San Carlos and other southern
Pacific ports. The first report was
brought by two of the soldiers who escaped
from the colony with the governor,
[Pg 192]

and had not been captured by
Cambiaso. They had witnessed the capture
of the Florida and the Eliza
Cornish, from their hiding place among
the bushes around the cantonment; had
even lurked in the vicinity long enough
to witness the embarkation of the colonists
and the abandonment of the colony;
then, through incredible hardships,
had found their way to the Pacific
coast, been taken off from thence by
some passing vessel, and carried to San
Carlos. Their report was that Cambiaso
had turned pirate, and was coming
to San Carlos to take the port.

The intelligence they brought had been
transmitted to Valparaiso, with a description
of the vessels; both of which
were said to belong to the United
States. Additional forces had been sent
to San Carlos, and an official communication
[Pg 193]

sent from the commander general
of marines, at Valparaiso, to the American
consul there, and from thence to
colonel Balie Peyton, the American Minister
at Santiago. Col. Peyton immediately
sent orders to Callao that the
U. S. frigate “Raritan” should proceed
in search of the two vessels; and a
request was also sent to the English
Admiral at Valparaiso, that the “Virago”
might be allowed to go again to
the Straits, and render such assistance
to the colonists and vessels as might be
needed. Some French and Swedish vessels
then in port also went out on the
search.

The Chilian authorities despatched two
Chilian men-of-war, and some Chilian
troops under Don Santiago Jorge Bynon.
The troops were put on board the Chilian
men-of-war; the latter on board the
[Pg 194]

Virago, on the same service. The English
steamer proceeded immediately to
the Straits, and it was to be hoped that
her officers would learn a lesson from
experience, and prove themselves more
sharp sighted than they had done a
month before, in their former visit to
the colony.

The news that the Florida had arrived
off the entrance of the harbor filled the
people of San Carlos with consternation,
which not even the sight of the American
flag and my signals of distress
served to dissipate entirely. We lay
off the harbor some six or seven miles
from the town, with the wind ahead,
blowing off from the harbor, and the
tide against us.

About sunset, a boat came near us
with six persons in her, and lay on her
oars within hailing distance.  Some one
[Pg 195]

from her hailed us in English, and asked
where we were from. This boat had
in her the captain of the port, who had
put off to reconnoitre, and now seeing
so many people on deck, was afraid to
come nearer. I answered him from the
Florida, saying that I had come into
the port in distress, having Cambiaso a
prisoner on board, and that I was anxious
to go on shore at once to see the Intendente
of the port, and deliver up my
vessel to him; as I was unable to
protect it any longer. This relieved
his fears, and he came alongside. I
had prepared every thing for my leaving
the vessel in safety; knowing that the
prisoners would not dare to make another
outbreak within the harbor, with
the guns of the Chilian war vessels
around them. The captain of the port
left a pilot on board, and took Mr.
[Pg 196]

Dunn, captain Avalos, and myself into
his boat. We were landed on the quay
at about nine o’clock.

We went immediately to the Intendente,
the captain of the port accompanying
us almost on a run, shouting out
as he passed through the streets, “Cambiaso
is taken!—he is here!—he is a
prisoner!” By the time that we reached
the Intendente’s house we were surrounded
by a crowd of the inhabitants
of San Carlos, asking questions and
shouting out their exultation. Our arrival
had excited such alarm that the
troops had been ordered out. I told
my story to the Intendente, representing
to him the worn out condition of my
crew, and the necessity there was for
sending them immediate aid. He sent
at once for the commander of the forces
on shore, and the captain of the Chilian
[Pg 197]

vessel of war, “Indefatigable,” then
lying in the harbor. They agreed that
the troops and the Indefatigable should
immediately take possession of the Florida;
and by twelve at night, a guard
of twenty-five soldiers, with their officer,
was placed over the prisoners on my
vessel, while the Indefatigable lay by
her side.

As we left the Intendente’s house, Mr.
Dunn was greeted on every side by
warm friends, all rejoicing to see him
alive once more, and eager to hear our
story and to extend the hospitalities of
their houses to us. Indeed, during the
few days that I remained in San Carlos
I experienced the greatest hospitality
and kindness from the inhabitants of
the place. Every house was thrown
open to me and to my friends; our
immediate wants of clothing and personal
[Pg 198]

comforts supplied; and every thing
done to make us look back to the time
passed there with grateful remembrance.

I experienced here a singular result
from the great anxiety and excitement
which I had undergone. Instead of
being overcome with fatigue, and enjoying
the rest which I so much needed,
and for which I had so longed, my
state of excitement continued. I scarcely
needed rest, and sleep seemed to have
fled from me entirely. For the first
three nights after leaving the vessel I
could not close my eyes.

My intention before reaching San Carlos
had been to report myself immediately
to the American consul, or to
any one holding authority from the
United States whom I might find there,
and follow his advice in regard to the
steps to be taken to deliver the prisoners,
[Pg 199]

treasure, and vessel into the
hands of the government of Chili; but
I was told by the captain of the port
that no American consul was in the
place. I then inquired if any vessel of
war belonging to the United States was
in the harbor, intending to claim its
assistance. There was none; and my
next step was to seek the Intendente of
the port. In my conversation with him
I told him that my wish was to deliver
up every thing into the hands of the
Chilian authorities as soon as I could
do it. He told me that no one in San
Carlos had power to take the vessel in
the name of the government; to find
any one authorized to do this. I must
go to Valparaiso. To attempt this without
further aid would be, I felt, to risk
the lives of my crew and passengers;
therefore I accepted the offer of the Intendente
[Pg 200]

to take the prisoners and treasure
from the Florida and send them to
Valparaiso in some Chilian vessel of
war then in harbor, with the understanding
that on reaching that port, I
was then to deliver every thing into
the hands of the government.

The next morning, while preparations
were making to transfer Cambiaso and
Garcia, together with the treasure, to
the Indefatigable, the Virago and Metero
were reported as coming into the
harbor.

The English steamer had then been
successful in her search for the Eliza
Cornish, and she now seemed inclined
to follow her orders to the letter, and
take the Florida
wherever she might find
her
; for immediately on entering the
harbor, captain Stewart, with two armed
boats, went alongside my vessel;—then,
[Pg 201]

not finding me there, he left the boats
lying at the side of the vessel, while
he came on shore and to the house of
the Intendente.

Here I met him; when he told me
that he had orders to take my vessel
wherever he found her. I answered that
he could not take her, as I had her
myself; when with something of what
seemed to me high handed insolence, he
insisted on his right and his orders.

I told him plainly that I gave up the
vessel, treasure, and prisoners to no one
but to the Chilian authorities; that if
he took them it must be by order of
the authorities; and that I should protest,
both here and in Valparaiso, against
his taking possession of the Florida.
This was all I could do; for I found
no disposition on the part of the Intendente
or of any other officials at
[Pg 202]

San Carlos to back me in my protest.
They all seemed to stand somewhat in
awe of captain Stewart; or, to speak
more properly, of the British lion, whose
might he represented. Captain Stewart
left me for a while, and soon after returned
to the Intendente’s, bringing with
him commander Bynon, who had sailed
with him in search of us, being appointed
by the Chilian authorities chief
of the naval expedition to the Straits
sent for our rescue. To him I repeated
what I had said to captain Stewart.
He heard me with attention and politeness,
and assured me that I should be
satisfied and all my just claims regarded.

After some consultation, it was decided
by the authorities at San Carlos, commander
Bynon, and captain Stewart, that
the ringleaders and the treasure should
[Pg 203]

be transferred to the Virago, and that
aid should be sent to the Florida, to
guard the prisoners remaining there, and
navigate the vessel to Valparaiso.

I was able to learn but little of the
re-taking of the Eliza Cornish, and the
rescue of the colonists left at Wood’s
Bay, merely having one hurried conversation
with my old fellow prisoner, the
English mate, about the subject. He
told me that the morning after Cambiaso
drove him in shore, at Wood’s
Bay, and forbade him to follow the
Florida, the forty colonists left on the
land hailed him, entreating to be taken
on board; but having already two hundred
crowded into his vessel, he was
afraid to do it, and indeed it was not
allowed by those on board. He therefore
was obliged to abandon them, and,
getting under way, beat to the westward.
[Pg 204]

After beating west for about
two days he met the English steamers,
which immediately sent two armed boats
to board the E. Cornish, and took her
as a prize. I was told by a sailor
from the Virago, that the moment the
boats came along side, the mate and
crew sprang into her, so glad were they
of any chance of escape.

The leading rebels were taken from
the E. Cornish in irons, and put on
the Virago, while a prize master and
fresh crew were sent to the brig, and
she was anchored in the Straits. The
Virago then proceeded to the eastward,
took up the colonists left at Wood’s
Bay, then went on to Sandy Bay Colony
in search of us; but failing to
find us, returned, took the E. Cornish
in tow, carried her out of the Straits
about three hundred miles, and then let
[Pg 205]

her go under sail, in company with the
Virago, for Valparaiso. On their way
they had kept a constant look out for
us, searching every harbor, as the impression
was strong with them, that
Cambiaso would attack the South Pacific
ports.

By Tuesday, the 17th, we were ready
for sea; and I must do captain Stuart
the justice to say, that during the
two days of preparation he rendered
me every assistance in his power. Four
seamen, a boatswain, and one officer
were transferred to the Florida from
the Virago, to assist my exhausted crew;
and as both vessels were ready for sea
at the same time, captain Stuart towed
my vessel above forty miles out. In
the evening of the 17th, a fair breeze
springing up, we parted company.  During
most of the passage up we had
[Pg 206]

a fine breeze and pleasant weather.
The steamer was to touch at Valdivia,
and other places on the coast, so
that I got ahead of her; and by Sunday,
the 22d, I was off Caruma head,
just south of Valparaiso. Here we had
light, baffling winds, and were obliged to
lay over till the next morning. About
eight o’clock A. M. on Monday, the
steamer was seen south of us, coming
up the coast, with the Eliza Cornish
in tow.

I then had all my sails clewed up,
set the American ensign at the mizen
top-mast head, and fired two four pounders,
to draw the attention of the
steamer. She soon bore down for us,
took us in tow also, and by two o’clock
in the afternoon, of February 23d, we
anchored in the harbor of Valparaiso.

On my arrival, I immediately went to
[Pg 207]

the United States Consul, Mr. William
Duer, and through him transmitted to
the Intendente of Valparaiso, commander
Robert Simpson, my abandonment of the
Florida. In reply I was informed by
commander Simpson that he had no
authority to accept the vessel, but that
the subject had been referred by him
to the government at Santiago.

The prisoners were landed from the
Virago, and the ringleaders delivered
into the hands of the law; but the
treasure was transferred to the Eliza
Cornish; and I learned that it was
claimed by the English admiral, and
surrendered to him by the Chilian government;
and that it was to be sent at
once to England, without being landed
at all in Valparaiso.

Upon learning this, I immediately entered
a protest before the American
[Pg 208]

consul, Mr. Duer, against the seizure of
the Florida, and claimed salvage on the
treasure rescued by me from the hands
of the pirates. On the 28th, Mr. Duer
received a communication from commander
Simpson, under the order of Don
Antonio Varas, the Minister of Foreign
Relations of the Chilian government,
wishing to know fully the reasons on
which I founded the abandonment of my
vessel, in order to determine whether
the government should give orders to
take possession of the vessel in the
name of the State. I then requested Mr.
Duer to call a survey on the Florida,
for the purpose of ascertaining her present
condition and the probable cost of
putting her in sea-worthy condition.

Captains Phineas Leach and Joseph
Carries, with Mr. George K. Stevenson,
master ship carpenter, were directed by
[Pg 209]

Mr. Duer to proceed to the Florida,
make an examination of her state, and
report to the consulate. They reported,
after a minute calculation, the cost of
putting the vessel in a sea-worthy condition
to be over four thousand dollars.
This report, with my own protest made
before the consul, giving an account of
the seizure of the vessel, Mr. Shaw’s
barbarous murder, my imprisonment, the
forcible detention of our private property,
the re-capture of the vessel, its
arrival in San Carlos, my delivery of it
into the hands of the authorities there,
the transfer of the prisoners and treasure
to the Virago, our passage to Valparaiso,
&c. &c., and claiming salvage
on the treasure and restoration of the
personal property of myself, passengers,
and crew, I transmitted to Don Antonio
Varas, at Santiago.

[Pg 210]
While waiting for some notice of these
communications from the government authorities,
I found that the Eliza Cornish,
having the treasure on board, was preparing
for sea, under the orders of the
British admiral, and that no steps were
being taken by the Chilian authorities
to claim the treasure. I therefore caused
process to be issued to prevent the sailing
of the vessel, in order to obtain an
adjudication in the courts of Chili for
the salvage to which I was justly entitled,
for the re-capture of the treasure.
But although there was ample time to
execute this process and prevent the
removal of the treasure and though I
did every thing in my power to cause
this to be done, yet the E. Cornish
was permitted to sail for England.

This was either from the gross neglect,
or the wilful default of the officers entrusted
[Pg 211]

with serving the process; and
I myself firmly believe that the neglect
was wilful, and that it arose from the
unwillingness on the part of the Chilian
government to come into direct collision
with the British admiral. Nay, more:
I have every reason to believe that
many articles of personal property belonging
to myself, my passengers, and
my crew, were also on the E. Cornish;
for the prisoners had in their possession
at the time we came into San Carlos
all our wearing apparel, weapons, and
so forth; all of which were transferred
to the Virago with the prisoners, and
which, I was told at San Carlos, should
be carefully restored to me on reaching
Valparaiso,—but which I never could
trace afterwards. Of my own personal
effects I never received any thing but
one pistol.

[Pg 212]
It was at this time I made the attempt
to recover the ring taken from
Mr. Shaw’s finger at the time of his
death—offering a reward to any one
who would bring it to me. I had
heard that it was seen on the finger of
one of the women brought to San Carlos
in the E. Cornish.

Finding no disposition on the part of
the government to attend to my written
communications, I went to Santiago on
the 14th of March, accompanied by Mr.
Duer, for the purpose of having a personal
interview with our Minister, colonel
Peyton, and with Don Antonio
Varas.

By the advice of colonel Peyton and
Mr. Duer, I addressed a letter to Don
Antonio, under date of March 19th, recapitulating
the grievances under which
I had labored; submitting my claims,
[Pg 213]

together with my protest, and appealing
to the honor of the government to see
that I should not suffer from the removal
of the treasure, since it had
arisen from the neglect of their own
officers. I also submitted, that had I
not recovered it, the Chilian government
would have been bound to make the
amount good to the owners; and that
at great hazard to my life, I had rendered
such service to the State as no
great nation permits to pass unrewarded.

In reply to this, an interview was
appointed by Don Antonio Varas, for
the next day, with Mr. Duer and myself.
We went at the time appointed,
and found the Minister unwilling to
allow any claim for damages sustained,
either in person or property, during the
time the Florida was in the hands of
the rebels, or for salvage on the treasure;
[Pg 214]

but he acknowledged the obligation
of the government to pay for the
use of the vessel for the time she was
in its service. He however postponed
the decision of the case until Monday,
the 22d, at which time he appointed
another interview. Mr. Duer and myself
were at his office at the time appointed,
but were put off again until
the next day. On Tuesday, we held
another conversation with Don Antonio
Varas, if possible, more unsatisfactory
than the first, for not the slightest hope
of relief was held forth.

Despairing of obtaining justice, I
returned to Valparaiso, and, on the
27th of March, advertised for money on
bottomry, to repair the Florida and enable
her to proceed to sea. I was
forced to do this, as I had literally
nothing wherewith to pay the wages of
[Pg 215]

my crew, much less repair the vessel.
The advertisement for bottomry remained
in the Daily Mercuria, of Valparaiso,
until April 3d, when, no proposals having
been received, I was forced to put
the barque up for sale, and advertised
her on the 7th. The next day, the
8th, Mr. Duer addressed another letter
to the Minister, Don Antonio Varas, in
which he proposed a compromise. This
was done to avoid the necessity for the
sale of the vessel, and in hopes that
an appeal to the sense of honor of the
government might have its effect. Mr.
Duer, at first protesting that in making
this offer he by no means admitted,
either for himself or for me, that my
claims were not in all respects just and
sound, went on to say that the price
paid for the use of the vessel, in taking
the prisoners to Magellan, was much
[Pg 216]

less than it would have been had not
the Florida been bound to the United
States, via Rio Janeiro, and therefore
could stop on her way at Magellan with
comparatively little loss or expense.
Nevertheless, he offered to accept for
the use of the vessel, from the time of
her arrival at Magellan till she reached
Valparaiso again, a sum per day equal
to that which she received according to
the contract made from Valparaiso to
Magellan, with the addition of ten per
cent. The claim for salvage on the
specie was not waived, nor the compensation
for my personal services. The
personal losses of Mr. Buela, the mate,
and crew, were ascertained by Mr. Duer,
and stated at what he considered a low
and reasonable amount.

I was induced to make the offer of
this compromise, from my desire to do
[Pg 217]

the best in my power for my owners,
and from my sense of the great sacrifice
to them which the forced sale of
the vessel would cause; and also from
my utter inability to meet any more
delay, or incur any further expense,
destitute as I was of even the necessaries
of life, and dependent as my crew
were upon me.

This letter was dated April 8th; but
no answer was received until the 24th.
In the meantime, proposals for the purchase
of the vessel were made by
Messrs. F. A. Richardson & Co., offering
the sum of two thousand eight hundred
dollars for the barque. The vessel
being advertised for sale on account of
whom it might concern, and this being
the highest offer received, of course it
was accepted.

On the 24th, Mr. Duer received a
[Pg 218]

letter from Don Antonio Varas, denying
the right to any claim for services rendered
or losses suffered in consequence
of the acts of the revolted colonists,
and proposing that in order to determine
the time during which the Florida
should be considered as employed in the
services of the government, an agent
should be employed to go between me
and the government.

He waives all examination of the estimate
formed in Mr. Duer’s letter, of
the amount to be allowed as claimed
by the Florida; he takes leave to observe
that Mr. Duer takes it for granted
that the Florida was in the service of
the government not only during the
time she was sailing under the orders
of the authorities of Chili, but also the
period she was in the power of the
insurrectionists; and that the personal
[Pg 219]

losses of the captain, sailors, and passengers
are included in the claim; whereas
they should be considered as resulting
from the acts of the rebels, which the
government is not responsible for.

With an excuse for his delay in answering
Mr. Duer’s letter, founded upon
his absence from the capital for a few
days, and other urgent occupations, he
signs himself, “Your obedient servant,
Antonio Varas.”

On receiving this letter, Mr. Duer
joined me in entering a protest at the
consulate, against the injuries and damages
I had received at the hands of the
Chilian government, and the affair was
put in the hands of our government
authorities, where it now remains.

[Pg 220]

CHAPTER X.

Cambiaso’s trial—His execution—His character—Garcia—My
interview with him—The officer saved by Garcia—His
wife’s gratitude—Mr. Duer’s kindness—Mr. Dunn—Captain
Avalos—Conclusion.

During the time that I had been occupied
in endeavoring to obtain a recognition
of my claims from the Chilian
government, the trial of Cambiaso, Garcia,
and the other ringleaders among
the rebels, had been going on at Valparaiso.

Cambiaso’s trial was not public, and
I was not called in during its course;
consequently I could know but little of
it. I attended the execution myself,
painful as the sight was to me, from
[Pg 221]

a strange desire which I had to see
the last of men who had caused me so
much suffering, and from a wish to
know how they would meet their fate.
Cambiaso was led out heavily ironed,
and therefore little could be judged of
the state of his feelings from his bearing
or appearance; but he certainly
showed no positive cowardice.

I have sometimes thought, in reflecting
on the intercourse I had with him, and
the traits of character he manifested,
that he had naturally fine abilities,
which, under a different training and
different circumstances, might have led
him through a brilliant course. He had,
however, a fatal vanity, which was constantly
a stronger temptation to him
than his principles of right were able
to withstand. Much of his cruelty seemed
to me to arise from a sort of bravado,
[Pg 222]

and a desire to impress his followers
with a great idea of his power and his
courage. I came to this conclusion from
noticing that his words were always
more cruel than his actions, and yet
that his threats did not seem to be
uttered under the influence of passion;
on the contrary, they were delivered in
a grandiloquent manner which sometimes
would have made me feel inclined to
laugh, if the subjects had not generally
been too serious for a joke.

His personal vanity was also very
great; and, indeed, he had some excuse
for it, for he was certainly a very handsome
man. His dress was always very
gaudy—sometimes blue, with gilt trimmings,
sometimes green—always with two
epaulets, and he went constantly armed.
I have called him cowardly, but perhaps
in that I have done him injustice. It
[Pg 223]

is possible that what seemed cowardice
to me, was only the workings of a sensitive
conscience; and that his shunning
the eye of those with whom he talked
was from a sense of guilt; his punishment
may have already begun in his
remorse. There were certainly two or
three slight indications of this during
our intercourse; for instance, he was
constantly promising me reparation for
the wrongs he had done me, “when we
should reach port,” or “when general
Cruz should come into power;” and
after each new crime he seemed to
harden himself against the recollection
of it by some drunken frolic with the
men, or some unusual display. I cannot
forget that my situation made it almost
impossible for me to judge him with
impartiality; and how difficult it is in
any situation for one man to judge of
[Pg 224]

the temptations of another, or of what
may be urged in his excuse.

Cambiaso had a wife living near San
Carlos, but I was told that she was
not a woman of good character, and
that he had separated from her. I hope
he had no children to inherit the disgrace
attached to his name.

Garcia was not acquitted by the court
martial, on the ground of his being compelled
to follow Cambiaso from fear of
his life, and in consideration of various
acts of humanity which he had performed,
and which were repeated by the
rebels themselves, but held for a second
trial. After his first trial, I called
upon him, and found his sister with
him. She was evidently a lady, and I
understood that his family were among
the most respectable in Valparaiso. He
received me very politely—even kindly—and
[Pg 225]

congratulated me on my escape;
at the same time thanking me for some
kindnesses which I had been able to
show him during his imprisonment on
the Florida.

While I was in Valparaiso, I saw
(in his prison,) the officer whose life
was spared through Garcia’s interference.
He was obliged to have his second
trial, and as his wife visited him daily,
he asked me to come and see him again,
saying that she wanted to thank me for
my sympathy on the night that he was
condemned by Cambiaso. These marks
of gratitude for slight favors made me
feel that no men are so far wrong that
some good feeling does not often show
itself, when occasion calls it out; and
that the saying which I have heard
somewhere, that “the difference between
the best good man and the worst bad
[Pg 226]

man in this world is not nearly so
great in the eyes of God as it is in
our eyes,” is perhaps very true.

In this narrative, I have endeavored
to speak impartially of every one whom
I have had occasion to mention; and
in cases where I have had occasion to
record wrongs done to me, I have endeavored
to give only a plain, straightforward
narrative of facts, without allowing
my own feelings to bias me more
than must needs be.

In regard to the salvage question, I
cannot but feel that I have been treated
unjustly, both by the Chilian government
and by the British officers at Valparaiso;
but I have endeavored to state the facts
as they occurred, leaving the judgment
of the case with my countrymen. I am
glad to take occasion here to thank Mr.
Duer, not only for the assistance which
[Pg 227]

he rendered me, in the way of his
office, but for the kindness and sympathy
which I received from him; for the
ready interest which he showed in my
affairs; and for the activity with which
he followed up my claims.

There are those to whom the reading
of this narrative will bring great pain,
because it will bring vividly before their
minds the sad fate of a dear relative.
I refer to the friends of Mr. Shaw. To
them I can only offer my deep sympathy,
and the assurance that Mr. Shaw was
to me not simply a companion, but a
deeply valued friend, and that my grief
for him was lasting and deep.

To Mr. Dunn and captain Avalos I
render my thanks for supporting me in
maintaining my authority on the Florida,
and for the kindness which they showed
me after I reached Valparaiso.

[Pg 228]
Last of all, let me render thanks to
that Providence which has rescued me
from so many and such great dangers,
and restored me to my family and
friends, when I had so much reason to
despair of ever meeting them again.

I have given this narrative to the
public from the thought that my adventures
and escapes would not be
without their interest to my countrymen;
and that the plain, unpretending narrative
of a sea-faring man from their own
shores, would show to landsmen what
they sometimes suffer who “go down to
the sea in ships.”

FOOTNOTES:

[A]
Six months in Italy. By George S. Hillard.

End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Sufferings and Escape of Capt.
Chas. H. Brown From an Awful Imprisonment by Chilian Convicts, by Chas. H. Brown

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ESCAPE OF CAPT. CHAS. H. BROWN ***

***** This file should be named 57456-h.htm or 57456-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/7/4/5/57456/

Produced by David E. Brown and The Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.