The Project Gutenberg EBook of Catalogue of the Retrospective Loan
Exhibition of European Tapestries, by Phyllis Ackerman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

Title: Catalogue of the Retrospective Loan Exhibition of European Tapestries

Author: Phyllis Ackerman

Contributor: J. Nilsen Laurvik

Release Date: July 16, 2018 [EBook #57518]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CATALOGUE ***

Produced by Jane Robins and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

EUROPEAN TAPESTRIES

SAN FRANCISCO MUSEUM OF ART

CATALOGUE

OF THE

RETROSPECTIVE LOAN EXHIBITION

OF

EUROPEAN TAPESTRIES

BY

PHYLLIS ACKERMAN

M.A.; PH.D.

WITH A PREFACE BY

J. NILSEN LAURVIK

DIRECTOR

SAN FRANCISCO

PUBLISHED BY THE MUSEUM

MCMXXII

[4]

Published September 29, 1922, in an edition of
2000 copies. Copyright, 1922, by San Francisco
Museum of Art. Reprinted November 15, 1922,
500 copies.

Printed by
T
AYLOR
& T
AYLOR
,
San Francisco.
In the making of the type-design for the cover, the
printer has introduced an illuminated fifteenth-century
woodcut by an unknown master. Its original
appears, illuminated as shown, in "L'Istoire de la
Destruction de Troye la Grant," a book printed
at Paris, dated May 12, 1484, of which only a
single copy is known to exist, that in the Royal
Library at Dresden, this reproduction having been
made from the excellent facsimile of the block shown
in Claudin's "Histoire de l'Imprimerie en France."
The border-design of the cover is composed of the
names of the chief tapestry-producing cities in Europe
during the Gothic and Renaissance periods.

Halftones made by Commercial Art Company, San
Francisco.

[5]

PREFACE

This historical exhibition of European Tapestries is the fourth in a series of retrospective
exhibitions which we have planned to illustrate the chronological development
of some important phase of world-art, as in the Old Masters Exhibition, held
in the fall of 1920, or of the art of an individual in whose work is significantly
reflected the spirit of his age, as in the J. Pierpont Morgan Collection of drawings
and etchings by Rembrandt, exhibited here in the spring of 1920.

In its scope and general lines this exhibition follows closely the plan of our Exhibition
of Paintings by Old Masters, and, as will at once be apparent from the
subject-matter and treatment, covers the same period of European history. Although
important exhibitions of European tapestries have been held at various times both
here and abroad, it has remained for our museum to arrange the first complete
historical survey of this art given in America. This collection presents in unbroken
sequence the main currents influential in the development and decadence of the
great art of tapestry-weaving in Europe, from the XIVth century down to and
including the early XIXth century, as exhibited in the work of the foremost designers
and weavers of the period, in examples that, for the most part, are brilliantly
typical and always characteristic of their particular style.

Virtually, every loom of importance in France, Flanders, Germany, Switzerland,
Spain, England, and Russia is here represented by historically famous pieces which
run the entire gamut of subjects that engaged the interest of the most celebrated
designers and weavers of each epoch, from allegorical, classical, historical, and
mythological to genre subjects, landscapes, religious pieces, and even portraits and
still-life subjects. The only omissions of any consequence are the Italian looms and
Soho, and the output of these was relatively small and the examples extant are very
scarce. However, their absence does not materially affect the historical integrity of
the exhibition as a whole. On the other hand, the Gothic series is perhaps the most
complete assemblage of all the most important types ever brought together at one
time in this country, and every important type of Renaissance design is here
included; the collection comprises two of the excessively rare products of the
Fontainebleau ateliers, as well as unusually fine specimens of the relatively scarce
examples of the Spanish and Russian looms.

My chief concern in organizing this exhibition has been to make it exemplify,
first, the history of tapestry, and, second, its æsthetic qualities as these have
appeared during the different periods of its changing and varying development,
which, like the art of painting, had its naïve, primitive beginnings, its glorious
culmination, and its decline. Therefore, every piece has been selected both to represent
a distinct and significant type in the chronology of the art and to illustrate the
artistic merits of that type, and all the tapestries shown are of the highest worth in
their particular category and many of them are among the supreme masterpieces
of European art, considered from whatever point of view one may choose to regard
them. Only too long have these noble products of the loom been relegated to a
[6]

secondary place in the history of European culture, which they did so much to
celebrate. I sincerely trust that this exhibition, culled from seventeen collections
in New York, San Francisco, and Paris, may successfully contribute something
toward abolishing the hypnotic spell of the gold-framed oil-painting, that artistic
fetish which too long has held the uncritical enthralled to the exclusion of other
and ofttimes more authentic manifestations of the human spirit in art.

Regarded from the standpoint of design alone, the extraordinary co-ordination of
color and pattern (not to speak of the depth and richness of the inner content)
exhibited in certain of these pieces is a sharp challenge to the oft-repeated distinction
drawn between the major and the minor arts, and one is constrained, after
studying these tapestries, to conclude that there are no major or minor arts, only
major and minor artists, and that greatness transfigures the material to the point
of art, be it paint or potter's clay, and a simple Tanagra transcends in worth all
the gilded and bejeweled banalities of Cellini, whose essentially flamboyant soul
sought refuge in gold and precious stones. This truth, too rarely insisted upon, is
of prime importance in any consideration of art, whether it be "fine" or applied
art, and a collection such as this should do much to make it clear. Here one may
observe how the principles of design and color that animate the immortal masterpieces
of mural painting are identical with those that give life and vitality to these
masterpieces of the loom, and thereby apprehend something of that mysterious
law governing the operation of the creative impulse which finds its expression in
all the arts, irrespective of time and place, whether it be in rugs, porcelains, Persian
tiles and manuscripts, in European primitives, or in the works of Chinese and
Japanese old masters, transcending racial differences and attaining a universal
affinity that makes a Holbein one with a Chinese ancestral portrait. Surely such
opulent fantasy of design and color as is revealed in Nos. 1, 3, 5, and 17, to mention
only four of the Gothic pieces in the collection, is deserving of something better
than the left-handed compliment of a comparison with painting.

In their masterly filling of the allotted space, in the fine subordination of the
varied details to the general effect, as well as in the loftiness and intensity of the
emotion expressed, these glorious products of the loom are worthy exemplars of the
highest ideals of mural decoration no less than of the aristocratic art of tapestry-weaving.
Reflections such as these are the natural consequence of a comparative
study of art, and these and kindred reasons are the impelling causes prompting one
to exhibit, not only tapestries, but rugs and textiles of all kinds, in an art museum
and to give them the same serious study one would accord a Leonardo, a Giotto, a
Rembrandt. Æsthetically and racially, they are no less revealing and frequently
more interesting in that they are the products of the earliest expressions of those
æsthetic impulses the manifestation of which has come to be called art; nor are
they less authentic and expressive because communicated with the force and
directness of the primitive loom, which give to all its products a certain character
and worth rarely equaled by the more sophisticated products of the so-called fine
arts.

[7]

It is our hope that this catalogue will serve as a helpful guide to all those wishing
to make such use of this collection. Every serious student of the subject no less
than every unbiased specialist will, I am sure, appreciate at its true worth the
scholarly work done by Dr. Ackerman, whose researches have made such a text
possible. Bringing to the task a critical judgment and a scientific method of analysis
hitherto applied almost exclusively to the identification and interpretation of
primitive paintings, the author has been able to correct several well-established
errors and to throw new light on many doubtful and obscure points which are so
well documented as should make them contributions of permanent value to the
literature of the subject.

In conclusion we wish to thank Messrs. William Baumgarten & Company, C.
Templeton Crocker, Demotte, Duveen Brothers, P. W. French & Company, A. J.
Halow, Jacques Seligmann & Company, Dikran K. Kelekian, Frank Partridge, Inc.,
W. & J. Sloane, William C. Van Antwerp, Wildenstein & Company, and Mesdames
James Creelman, William H. Crocker, Daniel C. Jackling, and Maison Jamarin of
Paris, for their kindness in lending us these priceless examples of the European
weavers' art that constitute this notable assemblage of tapestries, and to record our
deep appreciation of the generous co-operation of the patrons and patronesses whose
sponsorship has made the exhibition possible by guaranteeing the very considerable
expense involved in bringing the collection to San Francisco. And last, but not
least, we wish to express our grateful appreciation of the unremitting thought and
attention devoted by the printer to designing and executing the very fitting typographical
form that contributes so largely to making the varied material contained
herein readily available to the reader, and to acknowledge, on behalf of the author,
the friendly help of Arthur Upham Pope, whose suggestions and criticisms have
been found of real value in the preparation of the text of the catalogue.

J. N
ILSEN
L
AURVIK
, Director

San Francisco, September 29, 1922.

The patrons and patronesses of the Exhibition are: Messrs. William C. Van Antwerp,
Edwin Raymond Armsby, Leon Bocqueraz, Francis Carolan, C. Templeton Crocker,
Sidney M. Ehrman, William L. Gerstle, Joseph D. Grant, Walter S. Martin, James
D. Phelan, George A. Pope, Laurance Irving Scott, Paul Verdier, John I. Walter, Michel
D. Weill, and Mesdames A. S. Baldwin, C. Templeton Crocker, Henry J. Crocker,
William H. Crocker, Marcus Koshland, Eleanor Martin, George A. Pope, and Misses
Helen Cowell and Isabel Cowell, and The Emporium.

[8]

THE SAN FRANCISCO MUSEUM OF ART

BOARD OF TRUSTEES

WILLIAM C. VAN ANTWERP, EDWIN RAYMOND ARMSBY

ARTHUR BROWN, JR., FRANCIS CAROLAN, CHARLES W. CLARK

CHARLES TEMPLETON CROCKER

WILLIAM H. CROCKER, JOHN S. DRUM, SIDNEY M. EHRMAN

JOSEPH D. GRANT, DANIEL C. JACKLING

WALTER S. MARTIN, JAMES D. PHELAN, GEORGE A. POPE

LAURANCE I. SCOTT, RICHARD M. TOBIN

JOHN I. WALTER

DIRECTOR

J. NILSEN LAURVIK

THE MUSEUM IS HOUSED IN THE PALACE OF FINE ARTS

ERECTED BY THE PANAMA-PACIFIC INTERNATIONAL

EXPOSITION IN 1915

[9]

CONTENTS

For a detailed list of the tapestries

catalogued herein see the subject and title index at

the end of the volume

PREFACE

Page
5

INTRODUCTION

11

CATALOGUE

25

LIST OF WEAVERS

58

BIBLIOGRAPHY

59

SUBJECT AND TITLE INDEX

61

ILLUSTRATIONS

MAP

Facing Page
16

Showing the principal centers of production of Gothic and early
Renaissance tapestries

TAPESTRIES

The Annunciation

Facing Page
24

The Chase

25

The Annunciation, the Nativity, and the Announcement to the Shepherds

26

Scenes from the Roman de la Rose

27

The Vintage

30

Entombment on Millefleurs

31

Millefleurs with Shepherds and the Shield of the Rigaut Family

32

Pastoral Scene

33

The Creation of the World

34
[10]

Four Scenes from the Life of Christ

35

The Triumph of David

38

Two Pairs of Lovers

39

Hannibal Approaches Scipio to Sue for Peace

40

Cyrus Captures Astyages, His Grandfather

41

The Crucifixion

42

Grotesques

43

Triumph of Diana

46

The Niobides

47

Scene from the History of Cleopatra

48

Verdure

49

Verdure with Dancing Nymphs

50

The Conquest of Louis the Great

51

The Poisoning of a Spy

54

The Arms of France and Navarre

55

[11]

INTRODUCTION

AN HISTORICAL AND CRITICAL SURVEY

OF THE ART OF TAPESTRY

WEAVING

Tapestry is a compound art. It stands at the meeting-point of three other arts,
and so is beset by the problems of all three. In the first place, it is illustrative, for
while there are tapestries that show only a sprinkling of flowers, a conventionalized
landscape, or an armorial shield, the finest and most typical pieces are those with

personnages
that represent some episode from history, myth, or romance, or give a
glimpse of the current usages of daily life. In the second place, tapestry is a mural
decoration. It is part of the architectural setting of the rooms, really one with the
wall. And, in the third place, it is a woven material—a solid fabric of wool or silk
in the simplest of all techniques.

Since a tapestry is an illustration, it must be realistic and convincing, accurate
in details and clearly indicative of the story. Because it is also a wall decoration,
it cannot be too realistic, but must be structural in feeling and design, and the
details must fall into broad masses that carry a strong effect from a distance.
And since it is a woven material, even if it be structural, it must be flexible, and
must have a fullness of ornament that will enrich the whole surface so that none
of it will fall to the level of mere cloth.

But if the tapestry designer have a difficult problem in resolving these conflicting
demands of the different aspects of his art, he has also wider opportunities to
realize within those limitations. As an illustration, if he handle it with skill, he
can make the design convey all the fascination of romance and narrative. As a
mural decoration his design can attain a dignity and noble reserve denied to
smaller illustrations, splendid in itself, and valuable for counterbalancing the disproportionate
literary interest that the subject sometimes arouses. And the thick
material, with its soft, uneven surface, lends, even to a trivial design, a richness
and mellowness that the painter can achieve only in the greatest moments of his
work.

The designer of tapestry can steer his way among the difficulties of the three
phases of his art, and win the advantages of them all only if he have a fine and
sensitive feeling for the qualities that he must seek. A realism flattened to the
requirement of mural decoration and formalized to the needs of the technique of
weaving, that still retains the informality and charm of the illustration, can best
be won by considering the design as a pattern of silhouettes; for a silhouette is
flat, and so does not violate the structural flatness of the wall by bulging out in
high modeling. Moreover, it does give a broad, strong effect that can carry across
a large room. And, finally, it permits both of adaptation in attitude and gesture
[12]

to the needs of the story and of easy-flowing lines that can reshape themselves to
the changing folds of a textile. So, to make good silhouettes, the figures in a good
tapestry design will be arranged in the widest, largest planes possible, as they are
in a fine Greek relief, and they will be outlined with clear, decisive, continuous
lines, definitive of character, expressive and vivacious.

The strength and vivacity of the outline is of prime significance in tapestry
design, even though in its final effect it appears not primarily as a linear art, but
rather as a color art. The outlines have to be both clearly drawn in the cartoon
and forcefully presented in the weave; for they bear the burden both of the illustrative
expressiveness and of the decorative definition. If they are weakened in
delineation or submerged by the glow of the colors, the tapestry becomes confused
in import, weak in emphasis, and blurred in all its relations, while the charm and
interest of detail is quite lost. The too heavy lines of some of the primitive tapestries
are less a defect than the too delicate lines of the later pieces designed by those
who were primarily painters, and which were too much adapted to the painting
technique. The outlines in the best tapestries are not only indicated with a good
deal of force, but these lines themselves have unflagging energy, unambiguous
direction, diversified movement, and unfaltering control.

In order to complete and establish the silhouette effect, the color in the best
tapestries is laid on in broad flat areas, each containing only a limited number of
tones. A gradual transition of tone through many shades is undesirable, because
such modulations convey an impression of relief modeling, which is inappropriate
and superfluous in an art of silhouette. Then, again, these gradations at a little
distance tend to fuse, and thus somewhat blur the force and purity of the color;
and, finally, a considerable number of color transitions are ill-adapted to the
character of a textile, as they tend to make it appear too much like painting. Nor
are fluctuating tones and minute value-gradations necessary for a soft and varied
effect. The very quality of tapestry material accomplishes that—first, because the
ribbed surface breaks up the flatness of any color area and gives it shimmering
variations of light and shade, and, second, because the wide folds natural to the
material throw the flat tones now into dark and now into light, thus by direct
light and shade differentiating values that in the dyes themselves are identical.
Color in tapestry can thus be used in purer, more saturated masses than in any
form of painting, not excepting even the greatest murals.

Flat silhouetted figures cannot of course be set in a three-dimensional world.
They would not fit. So the landscape, too, must be flattened out into artificially
simplified stages. This is also necessary both for the architectural and the decorative
effect of tapestry, for otherwise the remote vistas tend to give the effect
of holes in the wall, and the distance, dimmed by atmosphere, is too pallid and
empty to be interesting as textile design. Yet the fact of perspective cannot be
altogether denied. Often the designer can avoid or limit the problem by cutting
off the farther views with a close screen of trees and buildings, and this has also
the advantage of giving a strong backdrop against which the figures stand out firm
[13]

and clear. But there are occasions in which a wider field is essential for the purposes
of illustration. The problem is how to show a stretch of country and still keep it
flat and full of detail. In the most skillful periods of tapestry design the difficulty
was met by reducing the perspective to three or four sharply stepped levels of
distance, laid one above the other in informal horizontal strips. Aerial perspective
was disregarded, each strip being filled with details, all sharply drawn but diminishing
in size. The scene was thus kept relatively flat, was adapted to flat figures,
and was also filled with interesting details.

This fullness of detail is important in tapestries and is the source of much of
their richness and charm. The great periods of weaving made lavish use of an
amazing variety of incidents and effects: the pattern of a gown, jewels, the chasing
or relief on a piece of armor, bits of decorative architecture, carved furniture, and
the numerous household utensils, quaint in shape or suddenly vivid in color—all
these, with the innumerable flowers, the veritable menagerie of beasts, real and
imaginary, gayly patterned birds, as well as rivers, groves, and mountains, make
up the properties with which the designer fills his spaces and creates a composition
of inexhaustible resource and delight.

So with flat figures, strong outlines, deep, pure, and simple colors, a flattened
setting, and a wealth of details, the artist can make a tapestry that will be at the
same time both a representative and an expressive illustration, an architectural
wall decoration, and a sumptuous piece of material. But even then he has not
solved every difficulty; for the tapestry cannot be merely beautiful in itself. It
has to serve as a background for a room and for the lives lived in it; so it must be
consonant in color and line quality with the furniture current at the time it is
made, and it must meet the prevailing interests of the people. Moreover, while it
must be rich enough to absorb the loitering attention, it must also have sufficient
repose and reserve and aloofness not to intrude unbidden into the eye and not to
be too wearyingly exciting—and this last was sometimes no easy problem to solve
when the designer was bidden to illustrate a rapidly moving and dramatic tale.
Sometimes, in truth, he did not solve it, but sometimes he employed with subtle
skill the device of so dispersing his major points of action that until they are
examined carefully they merge into a general mass effect.

While the designers have at different periods met these various problems in
different ways and with varying skill, the technique of the weaving has never
been modified to any extent. For centuries this simple kind of weaving has been
done. In essentials it is the same as that used in the most primitive kind of cloth
manufacture. The warps are stretched on a frame that may rest horizontally or
stand upright. The shuttle full of thread of the desired color is passed over and
under the alternate warps, the return reversing the order, now under the warps
where it was before over, and over where it was under. A comb is used to push
the wefts thus woven close together so that they entirely cover the warps. In the
finished tapestry the warps run horizontally across the design. A change of colors
in the weft-threads creates the pattern. In the more complex patterns of later
[14]

works the weaver follows the design drawn in outline on his warps, or sometimes,
in the horizontal looms, follows the pattern drawn on a paper laid under his
warps so that he looks down through them. His color cues he takes from the fully
painted cartoon suspended somewhere near in easy view. Occasionally, in later
pieces, to enrich the effect, the simple tapestry weave is supplemented with another
technique, such as brocading (cf. No. 52), but this is rare.

All the earliest examples left to us of this kind of weaving are akin to tapestry
as we usually know it only in technique. They have practically no bearing on the
development of its design. Of the very earliest we have no evidence left by which
to judge. Homer, the Bible, and a number of Latin authors all mention textiles that
probably could be classed as tapestries; but the references are too general to give
us any definite clue as to the treatment of the design. But from the VIth to the
VIIIth century, the Copts in Egypt produced many pieces, showing, usually in
very small scale, birds and animals and foliage, and even groups of people. Of
these we have many samples left. From various parts of Europe, primarily from
Germany, in the next two centuries we have a few famous examples. But these are
almost wholly without significant relation to the central development of tapestry
design. Tapestry, in our sense of the word, begins, as far as extant examples are
concerned, with the XIVth century.

From the XIVth to the end of the XVth century was the Gothic period. Then
tapestry was at its greatest height. More of the requisites of its design were met,
and met more adequately and more naturally, than by any subsequent school of
designers or any looms. As illustration, the tapestry of the Gothic period is interesting,
vivid, and provocative. The stories and episodes that it presents were, to
be sure, all part of the mental content of the audience, so that they comprehended
them more immediately than we; but even without the literary background we
follow them readily, so adequate is their delineation. Moreover, they carry successfully
almost every narrative mood—humor, romance, lyricism, excitement, pathos,
and pure adventure—and, except in the traditional religious scenes, they wisely
eschew such tenser dramatic attitudes as a momentous climax, long-sustained
suspense, or profound tragedy. Finally, when they had a good tale to tell, the
Gothic designers rendered their episodes with a fullness of incident and a vivacity
of detail never again equaled.

As mural decorations, too, the Gothic tapestries are equally successful. For the
figures are always flat and, even while natural and animated, are often slightly
formalized and structural in drawing (cf. No. 10); the outlines are clean and active,
the colors strong and broad, the vistas either eliminated as in the millefleurs (cf.
No. 11) or completely simplified (cf. No. 13), while the details are abundant and
delightful. Finally, they are among the most sumptuous textiles ever woven in the
Western World—sumptuous, not because of costly material, for they only rarely
use metal thread, and even silk is unusual, but sumptuous because of the variety
and magnificence of their designs and the splendor and opulence of their color.

Thus the Gothic designers both appreciated and employed to the full all of
[15]

the æsthetic conditions of their art; yet they did not do this from any theoretical
comprehension of the medium. The supremacy of Gothic tapestry rests on a
broad basis. It is the final product of one of the most vital and creative epochs
in the history of art; its designers were brought up in a great tradition, surrounded
everywhere by the most magnificent architectural monuments, accustomed to the
habit of beauty in small as well as great things, still inspired and nourished by the
fertile spirit that had created and triumphantly solved so many problems in the
field of art. A passion for perfection and an elevated and sophisticated taste animated
all of the crafts, of which tapestry was but one. The full flowering of tapestry
is contemporaneous with that of Limoges enamel, paralleling it in many ways,
even to the employment of the same designers (cf. No. 7). Great armor was being
made at the same time—armor that exemplified as never before or since its inherent
qualities and possibilities: perfection of form and finish, a sensitive and expressive
surface, and exquisite decoration logically developed out of construction. Furniture
also achieved at that time a combination of strength with natural and imaginative
embellishments that still defies copy, while the first publishers were producing the
most beautiful books that have ever been printed, unsurpassable in the clear and
decorative silhouette of the type, in the perfection of tone, and in the balanced
spacing of the composition. Other textile arts, such as that of velvet and brocade
weaving, reached the utmost heights of subtlety and magnificence. This easy
achievement of masterpieces in kindred fields, so characteristic of great epochs,
doubtless stimulated tapestry-weaving as it did every other art.

This great achievement of the Gothic period in so many fields of art was the
natural flowering of the spirit of the time. Life for all was limited in content,
education as we understand it meager and ill-diffused, opportunities for advancement
for the individual about non-existent. Despite these limitations—partly,
indeed, because of them—and despite the physical disorders of the age, there
were, none the less, a simplicity and unity of mind and an integrity of spirit that
provided the basis for great achievement. The spontaneous and tremendous energy,
the inexhaustible fertility that was an inheritance from their Frankish and Germanic
forbears were now moulded and controlled by common institutions, by the acceptance
of common points of view and the consciousness of unified and fundamental
principles of life, the acceptance of an authoritative social system that defined
and limited each man's ambitions. All these factors prevented the protracted self-analysis,
the aimless criticism, the uncertainties and confusion of individual aims
that consume our energies, detract from our will, and impoverish our accomplishments.
Theirs was in no sense an ambiguous age; they were conscious of a universal
spirit, continuously pressing for expression in art which could fortunately forge
straight ahead to objective embodiment.

The stimulation of all of the arts had come in part, too, from the inrush of culture
from the Byzantine Empire, where traditions and riches had been heaping up continuously
ever since the Greek civilization had at its height spilled over into the
East. Every flood-tide of culture is created by various streams of ideas and customs
[16]

that have for generations taken separate courses. All competent ethnologists are
agreed that, no matter what the native equipment of a people is, no matter how
abundant are their natural resources, how friendly and encouraging is their environment
or how threatening and stimulating, one stream of culture flowing alone
never rises to great heights. Invention, evolved organization, and artistic production
come only with the meeting and mingling of ideas and habits. The East had first
fertilized European intellectual creativeness when the numerous Crusades and the
sacking of Constantinople by the Franks brought a wealth of novel and exciting
ideas into France and the neighboring territories in the XIth and XIIth centuries.
There followed the great period of cathedral-building with all the minor accompanying
artistic developments of the sculpture, the glass-painting, the manuscript
illuminating, the enameling, the lyrics of Southern France, and the romances and
fabliaux of Northern. This tide was ebbing slowly when a second rush from the
East incident to the fall of Constantinople in 1453 lifted it again. The art of tapestry
was especially sensitive to this second Byzantine influence. The industry was
coming to its height; the demand was already prodigious, the prices paid enormous,
the workers highly skilled and well organized. Tapestry was ready to assimilate
any relevant contribution. It enthusiastically took unto itself the sumptuous
luxury of the decadent Orient with its splendid fabrics, encrusted architecture,
complex patterns, and heavy glowing colors. The simple Frankish spirit of the earlier
pieces (cf. No. 2) was almost submerged by the riotously extravagant opulence of the
East (cf. Nos. 17, 18). On the other hand, too, from the jewelry of Scandinavia, a remote
descendant of an ancient Oriental precedent, tapestry adopted examples of heavy
richness of design. And at the same time it took also from the Byzantine some of
the formality, the thickness of elaborate drapery, the conventionalization of types,
and the rigidity of drawing that had paralyzed the art of Byzantium, but that in
tapestry enhanced the architectural character and so constituted a real addition.
The tendency of the late XIVth century to an absorption in an exact naturalism
which might have immediately rushed French and Flemish taste into the scientific
realism of the Florentine Renaissance was checked and deflected by the example
and the memory of the stiff carven form, the arrested gestures, and the fixed
draperies of the mosaics and manuscript illuminations of the Eastern Empire (cf.
No. 8).

But aside from these general considerations, which were vital for the creation
of great tapestries, there was at work a specific principle perhaps even more important.
The manner of treatment which the tapestry medium itself calls for was
one which was native to the mind of the time and which declared itself in a great
variety of forms.

In the first place, the Middle Ages were in spirit narrative. The bulk of their
literature was narrative—long historical or romantic poems with endless sequences
of continued episodes that never came to any dominating climax. Their drama,
too, was narrative, a story recounted through a number of scenes that could be
cut short at almost any point or could be carried on indefinitely without destroying
[17]

the structure, because there was no inclusive unity in them, no returning of the
theme on itself such as distinguishes Greek drama or Shakespeare and which we
demand in modern times. Their religion and their ethics also were narrative,
dependent, for the common man, upon the life history of sacred individuals that
both explained the fundamental truths of the universe and set models for moral
behavior. And they were supplemented, too, by profane histories with moralizing
symbolism contrived to point the way to the good life, such as we find in the

Roman de la Rose
(cf. No. 4). Even their lesser ethics, their etiquette, was narrative,
derived from the fabric of chivalric romance. And, again, their greatest art, their
architecture, was adorned with narrative, ornamented with multiple histories, so
that even the capital of a column told a tale. The whole world about them was
narrative, so that the painters and designers must needs think in narrative terms,
and hence as illustrators. The narrative features of the other arts also lent them
valuable examples for their tapestries. Most of their renderings of religious stories
were taken direct from the Mystery Plays (cf. No. 14), and some of their scenes
were already familiar to them in stained glass and church sculptures.

Moreover, narrative decorations were interesting and important to the people
of the XVth century because they had only very limited resources for intellectual
entertainment. Books were scarce, but even if plentiful would have been of little
use, for very few could read. The theatre for the mass of the people was limited to
occasional productions on church holidays of Mystery and Miracle plays, and
even for the great dukes these were only meagerly supplemented by court entertainers.
There was no illustrated daily news, no moving pictures, no circuses, no
menageries, no easy travel to offer ready recreation. In our distractedly crowded
life today we are apt to forget how limited were the lives of our ancestors and what
pleasure, as a result, they could get from a woven story on their walls.

In the second place, the Gothic designers, when they came to draw their decorative
illustrations, because of their inherited traditions, naturally fell into a
technique adapted to the architectual forms of mural decoration. For all the art
of the Middle Ages was the derivative of architecture, and at its inception was
controlled by it. The original conception of the graphic arts in this period was
the delineation on a flat surface of sculpture—sculpture, moreover, that was
basically structural, because made as part of a building. So the painted figures
were heavily outlined silhouettes in a few broad planes with the poise and the
restraint essential to sculpture. These early statuesque figures, familiar in the
primitive manuscript illumination and stained-glass windows, had, by the time
the tapestries reached their apogee, been modified by a fast-wakening naturalism.
But the underlying idea of the silhouette and of the poised body was not yet lost,
and so it was natural for tapestry designers to meet these requirements. The
naturalism, on the other hand, was just becoming strong enough to make the lines
more gracefully flowing and the details more varied and more delicate and exact in
drawing, so that the very transitional form of the art of the time made it especially
well adapted to a woven rendition.

[18]

In the third place, the cartoons, even if they were not quite right in feeling when
they came from the painter's hand, would be modified in the translation into the
weave by the workmen themselves; for the weavers at that time were respected
craftsmen with sufficient command of design to make their own patterns for the
less important orders, and were therefore perfectly able to modify and enrich the
details of the cartoon of even a great painter. And no designer in the one medium
of paint can ever fit his theme to the other medium of wool quite as aptly as the
man who is doing the weaving himself.

Thus because the Gothic period happened to be a time when it was natural for
the artists to make vivacious and decorative illustrations in clear, flat silhouettes
with rich details, most of the Gothic tapestries have some measure of artistic
greatness, sufficient to put them above all but the very greatest pieces of later
times. Even when we discount the additions that time and our changed attitude
make, the beauty of softened and blended colors, the charm of the unaccustomed
and the quaint, the interest of the unfamiliar costumes, the literary flavor of old
romantic times—even discounting these, they are still inherently superior. To be
sure, they are rarely pretty and are sometimes frankly ugly, but with a tonic
ugliness which possesses the deepest of all æsthetic merits, stimulating vitality.
They have verve, energy, a pungent vividness that sharply reminds the beholder
that he is alive. Their angular emphatic silhouettes and pure, highly saturated,
abruptly contrasted colors catch and hold the attention and quicken all the vital
responses that are essential to clear perception and full appreciation. They are a
standing refutation of the many mistaken theories that would make the essence
of beauty consist merely in the balanced form and symmetry, or smooth perfection
of rendition, or photographic accuracy of representation. They are a forceful and
convincing demonstration that in the last analysis beauty is the quality that
arouses the fullest realization of life.

Within the common Gothic character there are clearly recorded local differences:
the division between the French and the Flemish, not marked until the
middle of the XVth century, because up to that time the Franco-Flemish school
was really one and continuous. It amalgamated influences from both regions and
absorbed a rather strong contribution from Italy. The center of activity was at
first Paris and then at the courts of the Burgundian dukes. But after the middle
of the century the divergence is rapid and clear. The French is characterized by
greater simplicity, clarity, elegance, and delicacy. Even the strong uprush of
realism was held in check in France by decorative sensitiveness. The most characteristic
designs of the time are the millefleurs, the finer being made in Touraine
(cf. No. 8), the coarser in La Marche. The Flemish decoration, on the other hand,
is sumptuous, overflowing, sometimes confused, always energetic, and strongly
varied in detail. Nothing checks the relentless realism that sometimes runs even
to caricature and often is fantastic (cf. the punishment scenes in No. 4). Typical
of Flemish abundance are the cartoons with multiple religious scenes, heavy with
rich draperies and gorgeous with infinite detail, yet not subordinating to theme
[19]

the human interest of many well-delineated types of character (cf. No. 18). Brussels
was the great center for the production of work of this kind, but beautiful pieces
were being produced in almost every city of the Lowlands—Bruges, Tournai, Arras,
and many more.

The German Gothic tapestry is quite different from both of these. It was developed
almost entirely independently, under quite other conditions. While the French
and Flemish shops grew up under the patronage of the great and wealthy nobles,
and worked primarily for these lavish art-patrons, in Germany the nobles were
impoverished and almost outcast; there was scarcely a real court, and all the
wealth lay in the hand of the burghers, solid, practical folk who did not see much
sense in art. So while in France and in the Lowlands the workshops were highly
organized under great
entrepreneurs
, and the profits were liberal, in Germany the
workshops were very small, and many of the pieces were not made professionally
at all, but were the work of nuns in the convents or of ladies in their many idle
hours. Thus the industry that in France and Flanders was definitely centered in
the great cities such as Paris and Brussels, in Germany was scattered through
many towns, primarily, however, those of south Germany and Switzerland. And,
too, while the designs for the French and Flemish pieces were specially made by
manuscript illuminators, painters, or professional cartoon designers, some of whom,
like Maître Philippe (cf. Nos. 17-19), conducted great studios, for the German
pieces the weavers themselves adapted the figures from one of the woodcuts that
were the popular art of the German people or from some book illustration. So
while the French and Flemish tapestries reached great heights of skill and luxury,
and really were a great art, the German tapestry remained naïve and simple and
most of its artistic value is the product of that very naïveté.

Toward the close of the XVth century a change begins to appear in the character
of tapestry design. More and more often paintings are exactly reproduced down
to the last detail. At first sporadic products, the reproductions of the work of such
masters as Roger Van der Weyden and Bernard Van Orley become more and
more frequent until by the end of the first quarter of the XVIth century they are
a commonplace. Yet even though tapestry is no longer entirely true to itself, these
tapestry paintings are nevertheless beautiful and fit. A woven painting has not
yet become an anomaly because painting in Northern Europe is still narrative
and decorative. There are still poise and restraint and clear flat silhouette and rich
detail.

It was not until tapestry plunged full into the tide of the Italian Renaissance
that it entirely lost its Gothic merits. But when, beginning in 1515 with the arrival
of Raphael's cartoons for the Pope's
Apostle
series, the weavers of the North began
to depend more and more for their designs on the painters of the South and on
painters trained in the South, the character of tapestry completely changed. True,
tapestry in the old style was still made for two decades, but in diminishing numbers.
The Renaissance had the field. In place of endlessly varied detail, the designers
sought for instantly impressive effects, and these are of necessity obvious. Every-thing
[20]

grew larger, coarser, more insistent on attention. Figures were monumental,
floreation bold and strong, architecture massive. Even the verdures developed a
new manner; great scrolling acanthus-leaves and exotic birds (cf. No. 33) took
the place of the delicate field flowers and pigeons and songsters. Drama took the
place of narrative. On many pieces metal thread was lavished in abundance. The
whole flagrant richness of the newly modern world was called into play.

For the first time also with Renaissance tapestry, it becomes relevant to ask,
Do they look like the scenes they depict?—for realism was in the full tide of its
power. A hundred and fifty years before the Renaissance realism had begun to
develop, inspired by the naturalism of Aristotle, whose influence had gradually
filtered down from the schools to the people, and throughout the XIVth and early
XVth century it had been slowly growing. The hunting tapestries of the first part of
the XVth century are early examples of it. But the Gothic realism was an attempt
to convey the impression of the familiar incidents of life, to get expressive gestures,
to record characteristic bits of portraiture, whether of people or things or episodes,
so that a Gothic tapestry can be adjudged naturalistically successful if it carries
strongly the spirit and effect of a situation regardless of whether the drawing is
quite true or not (cf. No. 2). Renaissance realism, on the other hand, is not satisfied
with the impression, but strives for the fact. It wishes to depict not only the world
as one sees it, but as one knows it to be—knows it, moreover, after long and careful
study. So in all Renaissance graphic art correct anatomy becomes of importance,
solid modeling is essential, and all details must be specific.

Yet, though tapestry in the Renaissance was no longer illustrative in the old
sense, it still was decoratively fine; for the painting of Italy was founded on a
mural art, and the decorative traditions still held true. Outlines are still clear and
expressive. There was respect for architectural structure, and details, if less complex
and sensitive, are still rich and full. Color, too, is still strong and pure, though
the key is heightened somewhat and the number of tones increased. Moreover, the
Renaissance introduced two important new resources, the wide border and the
grotesque. Hitherto the border had been a narrow floral garland, a minor adjunct
easily omitted. Now it became of major importance, always essential to the beauty
of the piece, often the most beautiful part of it, designed with great resource and
frequently interwoven with gold and silver. The grotesque, from being originally
a border decoration, soon spread itself over the whole field (cf. No. 36), mingling
with amusing incongruity but with decorative consistency goats and fair ladies,
trellis, flowers, and heraldic devices. What the Renaissance lacked in subtlety it
made up in abundance.

During the Renaissance the tapestry industry was dominated by the Flemish cities,
with Brussels at the head. She had the greatest looms, great both for the exceeding
skill of the workers and for the enormous quantity of the production. Some workshops,
of which the most famous was that of the Pannemaker family, specialized
in exquisitely fine work rendered in the richest materials. Of this class, the most
typical examples are the
miniature
religious tapestries in silk and metal thread,
[21]

in which all the perfection of a painting was united with the sumptuousness of a
most extravagant textile (cf. No. 35). But sometimes full-sized wall-hangings too
were done with the same perfection and elaboration (cf. Nos. 23-25). Other shops
sacrificed the perfection of workmanship to a large output, but even in the most
commercially organized houses the weavers of Flanders in the XVIth century were
able and conscientious craftsmen.

These same Flemish workmen were called to different countries in Europe to
establish local looms. So Italy had several small temporary ateliers at this period,
as did England also (cf. No. 32). But though these shops were in Italy and England,
they were still predominantly Flemish. The character of local decoration and local
demand influenced the design somewhat, but fundamentally the products both in
cartoon and in weave were still those of the mother country. In France, however,
the Flemish workmen were made the tools of the beginning of a new national
revival of the art. A group of weavers was called to Fontainebleau, where, under
the extravagant patronage of Francis I, the French Renaissance was taking form.
These Flemings, weaving designs made by Italians, nevertheless created decorative
textiles that are typically French in spirit (cf. No. 37). France alone had a strong
enough artistic character to refashion the conventions of Italy and the technique
of Flanders to a national idiom.

In the next century this revival of the art which survived at Fontainebleau
barely fifty years was carried on in several ateliers at Paris. The workmen were
still predominantly Flemish, but again their work was unmistakably French (cf.
No. 38). In Trinity Hospital looms had been maintained since the middle of the
XVIth century. In the gallery of the Louvre looms were set up about 1607. And
the third and most important shop was established by Marc de Comans and
François de la Planche at the invitation of the king. This was most important,
because it later was moved to the Bièvre River, where the Gobelins family had its
old dye-works, and it eventually became the great state manufactory.

Thereafter for the next two centuries the looms of Flanders and France worked
in competition. Now one, now the other took precedence, but France had a slowly
increasing superiority that by the middle of the XVIIIth century put her two royal
looms, the Gobelin and Beauvais, definitely in the forefront of the industry.

For cartoons the looms of the two countries called on the great painters of the
time, often requisitioning the work of the same painters, and sometimes even
using the very same designs. Thus Van der Meulen worked both for Brussels
manufacturers (cf. Nos. 53-56) and for the French state looms (cf. No. 52), and
the Gobelin adapted to its uses the old Lucas
Months
that had originated in
Flanders (cf. Nos. 57, 58.)

But though they did thus parallel each other in cartoons, the finished tapestries
nevertheless retained their national differences. As in the Gothic period, the
Flemish tapestries in all respects showed a tendency to somewhat overdo. Their
figures were larger, their borders crushed fuller of flowers and fruit, their verdures
heavier, their grotesques more heterogeneous, their metal threads solider. Their
[22]

abundance was rich and decorative, but lacking in refinement and grace. The
French, on the other hand, kept always a certain detachment and restraint that
made for clarity and often delicacy. When the Baroque taste demanded huge
active figures, the French still kept theirs well within the frame. Their borders
were always spaced and usually more abstract. The verdures of Aubusson can be
distinguished from those of Audenarde by the fewer leaves, the lighter massing,
the more dispersed lights and shades. The grotesques of France, especially in the
XVIIIth century, often controlled the random fancy popularized among the Flemish
weavers by introducing a central idea, a goddess above whom they could group
the proper attributes (cf. No. 36), or a court fête (cf. No. 59). And when the
French used metal thread it was to enrich a limited space rather than to weight
a whole tapestry. In a way the opulence of the Flemish was better adapted to
the medium. Certainly it produced some very beautiful tapestries. But the refinement
of the French is a little more sympathetic to an overcivilized age.

With the accession of Louis XV, tapestry joined the other textile arts and
painting in following furniture styles. Thereafter, until the advent of machinery
put an end to tapestry as a significant art, the cabinetmaker led all the other
decorators. Small pieces with small designs, light colors, delicate floral ornaments,
and the reigning temporary fad—now the Chinese taste (cf. No. 71), now the
pastoral (cf. No. 68)—occupied the attention of the cartoonmakers, so that the chief
occupations of the court beauties of each successive decade can be read in the
tapestries.

During this time France was dictating the fashions of all the Western World,
so other countries were eager not only to have her tapestries, but to have her
workmen weave for them in their own capitals. Accordingly, the royal family of
Russia, always foreign in its tastes, sent for a group of weavers to set up a royal
Russian tapestry works. Similarly, Spain sent for a Frenchman to direct her
principal looms, those at Santa Barbara and Madrid, which for a decade or so
had been running under a Fleming.

And meanwhile tapestry was steadily becoming more and more another form of
painting. Until the middle of the XVIIIth century it remains primarily illustrative.
The Renaissance designers continued to tell historical and biblical stories and to
fashion the designs in the service of the tale they had to tell. With the influence
of Rubens and his school (cf. No. 44), the story becomes chiefly the excuse for
the composition; but the story is nevertheless still there and adequately presented.
The artists of Louis XIV, when called upon to celebrate their king in
tapestry, respected this quality of the art by depicting his history and his military
exploits (cf. No. 52). But illustration already begins to run thin in the series of
the royal residences done by the Gobelins during his reign, and with the style of
his successor it runs out almost altogether. If Boucher paints the series of the

Loves of the Gods
it is not for the sake of the mythology, but for the rosy flesh
and floating drapes, and Fragonard does not even bother to think of an excuse,
but makes his languid nudes simply bathers (cf. No. 69). So when Louis XV is
[23]

to be celebrated by his weavers the designers make one effort to invent a story by
depicting his hunts, and then abandon episode and substitute portraiture (cf.
No. 64).

Throughout most of the Renaissance, tapestry remained decorative as a mural
painting is decorative, but in the XVIIth century, with the degeneration of all
architectual feeling, tapestry lost entirely its architectual character. It was still
decorative—it was decorative as the painting of the time was. The tapestries of the
XVIIth century are giant easel paintings, and of the XVIIIth century woven panel
paintings.

As to the textile quality, during the XVIIth century the very scale of the pieces
kept them somewhat true to it. The large figures, heavy foliage, and big floral
ornaments can fall successfully into wide, soft folds. But most of the tapestry of
the XVIIIth century must be stretched and set in panels or frames. That they are
woven is incidental, a fact to call forth wonder for the skill of the workmen, both
of the dyers who perfected the numberless slight gradations of delicate tones and
kept them constant, and of the almost unbelievably deft weavers who could ply
the shuttle so finely and exactly and grade these delicate tones to reproduce soft
modeled flesh, fluttering draperies, billowing clouds, spraying fountains, and the
sheen and folds of different materials. But that they are woven is scarcely a fact
to be considered in the artistic estimate. The only advantage of the woven decorations
over the painted panel is that they present a softer surface to relieve the cold
glitter of rooms. Otherwise as paintings they stand or fall. Even the border has
usually been reduced to a simulated wood or stucco frame.

During this gradual change through five hundred years in the artistic qualities
of tapestry the technical tricks of the weavers underwent corresponding modification.
In the Gothic period the drawing depended primarily upon a strong dark
outline, black or brown, that was unbroken, and that was especially important
whether the design was affiliated rather with panel painting (cf. No. 1) or with
the more graphic miniature illustration (cf. No. 5). Even the lesser accessories
were all drawn in clear outline. Within a given color area, transitions from tone to
tone were made by hatchings, little bars of irregular length of one of the shades
that fitted into alternate bars of the other shade, like the teeth of two combs interlocked.
And for shadows and emphasis of certain outlines, some of the Gothic
weavers had a very clever trick of dropping stitches (cf. No. 1), so that a series
of small holes in the fabric takes the place of a dark line. During the Renaissance
the outline becomes much narrower, and is used only for the major figures, a
device that sometimes makes the figures look as if they had been cut out and
applied to the design. Hatching, if used at all, is much finer than in the earlier
usage, consisting now of only single lines of one color shading into the next. In
the work of Fontainbleau (cf. Nos. 36, 37), the dotted series of holes between colors
is still used to give a subordinate outline. During the XVIIth century hatching is
scarcely used at all, and the outline has practically disappeared. During the
XVIIIth century the French weavers perfected a trick which obviated any break
[24]

in the weave where the color changes, thus enabling tapestry to approximate even
closer to painting effects.

To the weavers who adjusted these tricks to the varying demands of the cartoons,
and so translated painted patterns in a woven fabric, is due quite as much credit
for the finished work of art as to the painters who first made the design. Famous
painters did prepare tapestry designs. Aside from the masters of the Middle Ages
to whom tapestries are attributed, we have positive evidence that, among others,
Jacques Daret, Roger Van der Weyden, Raphael, Giulio Romano (cf. Nos. 23-25),
Le Brun, Rubens, Coypel (cf. Nos. 62, 63), Boucher (cf. Nos. 67, 68), Watteau,
Fragonard (cf. No. 69), and Vernet (cf. No. 70), all worked on tapestry designs.
The master weavers who could transpose their designs deserve to rank with
them in honor.

Yet we know relatively little of these master weavers. Many names of tapicers
appear in tax-lists and other documents, but not until the XVIIIth century do the
names often represent to us definite personalities, and until then we can only
occasionally credit a man with his surviving work. From the long lists of names
and the great numbers of remaining tapestries a few only can be connected. Among
the greatest of these is Nicolas Bataille, of Paris, who wove the famous set of the

Apocalypse
now in the Cathedral of Angers; Pasquier Grenier, of Tournai, to
whom the
Wars of Troy
and related sets can be accredited (cf. No. 7), but who
apparently was an
entrepreneur
rather than a weaver; Pieter Van Aelst, who was
so renowned that the cartoons of Raphael were first entrusted to him; William
Pannemaker, another Brussels man, who had supreme taste and skill, and his relative
Pierre, almost as skilful; Marc Comans and François de la Planche, the Flemings
who set up the looms in Paris that developed into the Gobelins (cf. No. 38); Jean
Lefébvre, who worked first in the gallery of the Louvre and then had his studio
in the Gobelins (cf. Nos. 39, 40); the Van der Beurchts, of Brussels (cf. Nos. 42, 56),
and Leyniers (cf. Nos. 26, 27), and Cozette, most famous weaver of the Gobelins.
Such men as these, and many more whose names are lost or are neglected because
we do not know their work, were in their medium as important artists as the painters
whose designs they followed.

With the passing of such master craftsmen the art of tapestry died. When men
must compete with machines their work is no more respected, and so tapestry is
no longer the natural medium of expression for the culture of the times. Tapestries
are still being made, but there is no genuine vitality in the art and little merit
in its product. It exists today only as an exhausted and irrelevant persistence
from the past, and, as a fine art, doomed to failure and ultimate extinction.

P.A.

The Annunciation

No. 1

The Chase

No. 2

[25]

CATALOGUE

Abbreviations
:
H.
(
Height
);
W.
(
Width
);
ft.
(
Feet
);
in.
(
Inches
).

"Right" & "Left," refer to right & left
of the spectator

1 FRANCO-FLEMISH, POSSIBLY ARRAS,
BEGINNING OF XV OR END OF XIV CENTURY

Wool, Silk, Gold.

H.
11
ft.
4
in.

W.
9
ft.
6
in.

THE ANNUNCIATION:
The Virgin, in a blue robe lined with red, is seated before a
reading-desk in a white marble portico with a tile floor. Behind her is a red and metal
gold brocade. The lily is in a majolica jar. The angel, in a green robe with yellow high
lights lined with red, has alighted in a garden without. In the sky, God the Father holding
the globe and two angels bearing a shield.

The treatment of the sky in two-toned blue and white striations, as well as the
conventional landscape without perspective, with small oak and laurel trees, is
characteristic of a number of tapestries of the opening years of the XVth century.
Most of them depicted hunting scenes. But there was one famous religious piece,
the
Passion
of the Cathedral of Saragossa. In the drawing of the figures and some of
the details the piece is closely related to the paintings of that Paris school of which
Jean Malouel is the most famous member. The work is by no means by Malouel,
but it is similar to that of one of his lesser contemporaries, whose only known surviving
work is a set of six panels painted on both sides, two of which are in the
Cuvellier Collection at Niort and the others in the Mayer Van der Bergh Collection
at Antwerp. The very primitively rendered Eternal Father is almost identical
with the one that appears in several of the panels; the roughly indicated shaggy
grass is the same, the rather unusual angle of the angel's wings recurs in the Cuvellier

Annunciation
, as does the suspended poise of the Virgin's attitude. The Virgin's
reading-desk, too, is almost identical, though shown in the panel at the other side of
the scene. The long, slim-fingered hands and the pointed nose and chin of the Virgin
are characteristic of the school.

The tiles in the portico, so carefully rendered, are of interest because they are very
similar to the earliest-known tile floor still in position—that of the Caracciolo Chapel
in Naples. Some of the same patterns are repeated, notably that of the Virgin's
initial and the star, which is more crudely rendered. The colors, too, are approximately
the same, the brown being a fair rendering of the manganese purple of the
chapel tiles. The majolica vase is also interesting as illustrating a type of which few
intact examples are left.

Exhibited:

Chicago Art Institute,
Gothic Exhibition
, 1921.

Lent by

P. W. French &
Company
.

The piece maintains a high level of æsthetic expression. The religious emotion is
intensely felt and is adequately conveyed in the wistful sadness of the Virgin's face
and the expectant suspense of her poised body. The portico seems removed from
reality and flooded by a direct heavenly light, in its shining whiteness contrasting
[26]

with the deep blue-green background. This tapestry by virtue of its intense and
elevated feeling, purified by æsthetic calm and by its exceptional decorative vividness,
ranks with the very great masterpieces of the graphic arts.

2 FRANCO-FLEMISH, EARLY XV CENTURY

Wool and Gold.

H.
5
ft.
5
in.

W.
5
ft.
11
in.

THE CHASE:
A man in a long dark-blue coat and high red hat and a lady in a brown
brocade dress and ermine turban watch a dog in leather armor attack a bear. A landscape
with trees and flowers is indicated without perspective and a castle in simple outline is
projected against a blue and white striated sky.

Exhibited:

South Kensington
Museum, French-English
Retrospective
Exhibition of Textiles
,
1921.

This tapestry is an important example of a small group of hunting scenes of the
early XVth century. It is closely related in style to the famous pair of large hunting
tapestries in the collection of the Duke of Devonshire. It is not definitely known
where any of these pieces were woven, but Arras is taken as a safe assumption, as
that was the center of weaving at the time, and these tapestries are the finest
production known of the period.

The very simple figures sharply silhouetted against the contrasting ground have a
decidedly architectural quality, perfectly adapted to mural decoration. Yet the
scene seems very natural and the persons have marked and attractive personalities.

Illustrated:

La Renaissance de
l'Art français
, 1921,
p. 104;

Burlington
, vol. 38,
opp. p. 171.

DeMotte,
Les Tapisseries
gothiques
,
Deuxième Série.

Lent by

Demotte
.

These exceedingly rare pieces mark the great wave of naturalism that began
sweeping over Europe about 1350 and they exemplify strikingly one of the finest
qualities of the primitive—the impressive universality and objectivity that come
from the freshness of the artist's vision. Looking straight at the thing itself, free
from all the presuppositions that come from an inherited convention, the draftsman
saw the essentials and recorded them directly without any confusing elaboration
of technique. He was completely absorbed by the unsolved problems of the
task, too occupied with the difficulty of rendering the central outstanding features
of the scene to be diverted by personal affectations. His realization thus became
vivid and intimate, his rendition achieved a singularity and epic force never again
to be found in tapestry.

This is one of the few tapestries that have been improved by age. Time has spread
over it a slight gray bloom that seems to remove it from the actual world, giving it
the isolation that is so important a factor in æsthetic effect; yet the depth and
strength of the colors have not been weakened, for we interpret the grayness as a
fine veil through which the colors shine with their original purity.

3 FLANDERS, MIDDLE XV CENTURY

Wool.

H.
15
ft.
7
in.

W.
14
ft.
7
in.

THE ANNUNCIATION, THE NATIVITY, AND THE ANNOUNCEMENT
TO THE SHEPHERDS:
At the left in a Gothic chapel the Annunciation. The Virgin,
in a richly jeweled and brocaded robe, reads the Holy Book. The angel in rich robes
kneels before her. The lilies are in a dinanderie vase. Through the open door a bit of
[27]

landscape is seen, and in a room beyond the chapel two women sit reading. The Nativity,
at the right, is under a pent roof. The Virgin, Joseph, and Saint Elizabeth kneel in
adoration about the Holy Babe, who lies on the flower-strewn grass. John kneels in front
of his mother, and in the foreground an angel also worships. Above and beyond the
stable the three shepherds sit tending their flocks, and an angel bearing the announcement
inscribed on a scroll flutters down to them from Heaven. Oak-trees, rose-vines, and
blossoming orange-trees in the grass.

The Annunciation, The Nativity, and The Announcement to the Shepherds

No. 3

Scenes from the Roman de la Rose

No. 4

This tapestry belongs to a small and very interesting group, all evidently the work
of one designer. The three famous
Conversations Galantes
(long erroneously called the

Baillée des Roses
) in the Metropolitan Museum are by the same man, as are the four
panels of the
History of Lohengrin
in Saint Catherine's Church, Cracow, the fifth
fragmentary panel of the series being in the Musée Industrielle, Cracow. A fragment
from the same designer showing a party of hunters is in the Church of Notre Dame
de Saumur de Nantilly, and another fragment depicting a combat is in the Musée
des Arts Decoratifs. Three small fragments—one with a single figure of a young man
with a swan, like the Metropolitan pieces, on a striped ground, another showing a
king reading in a portico very similar to the portico of the
Annunciation
, and the
third showing a group of people centered about a king—were in the Heilbronner
Collection.

Schmitz points out
[1]
a connection between the three Metropolitan pieces and the
series of seven pieces depicting the life of Saint Peter in the Beauvais Cathedral, with
an eighth piece in the Cluny Musée, and it is quite evident that the cartoons are the
work of the same man. But whereas the other pieces all have the same characteristics
in the weaving, this series shows a somewhat different technique in such
details as the outline and the hatchings, so that one must assume they were woven
on another loom.

Fortunately, there is documentary information on one set of the type that enables
us to say definitely where and when the whole group was made. The
Lohengrin
set
was ordered by Philip the Good from the first Grenier of Tournai in 1462. There
can be no reasonable doubt that the set in Saint Catherine's Church is the same, for
in this set the knight is quite apparently modeled after Duke Philip himself, judging
from the portraits of him in both the
Romance of Gerard de Rousillon
(Vienna Hof-bibliothèque)
and in the
History of Haynaut
(Bibliothèque Royale, Brussels).

Schmitz asserts that it is almost certainly useless to seek the author of these
cartoons among contemporary painters, as they are probably the work of a professional
cartoon painter, of which the Dukes of Burgundy kept several in their
service—and this is probably true. But artists were not as specialized then as they
are now, and even a professional tapestry designer might very well on occasion turn
his hand to illustrating a manuscript or making a sketch for an enamel, so that it is
not impossible that further research in the other contemporary arts may bring to
light more information about this marked personality who created so individual a
style.

[28]

Lent by

Duveen Brothers
.

This tapestry is exceedingly interesting, not only for its marked style of drawing
and its quaint charm, but for the direct sincerity of the presentation and the brilliant
and rather unaccustomed range of colors.

4 FLANDERS, MIDDLE XV CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

H.
8
ft.
4
in.

W.
20
ft.
4
in.

Formerly in Skipton
Castle, Ireland.

SCENES FROM THE ROMAN DE LA ROSE:
This piece illustrates one of the
most popular romances of the Middle Ages, the Romance of the Rose, the first part
of which was written in 1337 by Guillaume de Lorris, the second part in
1378
by Jean de
Meung, and translated into English by Chaucer. The culminating scenes are represented.
Jealousy has imprisoned Bel Acceuil in a tower because he helped the Lover see the
Rose after Jealousy had forbidden it. The Lover calls all his followers, Frankness,
Honor, Riches, Nobility of Heart, Leisure, Beauty, Courage, Kindness, Pity, and a
host of others, to aid him in rescuing the prisoner. In the course of the struggle Scandal,
one of Jealousy's henchmen, is trapped by two of the Lover's followers posing as
Pilgrims, who cut his throat and cut out his tongue. With the aid of Venus, the Lover
finally wins.

Exhibited:

Chicago Art Institute,
Gothic Exhibition
, 1921.

Lent by

P. W. French &
Company
.

The piece is very close in drawing to the illustrations of the Master of the Golden
Fleece,
[2]
whom Lindner has identified as Philip de Mazarolles. The long bony,
egg-shaped heads that look as if the necks were attached as an afterthought, the
shoe-button eyes, flat mouths, and peaked noses all occur in his many illustrations.
Characteristic of him, too, are the crowded grouping of the scene and the great
care in presenting the accessories, every gown being an individual design, whereas
many of his contemporary illustrators contented themselves with rendering the
general style without variations. The conventional trees are probably the weaver's
interpolations. The top of the tapestry being gone, there is no possibility of knowing
whether his customary architectural background was included or not.

The tapestry is interesting, not only because it is quaint, but because it is a
vivid illustration of the spirit of the time—virile, cruel, yet self-consciously
moralistic.

5 FLANDERS, MIDDLE XV CENTURY

Wool.

H.
10
ft.
9
in.

W.
17
ft.
5½
in.

THE VINTAGE:
This piece was probably originally one of a series of the Months,
representing September. Groups of lords and ladies have strolled down from the castle
in the background to watch the peasants gathering and pressing the grapes.

Formerly in the
Collection of Edouard
Aynard, Paris.

Exhibited:

Exhibition of the
Middle Ages and the
Renaissance, Old
Palace of Sagan, Paris
,
1913.

The costumes and the drawing indicate that the piece was made in Burgundy at
the time of Philip the Good. In fact, it is so close to the work of one of the most
prolific of the illustrators who worked for Philip the Good that it is safe to assume
that the original drawing for the cartoons was his work. In the pungency of the
[29]

illustration and the vivacity of the episodes as well as in numerous details it
follows closely the characteristics of Loysot Lyedet. Here are the same strong-featured
faces with large prominent square mouths, the same exaggeratedly long
and thin legs with suddenly bulging calves on the men, the same rapidly sketched
flat hands, and the same attitudes. The very exact drawing of the bunches of
grapes parallels the exactness with which he renders the household utensils in his
indoor scenes, and the dogs, while they are of types familiar in all the illustrations
of the time, have the decided personalities and alert manner that he seemed to
take particular pleasure in giving them.

Reproduced:

Les Arts
, Sept., 1913;

Gazette des Beaux
Arts
, 1913.

Lent by

Jacques Seligmann
& Company
.

Another tapestry that seems to be from the same hand is
Le Bal de Sauvages

in l'Eglise de Nantilly de Saumur.

The piece is one of the most vivid and convincing illustrations of the life of the
time that has come down to us in tapestry form. The silhouetting of the figures
against contrasting colors and the structural emphasis of the vertical lines give
the design great clarity and strength.

Loysot Lyedet was working for the Dukes of Burgundy in 1461. He died about 1468. Among the most
famous of his illustrations are those of the
History of Charles Martel
(Bibliothèque Royale, Brussels)

History of Alexander
(Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris) and the
Roman History
(Bibliothèque de l'Arsenal,
Paris.)

6 GERMANY, PROBABLY NUREMBERG,
MIDDLE XV CENTURY

Wool and Gold.

H.
3
ft.
6
in.

W.
7
ft.
6
in.

SCENES FROM THE LIFE OF CHRIST:
The Life of Christ is shown in eight
small scenes, beginning with the Entrance into Jerusalem, the Farewell to his Mother,
the Last Supper, the Agony in the Garden, the Carrying of the Cross, the Crucifixion,
the Pieta, and the Entombment.

The scenes in this tapestry were apparently adapted from the illustrations from
a Nuremberg manuscript of the middle of the XVth century. Of course, the weaving
may have been done later. The simplified arrangement of the scenes with a reduction
to a minimum of the number of actors, the relative size of the figures to the
small squares of the compositions, the marked indebtedness in the use of line and
light and shade to woodcuts, and the courageous but not altogether easy use of
the direct profile, all bring the pieces into close relationship with such book illustrations
as those of George Pfinzing's book of travels (
The Pilgrimage to Jerusalem
),
now in the City Library of Nuremberg.
[3]
In fact, the parallelism is so very close,
the tapestry may well have been adapted from illustrations by the same man,
the curiously conventionalized line-and-dot eyes being very characteristic of the
Pfinzing illustrations and not common to all the school.

Lent by

P. W. French &
Company
.

In weaving many of the figures the warp is curved to follow the contours.

The naïve directness and unassuming sincerity of the piece give it great interest.

[30]

7 TOURNAI, THIRD QUARTER XV CENTURY

Wool.

H.
10
ft.
6
in.

W.
8
ft.
9
in.

THE HISTORY OF HERCULES:
Hercules, clad in a magnificent suit of shining
black armor, rides into the thickest tumult of a furious battle; with sword in his right
hand, he skillfully parries the thrust of a huge lance, while with the other hand he deals
a swinging backhand blow that smites an enemy footman into insensibility. His next
opponent, obviously bewildered and frightened, has half-turned to flee. The whole
apparatus of mediæval combat is shown in intense and crowded action. The piece is
incomplete.

This tapestry illustrates one of the favorite stories of the Middle Ages, and was
undoubtedly originally one of a set. In design it is closely related to the famous

Wars of Troy
series, many examples of which are known and some of the first
sketches for which are in the Louvre. It is also closely related to the
History of
Titus
set in the Cathedrale de Notre Dame de Nantilly de Saumur.
[4]
Both of these
sets are signed by Jean Van Room, and this piece also is undoubtedly from his
cartoon. All of these pieces were probably woven between 1460 and 1470.

Jean Van Room (sometimes called de Bruxelles) is one of the most interesting
personalities connected with the history of Gothic tapestry. He was a cartoon
painter and probably conducted a large studio, judging from the number of pieces
of his which are left to us. Fortunately, he had a habit of signing his name on
obscure parts of the designs, such as the borders of garments. His work extends
over sixty years and changes markedly in style during that time, adapting itself to
the changing taste of his clients. This piece illustrates his earliest manner. In the
succeeding decades he is more and more affected by the Renaissance and the
Italian influence, until his latest pieces (cf. No. 21) are quite unlike these first
designs. At the close of the century he began to collaborate with Maître Philippe,
evidently a younger man, who had had Italian instruction and was less restrained
by early Gothic training (cf. Nos. 17-19).

Jean Van Room seems to have done designs for enamels, also, that were executed
in the studio of the so-called Monvaerni. In the collection of Otto H. Kahn is a

Jesus before Pilate
very close in style to Jean Van Room's early work,
[5]
on which
appear the letters M E R A, which might even be a pied misspelling of Room, for
similar confused signatures appear on tapestries known to be his. A triptych with

Crucifixion
in the collection of Charles P. Taft
[6]
has figures very close to the
Crucifixion

tapestry in the Cathedral of Angers done by Van Room in his middle period.
According to Marquet de Vasselot, this enamel bears the letters JENRAGE, but
M. de Vasselot also comments on its illegibility in the present condition of the
enamel. Could he have misread a letter or two? Still another triptych with
Crucifixion
,
in the Hermitage,
[7]
actually repeats two figures from the Angers
Crucifixion

with only very slight variations.

Jean Van Room borrowed liberally from various other artists at different stages of
[31]

his career. In the
Wars of Troy
, the
History of Titus
, and this piece he seems to have
relied primarily on Jean le Tavernier for his models, the affiliation being especially
close in the
Wars of Troy
. Le Tavernier is known to have illustrated the
Wars of
Troy
,
[8]
and Jean Van Room, judging from the close stylistic relations of his Troy
tapestries with le Tavernier's drawings, evidently took his hints from this lost
manuscript.

The Vintage

No. 5

Entombment on Millefleurs

No. 8

This piece was probably woven under Pasquier Grenier at Tournai, as were the

Wars of Troy
, on which there are some documents.

Lent by

P. W. French &
Company
.

This tapestry presents with extraordinary vividness the fury, din, excessive effort,
hot excitement, and blinding confusion of crowded hand-to-hand conflicts that
marked mediæval warfare. It must have been conceived and rendered by an eye-witness
who knew how to select and assemble the raw facts of the situation with
such honesty and directness that an overwhelming impression of force and tumult
is created, and it was woven for patrons, the fighting Dukes of Burgundy, by whom
every gruesome incident would be observed with relish and every fine point of individual
combat noted with a shrewd and appraising eye.

8 FRANCE, END XV CENTURY

Wool.

H.
2
ft.
10
in.

W.
7
ft.
10
in.

ENTOMBMENT ON MILLEFLEURS:
Christ lies on the tomb which is inscribed
"Humani Generis Redeptori." John in a red cloak, the Virgin in a blue cloak over a red
brocaded dress, and Mary Magdalene in a red cloak over a green dress stand behind the
tomb. At the head, removing the crown of thorns, stands Joseph of Arimathea and at the
foot Nicodemus. Both Joseph and Nicodemus are in richly brocaded robes. Borders at
the sides only of alternate blue and red squares inscribed I H S and M A surrounded by
jeweled frames. Millefleurs on a blue ground. In the upper left corner the monogram
I S and in the upper right W S, with a scroll under each bearing the inscription "de
Mailly."

This tapestry is an unusually delicately and perfectly rendered example of the

millefleurs aux personnages
of France of the late Gothic period. A small piece like
this was undoubtedly made for a private chapel, probably that of the de Mailly
family. This quality of millefleurs was probably woven in Touraine. An altar frontal
showing the Pieta which is very similar in style is in the Kunstgewerbe Museum.

Lent by

Demotte
.

The drawing has the nice exactness of a finished miniature, the workmanship the
brilliance of enamel; yet both are transfigured by the vivid conception of the
tragic event. Its utter pathos is expressed with moving power. We are in the
presence of an unutterably solemn moment.

[32]

9 FRANCE, END XV CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

H.
4
ft.
6
in.

W.
3
ft.

Formerly in the C. D.
Barney Collection.

Lent by

P. W. French &
Company
.

MILLEFLEURS ARMORIAL WITH WILD MEN:
On a delicate millefleurs
ground a wild man and woman hold an armorial shield surmounted by a winged helmet.

The wild men, probably a modified revival of the classical satyrs in modified form,
were very popular in France in the XIIIth and XIVth centuries. There are tapestries
extant depicting the balls where all the company came dressed in hairy tights to
represent these creatures. Froissart recounts an episode of a ball at the Hotel St. Pol
in Paris in 1392 when the king and five of his companions came in such costumes,
all chained together, and the flax used to imitate the hair caught fire from a torch,
so that in an instant all were enveloped in flames. The king was saved by the
presence of mind of his cousin, who enveloped him in her skirts, and another was
saved by jumping into a tub of water he had noticed earlier in the evening in an
adjacent service-room. The others were burned to death.

10 FRANCE, BEGINNING XVI CENTURY

Wool.

H.
7
ft.
10
in.

W.
10
ft.
7
in.

Lent by

P. W. French &
Company
.

MILLEFLEURS WITH SHEPHERDS AND THE SHIELD OF THE RIGAUT
FAMILY:
Against a background of conventionalized millefleurs, shepherds and shepherdesses
and their flock. In the center, two peasants holding a shield, evidently of the
Rigaut family. In the corners the shield of Rigaut and of another family. The tapestry
was evidently made to celebrate a marriage, the corner shields signifying the joining of
the families, an oblique reference being intended in the pairing of the shepherds and
shepherdesses. A scroll in the center bears the inscription "Par Içi Passe Rigaut."

The naïveté both of the characterization and of the drawing that emphasizes the
structural and silhouette character of the figures contributes greatly to the charm
of this piece. The clean, sharp rendering of the millefleurs enhances the decorative
effect. The piece is probably the work of a small provincial loom.

11 FRANCE, PROBABLY LA MARCHE,
BEGINNING XVI CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

H.
5
ft.
7
in.

W.
9
ft.
4
in.

Lent by

P. W. French &
Company
.

MILLEFLEURS WITH ANIMALS:
Against a large-scale millefleurs ground on
blue, deer are playing about a fountain within a paddock. On a fence-post perches a
peacock. Outside the fence a fox waits, watching slyly. In the background conventional
castles.

The floreation is rather unusual, as it shows the transition from the Gothic millefleurs
to the Renaissance verdure. The enlarged scale of the flowers and the use of
the iris and the scrolled thistle-leaves in the foreground show the influence of the
Renaissance, but the daisies and wild roses are still Gothic in feeling, as are the unusually
charming and vivacious deer. The conventional rendering of the water is
skillfully managed. The sly fox is especially well characterized.

Millefleurs with Shepherds and the Shield of the Rigaut Family

No. 10

Pastoral Scene

No. 13

[33]

12 FRANCE, PROBABLY LA MARCHE,
EARLY XVI CENTURY

Wool.

H.
4
ft.
5
in.

W.
9
ft.
5
in.

Lent by

Dikran K.
Kelekian
.

MILLEFLEURS WITH ANIMALS:
Millefleurs with animals on a blue ground.
At the top a narrow strip of conventionalized hilly landscape.

Many tapestries of this type were woven in France at the end of the XVth and beginning
of the XVIth century. They are one of the most successful types of tapestry
decoration, the quaint animals in this piece being especially charming, and
one of the most generally useful kinds of wall decoration, so that the demand for
them was large and continuous. As a result, the style was produced almost without
modification for over a hundred years. Only the bit of landscape at the top
indicates that this was woven in the beginning of the XVIth century and not in
the middle of the XVth.

13 FRANCE, LATE XV CENTURY

Wool.

H.
9
ft.
6
in.

W.
9
ft.

PASTORAL SCENE:
Two ladies have strolled into the country with their lords, who
are on the way to the hunt, one with a falcon and the other with a spear and dog. On the
way they have stopped to talk to a group of peasants who are tending their flocks and to
play with their children. One young peasant girl is gathering a basket of grapes.

Such peasant scenes as this were much in demand during the XVth century. A piece
very similar both in general spirit and in detailed drawing and facial types is in the
Musée des Arts Decoratifs. In this two lords are watching a large group of woodcutters.

Formerly in the
De Zolte Collection.

Lent by
Duveen Brothers
.

The piece is an excellent illustration of the clarity of French design. Each figure
stands out almost entirely detached against the background. Yet, nevertheless, the
naturalness of the grouping is not sacrificed. The piece conveys extraordinarily the
impression of a real scene, a common daily occurrence among people that we might
reasonably expect to know, at which we are allowed to be present in spite of the
intervening four hundred years.

Some of the tricks of drawing and the types portrayed are so very similar to
those in some of the stained-glass windows of St. Etienne du Mont and of St.
Germain-l'Auxerrois the cartoons must be by members of the same school, one of
the groups of l'Ile de France, and may quite possibly be by the same man.

14-16 FLANDERS, FIRST QUARTER XVI CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

No. 14:

H.
11
ft.
6
in.

W.
14
ft.
2
in.

No. 15:

H.
10
ft.
9
in.

W.
7
ft.
3½
in.

No. 16:

H.
11
ft.

W.
10
ft.
5
in.

THREE PIECES FROM A SERIES ILLUSTRATING THE CREED:
This
series of scenes illustrating the Creed begins
(
No.
14)
with the Creation of the World
.
The
designer, evidently with some allegorical poem in mind, includes in the scene Sapientia
,

Potencia, and Benignitas, depicted, in characteristic medieval form, as three richly
[34]

dressed women. In the center scene these three offer the world to God. On the right,
Gubernacio, Redempcio, and Caritas stand under the throne of the Trinity.

In the second piece
(
No.
15)
the series continues with the Life of Christ
,
beginning
with the Annunciation
,
the Nativity
,
and the Adoration of the Kings
.

Reverting to the older tradition of the XIVth century that had been almost displaced
during the XVth century
,
all the events of Christ's public life are omitted
,
and the third
piece
(
No.
16)
depicts the scenes of the Passion
,
including the popular interpolation of
Christ's farewell to his Mother
,
with the Apostles in the background
,
the Resurrection
,

and finally Christ taking his place at the right hand of God while the angels sing hosannas
.

Below, throughout the series, is the set of the Apostles facing Prophets, symbolic of the
parallelism of the Old and New Testaments, each with a scroll bearing his speech in the
conventional responses depicted in so many works of art of the period. So Peter (No. 14),
says, "I believe in God the Father Omnipotent," and Jeremiah, who faces him, replies,
"You invoke the Father who made the earth and builded the heavens."

Next
(
No.
15)

comes Andrew
,
who originally faced David
,
a figure now missing
.
The next pair, John
and Daniel, is also missing.

There follow
(
No.
16)
Thomas
,
who originally faced Hosea
,

and John the Lesser
,
who is opposite Amos
.
Above
,
on either side of the Nativity

(
No.
15),
is introduced another pair
,
John the Greater and Isaiah
.

The complete piece, of which number 16 is the right-hand end, was formerly in the
Toledo Cathedral, then in the collection of Asher Wertheimer, of London. The
present owner is unknown.
[9]
Another rendition was in the Vatican, but disappeared
in the middle of the XIXth century.
[10]

Tapestries illustrating the Creed were common throughout the Middle Ages.
They appear frequently in XIVth-century inventories, and a number of examples
from the XVth and early XVIth century are left to us. The Apostles and Prophets
arranged in pairs are a common feature of this type of tapestry.

Formerly in Evora
Palace, Portugal.

The cartoons are evidently the work of the painter who painted the ceiling of
the Church of St. Guy at Naarden, whom Dr. Six tentatively identifies as Albert
Claesz.
[11]
The similarity is too close to be overlooked. The Christ of the Naarden

Resurrection
[12]
and this
Resurrection
are almost identical, the face of God the
Father in the
Assumption
is almost identical with that of an onlooker in the Naarden

Betrayal
,
[13]
and Adam in the first piece of this series closely resembles the Christ of
the Naarden
Flagellation
.
[14]
But more indicative are the lesser peculiarities common
to both series. There are in both the same curiously flattened and slightly
distorted skulls with very large ears, the same large eyes with heavy arched lids and
eyebrows close above them, oblique and not quite correctly placed in the three-quarter
views, and always looking beyond their focus. The mouths, too, in some
of the faces are overemphasized in the same way, and the feet have the same quaint
distortion, being seen from above, as in the figure of the Prophet John (No. 15). And
[35]

in very conspicuous minor agreement, the cross has a strongly indicated and rigidly
conventionalized graining identical in the two renditions. The attitude of the Christ
and the indication of the garment in the Toledo tapestry is very close to that in the
Naarden painting.

The Creation of the World

No. 14

Four Scenes from the Life of Christ

No. 17

The floreation was probably introduced by the weaver. The delightfully exact
scene of the owl scolded by a magpie, while a pigeon sits near by and another bird
flutters about (No. 14), is repeated with slight variations in a number of XVIth-century
pieces.

Lent by

Demotte
.

The drawing in these tapestries is rather unusually primitive for pieces of this
period, but the figures have a broad monumental character and a direct sincerity of
bearing that make them very convincing.

17-19 FLANDERS, PROBABLY BRUSSELS,
BEGINNING XVI CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

No. 17:

H.
11
ft.
10
in.

W.
17
ft.
6
in.

No. 18:

H.
11
ft.
7
in.

W.
7
ft.
5
in.

No. 19:

H.
12
ft.

W.
26
ft.

THREE PIECES FROM A SERIES ILLUSTRATING THE CREED:
In the
first piece
(
No.
17)
four scenes from the Life of Christ are portrayed: the Adoration of
the Kings
,
the Presentation at the Temple
,
the meeting of Christ and John
,
and Christ
among the Doctors
.
In the corner sits a prophet, probably David. The piece undoubtedly
began with the Nativity, at the left, and possibly the Annunciation, with the Apostle
Andrew in the other corner. This would indicate that the piece was the second in the
series, the first probably having been the Creation of the Earth, with Peter and Jeremiah.

The second piece
(
No.
18)
shows the Circumcision and the Assumption of the
Virgin
,
and evidently included at least one more scene at the right
.

The Last Judgment
was
formerly in the Evora
Palace, Portugal, and
is illustrated from the
Louvre example in

Migeon, Les Arts de
Tissu
, p. 220; in part,
in
E. Mâle, L'Art
religieux de la fin du
Moyen Age en France
,
p. 501;
Burlington
, vol.
20, p. 9;
Figaro Illustré
,
1911.

The third piece
(
No.
19)
shows the full scene of the Last Judgment with a personage
who seems to be Philip in one corner and in the other Zephaniah
.
The piece is complete
except, possibly, for a border. A tapestry from the same cartoon with a narrow border
of flowers is in the Louvre. Christ, enthroned, is surrounded by the Virgin, Saint John,
and the eleven Apostles. Angels, bearing instruments of the Passion and sounding
trumpets flutter through the sky. At the right of the throne angels come bearing crowns
for the elect. Below the dead are rising from the graves. Before the throne of Christ
Justice bearing a sword and Pity bearing a lily come to punish the Seven Deadly
Sins, Pride, Avarice, Luxury, Greed, Anger, Envy, and Laziness, an episode adopted
from the Mystery Plays. On the border of the robe of the Virgin appear the letters
WOL and on the border of the robe of the last Apostle at Christ's left the letters RIM
DACI BAPTISTA ORADI.

The Circumcision and
Assumption
is illustrated
in
Demotte, Les
Tapisseries gothiques
,
Première Série, pl. 39.

Seven other large tapestries very closely related to these are known. They represent
various episodes involving Christ and numerous allegorical figures that have
not been identified. Three of these are in the collection of Baron de Zuylen du
Nyevelt de Haar, two in the Burgos Cathedral, and two others have passed into
private collections and been lost sight of.
[15]
Another smaller piece, apparently of

[36]

the same series, was number X in the Morgan Collection. Three duplicates are
also in Hampton Court.

The series is closely related also to the
Life of the Virgin
set in the Royal Collection
at Madrid, and also the
Presentation in the Temple
of the Martin le Roy
Collection. The cartoons are clearly the work of Maître Philippe, and the weaving
was evidently done in Flanders, probably in Brussels, about 1510. Marquet de
Vasselot suggests that the cartoons of the Martin le Roy piece and of the Madrid
series were done after a second master under the influence of Gerard David.
[16]

Destrée, following Wauters, suggests Jean de Bruxelles, known author of the
cartoon for the
Communion of Herkenbald
, another Maître Philippe piece, to
which he sees a resemblance,
[17]
and Thièry repeats the claim, but on far-fetched
evidence.
[18]

Certainly the types are very close to those of Gerard David. Some of the figures
on David's
Tree of Mary
in the Lyons Museum
[19]
are repeated almost exactly, and
some of the female figures are very like the Saint in the
Marriage of Catherine

in the San Luca Academy at Rome.
[20]
But other types, such as Zacharias in the
meeting of Christ and John, are more reminiscent of Hugo Van der Goes, being,
for instance, almost identical with Joseph of Arimathea in the
Descent from the
Cross
in the National Museum, Naples,
[21]
even to such details as the drawing and
placing of the ear. The glimpses of landscapes, too, are clearly derived from Hugo
in their composition and details, and even the floreations are close to those in
some of Hugo's work, notably the
Original Sin
in the Imperial Gallery of Vienna,
[22]

where one finds the same upspringing sheaf of iris. The work would seem to be
that of a lesser eclectic, such as the author of the
Life of Mary
in the Bishops'
Palace at Evora.

Lent by

Demotte
.

In all the pieces there are intense sincerity and real grandeur of design. The
Last
Judgment
, in the musical swinging together of the draperies, the perfect control
of the great composition, and in the fine development of the dominance of Christ
without sacrifice of the minor episodes, as well as in the power of expression of
the thrilling solemnity of the moment, deserves to rank with the greatest interpretations
of the subject.

20 BRUSSELS, BEGINNING OF XVI CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

H.
12
ft.
3
in.

W.
13
ft.
2
in.

Formerly in the
Morgan Collection.

Lent by

P. W. French &
Company
.

SCENES FROM A ROMANCE:
A queen surrounded by her court awaits the
preparation of a document. There is a general interchange of documents among the
courtiers at the right. In the background, upper left, a knight indites a letter, and on
the opposite side two knights wait on horseback. The scenes illustrate some contemporary
romance and are closely related to the Court of Love tapestries that were so often woven
[37]

at this time.

The cartoon, like those of the
Court of Love
scenes, is the work of the studio of
Maître Philippe. Jean Van Room probably collaborated, as his signature appears
on a very similar tapestry of
David and Bathsheba
in the Royal Spanish Collection.
[23]

As in that tapestry, the elegantly dressed persons are quite typical of the prosperous
burghers of the time and might well be used as fashion plates. The composition is
skillful in the balancing of the groups and the massing of the drapes to form a
support for the dominant figure of the queen.

21 BRUSSELS, EARLY XVI CENTURY

H.
13
ft.
9
in.

W.
22
ft.
1
in.

Barberini Collection;
Ffoulke Collection.

Illustrated:
Ffoulke
Collection
, opp. p. 43.
Exhibited:

Exposition d'Art
ancien bruxellois,
Brussels
, 1905,
No. XXI. Illustrated:

Destrée, Catalogue of
same
, pl. XXIV.

Lent by
Mrs. Wm.
C. Van Antwerp
.

THE TRIUMPH OF DAVID:
David carrying the head of Goliath on his sword
and surrounded by musicians is followed by King Saul and Jonathan on horseback.
In the background a hilly landscape with the tents of the Hebrews. A narrow floral
border.

The cartoon was painted by Jean Van Room, his signature appearing on another
piece
[24]
of the same series in the Musée du Cinquantenaire, Brussels. Maître Philippe
must have collaborated with him in this work, for a strong Italian influence is
evident which appears only in the Van Room tapestries that have had Philippe's
assistance.

Though the drawing and details show the incoming Renaissance influence, the
full continuous narrative arrangement of the group, the strong vertical lines of
the figures, and the simple modeling show the tarrying Gothic feeling. The groups
are beautifully massed and the individual figures show great dignity.

22 SWITZERLAND, EARLY XVI CENTURY

Wool.

H.
4
ft.
3½
in.

W.
7
ft.
9½
in.

Formerly in the
Collection of Comtesse
Desautoy.

TWO PAIRS OF LOVERS:
Two pairs of lovers are pictured against a background
of vines with blue-green scrolled leaves and large red and yellow blossoms on a dark-blue
field. The pair at the right is on either side of a Gothic pedestal on which is a
small statue. The ladies are in red robes. One man is in a blue doublet, the other in
a two-toned red brocaded cloak. Border of rose-vines and daisies.

The piece was probably woven in Basle, and is undoubtedly adapted from a wood-block
illustration in one of Leonhard Ysenmuth's publications. The width and
richness of the border indicate that it was done in the early XVIth rather than in
the late XVth century.

[38]

The subject of pairs of lovers was quite a favorite one with German and Swiss
weavers, and a number of them in different styles is left to us. The piece is probably
the work of an amateur, a nun, or more probably some lady, who thus filled
her long leisure hours. The wood-block print has been closely followed for the
figures, even to such minor details as the very simple conventionalization of the
hair. The vine background in rather a large scale is common to many Swiss tapestries
of the period. The limited range of colors used is especially worthy of note,
there being only three shades of blue, three of green-blue, three of tan, and two
of red, in addition to the black for the outlines.

Lent by

Wildenstein & Co.

The work is thoroughly naïve, but it has the strong appeal of genuineness and
directness common to naïve designs and shows a strong feeling for decorative
quality.

23-25 BRUSSELS, SECOND QUARTER XVI CENTURY

Wool, Silk, Gold.

No. 23:

H.
13
ft.
5
in.

W.
15
ft.
4
in.

No. 24:

H.
13
ft.
5
in.

W.
20
ft.

No. 25:

H.
13
ft.
5
in.

W.
20
ft.

THREE SCENES FROM THE DEEDS OF SCIPIO:
In the first piece
(
No.
23)

Scipio enthroned offers the mural crown to Caius Laelius
.
Roman army officers stand
about. In the background the army is assembled.

In the second piece
(
No.
24)
Scipio is about to land in Africa
.
In the foreground
two vessels filled with soldiers. In the background the city of Utica.

In the third piece
(
No.
25)
Hannibal approaches Scipio to sue for peace
.
In the
background the opposing armies face each other on either side of a river.

The pieces bear the Brussels city mark and the monogram H.M. (Hubert de
Mecht). The cartoons are attributed to Giulio Romano, fifteen of the original
small drawings being in the Louvre. There are in all eighteen pieces in this set,
and two subsequent sets, the
Triumphs of Scipio
and the
Fruits of War
, make a
total of thirty-five pieces in the complete history, one of the largest sequences ever
attempted in tapestry.

Illustrated:

Hauser y Menet,
Los Tapices de la
Corona de España
,
vol. 2, pl. 93;

Burlington
, 1916,
pp. 58-66, in
connection with
article by George
Leland Hunter,

Scipio Tapestries
Now in America
.

Lent by

Duveen Brothers
.

The cartoons have been woven a number of times and examples have been
included in many famous collections, including that of Francis I. These pieces
were so rich in gold that they were burned to obtain the metal during the Revolution.

These three pieces are from one of the earliest weavings, and in perfection of
execution and sumptuousness of material far surpass most of the renderings, ranking
with the greatest productions of the early Renaissance. The use of the metal
is particularly effective, occurring as it does in three techniques, plain weaving,
basket weaving, which always gives a heavy richness, and couching.

The borders with the classical allegorical figures under porticos are of a very
fine type, following the example set by Raphael in his panels for the
Acts of the
Apostles
.

For vividness of illustration, strength and clarity of silhouette, and delicacy
and freshness of color this set is nowhere surpassed.

The Triumph of David

No. 21

Two Pairs of Lovers

No. 22

[39]

26, 27 BRUSSELS, XVI CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

No. 26:

H.
12
ft.

W.
15
ft.

No. 27:

H.
12
ft.

W.
16
ft.

TWO SCENES FROM THE LIFE OF CYRUS:
In the first
(
No.
26)
Cyrus captures
Astyages
,
his grandfather
.
Soldiers stand about, and in the background the army
is assembled.

In the second
(
No.
27)
Thomyris has the head of Cyrus offered as a human sacrifice
.

An attendant is placing the head in a gold basin and soldiers standing about draw
back in horror. In the background a battle wages.

Illustrated:

Hauser y Menet,
Los Tapices de la
Corona de España
,
vol. 2, pls. 119, 121.

Lent by

Mr. & Mrs.
Daniel C.
Jackling
.

These two pieces, showing the moment of greatest triumph and the ultimate defeat
of Cyrus, the great world conqueror, are from a famous set that has been woven
several times. One of these sets, belonging to the royal family of France, was
used in the funeral service of Francis II. Another group from the series is in the
Royal Spanish Collection. The only set known with a weaver's signature bears
the mark of Nicolas Leyniers, and it is entirely probable that all of the examples,
including these two, are from those looms.

They are very fine examples of a type of design perfected in the first half of the
XVIth century in Brussels. The fullness of details in the background serves to keep
the textile rich and interesting and to throw into sharp silhouette the dominant figures.
The intricate and decorative borders that are used on these pieces well illustrate
one of the most important contributions of the Renaissance to tapestry design.

28 BRUSSELS, XVI CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

H.
8
ft.
10
in.

W.
7
ft.
2
in.

Lent by

William Baumgarten
& Company
.

THE PENTECOST:
The Apostles and the members of the Early Church are gathered
together. The tongues of fire descend upon them, and the Holy Ghost appears like a
dove between the figures of God and Jesus revealed above. A wide border of scroll with
inset medallions of biblical scenes. In the upper border a papal coat of arms.

Renaissance tapestries in so intimate a scale that yet are not miniature occur
rather seldom. The piece has great clarity and brilliance and carries forcefully
the religious feeling of the episode.

In the selvage the Brussels city mark and the weaver's initials, C. S. The mark
is unidentified.

29 BRUSSELS, XVI CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

H.
6
ft.
9
in.

W.
13
ft.
8
in.

Lent by

William Baumgarten
& Company
.

JUDITH DEPARTS FOR THE ENEMY'S CAMP:
Judith accompanied by her
maid takes leave of her mother. Attendants await to lead her away and a slave awaits
in the background holding two camels. Wide border of fruits and flowers.

This is one of a very famous set of the
Story of Judith and Holofernes
, examples
of which are in a number of famous collections. The tapestry bears on the selvage
the Brussels city mark and the weaver's monogram, N. X. The mark is unidentified.

This piece is a strong example of a set that combines characteristic Renaissance
stateliness with a less customary direct charm.

[40]

30 BRUSSELS, MIDDLE XVI CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

H.
11
ft.
3
in.

W.
12
ft.
9
in.

Lent by

P. W. French &
Company
.

GARDEN SCENE:
Through a trellis upheld by caryatides a formal garden with
fountains and pavilions is seen. In the foreground, deer. In the garden, various
animals. Border of scrolls and flowers with inset cartouches showing animals.

Such trellis designs as this were quite often used in the middle of the XVIth century.
A famous example very similar to this is the
Vertumnus and Pomona
set, one
of which was in the Palace of the Escurial and two in the Barberini Collection.
[25]

Another piece so like this that it must be the work of the same designer is in the
Vienna Collection, number 142.

It is a rich and resourceful kind of decoration well fitted to the requirements of
tapestry. The drawing of the deer is unusually graceful and vivacious.

31 FLANDERS, XVI CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

H.
5
ft.
9
in.

W.
12
ft.
9
in.

Lent by

Mrs. William H.
Crocker
.

VERDURE:
In the center a château surrounded by a moat on which swans and ducks
swim about. At the left fishermen on the bank and a hunter with his dogs. On the right
mounted hunters chasing rabbits through a wood.

The high-keyed landscape on a small scale was the Renaissance successor to the
Gothic millefleurs. The drawing in this piece is beautifully clean and exact, and
the color delightfully and uncommonly varied and vibrant. The château is so carefully
rendered that it is valuable as an architectural record. The piece may have
been made by Flemish weavers working in England.

32 FLANDERS, LATE XVI CENTURY

Wool.

H.
9
ft.

W.
23
ft.

Lent by

W. & J. Sloane
.

HUNTING SCENE:
Hunters riding through a woodland. In the foreground a knight
and lady strolling. Scroll border.

This piece is a rather uncommon variation of a familiar type. Many tapestries
were woven in Flanders in the second part of the XVIth century that were predominantly
verdure with a few minor figures, but the figures were seldom as delicately
drawn nor the colors so high in key and clear. It is quite possible that the
piece was woven by Flemish weavers in England, a few pieces woven there by the
Poyntz family being known to have somewhat the same quality. The relatively
low height in proportion to the great length also suggests that it was made for
an English house.

Hannibal Approaches Scipio to Sue for Peace

No. 25

Cyrus Captures Astyages, His Grandfather

No. 26

[41]

33 FLANDERS, ENGHIEN (?), XVI CENTURY

Wool.

H.
9
ft.
7
in.

W.
7
ft.
9
in.

Lent by

Dikran K.
Kelekian
.

VERDURE:
Large scrolling leaves, bluish-green, with bunches of fruit and flowers
and small finches. Wide border of fruit and flowers.

Verdures of this type were very much in demand in the Renaissance period. They
are typical of the decorative manner of the time and one of its finest inventions.

The heavy, simple leaves are often too obvious and too readily explored for the
best tapestry decoration; but in this piece the beautifully drawn birds provide
delicacy and interest of detail.

34 BRUGES, MIDDLE XVI CENTURY (1556)

Wool and Silk.

H.
9
ft.
1
in.

W.
8
ft.
9
in.

Lent by

P. W. French &
Company
.

ARMORIAL:
Two amorini support a shield. Above, crossed banners; below, dolphins.
Six flags radiate from the shield, each bearing the initial P surmounted by a crown.
Border of scrolls and classic figures.

In cartouches in the side and lower borders the
initials F
,
G
,
and X respectively
,
and in the corresponding cartouche of the top border
the date
, 1556.
On the right lower selvage is the city mark of Bruges, with the weaver's
monogram, A. F.
[26]

This tapestry is very interesting, not only because it is a clear, strong example of
a Renaissance heraldic hanging, but because very few pieces of the period can be
ascribed definitely to Bruges although it is known that important looms flourished
there. The weaver's monogram has not been identified. The coat of arms, which is
also unidentified, seems to be Spanish, and judging by the coronet evidently belonged
to a family of high station. The amorini are after a follower of Giulio
Romano, if not by Romano himself.

The relief effect of the design is quite extraordinary.

35 BRUSSELS, XVI CENTURY (1574)

Wool, Silk, Gold.

H.
with frame, 4
ft.

W.
with frame, 3
ft.
9
in.

THE CRUCIFIXION:
Christ and the two thieves on the crosses. In the foreground,
right, the Roman soldiers; left, the sorrowing Marys. Floral border.

Dated in cartouche
in the border
, 1574.

This is one of a number of small tapestries in silk and gold of religious subjects,
most of which have been attributed to Bernard Van Orley, who probably designed
this piece also. They are all of them very exact reproductions of paintings, remarkable
in weave and very beautiful in color. The type was first woven in the first
quarter of the XVIth century, and continued to be produced in very limited numbers
until well into the XVIIth century. They were undoubtedly woven only for
special orders—probably for private chapels.

[42]

The piece is a very brilliant example of one of the richest types of tapestry
that has ever been woven.

Lent by

P. W. French &
Company
.

Bernard Van Orley (1492-5 to 1540) was trained by his father, Valentin, and afterwards studied under
Raphael in Italy. He was engaged to supervise the translation of Raphael's cartoons for the famous
series of the
Apostles
into tapestry. In 1518 he became court painter. He designed many tapestries,
of which the most famous are the
Hunts of Maximilian
and the
Victory of Pavia
series.

36 FONTAINEBLEAU, MIDDLE XVI CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

H.
11
ft.

W.
17
ft.

GROTESQUES:
On a red ground, grotesques, of which the principal features are: in
the center Flora in an arbor on the top of which stands Atlas upholding the world; two
cartouches left and two right with candelabra and various deities. Below at the left
in a small oval medallion Leda and the Swan, and in the corresponding medallion
on the other side Eve and the Serpent. The remaining spaces are filled with amorini,
garlands of fruit and flowers, gods, and various ornaments. Narrow floral borders,
and in the center of both side borders a triangle.

The triangles in the border are the Deltas, the ciphers of Diane de Poitiers, indicating
that this piece was woven in the reign of Henry II for Diane, possibly for
the Château d'Anet.

Lent by

P. W. French &
Company
.

For fertile and varied imagination this piece is quite uncommon even among
grotesques, the most imaginative type of decorative tapestries. It exhibits a most
entertaining sense of humor and shows a capricious independence never found in
the more formal Flemish grotesques of the time.

37 FONTAINEBLEAU, MIDDLE XVI CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

H.
12
ft.
8
in.

W.
8
ft.

TRIUMPH OF DIANA:
The goddess in a blue robe, bearing her bow and arrows,
drives a pale-blue chariot on which a nymph is tied prisoner. Love, whose wings are
beautifully multicolored, also is a prisoner. Diana's attendants, garbed in blue and
red tunics, follow on foot, one in the foreground in a green tunic leading a large grey-hound.
In the border shells alternate with crescents on a blue ground and in the corners
above are crescents and rams' heads. The mottoes "Non Frusta Jupiter Am Bas"
and "Sic Immota Manet" are in the upper and lower borders respectively.
[27]

The tapestry was evidently made for Diane de Poitiers, mistress of Henry II, the
subject being chosen as a personal tribute.

Formerly in the
Collection of Edouard
Kann, Paris.

Aside from its evident beauty, the piece is important because it is one of the
few remaining examples of the work of the Fontainebleau looms, which adapted
to tapestry the characteristic Italian-French Renaissance decoration that was
formulated in the frescoes of Fontainebleau. There are few documents left on
these looms, but it is known that le Primatice made designs for tapestries woven
there, and, judging from the drawing of the figures with the long limbs and heavily
marked muscles that reflect the influence of Michael Angelo, and the contour of
the small heads with the hair flowing back and the classical features, together
with such other details as the long flexible fingers, this piece would seem to be
an example of his work. If not by le Primatice, it was certainly done directly
under his influence; but it could scarcely be by Baudouin, judging from the recently
discovered set in the Viennese exhibition,
[28]
for it has more poise and clarity of
space than any of those tapestries.

The Crucifixion

No. 35

[43]

Grotesques No.
36

For grace and charm, without any loss of strength, this surpasses most French
work of the period. It is an unusually typical illustration of the French Renaissance
which took the technique of the Italian revival of the antique and refashioned
it to her own spirit, giving the classic goddesses, even in their dignity, youthful
and feminine appeal, and refining the Italian opulence. The floreation in the foreground
is as delicate as in a XVIth-century millefleurs, and the colors are unusually
luminous.

Lent by

Wildenstein &
Company
.

Francesco Primaticcio (1504-1570) studied under a disciple of Raphael and worked with Giulio Romano
on the decorations of the Palace de Te, Mantua. In 1532 he went from Italy to Fontainebleau to work
on the decorations there. In 1540 he returned to Italy to collect works of art for the king. He returned
to France and continued to create decorations at Fontainebleau with a large staff of Italian painters
as his collaborators. Under Francis II he became Superintendent of the Building.

38 PARIS, EARLY XVII CENTURY

Wool.

H.
13
ft.

W.
16
ft.
9
in.

THE NIOBIDES:
Apollo and Artemis from a cloud shoot down the children of
Niobe, thus avenging their mother, who had been outraged by Niobe's boasting that
she had the more children. Border of fruit garlands and figures in camaieux.

Formerly in Marnier-Lapostalle
Collection,
Paris.

Reproduced:

Guiffrey, Les Gobelins
et Beauvais
, p. 15;

Hauser y Menet,
Los Tapices de la
Corona de España
,
vol. 2, pl. 132.

Lent by

Jacques Seligmann
& Company
.

The tapestry is one of the Artemis series designed for Marie de Medici by Toussaint
du Breuil. It was woven on the looms which were under the direction of Marc
Comans and François de la Planche, and which later became the Gobelins state
manufactory. The cartoons were repeated many times with different borders.
Judging by the border, this piece was woven about 1611.

The piece is a splendid example of the dramatic and monumental character of
the productions of the pre-Gobelins looms.

The sensitive feeling for decorative fitness and the reserve that are evident in
French designs from the Gothic period on differentiate such a cartoon as this from
the contemporary Flemish productions, usually so violent and exaggerated in scale,
in drawing, and in emotional expression. For, though dramatic, the scene is restrained
and the figures have an almost sculptural detachment. This quality is
sustained by the fine architectural border, which is very typical of the Paris looms
of this period.

Toussaint du Breuil (1561-1602) painted decorations in the Pavilions des Poêles at Fontainebleau,
and also in the Galerie des Rois in the Louvre. Most of his work has perished.

[44]

39, 40 GOBELINS, XVI CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

No. 39:

H.
7
ft.
9
in.

W.
13
ft.
6
in.

No. 40:

H.
7
ft.
9
in.

W.
11
ft.

TWO SCENES FROM THE HISTORY OF CLEOPATRA:
In the first
(
No.

39)
Cleopatra attended by two maidens greets a young prince who is being introduced
to her by a general
.
In the harbor the young stranger's ship is seen.

In the second
(
No.
40)
Cleopatra welcomes a young man
.
An attendant holds a
heavy canopy of silk. Beyond, a Greek temple is seen.

Side borders, only, of classic decorations on a red ground with inset medallions
showing the Judgment of Paris.

Formerly in the
Collection of
Lord Lovelace.

Lent by

William Baumgarten
& Company
.

The pieces both signed in the lower right corner—Lefébvre, with the fleur-de-lis
and G. They do not, however, appear on the records of the Gobelins, so they must
have been done by Lefébvre outside of the official work.

They are strong and fresh examples of the early work of the Gobelins weavers,
and typical of the classicism of the late Renaissance in France. The requirements
of mural decoration are met by the monumental character and sculptural poise of
the figures, but at the same time the design is adapted to a decorative textile
through the perfection of the detail and the richness of the colors.

41 FLANDERS, BEGINNING OF XVII CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

H.
7
ft.
10
in.

W.
13
ft.
4
in.

Lent by

Mrs. C. Templeton
Crocker
.

VERDURE:
A formal garden with fountains and a château in the distance and various
birds in the foreground.

Such landscape tapestries were a characteristic late Renaissance interpretation of
the verdure type, a transition between the Gothic
millefleurs
, that were really originally
landscapes without perspective (cf. No. 11), and the XVIIth-century verdures
(cf. No. 43). It is a very successful form of verdure, for they are broadly effective
from a distance and yet have a sufficient wealth of detail to yield interest on closer
exploration. The birds in this piece are especially carefully observed and well
drawn, and the purity and vivacity of the color is exceptional for this type.

42 BRUSSELS, LATE XVII CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

H.
13
ft.

W.
12
ft.

AMERICA:
In a tropical landscape an Indian with bow and arrows caressing a
crocodile. Two children beside him smoking pipes. In the background on a hill a
mission; in the foreground a heap of fruits and flowers and precious objects symbolic
of the wealth of the New World. Border of fruits and flowers with corner medallions
representing North, East, South, and West. On the lower selvage the Brussels city
mark and the signature, I. V. D. BEURCHT.

Another example in
Musée Impériale des
Ecuries, Petrograd,
No. 117.

Lent by

P. W. French &
Company
.

The piece is one of a set of four representing the four quarters of the globe. It
was woven by Jean Van der Beurcht, one of the great weavers of Brussels, who is
known to have been working there between 1690 and 1710. The Van der Beurcht
[45]

family had for several generations been painters, Jean being the first to turn from
that profession to tapestry weaving. He was followed by several other members
of the family (cf. No. 56), all of whom did work of the highest quality.

The piece is a splendid illustration of the romantic attitude toward America
at the time and a reminder of the importance America had to Europeans as a
source of wealth. The mission on the hill, and another mission settlement in the
valley of which a glimpse can be caught, are of especial interest.

43 FLANDERS, XVII CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

H.
11
ft.
10
in.

W.
11
ft.

Lent by

P. W. French &
Company
.

VERDURE WITH BEAR HUNT:
In a forest of large trees hunters shooting and
spearing bears. In place of a border, large columns at the sides with floral garlands
hung between them across the top.

The piece is a type of verdure, numbers of which with many variations were produced
in Flanders during the XVIIth century. It is one of a set of five, and is a
very strong, fresh example.

The substitution of massive columns for formal borders is characteristic of the
Baroque period and serves the better to adapt the tapestry to the prevailing architecture.

44 BRUSSELS, XVII CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

H.
11
ft.

W.
18
ft.
8
in.

From the Morgan
Collection, No. 17.
Another example in
the Swedish Royal
Collection.

TRIUMPH OF AUGUSTUS AND LIVIA:
Caesar offers the crown of victory to
Augustus, who kneels before him. He is surrounded by his attendants and his chariot
waits in the background. The side borders are of flower-draped columns, top and
bottom borders of fruit and flower garlands, with ornaments. On the side borders are
cartouches bearing the insignia: Pax. Aug. and Vic. Aug. (Pax Augusta and Victoria
Augusta).

The piece is one of a series on the
History of Julius Caesar
, three of which were
in the Morgan Collection. It has all the abundance and dramatic emphasis characteristic
of the Baroque period.

Illustrated:

Böttiger, Svenska
Statins Samling
,
vol. 3, pl. XLII.

Lent by

P. W. French &
Company
.

The massive yet active figures, the large folded, swinging drapes, the luxurious
and heavy accessories are all typical of the work of a time when the large, the impressive,
and the elaborate were sought in all forms of art. The manner was introduced
into tapestry cartoons by Rubens and carried on by many of his pupils and
imitators. Even the outline of the composition of this piece follows closely that
of Rubens' famous
Triumphs
, from which the suggestion for the cartoon was
undoubtedly taken.

[46]

45 FLANDERS, XVII CENTURY

Wool, Silk, Gold.

H.
3
ft.
1
in.

W.
4
ft.

Lent by

Duveen Brothers
.

THE VIRGIN AND CHILD:
The Virgin in a pale red gown with a dark-blue
cloak falling about her is seated on the ground. The child holding a staff in the form
of a cross sits on her knee. Beyond is a castle, and against the sky a high mountain.
Wide floral border. The high lights are in gold.

This is a most exceptional piece of tapestry, evidently made to special order,
probably for a private chapel, after an Italian Renaissance painting. The excessive
fineness of the weave and the unstinted use of gold to render the high lights
indicate that it was made for a person of wealth and importance.

The painting is faithfully and delicately reproduced and the border is remarkably
rich and glowing.

46 BRUSSELS, LATE XVII, EARLY XVIII CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

H.
12
ft.

W.
17
ft.
6
in.

Lent by

P. W. French &
Company
.

SANCHO IS TOSSED IN A BLANKET:
Sancho, following Don Quixote's example,
has refused to pay the innkeeper, as that is against the tradition of knights-errant and
their squires. So the clothmakers of Segovia and the needlemakers of Cordova who
chance to be there toss him in a blanket, while Don Quixote sits without on his horse
cursing lustily.

The piece is one of a set of illustrations of
Don Quixote
after David Teniers the
Younger. The scene has all the casual and convincing informality and boisterous
good spirits for which Teniers' paintings are famous. It quite catches the spirit
of the romance which it illustrates. The landscape vista is unusually lovely in
color.

David Teniers the Younger (1610-1694) was trained principally under his father, David the Elder,
also famous for paintings of peasant episodes. In 1633 he became Master of the Guild of St. Lukes,
and thereafter was Dean of the Guild and painter to the governor, Archduke Leopold William, a
position which he continued to hold under the next governor, Don Juan of Austria. In 1663 he helped
form the Antwerp Academy of Fine Arts. He painted innumerable pictures of peasant scenes, many
of which have been rendered in tapestry.

47, 48 BRUSSELS, XVIII CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

No. 47:

H.
11
ft.

W.
8
ft.
9
in.

No. 48:

H.
11
ft.

W.
8
ft.
9
in.

Lent by

Duveen Brothers
.

TWO PEASANT SCENES:
In the first
(
No.
47)
a group of peasants has stopped
to rest and talk beside a stream that comes tumbling down in broken cascades beneath
a high stone bridge. On the hills in the background are farmhouses and the ruins of
castles
.

In the second
(
No.
48)
a group of peasants sits and stands about under a tree in a
meadow
,
in which cattle and goats wander.

In the background is a farmhouse.

These tapestries after Teniers are typical of his illustrations of life among the
peasants and of his decorative and romantic yet realistic landscapes. They are
in weaving and color of the best quality of examples of this type.

Triumph of Diana

No. 37

The Niobides

No. 38

[47]

49 MORTLAKE, LATE XVII CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

H.
10
ft.
4
in.

W.
7
ft.
6
in.

Formerly in the
Collection of
Sir John Ramsay.

Lent by

Frank Partridge,
Inc.

PEASANTS IN A LANDSCAPE:
A group of peasants has stopped by the wayside
in a mountainous landscape. Above is a shield bearing the inscription "Iocatur in
Parvis sorts ut cum Magna Mercede Fallat."

The cartoon is after Teniers. The Mortlake renditions of these cartoons, which
were borrowed from Flanders, have a clarity and sharpness that give them marked
distinction. The towering mountain landscape is really impressive.

The rendition of the water is unusually realistic without any loss of decorative
interest. The translation of water into a woven design is one of the most difficult
problems of the craft. It has been given many solutions, of which this is the most
naturalistic.

50 BEAUVAIS, LATE XVII CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

H.
10
ft.

W.
8
ft.
8
in.

Lent by

Mrs. James
Creelman
.

HERMES AND THE SHEPHERD:
Hermes has taken the Shepherd's pipe, leaving
the caduceus on the ground, and is attempting to play. They are in a wood with large
flowers in the foreground. In the background there is a glimpse of a hilly landscape
and a formal garden with fountains. Wide floral border.

The piece is one of a set of five verdures, most of which have hunting scenes.
While there is no signature, and there are no records on them, the character of
the foliage and of the floreation makes it almost certain that these are of Beauvais
manufacture. While in some details they resemble contemporary Aubusson tapestries,
the quality of the color is rather different.

They are a particularly deep and quiet type of verdure, an excellent background
for fine furnishings. The quality of the greens is uncommonly fine.

51 BEAUVAIS, BEGINNING OF XVIII CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

H.
10
ft.
9
in.

W.
13
ft.
3
in.

Lent by

Dikran K.
Kelekian
.

VERDURE WITH DANCING NYMPHS:
In a wooded dell are four nymphs
dancing. Beyond is a glimpse of an open pasture with cows.

The strong and brilliant trees throw into sharp contrast the delicate perfection
of the bit of landscape beyond. The nymphs are probably after Noël Coypel. The
use of the red to relieve the general tone of green is especially successful.

52 BEAUVAIS, 1685-1711

Wool, Silk, Gold.

H.
15
ft.
8
in.

W.
11
ft.
10
in.

Formerly in the
Lord Amherst
Collection.

Illustrated:

Badin, La Manufacture
de la Tapisserie
de Beauvais
, opp. p. 4.

Lent by

P. W. French &
Company
.

THE CONQUEST OF LOUIS THE GREAT:
Louis XIV on horseback with two
attendants points with his cane to the siege of a city whose defenses are surrounded
by water. In the upper border appear the arms of Count Bruhl of Saxony. The
piece is one of a set of seven.

[48]

This is a very rare example from one of the earliest sets woven at Beauvais when
the factory was under the direction of Behagle. The cartoon was designed either
by Van der Meulen or his greatest pupil, Jean-Baptiste Martin, later called Martin
of the Battles, because of a famous series of cartoons which he made for the Beauvais
works illustrating the victories of Sweden over Denmark.

The richness of the king's group stands out brilliantly against the clear, cool
color and sharp geometrical lines of the background. The city with its canals and
buildings is exquisitely rendered, an interesting anticipation of an aeroplane view.

Adam Frans Van der Meulen (1632-1690) was a native of Brussels and studied there under Peter
Snayers, but on recommendation of Le Brun was invited by Colbert to Paris, where he was pensioned
by the king and given apartments in the Gobelins. In 1673 be was received into the Academy. He
collaborated with Le Brun in making designs for the Gobelins, notably for the series of
The History
of the King
.

53-56 BRUSSELS, BEGINNING XVIII CENTURY

Wool.

No. 53:

H.
10
ft.
7
in.

W.
29
ft.

No. 54:

H.
10
ft.
4
in.

W.
9
ft.
4
in.

No. 55:

H.
10
ft.
3½
in.

W.
7
ft.
2
in.

No. 56:

H.
10
ft.
4½
in.

W.
7
ft.
3
in.

Formerly in
Stowe House.

Lent by

Jacques Seligmann
& Company
.

THE OPERATIONS OF THE SIEGE OF LILLE:
Number
53
represents the
battle of Wynendael Wood.

Lord Cobham on horseback with his sword drawn is in
the midst of his troops.

Number
54
shows the burning of Lille
.
The burning city is seen in the background.
Soldiers in the foreground are getting bundles of wood to feed the flames.

Number
55
shows cavaliers foraging
.
Soldiers are carrying bundles of hay for their
horses and a lamb lies on the ground ready to be carried off.

Number
56
shows the poisoning of a spy
.
The cavaliers have just given a glass of
poisoned wine to a young woman who is about to drink.

The borders simulate wooden frames and carry the arms of Lord Cobham.

The set was designed by Van der Meulen for Lord Cobham, who served under
the Duke of Marlborough and had a brilliant military career. It was woven at
the Royal Manufactory of Brussels under the direction of Leyniers, whose signature
appears in the border of three pieces. In the fourth piece is the signature ACASTRO,
Latin for Van der Beurcht.

Cobham inherited Stowe House in 1697, and these tapestries until recently
hung in the dining-room there.

The set ranks with the strongest and most effective pieces of the period, rich
both in illustrative action and in decoration. The weave is technically perfect.

57 GOBELINS, MIDDLE XVIII CENTURY (1747-1751)

Wool and Silk.

H.
11
ft.
6
in.

W.
8
ft.
3
in.

JULY FROM THE "MONTHS" OF LUCAS:
From a series of designs of the
Months, used in Brussels since the XVth century and attributed without verification
to Lucas Van Leyden. The scene represents a falconing party.

Scene from the History of Cleopatra

No. 39

Verdure

No. 41

The piece has the last type of border used for the set, the so-called Dresden border,
[49]

representing a carved and gilded wood frame with corner ornaments surrounded
by naturalistic flowers, and with a sign of the Zodiac (Leo) in a cartouche at
the top.

Lent by

P. W. French &
Company
.

The piece was probably woven in the tenth weaving between 1741 and 1751
on the upright looms in the atelier of Cozette.
[29]

This is an unusually clear and brilliant example of a famous Gobelins set.

58 GOBELINS, XVII CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

H.
9
ft.
4
in.

W.
6
ft.
8
in.

Another example in
the Vienna Collection,
No. 109.

Lent by

Wildenstein &
Company
.

DECEMBER FROM THE "MONTHS" OF LUCAS:
A nobleman greets a peasant
woman and her child, while a man and woman carrying a baby wait for him. In the
background a castle and people skating on the ice. The piece is incomplete.

This tapestry is from the same set as the preceding, but woven almost a century
earlier, and it is interesting to contrast the changes that the change in taste has
made in the feeling of the rendition and the color key. During the XVIIIth century
the cartoon was refined with slight changes. The hand of the old man, for example,
was modified to hold a fruit for the child. The piece probably is from the third
or fourth weaving. If so, it was done on the horizontal looms in the atelier of
Lefébvre, outside of the official work of the Gobelins.
[30]

This is one of the few really successful renditions of a snow scene in tapestry.

59 BEAUVAIS, LATE XVII, EARLY XVIII CENTURY (1684-1711)

Wool and Silk.

H.
9
ft.
8
in.

W.
16
ft.
5
in.

Lent by

P. W. French &
Company
.

CHINESE GROTESQUE:
Under an arbor clowns conduct a circus. Above the
arbor are scrolls, garlands, birds, musical instruments, and other decorations. On a
yellow ground.

This is one of a famous series of grotesques by Berain on a yellow ground, woven
several times at the Beauvais works when they were under the direction of Behagle.
[31]

The entertaining fantasy of the conception, together with the delicate drawing
and the beautiful ground color, makes this one of the finest grotesques of the
XVIIIth century.

Jean Berain (1638-1711) was appointed in 1674 designer to the king, and in this position designed the
scenery and costumes for the court ballets. He is famous for his decorations.

[50]

60, 61 BEAUVAIS, XVIII CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

No. 60:

H.
15½
in.

W.
19
in.

No. 61:

H.
15½
in.

W.
19
in.

Lent by
Maison
Jamarin, Paris
.

TWO STILL-LIFE PIECES:
In one
(
No.
60)
a glass
,
a napkin
,
and some vegetables
on a table
.
In the other
(
No.
61)
various vegetables about a china dish
.

These panels, after paintings by Chardin, are the only recorded examples of still-life
composition in tapestry. From the middle of the XVth century household utensils
and various other types of accessories were used to contribute richness of ornamentation
to scenes, and during the Baroque period embossed metals and lavish carvings
became especially important in creating a luxurious effect, but not until tapestry
was thought of as a form of painting was a purely still-life subject attempted. All
still-life designs depend so much on contrasted weights, and especially on textures,
that they are particularly difficult to translate into a medium which, like tapestry,
renders primarily silhouettes and which has such a decided texture of its own. But
the extraordinary skill of the XVIIIth-century French weavers was equal even to
that problem. The skillful care of the composition of the original paintings and the
pure beauty of the colors of the tapestry make of rather unpromising subjects beautiful
decorations.

Jean Siméon Chardin (1699-1779) studied under Noël Coypel and assisted Jean Baptiste Van Loo in
restoring one of the galleries of Fontainebleau. He was admitted to the Academy in 1728. His early
work was devoted to still-life subjects principally, his later to peasant scenes, in which there are often
fine incidental still lifes.

62 AUBUSSON, MIDDLE XVIII CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

H.
9
ft.
8
in.

W.
10
ft.
9
in.

THE PRIEST AND CARDENIO MEET DOROTHY:
The priest and the barber
while looking for Don Quixote come across Cardenio. While Cardenio is telling them
the sad story of how his love, Lucinda, has been stolen from him by the treachery of
Don Fernando they hear someone lamenting. Following the sound of the voice, they
find Dorothy disguised as a shepherd-boy bathing her feet in a stream. She is on her
way to seek Don Fernando, who is her pledged husband and who has deserted her
for Lucinda. In the background Don Quixote, exhausted and starved from his wanderings,
lies on the ground, while the faithful Sancho pleads with him to return to Toboso.

The border simulates a carved frame. On the lower selvage is the signature M. R.
DAUBUSSON. MAGE. PICON.

The piece is one of a series of illustrations by Coypel, originally designed for the
Gobelins, and was engraved and used in many editions of the romance both in
France and Spain. Several looms made tapestries after the engravings, including
those of Santa Barbara in Madrid.

The signature is the mark of the royal manufacture of Aubusson, and of Mage,
a tapestry merchant in Paris in 1746, and Picon, dyer to the king from 1748 to
1756. The piece was evidently made in the royal works of Aubusson to the order
of the dealer Mage under the supervision of Picon, who, from his position, was
evidently one of the most important members of the staff there.

Verdure with Dancing Nymphs

No. 51

The Conquest of Louis The Great

No. 52

[51]

The piece shows Aubusson work at its richest and finest. The foliage of the
trees with every leaf shown and broken up into small spots of changing color is
very typical of Aubusson, and quite different from the manner of the Flemish
shops (cf. No. 55). The colors are remarkably fine.

Lent by

P. W. French &
Company
.

Charles Antoine Coypel (1694-1752) entered the Academy in 1715, and the next year made a series
of twenty-eight designs illustrating
Don Quixote
for the Gobelins. A second important series which
he designed for the Gobelins illustrated scenes from the theatre. He was a favorite painter of Queen
Marie Leczinska. He wrote several comic dramas and had an interest in an understanding of the
theatre which is reflected in his tapestry designs, which are conceived always as a theatrical scene in
a stage setting, with actors making the proper expressive gestures.

63 PARIS, XVIII CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

Oval;

H.
28
in.

W.
23
in.

Lent by

Jacques Seligmann
& Company
.

BACCHANTE:
A young bacchante wearing a tigerskin and holding Pan's pipes.
In an oval panel.

This panel is after a portrait by Coypel. Though it does not appear on the official
registers of the Gobelins, the technique would indicate that it was probably by a
Gobelins weaver, who quite often worked outside of the official orders.

The delicate execution reproduces faithfully the piquant charm of the painting;
even the most delicate gradations of tones are exactly reproduced.

64. GOBELINS, XVIII CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

H.
25
in.

W.
21
in.

Illustrated:

Böttiger, Svenska
Statins Samling
, vol.
2, pl. XLI;
Fénaille,
Etat général des
Tapisseries de la
Manufacture des
Gobelins, Dix-huitième
Siècle
, 2me
Partie, p. 311; as
portrait of Louis XVI,
in
Migeon, Les Arts de
Tissu
, p. 335.

Lent by

P. W. French &
Company
.

PORTRAIT OF LOUIS XV:
This portrait, after a painting by Van Loo made for
the Gobelins in
1760,
is one of a series of the royal family. It is in the original frame
.

While tapestry is not an appropriate medium for portraiture, a portrait is the
supreme test of the skill of the weaver. In this piece the effect of the painting is
reproduced with remarkable fidelity. The warp is vertical.

The technical difficulty was the greater because almost the entire piece was
woven in wool, the proper material for tapestry, silk being relied on only for a few
high lights. As a portrait it has directness and conviction, carrying the essential
dignity of royalty. The XVIIIth century, which first undertook to weave tapestry
portraits, produced a kind of portrait that was especially ill-adapted to this
material; for the likenesses depended primarily on the delicate modeling produced
by a very sensitively differentiated scale of values and scarcely at all on
lines. Even in Gothic tapestries there are many heads that are striking portraits,
but these are entirely graphic in character and so fitted for tapestry. In
rendering this portrait the weavers had literally to paint with the shuttle.

Carle Van Loo (1705-1756) studied in Rome under Luti and Le Gros. In his youth he painted scenery
for the opera with Boucher. In 1737 he was admitted to the Academy, and in 1762 made first painter
to the king.

[52]

65 GOBELINS, FIRST HALF XVIII CENTURY

Wool.

H.
13
ft.
3
in.

W.
8
ft.
3
in.

Another rendering in
the Vienna Collection,
No. 253; another in
the Musée Impériale
des Ecuries, Petrograd,
No. 118.

Lent by

Demotte
.

THE INDIAN HUNTER:
This tapestry is one of a set of eight illustrating the
New India after designs by François Desportes. The set was first woven in 1687.

This piece has the first type of border used with the series
,
bearing the arms of the
king
,
which means that it was woven before
1768
under either Cozette or Neilson
.
[32]

The design is typical of the romantic primitivism that Rousseau formulated in
his conception of the Noble Savage. The accuracy of detail in the Indian basket
is interesting and rather unexpected.

François Desportes (1661-1743) studied under Bernaert, a pupil of Snyders. He entered the Academy
in 1699 and was made painter to the king. He is famous for his paintings of animals and hunting scenes.

66 BEAUVAIS, XVIII CENTURY (1777)

Wool.

H.
11
ft.
1
in.

W.
21
ft.
3
in.

Formerly in Collection
of Count Polovzoff,
Petrograd.
Another example in
the Swedish Royal
Collection.
Illustrated:

Böttiger, Svenska
Statins Samling
,
vol. 3, pl. LXVI.

Lent by

Jacques Seligmann
& Company
.

THE THEFT OF THE TRUNK:
A group of gypsies surround a traveler's carriage,
and while some tell the lady's fortune and receive alms others attempt to steal
a trunk from the baggage-rack behind.

The tapestry is one of the series
Les Bohémiens
by François Casanova, and was
woven in Beauvais when the factory was under the direction of André Charlemagne
Charron, whose initials it bears in signature. According to the inventories, the
series has been woven only twice—once in 1777 for the king, and again in 1799.
[33]

The vividness of the minor episodes and the vivacity of characterization of even
the lesser actors make this a most interesting tapestry. The weaving is done with
exquisite skill and the color is unusually fresh and charming.

François Casanova (1730-1805) went to Italy in 1727 where he studied under Guardi and Francesco
Simonini. He returned to France and later studied under Parocel. In 1763 he was received into the
Academy and exhibited in the salons until 1783.

67 BEAUVAIS, XVIII CENTURY (1735-1740)

Wool and Silk.

H.
11
ft.
9
in.

W.
14
ft.
6
in.

Lent by

P. W. French &
Company
.

THE ARMS OF FRANCE AND NAVARRE:
Two angels on clouds support the
coat of arms before an ermine drape against a ground of fleur-de-lis on blue.

The angels are after Boucher, the only coat of arms in tapestry known to which
Boucher has contributed. It is evidently one of several fleur-de-lis pieces listed
in the accounts of Beauvais between 1735 and 1740 and may be the one made
for the Parliament of Rouen in the latter year.
[34]

[53]

It is an unusually rich and interesting armorial, the angels with their characteristic
Boucher grace adding great beauty to the formal setting.

François Boucher (1703-1770) studied with Lemoyne and during that time painted scenery for the
Opera, a work to which he returned in the height of his career (1737-44). In 1734 he became Academician.
In 1735 he was appointed head of the Gobelins by Marigny. In 1765 he was made first painter
to the king and Director of the Academy. In the years between 1740 and 1755 he painted many
cartoons for the Beauvais tapestry works. Among his most famous tapestry suites are the
Loves of
the Gods
, the
Chinese Hangings
, and the
Italian Fêtes
.

68 GOBELINS, XVIII CENTURY (1767)

Wool and Silk.

H.
4
ft.
11
in.

W.
6
ft.
6
in.

Illustrated:

Fénaille, L'Etat
général des Tapisseries
de la Manufacture des
Gobelins, Dix-huitième
Siècle
, 2me Partie, p. 238.

Lent by

Duveen Brothers
.

THE FORTUNE-TELLER:
Two peasant girls seated on the ground by a fountain
are having their fortune told by another girl. A naked baby clings to her skirts. From
one side a goat looks on inquisitively. It is signed F. Boucher and dated.

This is one of a series of cartoons in small size made by Boucher for the Gobelins
while he was director. They were very popular and have been woven a number
of times.

The piece shows how remarkably the delicate gradations of tone, on which
Boucher's essential quality depended, could be translated into the weave by the
extraordinarily skillful craftsmen of the Gobelins.

As in all of Boucher's cartoons, the subject is only an occasion for his own charming
decorative mannerisms. As a rendition of peasant life, it is interesting to contrast
this cartoon with the honest literalness of Teniers (cf. Nos. 47-49).

69 AUBUSSON, LATE XVIII CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

H.
9
ft.
10
in.

W.
7
ft.
5
in.

Lent by

P. W. French &
Company
.

BAIGNEUSE:
A bather attended by amorini is about to step into a woodland stream.
In an oval frame surrounded by an encadrement of garlands upheld by amorini and
satin drapes in the manner of Huet, on a gray ground.

The central panel is after Fragonard, a subject that he repeated with many variations.
The piece is typical of the Aubusson work, delicate in color with the decorative
effect depending largely on the flowery encadrement.

Jean Honoré Fragonard (1732-1806) studied under Boucher, Greuze, and Chardin, and is usually
considered the successor of Boucher. In 1752 he was given Grand Prize for Painting. He was a favorite
painter of Madame Du Barry, for whom he did a great deal of work.

70 AUBUSSON, LATE XVIII CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

H.
8
ft.
10
in.

W.
6
ft.
6
in.

Formerly in the Vaffrin
Collection, Bordeaux.

Lent by

Wildenstein &
Company
.

AU BORD DU MER:
In an oval panel are peasants landing from a rowboat. In
the harbor under a cliff is a sailing vessel. In an encadrement of red and blue flowers
and ribbons on a gray ground.

[54]

The central panel is after Vernet, who was particularly famous for his port scenes.
The encadrement is unusually rich and delicate.

Claude-Joseph Vernet (1714-1789) first studied under his father as a decorative painter of wall and
furniture panels. Afterward he studied under Bernardino Fergiori in Rome to be a marine painter.
In 1735 he was received by the Academy. His most famous paintings, of the seaports of France, are
in the Louvre.

71 AUBUSSON, XVIII CENTURY

Wool.

H.
9
ft.

W.
5
ft.

Lent by

A. J. Halow
.

CHINESE GROTESQUE:
A Chinaman, fantastically dressed, stands between two
tall tropical trees. On a pale-blue ground.

The piece is a delightful example of the taste for
chinoiseries
which the Pompadour
fostered for the benefit of the French East India Company, in which she was
interested, and which taste was eagerly followed by the frivolous and bored French
court, always seeking novelty.

72 AUBUSSON, XVIII CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

H.
4
ft.
3
in.

W.
3
ft.
9
in.

Exhibited:

Detroit Museum of
Fine Arts
, 1919.

Lent by

Dikran K.
Kelekian
.

ARMORIAL:
On a red ground, two angels support a shield. Border of scrolls.

This crisp and delicate little armorial is a fine example of the best quality of work
done at Aubusson in the late XVIIIth century. The clear drawing on the deep-red
background makes a vivid piece of decoration.

The rendition of a coat of arms in tapestry is difficult, because the decorative
value of heraldic devices depends almost entirely on the beauty of the line-drawing,
and tapestry, because of the character of the weave and the surface, is not a good
medium for clean lines. In the earlier periods, therefore, the shield was usually
made incidental to a design better adapted to tapestry (cf. No. 9). It was only well
into the XVIIIth century that the bearings could be woven delicately enough to
let them stand alone.

73 IMPERIAL RUSSIAN TAPESTRY WORKS,
ST. PETERSBURG, 1811

Wool and Silk.

H.
9
ft.
4
in.

W.
6
ft.
7
in.

Exhibited:

Metropolitan Museum
,
1912.

CATHERINE THE GREAT:
Catherine stands in her robes of state holding the
sceptre while the Imperial crown rests on a stool beside her. On the wall is the Russian
motto, NACHATOYE SOVERCHAYET ("What is begun is accomplished"). It is
signed and dated.

For sheer technical skill the rendition of this portrait is unsurpassable. The representation
of textures is remarkable, quite on a par with the cleverest paintings of
the period.

The Poisoning of a Spy

No. 56

The Arms of France and Navarre

No. 67

[55]

Illustrated:

Hunter, Tapestries
, pl.
229; also,
Candee,
Tapestry Book
, opp. p.
133,—but wrongly
attributed to the
Gobelins.

Lent by

P. W. French &
Company
.

It is, in truth, an absolutely perfect reproduction of a painting—a painting,
moreover, that from the character of all the accessories is particularly difficult to
render in wool; and while it is by no means the business of tapestry to imitate
painting, it is nevertheless an interesting display of remarkable virtuosity. The
personal power of the forceful old Empress is strongly presented. From every aspect
this is one of the greatest portraits in a woven medium. In general color tone the
piece has remained faithful to the character of tapestry, sustaining the rich
quality that the solid texture demands. In spite, also, of the need for many
delicately graded values to render the stuffs and the modeling, the weavers have
kept the color in large enough masses to be broadly decorative.

74 MADRID, LATE XVIII CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

H.
5
ft.

W.
8
ft.

Lent by

Duveen Brothers
.

THE CARD PLAYERS:
A group of men and women playing at cards sit about
a table on which is thrown a rich brocade. One of the company sits to one side playing
a lute.

This piece is one of the rather uncommon examples of the work of the Santa
Barbara looms of Madrid. The skill of the weavers is remarkable in reproducing
the heavy modeling of the deep shadows and the delicate modulations of the
faces. For the perfect rendition of the effect of a painting in tapestry it cannot
be excelled.

ADDENDA

The tapestries entered under this heading were received

too late to be entered in their proper order

in the body of the catalogue.

75 BRUSSELS, BEGINNING OF XVI CENTURY

Wool, Silk, Gold.

H.
9
ft.
1
in.

W.
7
ft.
8
in.

THE RESURRECTION:
The risen Christ discovered by Peter. Upper left, the
Agony in Gethsemane; upper right, Christ appearing to Mary in the garden. In the
background, the angel appearing to the three women. Border of fruits and flowers,
grapes, roses, and iris interspersed with finches and a paroquet.

This tapestry, the last of a series illustrating the
Passion
of Our Lord, was designed
in the studio of Bernard Van Orley, and may be the work of Van Orley himself,
though there were some of his students and followers who in purity of conception
and elevation and sensitiveness of feeling were superior at times to the master
himself. The weaving, unsurpassable in technical perfection, may be the work of
the Pannemaker looms. The quality of the design and weaving and the lavish use of
gold all indicate that this series was made for a great church or a noble family.

Formerly in the
Collection of the
Duc d'Albe.

The weavers at this period had attained complete mastery of the shuttle. This
[56]

absolute technical control made possible the exact translation into tapestry of the
intricate Renaissance patterns. The finish and elegance of the goldsmith's art which
characterized so much of Renaissance design is perfectly rendered.

However, while the weaving was fitted to the requirements of the Renaissance at
this time, it had not yet sacrificed any of its qualities as tapestry. Nor did the designs
of Bernard Van Orley force the weavers out of their proper limitations. For though
he was Italian trained and saturated with Renaissance influences, he was still
close to the technical problems of the weaver's art and he adjusted the new manner
in painting to them. So this piece is rich in jewel-like detail that enriches without
crowding the whole surface. The drawing of the flowers and the birds is exquisite.
The figures also, in spite of their dramatic force, keep the aloof poise that decorative
art demands. Finally, by means of a dispersion of substantial tones, the brilliant
suffusion of golden light which the Renaissance loved is fully achieved.

Such a scene as this is, in short, one of the last great monuments of the perfection
of Gothic tapestry, reinspired by the new insights of the Renaissance before the
ostentation and mistaken conventions of Raphael misguided the entire art.

Lent by

Mrs. William H.
Crocker
.

Nor is it merely a technical triumph. It is the direct expression of a profound
religious emotion which shines through the material beauty, elevates it above
earthly things, and sets it apart in glory. Easter has scarce had a lovelier celebration.

76 BRUSSELS, XVI CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

H.
15
ft.

W.
19
ft.

THE TRIUMPH OF WISDOM:
Wisdom with her two herons rides in a chariot
drawn by mythological beasts. In the upper right are Perseus and Pegasus. Before the
chariot are Ahasuerus, Abigail, David, and Saba. Cassandra walks beside, while
Titus and his soldiers, Rachel, and Judith with the head of Holofernes bring up the
rear. In the upper left Prometheus, in the lower Cadmus, contending with the dragons.

This is one of a very famous set of tapestries illustrating the
Triumphs of Petrarch

and a number of other
Triumphs
invented by French poets in imitation of Petrarch.
The cartoons are evidently the product of the studio of Maître Philippe (cf. Nos.
19, 20), for the heads of several of the minor characters are regular models, often
repeated in his work. The cartoons were painted and also executed before 1523,
because in that year Henry VII bought eight of the set, four of which are still at
Hampton Court. This piece, however, was woven in the middle of the century, as
is shown by the character of the heavy floral border. In the selvage is the Brussels
city mark and the mark of the Brussels weaver, Leo Van den Hecke.

Lent by

Mrs. William H.
Crocker
.

The design is full of the oblique symbolism that the period loved. The allusions
are drawn with equal interest from classic tradition, secular history, and Christian
legend. The entire past has been laid under tribute with magnificent disregard of
historical, social, and religious congruity. Such an unclassified assemblage of exciting
personalities might even cause confusion in the Day of Judgment. It is
typical of the Renaissance catholicity, the Renaissance eagerness to assimilate all
[57]

knowledge and be always as impressive as possible. Yet the figures still have some
of the stately restraint of the Gothic, and the dispersion of the points of interest,
so that the whole textile is equally covered, is a remainder from the Gothic taste.
Truly transitional, it represents the final stage of Maître Philippe's development.

77 FLANDERS, ENGHIEN (?), XVI CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

H.
5
ft.

W.
6
ft.
11
in.

Lent by

Mrs. William H.
Crocker
.

VERDURE:
Scrolling leaves in rich blue-green with red and yellow flowers and
fruits on a very deep-blue ground. A wide border of clusters of flowers and fruits.

This is a notably brilliant example of the characteristic Renaissance verdure.
The drawing is both accurate and vivacious, the colors pure, deep, and brilliant, the
wool of extraordinary firmness and lustre, while the weave is remarkably close for the
type. Tapestries of this class are so often perfunctory in conception and mechanical
in execution that we need a piece of this clarity, strength, and perfect finish to
show how splendid are the possibilities inherent in the simple design.

78 FLANDERS, LATE XVII CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

H.
11
ft.
8
in.

W.
15
ft.

Lent by

Mrs. William H.
Crocker
.

THE CABRIOLE:
A young knight shows his skill in jumping his horse. At the left
a page leads in a sumptuously caparisoned horse. At the right a large fountain is seen
through the trees, and in the background is a formal garden with fountains.

Such very decorative verdures, half realistic landscapes, were among the finest products
of the late XVIIth and XVIIIth centuries. Audenarde looms wove many of
the best pieces of the type, and this piece probably came from that district. The
fountain is rendered with delightful detail and animation, and the drawing of flowing
waters, a trying problem for tapestry, is managed with admirable dexterity.

79 ANTWERP, LATE XVII CENTURY

Wool and Silk.

H.
32
in.

W.
24
in.

Illustrated:

Schmitz,
Bild-Teppiche
,
p. 265.

Lent by

Mrs. William H.
Crocker
.

SCENES FROM THE CHILDHOOD OF CHRIST:
On a black ground strewn with
flowers, five oval panels framed with wreaths: the Annunciation; the Nativity; the Adoration
of the Magi; the Circumcision; the Flight into Egypt.

This very unusual tapestry was the work of Balthasar Bosmanns, one of the greatest
weavers of Antwerp. The realistically drawn yet richly decorative flowers show the
influence of the school of flower painters of which Jan Brueghel was the most
famous. The landscape in the
Adoration
and the
Flight into Egypt
are rendered
with exquisite delicacy. The effect of the panels in such light, fresh, almost pastel
colors against the black ground is a daring and striking decorative experiment.
Another rendering of the same cartoon is in the Kunstgewerbe Museum, Berlin.

[58]

FOOTNOTES:

[1]

Schmitz, Bild-Teppiche
, p. 186.

[2]

Lindner, Der Breslauer Froissart
.

[3]

Amberger Catalogue.

[4]

Thièry, Les Inscriptions des Tapisseries de Jean Van Room
, pp. 23, 24
E
.

[5]

Marquet de Vasselot, Les Emaux Limousin
, No. 8, pl. II.

[6]

Op. cit.
29, pl. X.

[7]

Op. cit.
49, pl. XVI.

[8]

Order for Payment of Philip the Good
,
April
4, 1455,
quoted in Van den Gheyn
,
Chroniques et Conquêtes
de Charlemagne
,
by le Tavernier
,
p.
11.

[9]

See Burlington Magazine
, vol. 20, pp. 247, 309.
D. T. B. Wood, Credo Tapestries.

[10]

See Barbier de Montault's inventory in Annales Archéologiques
, tome 15, pp. 232, 296.

[11]

Van Kalcken, Peintures ecclésiastiques du Moyen Age. Notes by Dr. Jan Six.

[12]

Op. cit.
p. 1.

[13]

Op. cit.
p. 3.

[14]

Op. cit.
p. 15.

[15]

Burlington Magazine
, vol. 20, p. 220.
D. T. B. Wood, Tapestries of the Seven Deadly Sins.

[16]

Catalogue of the Collection of Martin le Roy
, vol. 4.

[17]

Destrée, Tapisseries et Sculptures bruxelloises
, p. 8.

[18]

Thièry, Les Inscriptions des Tapisseries de Jean Van Room.

[19]

Bodenhauser, Gerard David
, No. 10.

[20]

Op. cit.
No. 25a.

[21]

Destrée, Hugo Van der Goes
, opp. p. 48.

[22]

Op. cit.
, opp. p. 32.

[23]

Thièry, Les Inscriptions des Tapisseries de Jean Van Room
, p. 28.

[24]

Thièry, Les Inscriptions des Tapisseries de Jean Van Room
, p. 27. Also,
Destrée and Van den Ven,
Les Tapisseries
, No. 17.

[25]
For illustration, see
Fsoulke Collection
, opp. p. 49.

[26]

Thomson, History of Tapestry
, p. 479.

[27]
For further discussion, see
Gazette des Beaux Arts
, 2me Période;
Montaiglon, Diane de Poitiers et Son
Goût dans les Arts
, t. XIX, p. 152.

[28]

La Renaissance de l'Art français
, 1921, p. 159 ff.;
E. Dimier, La Tenture de la Grande Galerie
.

[29]

Fénaille, Etat général des Tapisseries de la Manufacture des Gobelins, Période Louis XIV
, pp. 337,
341f., 344, 370.

[30]

Fénaille, Etat général des Tapisseries de la Manufacture des Gobelins, Période Louis XIV
, pp. 337.
343f., 369.

[31]

Badin, La Manufacture de la Tapisserie de Beauvais
, p. 11.

[32]

Fénaille, Etat général des Tapisseries de la Manufacture des Gobelins, Dix-huitième Siècle
, Partie
11, p. 40ff.

[33]

Badin, La Manufacture de la Tapisserie de Beauvais
, p. 64.

[34]

Badin, La Manufacture de la Tapisserie de Beauvais
, p. 75.

A LIST OF WEAVERS

The following is a list of the most prominent weavers. Such men as Sir Francis
Crane, of Mortlake, and Delorme, of Fontainebleau, have not been included
because they were only administrators. It is possible that Grenier was not a weaver,
though he may have been both weaver and contractor.

Nicolas Bataille

Paris

XIVth Century

Pasquier Grenier

Tournai

Middle of XVth Century

Pieter Van Aelst

Brussels

XVIth Century

Wilhelm Pannemaker

Brussels

XVIth Century

François Geubels

Brussels

XVIth Century

Hubert de Mecht

Brussels

XVIth Century

John Karcher

Ferrara

XVIth Century

Nicolas Karcher

Ferrara

XVIth Century

John Rost

Florence

XVIth Century

Philip de Mecht

Mortlake

XVIIth Century

Francis Poyntz

Mortlake

XVIIth Century

Francis Spierinx

Delft

XVIIth Century

John Vanderbanc

England

XVIIth Century

Catherine Van der Eynde

Brussels

XVIIth Century

Jean Raes

Brussels

XVIIth Century

Everard Leyniers

Brussels

XVIIth Century

Jacques Van der Beurcht

Brussels

XVIIth Century

Marc Comans

Paris

XVIIth Century

François de la Planche

Paris

XVIIth Century

Jean Lefébvre

Paris

XVIIth Century

Jean Jans

Paris

XVIIth Century

Gerard Laurent

Paris

XVIIth Century

Philippe Behagle

Beauvais

XVIIIth Century

Cozette

Gobelins

XVIIIth Century

Le Blond

Gobelins

XVIIIth Century

De la Tour

Gobelins

XVIIIth Century

James Neilson

Gobelins

XVIIIth Century

Jacques Van der Goten

Madrid

XVIIIth Century

Antoine Lenger

Madrid

XVIIIth Century

[59]

BIBLIOGRAPHY

All the books starred
(*)
may be consulted in the

San Francisco Public Library

There is, unfortunately, no satisfactory book in English on Tapestry and no
wholly satisfactory book for the general reader in any language. The following are
the most useful and are readily available.

*
Candee, Helen Churchill. The Tapestry Book. New York
, 1912.

A somewhat superficial and sentimental sketch of the history of tapestry, with
almost no interpretation and little indication of the relation of tapestry to the
other arts.

DeMotte, G. J. Les Tapisseries gothiques. Paris
, 1922.

When complete will contain two hundred large color plates of incomparable
beauty and fidelity. Invaluable as a source-book. Will contain probably the
majority of important examples of the period.

Guiffrey, J. J. L'Histoire de la Tapisserie. Tours
, 1886.

A narrative history, now superseded in a number of respects.

Guiffrey, J. J. L'Histoire de la Tapisserie en France
(
L'Histoire générale de la
Tapisserie
).
Paris
, 1878-85.

A compilation of all the facts available at the time, and still an important
fundamental reference work.

Guiffrey, J. J. Les Tapisseries du XIIe à la fin du XVIe Siècle. Paris, n. d.

The most detailed survey of the period, but unfortunately poorly organized.
Superbly illustrated.

*
Hunter, George Leland. Tapestries: Their Origin, History, and Renaissance. New
York
, 1912.

An unsystematic assemblage of facts, not all of which are correct, and many of
which are irrelevant.

Migeon, Gaston. Les Arts de Tissu
(
Troisième Partie
).
Paris
, 1909.

A complete and readable account of the history of tapestry, with some excellent
interpretations.

Müntz, Eugène. L'Histoire de la Tapisserie en Italie, en Allemagne, etc.
(
L'Histoire
générale de la Tapisserie
).
Paris
, 1878-85.

Similar to Guiffrey's volume in the same series.

[60]

Müntz, Eugène. La Tapisserie. Paris
, 1883.

A brief presentation of the general history, superseded at some points, but with
valuable illuminating interpretations.

Pinchart, A. L'Histoire de la Tapisserie dans les Flandres
(
L'Histoire générale de la
Tapisserie
).
Paris
, 1878-85.

Similar to the other volumes of the same series.

Schmitz, Herman. Bild-Teppiche. Berlin
, 1919.

By far the most systematic, scholarly, complete, and informing book yet published
on the subject.

*
Thomson, W. G. A History of Tapestry. New York
, 1906.

A conventional history with useful tables of marks, but limited by being illustrated
entirely with examples in England.

*
Thomson, W. G. Tapestry Weaving in England. New York
, 1914.

The fundamental reference on this aspect of the subject, with full reproduction
of documents.

In addition to the above titles, there are a great number of monographs on
various phases of the subject, many of which are excellent. For example:
Thièry,
Les
Inscriptions
des Tapisseries de Jean Van Room, Louvain
, 1907, is an able piece
of work, a model of exact scholarship. The majority of these monographs are
of interest only to the special student. Schmitz refers to the more important
of them in his foot-notes.

[61]

SUBJECT & TITLE INDEX

Every tapestry is listed by its respective catalogue number, and a star
(*)

indicates the tapestry is illustrated.

LOOMS REPRESENTED IN THE EXHIBITION

Numbers

Aubusson

62, 69, 70, 71, 72

Beauvais

*51, *52, 59, 60, 61, 66, *67

English

49

Flemish Gothic

*3 *4, *5, 7, *14, 15, 16, *17, 18, 19, 20, *21, 75, 76

Flemish Renaissance

23, 24, *25, *26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, *35, 77

Flemish, XVIIth Century

*41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 78, 79

Flemish, XVIIIth Century

47, 48, 53, 54, 55, *56

Fontainebleau

*36, *37

French Gothic

*1, *2, *8, 9, *10, 11, 12, *13

French, XVIIth Century

*38, *39, 40, 50, 58

German and Swiss Gothic

6, *22

Gobelins

57, 63, 64, 65, 68

Russian

73

Spanish

74

ALLEGORICAL, CLASSICAL, HISTORICAL,
AND MYTHOLOGICAL

America

42

Augustus and Livia, Triumph of

44

Bacchante

63

Chinese Grotesque

59

Chinese Grotesque

71

Cleopatra, Two Scenes from the History of

*39, 40

Cyrus, Two Scenes from the Life of

*26, 27

December from the "Months" of Lucas

58

Diana, Triumph of

*37

Grotesques

*36

Hercules, the History of

7

Indian Hunter, The

65

July from the "Months" of Lucas

57

Louis the Great, The Conquest of

*52

Niobides, The

*38

Priest and Cardenio Meet Dorothy, The

62

Roman de la Rose, Scenes from the

*4

Romance, Scenes from a

20

Sancho is Tossed in a Blanket

46
[62]

Scipio, Three Scenes from the Deeds of

23, 24, *25

Siege of Lille, The Operations of the

53, 54, 55, *56

Wisdom, Triumph of

76

ARMORIAL

Armorial, Aubusson, XVIIIth Century

72

Armorial, Bruges
, 1556

34

Arms of France and Navarre, The

*67

Millefleurs Armorial with Wild Men

9

Millefleurs with Shepherds and the Shield of the Rigaut Family

*10

GENRE SCENES

Au Bord Du Mer

70

Baigneuse

69

Cabriole, The

78

Card Players, The

74

Chase, The

*2

Fortune-Teller, The

68

Pastoral Scene

*13

Peasants in a Landscape

49

Peasant Scenes, Two

47, 48

Theft of the Trunk, The

66

Two Pairs of Lovers

*22

Vintage, The

*5

LANDSCAPES

Garden Scene

30

Hunting Scene

32

Millefleurs with Animals

11

Millefleurs with Animals

12

Verdure, Enghien
(?)

33

Verdure, Enghien
(?)

77

Verdure, Flanders, XVIth Century

31

Verdure, Flanders, XVIIth Century

*41

Verdure: Hermes and the Shepherd

50

Verdure with Bear Hunt

43

Verdure with Dancing Nymphs

*51

PORTRAITS

Catherine the Great

73

Louis XV

64
[63]

RELIGIOUS SUBJECTS

Annunciation, The

*1

Annunciation, the Nativity and the Announcement to the Shepherds, The

*3

Childhood of Christ, Scenes from the

79

Creed, Three Pieces from a Series Illustrating the

*14, 15, 16

Creed, Three Pieces from a Series Illustrating the

*17, 18, 19

Crucifixion, The

*35

David, The Triumph of

*21

Entombment on Millefleurs

*8

Judith Departs for the Enemy's Camp

29

Life of Christ, Scenes from the

6

Pentecost, The

28

Resurrection, The

75

Virgin and Child, The

45

STILL LIFE

Two Still-Life Pieces

60, 61

TAYLOR & TAYLOR

EDWARD DE WITT & HENRY H. TAYLOR

SAN FRANCISCO

1922

Transcriber Notes:

P.
20
. 'the minature' changed to 'the miniature'.

Footnote p.
31
. 'Chroniques et Conquêtes de Charlemaine' changed to 'Chroniques et Conquêtes Charlemagne'.

P.
60
. 'Les Incriptions' changed to 'Les Inscriptions'.

Corrected various punctuation.

End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Catalogue of the Retrospective Loan
Exhibition of European Tapestries, by Phyllis Ackerman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CATALOGUE ***

***** This file should be named 57518-h.htm or 57518-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/7/5/1/57518/

Produced by Jane Robins and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.

*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).

Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License.  You must require such a user to return or
destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.

Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.

Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate

Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.