The Project Gutenberg EBook of Hall Caine, by C. Fred Kenyon

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Hall Caine
The Man and the Novelist

Author: C. Fred Kenyon

Release Date: July 21, 2018 [EBook #57564]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HALL CAINE ***

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)

[i]

English Writers of To-day, No. 4

HALL CAINE

[ii]

[iii]

Elliott & Fry, Photographers, London.

With kindest greetings

Hall Caine

[iv]

HALL CAINE

The Man and the Novelist

BY

C. FRED KENYON.

London

GREENING & CO., LTD.

20 CECIL COURT, CHARING CROSS ROAD

1901

All rights reserved

[v]

Copyright

in

Great Britain

in the

Dominion of Canada

and in the

United States of America

November 1901

[vi]

TO

E⸺ L⸺

S⸺ M⸺

AND

H⸺ H⸺

[vii]

CONTENTS

Chap.

PAGE.

I.

Introductory

1

II.

Hall Caine’s Childhood and Youth

18

III.

1879-1884

59

IV.

“The Shadow of a Crime,” and “A Son of Hagar”

82

V.

“The Deemster”

98

VI.

Hall Caine as a Dramatist, Short-Story Writer, Poet and Critic

120

VII.

“The Bondman”

132

VIII.

“The Scapegoat”

149

IX.

“The Manxman”

170

X.

“The Christian”

188

XI.

“The Eternal City”

200

[viii]

[ix]

PREFACE

In preparing this monograph on Mr Hall Caine,
I have devoted much more attention to his earlier
life than to those years during which he has been
before the public as a novelist. The reasons for
this are obvious, the chief one being that the
early life of a famous man, with its struggles
against circumstance, and its slow, oft-impeded
progress towards success, is of much more interest
to the general reader than that part of his life
which is passed immediately under the gaze of
all interested in him.

I have to express my thanks to Miss Esther
Luffman for considerable assistance in Chapters
VII., VIII. and IX.; to Miss Brown, daughter of
the Rev. T. E. Brown, for permission to use the
letters printed on pages 115-17, 145-6, 182-3; to
Miss Pinto Leite, the literary executrix of R. D.
Blackmore, for permission to use the letters
printed on pages 90-2, 94-7, 118-19; to Miss
Harriett Jay, the literary executrix of Robert
Buchanan, for permission to use the letter printed
[x]

on pages 79-80; and to Mr A. P. Watt, the literary
executor of Wilkie Collins, for permission to use
the letters printed on pages 108-10.

These letters, all of them addressed to Mr Hall
Caine, are used with his consent.

I owe my thanks to two early friends of Mr
Hall Caine, the Rev. Wm. Pierce and Mr George
Rose, for the recollections of the boyhood of my
subject which give so much freshness and
vitality to my narrative.

In preparing this volume I have sometimes
spoken out of my personal knowledge of my
subject, and it may be that without intending it
I have appeared to commit him to my own
opinions. If this be so, let me hasten to say that
whatever the value of what I have said, it is
everywhere and entirely my own, and the last
thing I desire is to charge my own views to my
subject, especially where in any degree they
concern himself.

After I had finished my work I wished to submit
the manuscript to Mr Hall Caine for the verification
of facts, and I hoped that perhaps he would
give me the benefit of a short prefatory note
saying that these were correctly stated. But Mr
Hall Caine could not be induced to meet the latter
part of my request, and to the former part he
would only respond so far as the facts concerned
[xi]

others than himself. I now feel that this decision
was the only proper and possible one, but as
paragraphs in literary papers have said that
Mr Hall Caine has “revised” my biography of
himself, I find myself reluctantly compelled to
publish the following letter:—

“
Dear Mr Kenyon
,—I have looked over the
portion of your manuscript which you sent me,
and have made a few comparatively unimportant
changes. They concern what you say about my
friends, living and dead, and therefore I have
felt it to be my duty to set you right where I
thought you were wrong. With what you say
of myself, whether in the way of criticism or
biography, I do not feel that I have any right
to interfere, and I fear I must deny myself the
pleasure of writing the Preface which you are
good enough to request. If your view of my
life and my books is to have any value for the
public, it must stand as your own, without any
criticism or endorsement from me.

“Perhaps I feel that much of a book of this
intimate nature might be better deferred until
the subject of it is gone, but I can only thank
you for the goodwill with which you have done
what you set out to do.—Yours very truly,

“
Hall Caine
.”

[xii]

Therefore, in publishing this monograph on a
living man who is much in the light of public
opinion and still a subject for controversy, I
wish to take every responsibility for whatever
errors of judgment or taste may appear in my
work. My sources of information, with the important
exceptions indicated above, have been
public ones, and the subject of my sketch has
had nothing to do either with the origin of
my book or the way in which it has been
carried out.

C. FRED KENYON.

Ellesmere Park,
Eccles
,
September 24, 1901
.

[1]

HALL CAINE

CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTORY

The keynote of Hall Caine’s character, both
as a man and as a novelist, is sincerity, and
the deepest thing in him is love of humanity.
He is dominated by the ambition to get out
of the realm of thought all that is best and
wisest, and from his heart a stream of love
for suffering, tortured humanity is constantly
flowing. Heart and brain alike are
ever at work for the good of mankind.
“I have a real sense of joy in the thought
that I am at least in the midst of the
full stream of life, not in an eddy or backwater,”
he said to me one summer day, as
we lay among the ferns of Greeba. He
loves to feel that he is striving with the
[2]

complex forces of these impetuous days of
a new century; loves to feel that he is
being carried along by the River of Life, for
ever battling with the torrent, and always
stretching out eager hands to help those
who are weaker than himself. This, I
repeat, is the deepest thing in Hall Caine,
both as a man and as a writer, and the
critics who find other interpretations of
either know both imperfectly.

Thus it comes about that the great body
of his written work is full of a wonderful
sympathy for his fellow-creatures. Every
man’s sorrow is
his
sorrow, and every man’s
joy
his
joy. At no time of his life has he
been immersed in the study of dead-and-gone
languages; he has always been
occupied with the study of humanity—humanity
in its multifarious activities,
hopes, struggles and fears. He has gone
to the root of all things—the souls and
hearts of men and women. He is no
psychological analyst of man’s wickedness;
rather does he overlook the weakness of
man’s nature in his admiration for all the
[3]

good he finds there. “No man is as black
as he is painted,” he has told me, not once,
but often; and he does not say this because
of any inability to perceive sin where it
exists, but rather because his clear-sighted
intellect detects all the hereditary influences,
the hideous power of circumstance, and the
temptation to which men are exposed. I
can think of no English writer, past or
present, who evinces so broad and generous
a sympathy with all mankind, as does Hall
Caine. His power of sympathy has enabled
him to understand the characters of men
with whom he has come in contact, no
matter of what nationality they have been.
Englishman, Icelander, Moor, Italian,
German—all are read by him with
sympathy and with ease, because he
accepts the fact that the passions of love,
hate, sorrow and joy are the same all the
world over. In his works I do not find any
subtle analyses of character; he treats all
his men and women on broad human
principles, concerning himself with the
structural basis of their natures, and leaving
[4]

the details to take care of themselves. He
has neither the analytical sense of George
Moore, nor the extraordinary subtlety of
George Meredith; neither the passionate
pessimism of Thomas Hardy, nor the
epigrammatic cynicism of John Oliver
Hobbes. He is simple, earnest, human.
He takes no heed of the tricks by means of
which an unwholesome interest is aroused;
but his strong dramatic sense takes the
place of these, and enchains the reader’s
attention.

I am very far from saying that Hall Caine
is without fault as an imaginative writer:
he himself would be the first to deprecate
such a statement. He has the defect of his
qualities. He sees everything on a large
scale, no matter how intrinsically insignificant
it may be. So great is his absorption
in and love for humanity that he has
dulled his sense of perspective, and what
seems to the average man an ordinary,
everyday affair, is to him charged with
tragic significance. The consequence is that
he is always writing at white heat: it is a
[5]

real mental and emotional strain for anyone
to read a novel of his. He expects almost
as much from the reader as he gives him.
Again, his view of life is often very one-sided;
he sees all its tragedy, and little or
nothing of its comedy. This is particularly
noticeable in his earlier books. He takes
himself seriously, as every artist should, but
he sometimes forgets that in order to take
oneself seriously it is not necessary to shut
one’s eyes to the light and laughter that are
in the world. That Hall Caine has humour
no one who has read
The Deemster
,
The
Christian
, or
Cap’n Davy’s Honeymoon

can doubt; but his humorous instincts are
constantly kept in check, and subordinated
to the tragic interest of the plot. There is
nothing approaching “comic relief” in any
of his works, and for this reason we may be
grateful, for, structurally, his novels are
almost perfect, and to have gone out of his
way in order to introduce eccentric and
humorous characters would have been to
destroy the symmetry of his plots. No!
it is his general outlook on life which
[6]

seems at fault: all is tragedy, as black and
awe-inspiring as a thundercloud. The
white brilliant day is to him never free
from distant thunders; the sun is always
shadowed by a cloud. To quarrel with
this view of humanity would be useless,
for it is the man himself, and his work is
but an honest, sincere interpretation of his
personality.

One of the chief qualities of his work is
his dramatic sense. He uses it powerfully
and, at times, with astounding effect. In
his earlier novels (
The Shadow of a Crime

and
A Son of Hagar
) he does not employ
it so skilfully as in, say,
The Deemster
and

The Bondman
; he is so mastered by it,
and so much the slave of his own personality,
that the written result is often melodrama
pure and simple. Indeed, it is the
opinion of many critics that Mr Caine was
born a dramatist, and not a novelist, and
the late Mr Blackmore used to insist that
the success of the author of
The Manxman

would be as nothing compared with what
awaited him as a dramatist. This opinion
[7]

has been endorsed by the American public,
who were as enthusiastic over the dramatised
version of
The Christian
as they were over
the novel. But probably the dramatist in
Hall Caine has never yet expressed itself.
A dramatised version of a novel begins with
obvious limitations.

Let me say something of Mr Caine’s
method of working. In many respects it
resembles that of M. Zola. They are,
above everything, conscientious. Mr Caine
works slowly: three years elapsed between
the publication of
The Manxman
and the
publication of
The Christian
; and four
between
The Christian
and
The Eternal
City
. “For the writing of
The Eternal
City
, I have read or looked into as many
books as there are over there,” said the
novelist to me in his library, pointing to
a bookcase containing several hundred
volumes. He takes notes freely. His
writing is a process of condensation. He
verifies each statement of importance by
personal reference to the original authorities.
Nothing escapes his attention. He tries
[8]

to weld his various facts into one consistent
whole, and the result is a closely-written
logical piece of work. He seeks documentary
evidence, not from one source only,
but from all sources. It will be readily seen
that such a method of work as this involves
enormous care and patience: a single slip,
and the critics are on him, shouting that a
mere schoolboy could teach him better than
that! For Hall Caine is a born fighter—a
fighter against all the injustice and
sham of modern society; and whatever he
may attack, the critic is sure to imagine
that it is his duty to take up the cudgels on
behalf of him who is assailed. In such
closely-written, fully-packed books as Hall
Caine’s, it would be an utter impossibility
that there should be no technical mistake
of any kind; and because a few of these
crept into
The Christian
, some of the critics
thought they were justified in declaring the
whole book a mistake. On what they
knew they based their judgment of what
they did not know. It is the way of the
world.

[9]

If one estimated the amount of work done
by a writer by the number of words he
wrote each day, then Mr Hall Caine could
not be called a hard worker; for his daily
output is small. Sometimes it is represented
by a blank page. But ten hours
spent in concentrated thought can be a far
harder day’s work than four or five foolscap
sheets of writing. At the time of my last
visit to Mr Caine, he was rising at 5 a.m.,
and working steadily till 10.30 a.m. That
is to say, that when most men are beginning
their day’s labour, Mr Caine has finished
his. He gives up the best of his life to
his art. He finds that when the digestive
organs are at work he does not work so
well; so the early morning hours, both in
summer and winter, find him with pen or
book in hand. He prepares for each work
just as a student prepares for a difficult examination.
In
The Bondman
he was writing
about Iceland; so he went to Iceland and
studied at first hand what he was to describe.
In
The Scapegoat
, Morocco; so he went to
Morocco. In
The Eternal City
, Rome; so
[10]

he went to Rome. And so on, throughout
all his books, and not in their broad features
merely but in their every detail. I have seen
the MS. copy of
The Bondman
: it is written
in small, exquisitely neat handwriting, with
many alterations and erasures. On my expressing
amazement at the patience and
care with which he worked, the novelist
replied: “Oh! that is only the final copy.
For each page you see there, perhaps three
or four were written—the second better than
the first, the third better than the second,
and so on.” No one but a writer can
appreciate the amount of toil required for
such a method of working as this; but Hall
Caine sacrifices everything for the sake of
his art. He feels the power of the written
word, and the responsibility of giving to the
world that which is not of one’s best.

Apparently, before beginning work on a
new novel, Mr Caine does not deliberately
seek a plot. First of all, he becomes
absorbed in some abstract idea—an idea
that is the outcome of the times in which
we live, and the conditions under which
[11]

we work. The idea lives in his brain for
hours, days, weeks, months, and it may be
years. From this idea his characters grow
without any effort on his part. They spring
into being out of the nebulous atmosphere
in which they exist, and from his characters
comes his plot. It is generally a matter of
slow germination: the abstract idea—the
seed of the novel—lies in his brain, gathering
unto itself all the experience and thought of
the novelist’s life, and gradually it grows and
expands until it has reached a state of
cohesion and unity. This method of working
is the method of nearly all creative
minds; there are few who deliberately seize
a plot, and create their characters to fit in
with the exigencies of time, place and
circumstance. A man’s character it is that
makes the plot, not
vice versa
. It must
not be supposed from this that Hall Caine
regards the plot as quite a secondary matter;
but he works from within outwards, making
the plot develop according to the manner
in which the creatures of his brain act, feel
and think. A cut-and-dried plot is very
[12]

often the mere mechanism of an agile mind;
but there is a kind of plot which is inspired,
which has for its centre of radiation a
spiritual idea of truth and beauty. And
this is the kind of plot with which Hall
Caine has sympathy. Take
The Deemster
,
for instance. What is it but a modern
version of the Prodigal Son? The abstract
idea of repentance and self-purification after
a life of dissolute conduct. Again,
The
Bondman
is the story of Esau and Jacob,
with the sympathy of the reader being
drawn to Esau.
The Scapegoat
is the story
of Eli and his sons, a girl taking the place
of Samuel; and
The Manxman
is a modern
version of David and Uriah.

The root idea of each of these stories is
not one that depends for its interest on any
particular time or place; it is for all times
and all places. The
mise-en-scène
, the
atmosphere, the characters are but accidents—the
necessary accidents for the presentment
of the moral and spiritual drama.
The
Christian
and
The Eternal City
, it is true,
depend on their presentment for a great deal
[13]

of their interest: they are the outcome of the
strenuous and conflicting times in which we
live. But still, in these books also, the
eternal spiritual questions are clearly indicated
and clearly discernible. It seems to
me Mr Caine believes that if a novelist or
poet does not seek to elevate his fellow-creatures
by his work, there can be no
reason for his continuing to write. It cheers
and strengthens the reader to have a noble
character put before him, for he thinks to
himself, “I could be like that if I tried;” and
in many cases he does try, and the result
achieved is the greatest reward a writer can
receive. The hero must not be too good;
he must be human, faulty maybe; but still
pure and noble. Otherwise, the reader says,
“Such a character never existed. He is
utterly beyond me. Try how I might I
could never be like that” No! a noble
nature is rarely without sin, and it is the
small faults of disposition, temperament and
character which make him real and human.
In this connection I think of the noble-hearted
Dan of
The Deemster
, that tortured
[14]

soul who, though a forger and a murderer,
yet remains one of the purest and most
lovable characters in modern fiction.

Before closing this introductory chapter,
I should like to say something of Mr Caine
as he impresses one in conversation. It
has been my privilege to have met him
several times, and I have spent many unforgettable
hours in his company alone.
First of all, he is one of the very few men
I have met who impressed me, almost at the
first glance, with the conviction that he had
genius. As soon as he speaks his face
lights up, his eyes shine, and his soul is laid
bare. That is no manner of speaking: it
is the simple truth. One knows that whatever
he may say it is exactly what he feels.
There is no “smartness” in his conversation,
no epigrammatic fireworks, no talking
for mere cleverness’ sake. He speaks convincingly
because what he says he believes to
be the truth. His delivery is dramatic and
realistic. He rarely gesticulates, but when
he does it is with the discrimination of the
born actor; one feels, indeed, that the stage
[15]

has lost a man who would surely have
become one of its most notable figures. His
knowledge of men and things is both deep
and wide. Nothing escapes his observation.
He has travelled in many countries—America,
Russia, Poland, Iceland, Italy and
Morocco, and wherever he has been he has
studied, first of all, humanity, and secondly,
humanity, and yet again humanity. And so,
throughout the busy years of his life, when
he was engaged in journalism, study, novel-writing,
travelling, lecturing, he was all the
time adding to his knowledge of his fellow-creatures,
quietly observing not only the
great men of the earth with whom he came
in contact, but also the boy who brought
the newspaper in the morning, the fishermen
at their nets, and the hundred-and-one
seemingly commonplace people whom one
meets in the street day by day. Still, with
all this knowledge of humanity he is never
eager to express opinions on notable men
and women. He is silent concerning those
he dislikes for fear lest he has misjudged
them; he will not speak of his friends
[16]

because he sets so high a value on their
friendship. But on all the problems that
have come under his immediate notice, he
is willing—nay, anxious—to hear the opinion
of other people, no matter if their knowledge
be merely superficial.

Mr Caine is of average height, well-made
and erect. His brow is fine and broad, his
eyes large and luminous. His head is the
head of a poet, a thinker, a prophet. It is
suggestive of most of the portraits—ideal
and otherwise—of Shakespeare; there is
the same noble forehead, and the same large,
passionate eyes. In manner he is quiet and,
except among friends, somewhat reserved;
but when his interest is aroused he asserts
himself at once, speaking passionately and
with consummate fluency. He is, perhaps,
one of the best
raconteurs
living, and has a
vast store of personal anecdote with which
to illustrate any point which may crop up in
conversation. He has a particularly keen sense
of the humorous, and his manner of relating
a funny story is equal to that of his fellow-countryman,
the late Thomas Edward Brown.

[17]

His home life is simple and unaffected;
it is a life of plain living and high thinking.
He is the friend of every cottager round
about Greeba, and the fishermen of Peel are
his comrades. I remember an old woman
from Crosby talking of him to me three or
four years ago. “Terrible kind he is,” she
said, “and simple. Aw, but you should
have seen him makin’ hay on the curragh—laughin’
and jokin’ and all that.” And whatever
sentence she began, it always ended
with the same words, “terrible kind he is.”

[18]

CHAPTER II

HALL CAINE’S CHILDHOOD AND YOUTH

Thomas Henry Hall Caine was born in
Runcorn, Lancashire, on May 14, 1853.
Runcorn is by no means a romantic town,
and, fortunately for the future novelist, he
only spent ten days of his life within its
precincts. His father was a Manxman,
and his mother a native of Cumberland.
They were both of the people—hard-working,
poor and thrifty; but they must have
possessed some remarkable qualities of mind
and heart if we are to give any credence
to the theory of heredity, for not only has
Hall Caine made his mark upon his generation,
but his sister, Miss Lily Hall Caine,
has won a by no means unimportant place
in the theatrical world, and his brother, Mr
Ralph Hall Caine, is, within limits, a charming
[19]

writer of talent and ability. Caine is
a Celtic name; Hall, his mother’s maiden
name, is Norse, and is very commonly met
with still in Iceland. The novelist himself
has inherited the physical characteristics of
his maternal ancestors, for, like the Norsemen,
his beard and hair are red, and
although he is the reverse of a strong man,
his clearly-defined and well-developed
features indicate to some extent the physical
robustness of the Norsemen. His forefathers
were farmers and fishermen, an
old hardy family of great strength and
physical endurance.

Though born in Runcorn, and resident
whilst a very young child in Liverpool,
Hall Caine’s earliest recollections are of
the Isle of Man, of his grandmother’s
cottage “Ballavolley,” Ballaugh, in the
north of Manxland. It speaks much for
his early development that even as a little
child he loved the island which, in future
years, was to be dearer to him than any
spot on earth. “There is no place in
America, Italy, Russia, Iceland, Morocco,
[20]

or any other country I have visited, that
is quite so beautiful as my own little island
in its own little way,” he said to me only
a month or two ago. And what he thinks
to-day he has always thought.

There is a subtle, elusive charm about
the Isle of Man which is obvious to the
least observant of men, but there are few
who are able to define its particular character,
or who are able to define from what
source it is derived. Once become a lover
of that narrow stretch of land, and you are
eternally lost; its beauty, its freshness and
its fragrance will haunt you for ever, and
each year when June comes round you
will be impelled, by an irresistible desire,
to tread once more the heights of Snaefell
and Barrule, and wander again through
the glens of Sulby and the Dhoon. It
were worse than useless for me to attempt
to paint any of the beautiful scenes which
Manxland possesses, but the explanation
of its distinctive charm lies in this, that
it is an island. For not only is it an island,
but a nation—a nation with manners and
[21]

customs peculiar to itself—a nation that
is, for the most part, occupied with itself
and its own affairs. Its very aloofness
attracts. It is in the world, but not of
it; it lies apart surrounded by the ever-changing
seas, and covered by a firmament
which seems to be a part of its very
self. The dim outline of the hills of other
lands—England, Scotland, Ireland and
Wales—only emphasises this sense of remoteness.
It is only the vessels out at
sea creeping steadily along the horizon,
that act as a reminder of the existence of
other lands, and not the far-off lands themselves.
These vessels are the only disturbing
influence of the island’s peace: they
breathe forth the breath of the city, and
remind one of that which one has been
tempted almost to forget—that the world
is not all beautiful, and that sooner or later
the city will again claim us as its own.

But this island-charm was not the only
influence that was at work upon the young
child’s imagination. His grandmother,
superstitious like all good Manx people,
[22]

would tell him tales in the dusk of evening,
that banished all sleep from his eyes,
and set his fancy weaving stories of elves,
fairies, gnomes and witches. The old
woman had the folk-lore of her native
country at her finger-ends, and so attentive
a listener curled up at the fire of peat made
a good story-teller of her. The first book
he remembers reading was a huge volume
on the German Reformation, about Luther
and Melancthon, and other men who soon
became his well-loved heroes. These days
Mr Caine remembers well and the memory
is sweet and pleasant. But the time came
when it was necessary for him to go to
school, and he returned to his parents who
had settled in Liverpool. At the age of
ten he entered as a “new boy” the public
school in Hope Street, Liverpool. Among
his fellow-pupils was a William Pierce
who was afterwards to become one of the
most prominent figures in the Congregational
Ministry. I am indebted to this
gentleman for the following schoolboy reminiscences
of his companion.

[23]

“Many things served to make the entry
of Hall Caine among us noteworthy. In
the first place, he was easily distinguished
among a crowd of schoolboys by his then
bright hair—gold, turning to red—his clear,
almost girlish complexion, and his large,
luminous brown eyes. I think the almost
instantaneous conviction in the minds of the
rest of the class that morning was that
our new friend would be all the better for
a little wholesome persecution when their
duties were over, if only to take some
of the painful freshness out of him and
tone him down to our own colour. This
feeling on our part was heightened when
he was called upon to read a passage
aloud, which he did, as I clearly recall,
in a very musical voice, and with much
greater modulation than we had dared to
employ—lest we should be thought to be
giving ourselves airs! When our master
was injudicious enough to praise Hall
Caine warmly at the expense of the rest
of us, the duty of taking him in hand
became one of high moral obligation.
[24]

And though I have no recollection of
what happened, I have no doubt that,
being so different from other boys in
many respects, he did suffer some little
persecution, without being, I hope, any the
worse for the discipline.

“I think that probably, to the end of
his school experience, Caine was somewhat
scoffed at by the rougher boys;
partly, also, because he was not addicted
to settling his differences with other boys
by giving or accepting challenges to fight.
But he was not in the least a milksop.
Among the trivial remembrances of those
days, the only outstanding recollection I
have of Caine is quite characteristic of
him. At one of the terminal examinations
we were set to write a short English composition.
The report of the examiner
stated that one paper was unusual, coming
from a class of boys of our years. This
youthful production was graced by apt
poetical quotations, illustrations of the
theme set us—a unique feature in the examiner’s
experience of boys of our standard.
[25]

I remember one of our class-mates remarking
that it required some cheek to quote
poetry in old ⸺’s composition; but my
own estimate of Caine increased by this
and similar circumstances, and when I left
for one of the larger grammar schools in
the city, we were already great friends.”

It will be seen from the above that
early in life Hall Caine was schooled to
bear the unfriendly criticism and persecution
of those who were unable to understand
him. The schoolmaster mentioned
by the Reverend William Pierce was Mr
George Gill, the head of the well-known
firm of publishers of schoolbooks. From
the very first Mr Gill recognised that his
young, sensitive pupil had remarkable
powers, and that if all went well he would
one day make a name for himself. In
proof of this I should like to relate a story
in connection with the first night of
The
Christian
in London. Mr George Gill,
now an old man, was in the stalls, his
heart full of pride at the distinguished
position his quondam pupil had gained.
[26]

The theatre was packed with a fashionable
and intellectual audience. A play was about
to be produced which had taken America
by storm, and it was confidently expected
that in England also the drama would
achieve a tremendous success. Carried
away by generous pride and enthusiasm, Mr
Gill turned to those seated near him, exclaiming:
“I always knew it! I
always
knew
it! I said from the very first that the
lad had genius, and to-night I am witnessing
the proof of it.” The conduct of the
old gentleman reflected the greatest credit
on his heart and head alike, and it is a
noteworthy instance of Hall Caine’s power
of making and keeping friends.

But let me return to Mr Pierce’s reminiscences.
“During the few years that
followed,” he says, “my friendship with
Caine met with little advance. I saw him
occasionally only, and heard of his doings
but at rare intervals. His people were
attached to the large and important Baptist
Church in Myrtle Street, presided over by
Hugh Stowell Brown, himself a Manxman.
[27]

It was natural that young Caine should
find here an opening for his budding
faculties, though he never became one of
the inner circle of the workers of the
church. I used to hear of his occasional
participation in the proceedings of a literary
and debating society established at Myrtle
Street. Without aiming at it, he easily
drew attention to himself—in voice, in
manner and in mental cast he was an
exceptional youth. Meanwhile he was
‘something in the city.’”

Mr George Rose, another of his most
intimate friends at this time, writes me that
at the age of fifteen young Caine was
apprenticed to an architect. “It was in a
quiet spot,” continues Mr Rose, “somewhat
remote from the part of the town where the
activities of commerce were carried on. The
daily routine of duties was not burdensome,
and many of his hours were devoted to the
self-imposed tasks of a literary nature, in
which he delighted. Probably he dreamed,
through many a quiet hour, of success to be
gained in after years; if it were possible to
[28]

recall some of those dreams and, by putting
them together, to form the chart of a projected
journey through life, it would be found
to differ widely in many ways from the course
he was ordained to follow. Perhaps the only
points of coincidence which could be noticed
would be the constant turning towards the
Isle of Man that was never absent from any
scheme of life upon which his fancy dwelt in
youthful days.

“For those who hope to ‘make their way,’
London necessarily fills a large space in the
map of life, and thither Hall Caine’s thoughts
often turned. Then there were quiet joys in
Lakeland to tempt the wanderer; but the
little Man Island was the home to which
return was to be made at last, and which
was to have its scenes brightened by
any glory that could be won in the outer
world.

“Hall Caine was endowed by Nature with
some graceful qualities which would have
made him popular in whatever walk of life
he chose to follow. Before it was known
outside the circle of his friends that he
[29]

possessed such remarkable qualities of mind
he had already shown his power to hold the
attention of audiences, and was well known
and greatly esteemed in the wide district
occupied by the southern portion of Liverpool.
It was customary at that time to
arrange ‘Readings’ for the amusement of
the people. These entertainments were
given by societies connected with places of
worship, and were intended to have an
educating and refining effect on the people
who attended them. Hall Caine when very
young was in great request at gatherings of
that kind, and his presence on any platform
was enthusiastically welcomed. He was
of pleasing appearance, confident in his
manner, and his countenance gave the
impression that his disposition was genial.
People were always happy to make his
acquaintance, and when he began to speak,
whether expressing his own thoughts or
reciting some piece of poetry, the clear tone
of his voice, the perfect enunciation of his
words, his intense earnestness and effective
dramatic style enabled him to hold the
[30]

attention of an audience from his first word
so long as he chose to address them. His
taste lay in the selection of serious pieces;
sometimes they were even a little beyond the
comprehension of his hearers. He had given
much attention to the study of the works
of the Lake school of poets, and to those of
the best writers of the eighteenth century.
With these as models, he had formed for
himself an ideal of perfection in language
that, even in the excitement of speaking in
public, he never lost sight of; and this,
combined with his natural fluency of speech,
raised his efforts to the level of oratory. The
extent and variety of his reading tended to
give a peculiar quaintness to some of his
forms of expression. He sometimes introduced
words and phrases borrowed from old
authors, forgetting that they were no longer
in common use. At other times the sense
in which he used a word was different from
that in which his hearers understood it. In
connection with his work in the society of
Myrtle Street Chapel he undertook to read a
poem upon which he was then engaged; it
[31]

was a romantic composition in blank verse.
The subject was the return of a hero to his
desolated native land, in defence of which he
had been long absent on a distant journey.
Although the poem was of considerable
length it contained few characters and
incidents, but its lines embodied Hall Caine’s
ideal of a golden age. When he first turned
his thoughts to literature as a profession his
inclination would have led him to express his
ideas in the form of poetry; in this particular
his mind gradually changed. Next to poetry
his desire was to become a journalist. During
his holiday visits to the Isle of Man he found
opportunities of contributing to the island
newspapers, and soon his articles were so
highly valued that his editor accepted everything
that came from his pen. One little
peculiarity in those articles was the source of
much amusement to his friends in Liverpool.
It was the frequent repetition of a pet phrase,
‘these three small islands,’ by which he
meant Great Britain, Ireland and the Isle of
Man. If he had then been called upon to
name them in the order of their importance
[32]

he would undoubtedly have given the first
place to Manxland.”

In connection with these articles mentioned
by Mr Rose, I may say that they
were written when their author was sixteen
years of age. It has been my privilege to
read many of them. They are noticeable
for close reasoning and exceptionally wide
reading for one so young. They were
written in favour of the maintenance of
Manx political institutions which, at that
time, were threatened with annihilation.
They are vehement but reasonable, and in
no place does their author overstep the
bounds of common-sense.

Again I quote Mr Rose. “One of Hall
Caine’s favourite plans was an intention
to write a drama. He had read that in
some part of Germany there was a law
by virtue of which an inquiry was made
immediately after a man’s death into the
extent of his possessions; and when it was
found that he had evaded payment of any
portion of the taxes to which a man of his
means was liable, the whole of his property
[33]

was forfeited to the State. The plot of
Hall Caine’s intended drama was to be
founded upon a tragic result of this custom.
The principal idea of the story was that a
wealthy merchant having entrusted to his
confidential agent the duty of making the
statements required by the law, the agent
systematically falsified them, in order that on
the death of the principal the agent might
become an informer and bring about the
forfeiture of the estate. The motive was
that the daughter of the merchant, being
rendered penniless, might be driven to
accept the informer’s proposal of marriage.

“Such was the crude outline of the plot;
but it was altered almost every day. He
often talked about this project, but never
spoke about the words of the play. It was
the machinery of the play that he was concerned
about, the number of the scenes and
their order of succession, with other points
of stage management. He wrote so easily
that he felt no anxiety about his ability to
accomplish the literary part of the design;
but he believed that in a dramatic composition,
[34]

however original and lofty the
thoughts it contained, however perfect the
expression of them, all would be wasted
unless they were woven around a framework
of method exactly adapted to meet the
conditions of stage representation.

“Although the idea of writing such a
play was never carried into effect, it served
to show what direction Hall Caine’s
thoughts were taking. Many of his contributions
to Liverpool newspapers took the
form of dramatic criticism. His mind was
greatly influenced by the successes achieved
by Henry Irving. It will be remembered
that for some considerable time before Mr
Irving appeared in the character of Hamlet,
his intention to do so was known, and the
degree in which his representation of the
part would differ from that of other actors
was the subject of lively discussion. Hall
Caine interested himself deeply in the
matter, and contributed many brilliant
articles on the subject to various papers.
He gave a great deal of attention to the
study of Shakespeare’s writings, and his
[35]

conversation on the subject was very interesting
because of the light he was able
to throw on the meaning of passages the
importance of which would be overlooked
by an ordinary reader. I heard him speak
at a meeting of a literary society over
which he presided for some time and which
had enrolled many able men amongst its
members. The subject was a reading of
scenes from Shakespeare’s
Julius Cæsar
.
Some remarks had been made about the
conversation of the conspirators which takes
place as they stand in the garden of Brutus’s
house. In talking together they allude to
the dawn which they saw or pretended to
see. Hall Caine insisted that the words
were full of hidden meaning if properly
emphasised by appropriate gesture. He
quoted the speech of Casca in Act II.,
Scene I. ‘Here as I point my sword,
the sun arises; … some two months hence,
up higher towards the north, he first presents
his fire,’ and said it was necessary for
the actor to bring out the true significance
of the lines by pointing with his sword,
[36]

first to the house of Cæsar, and then to that
of Brutus, indicating the transfer of power
to the latter which the conspirator desired
to effect.”

This study of Shakespeare—a study close,
intimate and unremitting—cannot be insisted
on too strongly. Shakespeare and
the Bible have from his earliest years been
his chief mental food: his thoughts are
coloured by the imagery of the Prophets,
and his language has gained in terseness,
vigour and force from the greatest poet who
has ever lived.

I now resume Mr Pierce’s reminiscences.
“He was becoming” (in about the year
1870, when Hall Caine was seventeen years
of age) “more and more absorbed in literary
studies, and quite early began to make
acquaintance with the dramatists—not content,
as most of us were, with reading the
plays of Shakespeare only among the
Elizabethans, but reading extensively and
thoughtfully the writings of all the most
notable playwrights of that great age. I
was early struck by his references to the
[37]

Jew of Malta
. He would quote Ben
Jonson’s
Volpone
, or from a play by
Massinger, or Beaumont and Fletcher, or
Webster, in a way which showed considerable
familiarity with the literature of
the time. These facts have more significance
for me now than then, as I see in them
the growth of his mind, and the evidence
of an original impulse towards literary
studies. It is difficult to explain how this
solitary youth, amidst surroundings by no
means suggestive of such studies, should
have chosen this way of spending his hours
of leisure; and by what instinct, in those
early days when university extension lectures
were yet unknown, before English literature
as an educational subject was popularised,
and before the publication of our modern
guides and manuals for the help of the
blundering tyro, Caine seized at once the
salient points of the great subject, divining
the place and importance of names not known
to the merely well-informed multitude, least
of all to youths who had not long left
school.

[38]

“It was during this period that I began
to renew my intimacy with Caine. It was
probably due to some kindness on his part.
He has a genius for friendship, and is
capable of taking immeasurable pains in
the service of those to whom he is attached;
and he is, or perhaps I should say he was,
one of the best and most faithful letter-writers
I have ever known. I had left
business and was studying Art and Literature
in an easy, unmethodical, Bohemian fashion,
drawing from the antique during the day,
and exploring the poets and essayists in
the evening, with desultory violin studies
and excursions into Geology and
Genesis

by way of diversion and variety. Caine
was interested in all these things; but he
never aspired to sing or play, and made fun
of his own drawings, though I believe he
was really a skilful architectural draughtsman.
He did one thing, one thing only, and he
did it better than anyone else.

“Perhaps my knowledge of his mind
during these early years is due to the fact
that I left Liverpool about the close of 1871
[39]

for Carnarvon to take up a press appointment.
Caine had no difficulty in communicating
his thoughts in writing. I must have
written him some account of my whereabouts,
or have sent him copies of the newspaper
on which I was engaged, or probably have
done both things. And so a correspondence,
to me most notable, began. Caine was
principally responsible for its maintenance;
he was the more regular and conscientious
writer. His letters were often extraordinary
with regard to their length, and more often
extraordinary with regard to their contents.
But in the most rapid and familiar of them
there is a sense of style. He is full of
qualifying clauses, inversions, interpolated
interrogations, and exclamations, but the
grammatical and logical close of each
sentence is successfully reached. Still,
though often somewhat formidable in length,
and graced by literary ingenuities at times,
they are letters, nevertheless, and not essays.
There is no consciousness that a word in
any one of them is ever to be seen by a third
person. That they are less casual and
[40]

simple in style than most letters addressed
to familiar friends must be set down to the
character of the writer. I remember a
somewhat matter-of-fact schoolfellow, himself
innocent enough of any refinement of
speech or culture of mind, expressing his
detestation of Caine because when you met
him on the most ordinary occasions and
conversed on the most trifling subjects, ‘he
always spoke like a book.’ However, it
was natural to Caine to dress his casual
thoughts in refined and graceful language.
His thoughts are grave and gay in his
letters, and sometimes, indeed, he writes for
the sake of writing; he likes playing with
words and sentences. He is naturally communicative—tells
his thoughts, and gossips
about himself pleasantly. He has been
gracing a friend’s essay on ‘War’ with a
couple of stanzas. Not that he is a peace-at-any-price
man; the stanzas, though not
at all sanguinary, are highly patriotic. He
has even delivered a Temperance lecture,
and not without much appreciation on the
part of the ancients who heard him; but he
[41]

positively declines to pursue Fame on the
Temperance platform. Then after a little
pleasantry he hopes I am laughing, as he
himself does at his own jokes; in the first
place, for reasons of prudence—since none
other might laugh save himself, and in the
second place, because it is unchristianlike
to ask another to do what you refuse to
do yourself. One item startles us. He has
just finished a play in blank verse, and
inquires if I should like to peruse it.

“In another letter he hopes the correspondence
will continue, since he knows it
would tend ‘towards the establishment in our
minds of fixed principles, upon matters the
most important to man’s welfare here, as
well as in that existence of his which (we
believe) is to come.’ It would also
strengthen our friendship, though upon the
subject generally he has some sad things
to say—as that at the time he is writing
there lived not the man with whom he had
‘true unity of feeling.’ As the letter
proceeds we see that he is entering the
melancholy period of life when sad and
[42]

depressed spirits are a very frequent distemper
with young men who are thoughtful
and live much alone. In such a mood Caine
had the day before written verses some
of which he quotes, and a few lines of which
I further quote.

“‘What wonder, if in height of grief

The fading flower, the falling leaf

Make truer solace to the mind,

Than Nature’s richest, gladdest bloom

In harvest waving to the wind.

“‘What wonder if it grant relief

To hearts o’erta’en, o’erdone by grief,

To see the sun and sky unblest

Put on a dark and murky vest!

To see the moon in shadows pale

Fade out before the coming gale!’

“It is a not uncommon mood with young
men, and its not unnatural cure is for the
young man to fall deeply in love. But
there seemed no likelihood of any such
happiness befalling young Caine, so far as
any of his friends knew. He seemed to
avoid the possibility of such a contingency.
His friendships, so far as I knew, were
exclusively with young men, though there
[43]

was nothing of the misogynist in him. In
the letter from which the above quotations
are taken, he again refers to grave spiritual
questions—what is life? he asks, and
naturally gives vague answers and speculations.
He quotes, in connection with the
hypothesis that evil is a quality of our
more material part, the lines:—

“‘I am the wave of life

Stained with my margin’s dust.’

He excuses himself for not sending the
play in blank verse as he has only one
draft copy, and its condition is such that
he is convinced I could not read it. In
some letters now lost he had referred to
a Christmas poem he is to write, but
although now it is the first day of
December, it is not begun. ‘It is to be
framed from an old plot of one of the
Greek Tragedians,’ and is to be ‘written
in the same vein as Christabel.’ At the
close of this letter he mentions that if I
cared to see newspaper articles of general
interest written by him, I could have them
in volumes.

[44]

“A later letter is written in rhymed
couplets. After some four hundred lines
in verse, it finishes with a few lines in
prose. The poem referred to in previous
letters is to be called
Geraldine
, but cannot
be sent as ‘a bookseller fellow needs to
see it.’ He had hoped to raise the character
of this rhymed effusion by adding some
verses on the Days of Minstrelsy, but after
keeping it six days he must dispatch it
without. He is to deliver a lecture on

Hamlet
the following month, and the subject
is absorbing all his thoughts.

“Soon after this—about the close of 1873
or the beginning of the following year—I
was interested to find Caine was proposing
to publish a small monthly magazine,
and he was good enough to ask me for
a contribution. There were, evidently,
difficulties in the way of the venture, small
as it was. But he put all his usual energy
into the enterprise and communicated his
enthusiasm to his friends, and in due course
the first number of
Stray Leaves
appeared,
with a lithographic portrait of Henry Irving
[45]

as a frontispiece. It had some modest
literary pretensions, though of no very distinctive
character, and therefore after prolonged
expectation it was not quite surprising
to read: ‘
Stray Leaves
has made no
second appearance. It never will.’ But,
meanwhile, he has another and larger
magazine in hand, and this time, with a
view of avoiding some of the difficulties
which had beset him on his earlier venture,
in announcing
The Rambler Magazine
he
prints on the official paper ‘T. H. H.
Caine, Proprietor.’ I was obliged to take
an interest in the new magazine—Caine
was so buoyantly sanguine of its success.
I therefore sent him a poem, and next,
and more to the purpose, arranged with
a local bookseller to exhibit the poster and
sell copies. I also got a favourable review
of the first number inserted in the newspaper
with which I was connected; and
this ought to sell ‘at least three dozen
copies,’ he writes. The parcel for our
town got unaccountably delayed, but every
copy was eventually distributed. Caine had
[46]

been staying at or near Keswick, and
writes his astonishment that the poet Close
(a well-known character in those parts)
had sold two hundred copies, and was
asking for a further hundred. But the
letter containing this information has a
much more exciting piece of news. He
had to-day replied to an inquiry from ‘a
man of means (heaps of money)’ concerning
‘the establishment of a critical
newspaper in Liverpool.’ He is willing to
conduct such a journal for three months
if a sufficient guarantee fund is provided,
and already seeing the possible success of
this fresh candidate for Fame, says, if the
project advances, I must return to Liverpool
to take a place on his staff.

“There was being published in Liverpool
at this time a small weekly journal called

The Town Crier
, satirising and criticising
with more or less good humour the affairs
of the town. It is not necessary to enter
upon any details as to the establishment of
this paper, but I was interested in its existence
because Caine had some sort of connection
[47]

with it. The editor and general
factotum was our old schoolfellow William
Tirebuck, while Caine wrote for it, especially
dramatic notices and reviews, and acted as
adviser generally, if I remember rightly.
We were all surely young enough to be
engaged in such work, but Tirebuck was
our junior by a couple of years. I remember
visiting Liverpool about this time and calling
at the small editorial sanctum out of South
Castle Street. I had already written a little
for
The Town Crier
, and was much interested
in its career. It was a great time.
Everybody was busy preparing for the next
day’s issue. The printer’s boy had brought
a bundle of galley proofs and was told he
must not return without the rest of the copy.
There were confidential conferences over
correspondence, some of it purporting to
divulge certain pieces of municipal jobbery;
final consideration of the article which sailed
very near the wind in denouncing a town
scandal, in which a man of much wealth and
no principle was concerned. Everyone
was in the highest spirits. Caine had come
[48]

down in his dinner hour, or had special
leave, and when we had settled the affairs
of
The Town Crier
and of the town
generally, we went off to a meal, not at
all of an elaborate character, I admit, but
graced by overflowing good-fellowship and
light-hearted wit.

“Meanwhile, the fortunes of
The Rambler
,
notwithstanding that all the copies of the
first number were distributed and in some
cases further copies called for, were not in
a flourishing way. The printer’s bill was a
very matter-of-fact document. No amount
of generous self-denying enthusiasm could
alter its figures. Even reviews favourable
and unfavourable, and there was a liberal
number of both kinds, did not solve the
problem. Caine rightly claimed that the
widespread notice taken of
The Rambler

was some proof of its worth. One journal
gave prominent place to the opinion that
‘the contents of
The Rambler
are bosh—pure,
unmitigated bosh,’ the style of the
criticism at least indicating the character of
the journal. But the ‘bosh’ was not so
[49]

unmitigated that it could be disregarded.
Nevertheless, the financial results were not
encouraging. He tried, in answer to a
sympathetic inquiry on my part, to let me
know how matters stood. He says, ‘The
last issue paid (cannot pay more than) (or,
rather, didn’t
pay
at all, or paid on the wrong
side) fifty per cent.’ Then feeling that this
was not exactly an enlightening statement,
he proceeds—‘I am really such a fool at
business affairs and so very little acquainted
with the technicalities of trade as surely to
have made a mess of the last explanation.’
The substance of the explanation was that
they had reckoned on a loss, and had received
half of what they had calculated their
proceeds might be, making the real loss
proportionately greater. He does not contemplate
giving up; is ‘only disposed to

delay
the issue of No. 2 in the hope of
balancing affairs.’ However, he never
troubled any of his friends about the
financial difficulties; whatever the losses may
have been, he squared them without the aid
of his fellow-contributors. The second
[50]

number did appear, somewhat belated, but
that was the end of Caine’s amateur efforts
at floating a magazine.

“When I returned to Liverpool in the
beginning of 1875, to prepare myself for
college, I had an opportunity of renewing
my personal intercourse with Caine. It was
a very pleasant time to me. We had one or
two congenial friends and with them or ourselves
alone had a long succession of talks
upon the subjects that interested us. I
think he generally determined the course of
our conversation. Earlier in life he had
been greatly under the sway of Coleridge.
By this time his tastes had widened and
were more varied. He had much to say
about Wordsworth. I recall an evening
when he was full of the
Ode to Immortality
,
which he quoted at great length—as he
could most things he admired—and discussed
with great insight and power. But
the range of subjects we ventured upon was
wide and varied enough to suit all tastes and
dispositions. I can by no means recall them
all, but I remember such subjects as the
[51]

writings of Jean Paul, the Aristotelian unities
and the modern drama, the nature of
Hamlet’s madness, and Shakespearian subjects
generally. Curiously enough, we had
little to say concerning Tennyson—
In
Memoriam
was the only poem I remember
discussing—and even less in regard to
Browning, though I had myself a vague
conviction that Browning was the greater
poet of the two. But we frequently conversed
about Rossetti, Swinburne and
William Morris. On many evenings when
we felt little inclined for literary talks we
enjoyed lighter chat and gossip; while,
occasionally, we turned to graver subjects
and speculated on eternal things with the
calmness and confidence which are part of
youth’s prerogative. And though we were
a kind of peripatetic academy, we were
happy enough, and seasoned our more
serious mental fare with a liberal share of
laughter and fun.

“Apart from the little circle of friends
with whom he thus associated—and I recall
him most easily during the midsummer
[52]

months when I spent most of my long vacation
at home—I think he spent a solitary
life. He was little understood. The
majority of the people he met being very
dull persons, they could note only his outward
peculiarities, and I have no doubt most
of them set him down as an eccentric young
man. They were struck with his musical
voice, his copious diction, his literary style
of speech, which I think they generally set
down as an affectation. Yet he could, when
he chose, make himself interesting to very
commonplace people. He knew so many
things. He found
them
interesting in ways
they themselves little suspected. Then
beside being a remarkable talker he was
never disposed to turn the conversation into
a monologue. He was a most sympathetic
listener.

“For the sake of his health he often spent
his week-ends at New Brighton, at the
mouth of the Mersey, and for some time
had permanent lodgings there. We were
all compelled to visit him, for he was ever
the most hospitable of friends, and thought
[53]

no trouble too great to bestow on the
comfort of those who were his guests. I
was his guest overnight, and specially recall
his appearance at that time. He had grown
as tall as he is now, and was of spare habit.
He wore his hair, which had lost its early
golden tinge, slightly longer than is usual.
He had a striking face—pale and clean-shaven,
a refined expression, ample forehead,
and large, bright, intelligent eyes. For a
student he walked very erect, wore a close-fitting
and fairly long frock-coat, many-buttoned
and double-breasted, and was very
square-shouldered. He was a man easily
distinguished in a crowd.

“In my early days at college I had one
special letter from Caine, and with some
reference to it my own particular reminiscences
of my eminent friend may come to a
close. His younger brother John, a very
fine young fellow, was at the time dangerously
ill. Very soon after he died of consumptive
disease. Hall Caine was subject to
fits of depression, and this event did not
tend to relieve his thoughts. Yet I think
[54]

the sad event left him with more hope and
fortitude. Trial and difficulty always
aroused the best in him. His letter, however,
is very pathetic and interesting. I
gather that I must have written, in reply to
an earlier letter, that the stronger the natural
affection, the greater the tendency to
magnify the danger. He replies that it
would not be easy to exaggerate the gravity
of his brother’s case, though they are not
without hope that rest and nourishing food
may do something to alleviate the lung
disease. The letter is full of frank disclosures
of his thought and feeling. He is
preparing himself ‘for the utmost length and
disaster.’ But his sad philosophy can only
say: ‘The best that can leave us is Life;
the worst that can come is Death; of which
we may remember that if it be now, it is not
to come; if it be not to come, then it is now—the
readiness is all.’ My interpretation of
his gloomy outlook as being not reality but
the creation of his own thought, he examines
and analyses, yet without comfort to himself.
He feels how small is our power to choose
[55]

our own thoughts, ‘how entirely men are

born
to convictions.’ He moralises over
a photograph of myself which I had sent
him, and sees all my future in my face.
And so with himself. It is not because
he has
chosen
to think it so, that to him—

“‘The world is wild, and rough, and steep, and ribbed,

And circle-bound with shades of misery.’

At the same time he declines Jean Paul’s
advice to treat it all like a dream. When
we awake the dream-sorrow vanishes. ‘I
tremble when I reflect upon the horrible
sceptic I should become, say rather the
demon I should be, if believing in a Godhead
I should believe also the world to be
but a dream.’ The sight of the young life
leaving behind all the happy activities of
existence here, and entering upon a succession
of weary days ‘doomed to peer through
the darkness for the light of the fairer
morning’ touches him acutely; but it leads
him to say that for his own part he means to
face life bravely. Once, indeed, in a time of
spiritual prostration ‘Actual Death’ seemed
[56]

‘less terrible than its shadow,’ but ‘I have
grown out of the weakness of that period, and
now intend, not proudly, but resolutely, to
meet life and go through with it.’ And he
has doubtless kept to the resolution, and
through it achieved his present position.”

It will be seen from the foregoing that
whilst in Liverpool Hall Caine’s life was an
exceedingly busy one. With characteristic
energy he threw himself heart and soul into
any work he undertook, and already a burning
ambition was urging him on to strain
every nerve to gain his goal. His mind
developed quickly: long nights of study and
deep thought, some struggles of a material
kind, and at least one tragic event made a
man of him long before his time. Not that he
was ever anything of a recluse: he was merely
absorbed in his work, and the thoughts of
the great minds which he studied matured
his judgment, and he crammed a lifetime of
experience into a few years. His connection
with Rossetti was to ripen many qualities
of his mind, and strengthen his character.

[57]

The following letters of Ruskin were addressed
to Caine a year or two before the
future novelist left Liverpool, and when he
was in the midst of the office, journalistic
and lecturing work described by Mr Pierce
and Mr Rose. The first is dated November
8, 1878, and was written in reply to an
invitation of Mr Caine to deliver an address
in Liverpool.

“
My Dear Sir
,—I have, of course, the deepest
interest in your work—and
for that reason
must keep
wholly out of it.

“I should drive myself mad again in a week if I
thought of such things.—I am doing botany and geology—and
you, who are able for it, must fight with rogues
and fools. I will be no more plagued by them.—Ever
truly yours,

“
J. Ruskin
.

“I wrote first page on reading your printed report
before reading your letter.

“
My Dear Sir
,—I am entirely hopeless of any good
whatever against these devilish modern powers and
passions—my words choke me if I try to speak.

“I know nothing of Liverpool—and what can I say
there—but that it has first to look after its poor—and
the churches will take care of themselves.

“Ever truly yours.”

The second letter, dated 27th December
1879, reads:—

[58]

“
My Dear Sir
,—A bad fit of weariness,—not to say
worse—kept me from fulfilling my promise. The paper
you were good enough to send me is safe, but I fear left
at Herne Hill—it can be got at if you require it.

“I am sincerely glad and grateful for all you tell me of
your proposed work.—Most truly yours,

“
J. Ruskin
.”

Ruskin, however, was not the only famous
writer who had his eye on the young man
working away in Liverpool. Already
Matthew Arnold and Lord Houghton had
made friendly and encouraging advances—the
former writing him a long letter of
praise concerning an essay of Caine’s
which had come into his hands, and the
latter asking Henry Bright (the H. A. B. of
Hawthorne) to arrange an interview between
himself and the rising young

littérateur
. These marks of distinct encouragement
from eminent and well-loved
men were a source of keen pleasure to Hall
Caine; they not only gave him confidence
in his own powers, amid many discouraging
circumstances, but made him feel that his
strenuous labour was not being done in vain.

[59]

CHAPTER III

1879-1884

In the year 1878 an event of the greatest
importance to Hall Caine’s future life
happened; he became acquainted with the
poems of Dante Gabriel Rossetti. Little
did the eager young student of literature
imagine, when he first heard the name of
one of the most subtle and alluring poets
of the last century, that his life would one
day be joined with his. Rossetti was to
exercise an influence on his future the
full extent of which cannot even now be
estimated. In his fascinating
Recollections
of Rossetti
Mr Caine tells, with a certain
amount of detail, the story of his friendship
with the poet. The story is a deeply interesting
one, and in some respects without
precedent in Literature. Their friendship
[60]

was an honourable affair to both of them—more
especially to the younger man, who
not only gave up many months of his early
youth when, maybe, he would have preferred
to have been battling with a still
unconquered world, but also sacrificed much
of his peace of mind in his endeavour to
make happy the last hours of Rossetti’s
troubled life. On the other hand, what he
lost in health of body and mind, he gained
in intellectual stimulus; for Rossetti had a
mind richly stored with poetic and artistic
lore, and the strangely beautiful dreams and
phantasmagoria that flitted through his
brain undoubtedly did a great deal towards
stirring up the imagination of the future
novelist, and inciting him to further achievement.
As I think of the poet and his
enthusiast talking for many hours together
in Chelsea; as I think of them afterwards
in their loneliness in the Vale of St John;
and as I ponder over those last tragic
days together at Birchington, I see many
examples of sacrifice on the part of Hall
Caine, and many, many bitter hours when
[61]

the poet, forced by what seemed almost
a power outside himself, gave way to the
accursed drug which killed him. A weak,
febrile mind would have given way under
the strain of constant companionship with
Rossetti during the last months of his life;
but Hall Caine had more than this to weigh
down his vigorous young intellect. For
several weeks he had the sole responsibility
of the poet’s life on his shoulders, and it
even became necessary for him to regulate
the doses of chloral which was Life and
Death to the diseased man with whom he
lived; and many were the extremities to
which he was put in order to hide the fatal drug
from his friend. The story of their friendship,
quite apart from its own intrinsic interest, is
essential to any honest attempt to understand
the development of the novelist’s mind.

It was in the early spring of 1879 that
Rossetti wrote his first letter to Hall Caine.
It reads as follows:—

“
16 Cheyne Walk, Chelsea
,

“
29th July 1879
.

“
Dear Mr Caine
,—I am much struck by
[62]

the generous enthusiasm displayed in your lecture, and
by the ability with which it is written. Your estimate
of the impulses influencing my poetry is such as I should
wish it to suggest, and this suggestion, I believe, it will
have always for a true-hearted nature. You say that
you are grateful to me: my response is, that I am grateful
to you: for you have spoken out heartily and unfalteringly
for the work you love.

“I daresay you sometimes come to London. I
should be very glad to know you, and would ask you,
if you thought of calling, to give me a day’s notice when
to expect you, as I am not always able to see visitors
without appointment. The afternoon about 5 might
suit me, or else the evening about 9.30 p.m.—With
all best wishes, Yours sincerely,

“
D. G. Rossetti
.

“
T. H. Caine
, Esq.”

This was sent in reply to a note of Hall
Caine’s covering a copy of a lecture he
had twice or thrice delivered in Liverpool,
on Rossetti’s poetry. The lecture was subsequently
printed in a magazine, and some
little time after its publication he conceived
the idea of sending a copy to the poet.
This letter was the first of nearly two
hundred which followed in quick succession.
Rossetti’s generous nature immediately recognised
the enthusiasm of his admirer, and
Hall Caine writes in his
Recollections of
[63]

Rossetti
: “It is hardly necessary to say
that I was … delighted with the warmth
of the reception accorded to my essay, and
with the revelation the letters appeared to
contain of a sincere and unselfish nature.”
Mr Caine was naturally somewhat chary
of seeming to seek favour from the distinguished
poet, and his purpose of bringing
to Rossetti’s knowledge the contents of his
essay being served, he withdrew from the
correspondence and “there ensued an
interval in which I did not write to him.”
Rossetti then wrote:—

“
My Dear Caine
,—Let me assure you at once that
correspondence with yourself is one of my best pleasures,
and that you cannot write too much or too often for

me
; though after what you have told me as to the apportioning
of your time, I should be unwilling to encroach
unduly upon it.”

This at once put at rest all doubts that
troubled Mr Caine, and a long, ardent
correspondence ensued.

During the time that Hall Caine was
engaged in writing to Rossetti, his life was
an exceedingly busy one, and full of many
[64]

and varied interests. As we have seen,
he was engaged all day in office work—uncongenial,
one can imagine, and perhaps
even irksome. At night—sometimes
all

night—he worked at his books, reading and
writing, for he had a good deal to do in
order to catch up with others who had
enjoyed better opportunities. His life was
far from unhappy, in spite of the checked
ambition which was beginning to dominate
him. He had friends of like mind and tastes
with his own, and his work in connection
with the Liverpool Notes and Queries
Shakespearian Society brought him in contact
with many interesting people. Still,
he was longing to be away—longing to
test his strength with the strength of the
world, and desiring nothing better than to
work out his destiny. The story of how
he threw off the shackles of conventional
life in Liverpool and escaped to the
mountains of Cumberland is by no means
uncharacteristic, and I may perhaps be
pardoned if I tell it here pretty much as
Mr Caine himself related it to me.

[65]

In 1881 his health seemed on the point
of breaking down. He mentioned the fact
to his employer, with whom, by now, he
was on terms of friendship. Perhaps
business was pressing, perhaps there were
good and sufficient reasons of some other kind,
but at all events little attention was taken,
and for a week or two Mr Caine worked on
uncomplainingly. But a time came when
he felt that if he wished to preserve his
health he must have an immediate holiday,
so, giving up his keys to his fellow clerk,
he walked out of the office and never
returned, in spite of the affectionate and
solicitous letters which followed him. But
he had had more than enough of office
life, and had made up his mind to devote
his energies to Literature. At this time he
possessed a sum of about thirty pounds, and
was delivering a course of twenty-four
lectures for the Liverpool Corporation.
For each lecture he received two or three
guineas, but that was all that stood between
him and the bottom of the purse. But in
his heart of hearts he knew that Literature
[66]

was the only profession in the world for him,
and that the sooner he began to devote his
life to it the better. At this date, Hall Caine
had twice stayed with Rossetti at his house
in Chelsea. He had found the poet cheerful
and in good health, but the mental atmosphere
in which he lived was almost morbid.
“The gloom, the mediæval furniture, the
brass censers, sacramental cups, lamps and
crucifixes conspired, I thought, to make the
atmosphere of a dwelling-house heavy and
unwholesome.” But he felt that by personal
contact with the man he had been brought
much nearer to him in spirit, and there
existed between them an affectionate regard
such as father and son might have for each
other. The younger man was soon to be
called upon to make a sacrifice on behalf of
his friend, and with that “genius for friendship”
of which we have already heard, the
sacrifice was made eagerly enough. Hall
Caine had not been settled long at the Vale
of St John before Rossetti wrote saying that
he too was ill—bodily and mentally, and that
he must soon leave London. If only he
[67]

could get away to the country, he was sure
he would be better. “Supposing,” he
wrote, “I were to ask you to come to town
in a fortnight’s time from now—I returning
with you for a while into the country—would
that be feasible to you?” For a
few days he remained undecided, but at
length wrote to the Vale of St John asking
Mr Caine to come to him. Mr Caine went,
but on arriving at Rossetti’s house found the
poet unwilling to move. A great change
had now taken place. Rossetti had lost
his cheerfulness, his fund of good spirits.
He was ill, and more than ever a slave to
chloral. His mind was unsettled and
gloomy, and he suffered from the
hallucination that nearly all his friends had proved
faithless. He longed to escape from
London, but yet he had not the strength of
mind to take the necessary steps. His
doctor gave his permission for a visit to
Cumberland, but still Rossetti would not go.
At last, yielding to the persuasion of Mr
Caine, strongly supported by the advice of
Rossetti’s older and more immediate friends,
[68]

Theodore Watts, Frederick Shields and
William Rossetti, his brother, who thought
the bracing mountain air of Cumberland
would work wonders, Rossetti consented to
go. And now ensued a time of anxiety for
Hall Caine. They were entirely alone in
the little house they had rented in the
mountains, save for a nurse to attend to the
wants of the sick man; and Caine had the
real responsibility of Rossetti’s life on his
shoulders. Rossetti could not sleep, so
night was turned into day and day into
night. They would sit up through the
dark hours together, with the sound of the
flooded ghyll outside, and within the tones
of Caine’s voice as he read aloud to Rossetti
to while the hours away. And as he read,
the poet would walk up and down the
oblong room, restless, nervous, and longing
to get at the chloral which was safely
locked away in a place he knew not of. The
hot, quick, anguishing thirst for chloral was
on him during these days, and when Rossetti
used to come to Hall Caine’s bedside and
beg for an extra dose, the younger man
[69]

found him simply irresistible, and often had
to give way to his friend’s earnest pleading.
There were other grave responsibilities
thrust upon him of which I cannot speak;
suffice it to say that he bore them bravely
and uncomplainingly, and came out from
his trial a more experienced and a stronger
man.

It was during these long sleepless nights
that Hall Caine first told Rossetti the outline
of the story which was afterwards to
be the framework of his first novel,
The
Shadow of a Crime
. This story, which is
dealt with in an ensuing chapter, although
it appealed to Rossetti’s imagination, did not
convince him that it would make a good
novel. It was too terrible—too unsympathetic.
He urged Caine to try his hand
at a Manx novel, and told him that it would
be no mean ambition to strive to become the
bard of Manxland. The plot was discussed
from every point of view, but as yet the
writing of it had not been commenced.
Perhaps the young student of Literature
did not yet feel quite strong enough in experience
[70]

and imagination to attempt so large
a scheme; perhaps he was too engrossed
reading Smollett, Fielding and Richardson
for his Liverpool lectures; or perhaps he
had seen that Rossetti’s criticism was a just
one, and that the story would prove cold
and inhuman. Whatever the reason, the
fact remains that he did not begin to work
on his first novel until some time afterwards
when Rossetti lay in his grave, but month
by month, week by week, it was getting a
stronger and yet stronger hold on his
imagination, until it dominated him entirely.
The familiar legend of his youth became a
part of his everyday life, a part of his very
being. It obsessed him almost entirely to
the exclusion of all other interests; but he
restrained himself day by day, until restraint
was no longer possible, and then in a fever
of impatience and enthusiasm he began to
write.

Meanwhile Rossetti was gradually becoming
worse and worse, and Caine more and
more anxious. What was to be done?
They were hundreds of miles away from
[71]

home and older and more experienced
friends, and Rossetti seemed too ill to travel.
It was a critical time for both of them.
Rossetti was by turns irritable and genial,
bad-tempered and high-spirited, full of life
and languidly indolent; but these various
moods were not reflected in his companion—he
was always anxious, always wondering
what was going to happen. The solitude,
the anxiety and the poor state of his own
health made him suffer keenly; yet even
now he confesses that he looks back with
great tenderness and gratitude to those four
weeks with Rossetti among the Cumberland
hills. At length it was decided that they
should return home, and the instant the
decision was made Rossetti’s spirits rose.
Perhaps he had already a premonition of his
nearly-approaching death, and felt more at
ease that he was to die near friends and
kindred instead of in the almost tragic silence
and loneliness of Cumberland. He returned
worse in health and spirits than he had come,
and as soon as his doctor saw him he
realised that the time had arrived when
[72]

drastic measures should be taken. Rossetti
had an attack of paralysis, and from that
time his drug was absolutely forbidden him.
The pain that ensued was intense, and he
became delirious with desire for chloral. A
few days after, however, he rallied and
became more cheerful, and it was decided
that he should stay for a time at a bungalow
at Birchington-on-Sea which had very
opportunely been placed at his service.
Thither he went with Hall Caine, his constant
friend and comforter, and there he died
shortly afterwards—literally in his young
friend’s arms, for at the last moments Caine
had put his arm about Rossetti to raise him
up, in order to relieve his apparent pain.

In attempting to gauge the kind of
influence which Rossetti exercised over
Hall Caine, it must not be overlooked that
the poet was old enough to be the younger
man’s father; indeed, both in letters and
conversation, he more than once expressed
the wish that he
was
his father. When
Caine first knew Rossetti, the latter’s health
and nerves were already on the point of
[73]

breaking down, and he was even then a
victim to the chloral-taking habit. He was
morbid and fanciful; his body diseased, and
his mind unhealthy. Caine, on the other
hand, had fair health and a vigorous, lusty
mind. What came to pass is only what a
spectator might have guessed; the older
man attracted and fascinated the younger,
and there can be little doubt that this fascination
had by no means an entirely healthy
influence over Hall Caine. Indeed, he tells
us in his
Recollections of Rossetti
that one day
he found himself becoming the victim of the
very delusions which so tortured his friend,
and this is but one instance out of many by
means of which it might be shown that the
poet’s influence over the budding novelist
was one of at least questionable value. As
I have already remarked, it would have required
a peculiarly strong and vigorous mind
and body to have lived with Rossetti
towards the end of his life without being
detrimentally influenced by his personality;
but fortunately for Hall Caine, this doubtful
part of the influence was only temporary,
[74]

while the good and noble part of it was
permanent, and was felt long after the
personal intercourse came to its end. It
must not be forgotten, too, that Hall Caine’s
imagination was with him a masterful power
which he had not yet learned to control
properly, and his sensitive, responsive disposition
made him particularly impressionable.
But it cannot be doubted that the
friendship of these two men, both strongly,
indeed peculiarly individual, had a great
deal to do in developing the character of
the younger man. It was inevitable that a
man of Rossetti’s genius and character
should inflame his imagination and light
up many beacons of his intellect.

When a year or two later Hall Caine
began to strike out for himself it was bruited
abroad that he was making capital out of
the names of his friends—in other words,
that he was making a bid for Fame by the
help of those who constituted the Rossetti
circle.

This, of course, was as absurd as it was
untrue. People said that Caine had been
[75]

Rossetti’s secretary, and some foolish
gossips went so far as to declare that he
had been his valet. The only relationship
that existed between them was one of friendship.
Hall Caine looked on Rossetti with
enthusiastic admiration and something almost
approaching reverence, and Rossetti regarded
him with the keen interest one naturally
takes in the career of a young man of genius.
For Rossetti often encouraged his young
friend by bidding him have no anxiety as
to what the future held for him, declaring
that Fame was bound to come to him sooner
or later. It speaks much for Rossetti’s
perspicacity that he was able to discern
the genius of his friend, for at this time
Hall Caine had produced little or nothing
that he cares to recognise now. He had
written a quantity of mediocre verse, and a
few sonnets of real and lasting beauty; but
that was all. Rossetti insisted that Caine’s
vocation lay in the writing of fervid and
impassioned prose, and the truth of this
remark has been demonstrated over and
over again since it was first uttered.

[76]

I have not read the essay which Hall
Caine wrote on the poetry of Rossetti, and
which was the means of bringing the two
men together, but I can very well imagine
what it was in the poet that attracted him.
Different as the two men seem to be in
almost every particular save their mutual
love of Beauty, there is one common trait
which bound them together: they were both
strangely and strongly attracted towards the
supernatural and spiritual. There is an
air of mystery, of unknown and unseen
terrors and forces in Rossetti’s poetry that
is also breathed in the earlier novels of Hall
Caine. To this very day, Hall Caine is a
firm believer in many of the phenomena
which, by ignorant people, are placed in
the category of spiritualism. For instance,
he believes in second sight. On several
occasions he has himself had distinct and
indisputable warnings of accidents some
minutes before they actually happened. A
case in point occurred the day previous to
my last visit to Greeba Castle. A young
lady was bicycling through Greeba on the
[77]

way to Peel. She was “scorching,” but, so
far as one could judge, had complete
command over her machine. Mr Caine
happened to be in the road at the time
with a friend, and as the lady passed he
turned to his companion and said: “That
girl will meet with an accident before she
has turned the corner!” They watched
her for a minute or so with interest, and
then everything happened as the novelist
had predicted. She collided with an unsuspecting
cow, which appeared from some
unseen place, and fell to the ground almost
insensible. I could, if it were necessary,
produce other instances of the exercise of
the somewhat mysterious faculty for foreseeing
which have come within my own observation.

Rossetti was always powerfully attracted
by the supernatural, as, indeed, men of
imagination usually are, and this mutual
attraction undoubtedly served to bind the
two writers together. Caine’s attraction
to and study of Coleridge had undoubtedly
prepared him for the advent of Rossetti,
[78]

for the mystic imagery, the finished
technique and the mandragora-like spell
of the earlier poet were reproduced in
detail by the later. Again, the supernatural
in Shakespeare had received Caine’s
particular study, and throughout his life it
has been a powerful factor in stirring up his
imagination.

In 1882—the year of Rossetti’s death—appeared
Hall Caine’s
Recollections of
Rossetti
, which has already been referred to
several times in this chapter. For this he
received forty pounds. The book made
something of a sensation in the literary
world, owing chiefly, or perhaps entirely,
to its subject, and the intimate nature of
its revelations, but it did not in the least
enhance its author’s reputation among the
large body of general readers. Mr Caine
does not to-day regard this product of his
earlier years with any feeling of respect.
It was edited with the kindest and best
possible intentions by Rossetti’s friends and
relatives, and many important changes were
insisted on. I myself have read the original
[79]

version side by side with that which was
eventually published, and I have not the
least hesitation in saying that the unedited
account which Mr Caine wrote of his
relations with his revered friend is vastly
superior to that with which the public is
familiar.

Before I leave Rossetti and turn to the
novels of the subject of this monograph,
I should like to give a letter of the late
Mr Robert Buchanan, addressed by him
to Mr Caine after reading the latter’s
obituary notice of his friend in the
Academy
.
To all who know anything of the life of
Rossetti, it will prove of exceptional interest,
for it bears directly upon one of the causes
of his premature death, and throws fresh
light on one of the most widely-discussed
episodes of nineteenth-century literature.

“
30 Boulevard Ste Beuve
,

“
Boulogne-sur-Mer
,

“
France
,
May 18 [1882]
.

“
Dear Sir
,—I have read with deep interest your
memorial of poor Rossetti, and been particularly moved
by your passing allusion to myself. I don’t know if
your intention was to heap ‘coals of fire’ on my head,
[80]

but whether or not you have succeeded. I have often
regretted my old criticism on your friend, not so much
because it was stupid, but because, after all, I doubt one
poet’s right to criticise another. For the rest, I have
long been of opinion that Rossetti was a great spirit;
and in that belief I inscribed to him my ‘God and the
Man.’

“I suppose it was lack of courage which kept me from
putting his name boldly on the preprint of my book; but
had I dreamed he was ill or ailing, how eagerly would I
not have done so! Still, I cannot conceive anyone mistaking
the words of that dedication. Some people have
been foolish enough to take it as addressed to Swinburne;
but every line of it is against that supposition. I wonder
now, if Rossetti himself knew of, and understood, that
inscription? Perhaps you could tell me, and to ask you
I write this letter. It would be a sincere satisfaction to
me to know that he
did
read it, and accepted it in the
spirit in which it was written.

“I am here on my way to Paris, but after this week
my address will be uncertain. A letter sent to 30 Queen
Anne St., Cavendish Square, will always find me.—I am,
dear sir, yours faithfully,

“
Robert Buchanan
.

“
T. Hall Caine
, Esq.”

In the meantime, Caine had also published
an anthology of sonnets, entitled
Sonnets
of Three Centuries
(a particularly handsome
volume, prefaced by a very capable and
original essay on the history of the sonnet),
and a volume of essays entitled
Cobwebs of
[81]

Criticism
. Neither of these books did much
to widen his reputation, but the volume of
sonnets was a labour of love, and the essays
contained in the latter consisted chiefly of
lectures delivered in Liverpool.

[82]

CHAPTER IV

THE SHADOW OF A CRIME
AND
A SON OF HAGAR

After the death of Rossetti, Hall Caine
spent eighteen months in daily journalism
in London writing his Rossetti recollections,
and reviewing books, etc., for the
Academy

and
Athenæum
. He was also employed as
a leader-writer on the
Liverpool Mercury
at
a salary beginning at a hundred pounds per
annum. This life, honourable and fascinating
as it was, did not satisfy him, however. He
was beginning to look further afield. Besides,
he was being dominated by the legend which
was to be the germ of his first novel.

So, in order to obtain complete immunity
from all interruption, social and professional,
he “settled in a little bungalow of three
rooms in a garden near the beach at
Sandown in the Isle of Wight.” In the
[83]

meantime he had married, and at the time
of settling at Sandown he had enough
money to keep him going for about four
months. But his story was deeply rooted
in his mind and heart, and he feared nothing—not
even failure. The legend that so
dominated him was as follows. (I quote
from
The Idler
, to which magazine Mr
Caine contributed an article entitled
My
First Book
):—

“One of the oldest legends of the Lake
mountains tells of the time of the plague.
The people were afraid to go to market,
afraid to meet at church and afraid to pass
on the highway. When any lonely body
was ill, the nearest neighbour left meat
and drink at the door of the afflicted house,
and knocked and ran away. In these days
a widow and two sons lived in one of the
darkest of the valleys. The younger son
died, and the body had to be carried over
the mountains to be buried. Its course
lay across Sty Head Pass, a bleak and
‘brant’ place, where the winds are often
high. The eldest son, a strong-hearted lad,
[84]

undertook the duty. He strapped the coffin
on to the back of a young horse, and they
started away. The day was wild, and on
the top of the pass, where the path dips
into Wastdale, between the breast of
Great Gable and the heights of Scawfell,
the wind rose to a gale. The horse was
terrified. It broke away and galloped over
the fells, carrying its burden with it. The
lad followed and searched for it, but in vain,
and he had to go home at last, unsatisfied.

“This was in the spring, and nearly all
the summer through the surviving son of
the widow was out on the mountains, trying
to recover the runaway horse, but never
once did he catch sight of it, though sometimes,
as he turned homeward at night, he
thought he heard, in the gathering darkness,
above the sough of the wind, the horse’s
neigh. Then winter came, and the mother
died. Once more the dead body had to be
carried over the fells for burial, and once
again the coffin was strapped on the back
of a horse. It was an old mare that was
chosen this time, the mother of the young
[85]

one that had been lost. The snow lay deep
on the pass, and from the cliffs of the
Scawfell pikes it hung in great toppling
masses. All went well with the little
funeral party until they came to the top
of the pass, and though the day was dead
calm the son held the rein with a hand that
was like a vice. But just as the mare
reached the spot where the wind had
frightened the young horse, there was a
terrific noise. An immense body of the
snow had parted at that instant from the
beetling heights overhead, and rushed down
into the valley with the movement as of a
mighty earthquake, and the deafening sound
as of a peal of thunder. The dale echoed
and re-echoed from side to side, and from
height to height. The old mare was
affrighted; she reared, leapt, flung her
master away, and galloped off. When they
had recovered from their consternation, the
funeral party gave chase, and at length,
down in a hollow place, they thought they
saw what they were in search of. It was
a horse with something strapped on its
[86]

back. When they came up with it they
found it was the
young
horse, with the coffin
of the younger son. They led it away, and
buried the body that it had carried so long,
but the old mare they never recovered,
and the body of the mother never found
sepulchre.”

It will be seen at a glance that this
legend contains great dramatic and imaginative
possibilities, but for Hall Caine its
fascination lay in its “shadow and suggestion
of the supernatural.” When Rossetti
was still alive, Mr Caine had discussed
with him its merits as the foundation
for a novel; but the poet, as we have
seen, was against the idea. He did not
see the possibility of getting any sympathy
into it. This judgment, coming from so
expert and experienced a quarter, disheartened
the younger man, and he “let
the idea go back to the dark chambers of
memory.” But it was of no use, the ghost
would not be laid. The idea recurred to
him at intervals, and each time it impressed
him more and more. At last, when settled
[87]

in the Isle of Wight, he thought he had
found a way of evading Rossetti’s criticism.
“The sympathy was to be got out of the
elder son. He was to think God’s hand
was upon him. But whom God’s hand
rested on had God at his right hand; so
the elder son was to be a splendid fellow—brave,
strong, calm, patient, long-suffering,
a victim of unrequited love, a man standing
square on his legs against all weathers.”
Then he began to write; but he was faced
by a thousand difficulties. It was his desire
to grip the reader’s interest from the very
outset, and it took him a fortnight’s hard
work to make what he judged to be a
satisfactory beginning. Within three months
it was practically finished. He showed it
first to Mr J. S. Cotton, an old and
valued friend and at that time editor of the

Academy
. “His rapid mind saw a new
opportunity. ‘You want
peine forte et
dure
,’ he said. ‘What’s that?’ I asked.
‘An old punishment—a beautiful thing,’ he
answered. ‘Where’s my dear old Blackstone?’
and the statute concerning the
[88]

punishment for standing mute was read to
me. It was just the thing I wanted for
my hero, and I was in rapture, but I was
also in despair. To work this fresh interest
into my theme half of what I had written
would need to be destroyed!”

But destroyed it was, and after two
months’ arduous labour, he took it to the
late John Lovell, editor of the
Liverpool
Mercury
. “It’s crude,” he said. “But it
only wants sub-editing.” Imagine the
young author’s feelings! Sub-editing, indeed!
But again he re-wrote it, and this
time to some purpose, for Mr Lovell offered
him a hundred pounds for the serial right in
the
Liverpool Weekly Mercury
. This offer
was, of course, accepted.

Mr Caine was now living in rooms on
the fourth floor of New Court, in Lincoln’s
Inn. He called upon several publishers
with the object of getting his novel issued
in volume form; eventually Chatto &
Windus made him an offer which he
accepted, and at this date the book has
gone through more editions than I care to
[89]

count. It was an immediate and undoubted
success, and the only thing that Mr Caine
regrets with regard to it is the fact that
he was forced to sell it outright instead
of on the royalty system. Hard cash was
what he wanted, though the amount he
received in ready money would have been
trebled many times over if he had been paid
according to the number of copies sold.

As the first novel of a young man (and,
at this time, Mr Caine was quite painfully
young)
The Shadow of a Crime
shows
little evidence of crudity. It is coherent,
cohesive and mature. It is true, the melodramatic
interest is often too insistent, and
that the novelist expects too much from
the credulity of the reader; but these
faults apart, the book is the book of a
grown man and a practised writer. It
evinces an intimate knowledge of Cumberland
life and dialect, and has the dignity
and strength of a work of genius.

After the publication of
The Shadow of
a Crime
a time of need ensued. He canvassed
many publishers and offered himself
[90]

as reader, but he was invariably turned
away. Whatever indignity and humiliation
was thrust upon him only made him more
determined to succeed. He never knew
when he was beaten. He never
was
beaten,
for he never withdrew from his hand-to-hand
fight with the world, but struggled
on with the passionate conviction that he
would one day come off the winner. So,
undaunted, he set about the writing of a
new work,
A Son of Hagar
.

When this book was nearing completion,
he expressed a wish to Mr Richard Gowing
to dedicate it to Mr R. D. Blackmore, the
author of
Lorna Doone
. Mr Gowing, who
was a friend of Mr Blackmore’s, immediately
communicated with him and received the
following reply:—

“
Teddington
,
December 21, 1886
.

“
My Dear Mr Gowing
,—It will give me great
pleasure to find a work of Mr Hall Caine’s inscribed to
myself. I have not read any book of his, although I
have wished to do so.
The Shadow of a Crime
slipped
by me somehow, when I was very busy; but I know
that it was a fine work. My name is not of such repute
that he need entertain any fear of misconstruction. His
own work will lead him on; if he shows the proper
[91]

value for it, in the care which makes it good—as I
gather from his letter that he does. Please to tell him
that I am proud of his goodwill and approval. I hope
that you are doing well, and offer my best wishes for the
Christmas, and the coming year.

“For myself, I met with an accident last June, which
crippled me for several months; but at last I begin to
plod again, and renew my acquaintance with plant and
tree. They are all in great tribulation now, and many
will never see the coming year.—Believe me, with kind
regards, very truly yours,

“
R. D. Blackmore
.”

Three months later he wrote the following
letter to Mr Caine himself:—

“
Teddington
,
March 14, 1887
.

“
My Dear Mr Caine
,—Your publishers have kindly
sent me a copy of
The Shadow of a Crime
, and I am
reading it carefully. Your style does not permit any
skipping; no work that does so is of much value. So
far as I can yet judge, the book is full of power and true
imagination. To the critical gift I have no claim; but
I seem to myself to know when I come across genuine
matter. And you have also that respect for yourself
and your readers which is a
sine qua non
for the
achievement of great work. However, I will not show
my own deficiency in that quality by offering premature
remarks; only I am eager to express my impressions of
pleasure and admiration.

“I hope that your health will soon be restored, and
your mind refreshed with total change. I find myself
much under par, with long bronchial attack.

[92]

“Your second work,
A Son of Hagar
, will be looked
for by me with eager anticipation; but
The Shadow of a
Crime
will hold me for at least a week, in my present
state; as I can only read at night, and am bound just
now to keep early hours.

“I have not heard a word about
Springhaven
, whether
it goes, or sticks fast; except that an extract from the

Whitehall Review
of last week has been sent to me.

“With many thanks for your kind words, and all good
wishes for your work,—I am, always truly yours,

“
R. D. Blackmore
.”

A Son of Hagar
was completed in 1886,
as was also a life of Coleridge which was
written in three weeks. The former brought
him three hundred pounds; the latter thirty
pounds. Coleridge had always been a
favourite study of Hall Caine’s; we have
seen that as a young man in Liverpool he
was particularly attracted towards his work,
and the incidents of the great poet’s life had
received his careful and unremitting attention.
But the series for which it was written
was one devoted to brief biographies only,
and Mr Caine was unable to make use of the
vast store of knowledge which he had so
patiently acquired. Still, the biography was
one of the best of the series, and though it
[93]

brought neither fame nor fortune to its
author, it undoubtedly did something towards
establishing his reputation as an original and
thoughtful critic.

A Son of Hagar
was written on somewhat
the same lines as
The Shadow of a Crime
;
that is to say, there is the same knowledge
of the life of the Cumberland people of the
“statesman” class, the same intimate acquaintance
with Cumberland dialect, and the
same partiality for melodrama and, one must
acknowledge, improbable incident. Judged
by present-day standards, this book achieved
what would be called remarkable popular
success; but the success was not sufficient
to satisfy the consuming ambition of the
young novelist. He said to himself, “I
will write one more book. I will put into
it all the work that is in me, and if the
public still remains indifferent, I will never
write another.” These words, uttered in the
heat of the moment, must be taken
cum
grano salis
; for I feel convinced that if Mr
Caine had written ten or a dozen unsuccessful
works, he would still have continued
[94]

faithful to the novel as a means of expressing
his own personality and his views of the
complex individual and social life as he has
found it, not only in history, but in these
hot, passionate days of a new century. Yet,
the fact remains, that what he chose to consider
his limited success did not satisfy him.

I am privileged to give the following
letters written by Mr Blackmore to Mr
Caine during the year 1887.

“
Teddington.

“
My Dear Mr Caine
,—I thank you heartily for
your kind letter, and look forward to the pleasure of
reading your new work, which I have not seen as yet.

“From what Mr Gowing said, I feared that you were
not at present in strong health, and I trust that you will
not allow yourself to be worried by doubts about your
work, or distressed by too zealous exertion. However
untidy your garden may be—and it can scarcely be
worse than mine—the
Son of Hagar
should be expelled
for some hours daily from that quiet spot.”

Mr Blackmore then proceeds to give vent
to the irritation which he felt towards
humanity in general, and his publisher’s
corrector of proofs in particular. This latter
gentleman seems to have had his own ideas
as to correct grammar and punctuation; these
[95]

ideas, however, did not coincide with those
of Mr Blackmore. He adds:—

“The main point is to take them easily; even as
one does the supernatural wisdom of Reviewers.

“With the best wishes for your new story—may the
Son be the child of promise!—I am, dear sir, very truly
yours,

“
R. D. Blackmore
.”

“
Hall Caine
, Esq.”

The second letter was written concerning
Caine’s
Life of Coleridge
—interesting for
its reference to the first reviews of
Lorna
Doone
.

“
Teddington
,
May 7, 1887
.

“
My Dear Mr Caine
,—I am deeply engaged with
your interesting book, and thank you for so kindly sending
it. The
Son of Hagar
has not come this way yet,
and I put him vainly upon my book-list. However, it
is good not to have one’s pleasures too abundantly—
commendat
rarior usus
.

“Have you ever dealt at all with ⸺, the great
‘organiser’ of Newspaper novels? He has asked me more
than once to be distributed in that way; but hitherto I
have declined. His terms are fair—so far as I can judge—and
he seems a sharp man of business. Writers of higher
repute than mine have marched under his standard; but
I doubt me whether my ‘politics’ would suit his mighty
horde.

“I conclude that you have left the Isle of Man, and
hope you are working at a book of the
quocunque jeceris
stabit
. Any work of yours will now command a larger
[96]

circle than the critics; to whom (like myself) you owe
little. If the matter were of more interest, I would print
the
first notices of Lorna Doone
, which they now quote as
a standard. I have them somewhere, and a damp bed
they are to smother a shy guest in. But you know well
enough how these men fumble the keys of an open door.

“I must now be off to my pipes and Coleridge. I am
heartily glad to find you
[1]
against that far
inferior—and, to my mind, prosy fellow—Southey.—With
kind regards, I am very truly yours,

“
R. D. Blackmore
.”

“
Hall Caine
, Esq.”

[1]
Word undecipherable.

Mr Caine has inscribed this note at the
head of the following. “This letter was
written about
A Son of Hagar
, which was
dedicated to Blackmore. The censorious
part of it is very just.—H. C.”

“
Teddington
,
August 25, 1887
.

“
My Dear Mr Caine
,—I would not write again until
I had read your book, which I have now done with great
care. My opinion is of very little value, but so far as I
can distinctly form one, it is nearly as follows. There is
any amount of vigour and power, and some real pathos
(which is, of course, a part of power), also there are many
other merits—strong English style, great knowledge of
character, keen observation, and much originality.

“But I think you will improve upon this book vastly,
as experience grows. The incidents appear to me to be
huddled, without sense of proportion now and then, and
there is much strain upon credulity. But I am loth to
[97]

find fault, knowing that I am not a skilled workman
myself.

“We are just leaving home, in the hope—probably a
vain one—of doing some good to my helpless hand,
whose failure is a great loss to me in every branch of
garden work. I think of invading T. Hardy’s land—Swanage
or the neighbourhood, almost the only part of
the southern coast unknown to me. Further I would
gladly go, but my wife cannot bear a long journey, or
changes of conveyance. After our return I shall be
very glad to see you, though I cannot advise much about
Wales. North Wales is, of course, much the more
picturesque, and the style of the natives more Cymric;
whereas I am chiefly acquainted with the south. The
love of truth seems to have been overlooked in the
composition of Welsh character. The lower classes do
not even resent the charge of lying, and consider it disgraceful
mainly as a blot upon their intellect. But I
must not be hard upon them, as my mother’s family,
though English in the main, possessed many veins of
Taffic fluid.

“I hope that you are now in strong health again, after
the passing of the solid hot waves. As a fruit-grower, I
have suffered bitter woes, some of my trees having shed
all their fruit and none having fine crop as they promised.
The rain came in earnest last week, but too late, and
now we could take as much again.—With all good wishes,
I am, truly yours,

“
R. D. Blackmore
.”

[98]

CHAPTER V

THE DEEMSTER

It was
The Deemster
that brought Hall
Caine fame. It was written in a mood of
dissatisfaction, of disappointment. He felt
that he had it in him to write a novel that
should be worthy of the world’s respect, and
though
The Shadow of a Crime
and
A Son
of Hagar
were, in no sense, failures, yet
they had not met with the success for which
the young novelist was so ardently longing.
This was to be his first book dealing with
Manx life, customs and character, and he
wrote it in the island with all the beautiful
landscape and the glorious sea for an inspiration.

The plot of the book is founded on the
story of the Prodigal Son. It teaches the
doctrine of purification by suffering, though
[99]

by no stretch of the imagination can it be
called a “book with a purpose.” Rather is
it an imaginative picture of wonderful pathos,
and the moral which it enforces is never
hinted at; it is revealed in the very atmosphere
of the book, in its childlike purity, in
its passionate simplicity.

The Prodigal Son is Daniel, son of
Gilchrist Mylrea, Bishop of Man. His
mother died at his birth, and so during the
early years of his young life his father acted
as mother, nurse, teacher, playmate and
friend. Here is a picture of father and son,
with Mona and Ewan, Dan’s cousins and
housemates.

Meantime Bishop’s Court was musical with children’s
voices, and with the patter of tiny feet that ferreted out
every nook and cranny of the old place. There was
Ewan, the Deemster’s son, a slight, sensitive boy, who
listened to you with head aslant, and with absent looks.
There was wee Mona, Ewan’s meek sister, with the big
eyes and the quiet ways, who liked to be fondled, and
would cry sometimes when no one knew why. And
there was Daniel—Danny—Dan, the Bishop’s boy, a
braw little rogue, with a slice of the man in him, as
broad as he was long, with tousled fair head and face
usually smudged, laughing a good deal, and not crying
[100]

over much, loving a good tug or a delightful bit of a
fight, and always feeling high disdain at being kissed.
And the Bishop, God bless him! was father and mother
both to the motherless brood, though Kerry Quayle
was kept as nurse. He would tell a story, or perhaps
sing one, while Mona sat on his knee with her pretty
head resting on his breast, and Ewan held on to his
chair with his shy head hanging on his own shoulder,
and his eyes looking out at the window, listening intently
in his queer little absent way. And when Dan, in lordly
contempt of such doings, would break in on song or
story, and tear his way up the back of the chair to the
back of the Bishop, Mona would be set on her feet,
and the biggest baby of the four there present would
slide down on to his hands and knees and creep along
the floor with the great little man astride him, and
whinny like a horse, or perhaps bark like a dog, and pretend
to leap the four-bar gate of the baby’s chair tumbled
down on its side. And when Dan would slide from his
saddle, and the restless horseman would turn coachman
and tug the mane of his steed, and all the Bishop’s long
hair would tumble over his face, what shrieks of laughter,
what rolling on the ground and tossing up of bare legs!
And then when supper-time came, and the porridge
would be brought in, and little Mona would begin to
whimper because she had to eat it, and Ewan to fret
because it was barley porridge and not oaten cake, and
Dan to devour his share with silent industry, and then
bellow for more than was good for him, what schemes the
good Bishop resorted to, what promises he made, what
crafty tricks he learned, what an artful old pate his simple
head suddenly became! And then, when Kerry came
with the tub and the towels, and three little naked bodies
[101]

had to be bathed, and the Bishop stole away to his unfinished
sermon, and little Mona’s wet hands clung to
Kerry’s dress, and Ewan, standing bolt upright in the three
inches of water, blubbered while he rubbed the sponge
over an inch and a half of one cheek, and Dan sat on his
haunches in the bottom of the tub splashing the water on
every side, and shrieking at every splash; then the fearful
commotion would bring the Bishop back from the
dusky room upstairs, where the shaded lamp burned on
a table that was littered with papers. And at last, when
the day’s big battle was done, and night’s bigger battle
begun; and three night-dresses were popped over three
weary heads that dodged them when they could, the
Bishop would carry three sleepless, squealing piggies to
bed—Mona at his breast because she was little, Ewan at
his back because he was big, and Dan across his
shoulders because he could not get to any loftier perch.
Presently there would be three little pairs of knees by
the crib side, and then three little flaxen polls on the
pillow, tumbling and tossing, and with the great dark
head of the Bishop shaking gravely at them from over
the counterpane, and then a hush broken by a question
lisped drowsily, or a baby rhyme that ran a line or two
and stopped, and at length the long deep quiet and the
silence of sleep, and the Bishop going off on tiptoe to
the dusky room with the shaded lamp, and to-morrow’s
sermon lying half-written beneath it.

Can you not see them?—the four innocent
children playing their games as though they
were the whole world. But their happiness
was soon cut short. Thorkell Mylrea, the
[102]

Deemster and the father of Ewan and Mona,
and the evil genius of the book, calls at
Bishop’s Court, and takes his children away.
“Let a father treat his children as the world
will treat them when they have nothing but
the world for their father,” he says, and
henceforth the children’s joy is taken away.
But Dan lives on with his father, the Bishop,
laughing, playing his pranks, and making of
the Court one huge nursery. The years
pass, and a friendship like that of David and
Jonathan springs up between Dan and
Ewan. But Dan is headstrong, wilful and
impetuous. He runs almost wild, and his
great strength and love of sport lead him
into the companionship of good-for-noughts.
He quarrels with Ewan, and, in a scene of
great beauty and tenderness, a reconciliation
is effected. But again they quarrel, and Dan
strikes Ewan a terrible blow which has far-reaching
consequences. Dan is covered
with shame, and feels abased in his very soul.
And then, assailed by the most subtle
temptation, Dan commits forgery, and
Ewan, by now a priest, tells a lie to save
[103]

him. And so Dan, the noble-hearted, pure-minded
soul, sinks deeper and deeper into
petty sins. He wastes his substance, idles,
drinks—does all that a tortured weak soul
will do when it has begun to step on the
downward path. The end of it all is that
in fair fight Dan kills his cousin, and goes
to Mona to tell her of his sin.

“Yes, yes, our Ewan is dead,” he repeated in a
murmur that came up from his heart. “The truest
friend, the fondest brother, the whitest soul, the
dearest, bravest, purest, noblest—O God! O God!
dead, dead! Worse, a hundredfold worse—Mona, he
is murdered.”

At that she raised herself up, and a bewildered look
was in her eyes.

“Murdered? No, that is not possible. He was
beloved by all. There is no one who would kill him—there
is no one alive with a heart so black.”

“Yes, Mona, but there is,” he said; “there is one man
with a heart so black.”

“Who is he?”

“Who! He is the foulest creature on God’s earth.
Oh, God in heaven! Why was he born?”

“Who is he?”

He bowed his head where he stood before her, and
beads of sweat started from his brow.

“Cursed be the hour when that man was born!” he
said in an awful whisper.

Then Mona’s despair came upon her like a torrent
[104]

and she wept long. In the bitterness of her heart she
cried,—

“Cursed indeed, cursed for ever! Dan, Dan, you
must kill him—you must kill that man…”

Then Dan said in a heartrending voice,—

“Mona, he did not mean to kill Ewan—they fought—it
was all in the heat of blood.”

Once more he tried to avoid her gaze, and once more,
pale and immovable, she watched his face.

“Who is he?” she asked, with an awful calmness.

“Mona, turn your face away from me, and I will tell
you,” he said.

Then everything swam about her, and her pale lips
grew ashy.

“Don’t you know?” he asked in a whisper.

She did not turn her face, and he was compelled to
look at her now. His glaring eyes were fixed upon
her.

“Don’t you know?” he whispered again, and then in
a scarcely audible voice he said, “It was I, Mona.”

The restrained power of this passage is
typical of Hall Caine—not one word too
much, and yet the man and woman live and
breathe before our very eyes.

Mona confesses her love, and Dan leaves
her to give himself up to justice. But
temptation and hindrances are put in his
way. It seems to be fated that his crime
shall go unpunished, unatoned for. At
[105]

length, overcoming all his weakness, and
with a mighty resolve to suffer the penalty
of his guilt, Dan gives himself up at the
Ramsey courthouse. Then follow weary
months of waiting until his trial. Finally he
receives his punishment on Tynwald Hill—the
ancient mound where, once in each year,
the laws of the island are proclaimed to the
assembled people. He is sentenced by his
own father to lifelong solitude. “Men and
women of Man,” cries the Bishop, “the
sentence of the court of the barony of the
island is, that this man shall be cut off from
his people. Henceforth let him have no
name among us, nor family, nor kin. From
now for ever let no flesh touch his flesh.
Let no tongue speak to him. Let no eye
look on him. If he should be an-hungered,
let none give him meat. When he shall be
sick, let none minister to him. When his
death shall come, let no man bury him.
Alone let him live, alone let him die, and
among the beasts of the field let him hide his
unburied bones.” And then follows a tear-compelling
document written by Dan in his
[106]

exile, wherein it is shown how he works out
his own redemption, and regains his manhood.
Eventually he becomes the saviour
of his people and dies in Mona’s arms.

Many critics have levelled at Mr Caine a
charge of unnecessary sadness in thus allowing
his hero to die just at the moment when
his regeneration is complete, but to my mind
that is the only possible ending. Read in
the right spirit the book is not sad; pervading
its pages is seen a glorious optimism
which not only gives one new faith in
humanity, but makes one feel that life itself
is a grander and nobler thing than one had
ever before imagined. If Dan had had his
punishment cancelled, and had married
Mona—what a painful piece of bathos it
would have been! And yet that is precisely
what many critics desired. They seem to
imagine that the temporal life is of far more
importance than the spiritual. Dan’s life
was crowned and his death glorified by his
spiritual triumph. During those years of
awful loneliness he not only purified his own
nature, but exalted his very soul.
The
[107]

Deemster
is no melodramatic piece of stagework;
it is a direct human document, a
spiritual drama. It is the first work of Hall
Caine’s which has indubitably written on
every page the word “genius.”

It was published in 1838, and immediately
created a sensation. Critics welcomed it on
all hands. It was recognised as a powerful
and original piece of work, and the new
setting for the story added not a little to its
attractiveness; for, fully in sympathy with
Manxland, its laws, customs and society,
Mr Caine had painted a picture of great
charm and attraction. Old Kerry, Quilleash,
and Hommy-beg were accepted as true
portraits of Manx character, with their ingrained
superstition, their vanity and their
generosity. But the book did not impress
the critics only; it was read far and wide by
the public, and within a few months the
circulation had become enormous.
The
Deemster
was one of the successes of the
year, and from the date of its publication the
popularity of Hall Caine began.

I am permitted to give here, by the
[108]

courtesy of Mr A. P. Watt, Mr Wilkie
Collins’s literary executor, a letter addressed
to Mr Caine by the late novelist. It is only
one out of many hundreds received by Hall
Caine from all parts of the world, congratulating
him on his success, and offering him
tributes of thanks.

“
90 Gloucester Place
,

“
Portman Square, W.
,

“
London
,
March 15, 1888
.

“
Dear Hall Caine
,—(Let us drop the formality of
‘Mr’—and let me set the example because I am the
oldest).

“I have waited to thank you for
The Deemster
, until
I could command time enough to read the book without
interruptions. Let me add that the chair in which I
have enjoyed this pleasure is not the chair of the critic.
What I am now writing conveys the impressions of a
brother in the art.

“You have written a remarkable work of fiction—a
great advance on
The Shadow of a Crime
(to my
mind)—a powerful and pathetic story—the characters
vividly conceived, and set in action with a master hand.
Within the limits of a letter, I cannot quote a
tenth part of the passages which have seized on my
interest and admiration. As one example, among many
others which I should like to quote, let me mention the
chapters that describe the fishermen taking the dead
body out to sea in the hope of concealing the murder.
The motives assigned to the men and the manner in
[109]

which they express themselves show a knowledge of
human nature which place you among the masters of our
craft, and a superiority to temptations to conventional
treatment that no words of mine can praise too highly.
For a long time past, I have read nothing in contemporary
fiction that approaches what you have done here.
I have read the chapters twice, and, if I know anything
of our art, I am sure of what I say.

“Now let me think of the next book that you will
write, and let me own frankly where I see room for
improvement in what the painters call, ‘treatment of
the subject.’

“When you next take up your pen, will you consider
a little whether your tendency to dwell on what is
grotesque and violent in human character does not
require some discipline? Look again at ‘The Deemster’
and at some of the qualities and modes of thought
attributed to ‘Dan.’

“Again—your power as a writer sometimes misleads
you, as I think, into forgetting the value of contrast.
The grand picture which your story presents of terror
and grief wants relief. Individually and collectively,
there is variety in the human lot. We are no more
continuously wretched than we are continuously happy.
Next time, I want more humour, which breaks out so
delightfully in old ‘Quilleash.’ More breaks of sunshine
in your splendid cloudy sky will be a truer picture of
nature—and will certainly enlarge the number of your
admiring readers. Look at two of the greatest tragic
stories—
Hamlet
and
The Bride of Lammermoor
, and see
how Shakespeare and Scott take every opportunity of
presenting contrasts, and brightening the picture at the
right place.

[110]

“I believe you have not—even yet—written your best
work. And here you have the proof of my sincerity.
Always truly yours,

“
Wilkie Collins
.”

The criticism contained in this letter is
both sound and just, and though Mr Collins
declares that in penning it he was not sitting
in the chair of the critic, but in that of the
novelist, yet the advice afforded is such as
only the most competent critic who united
the qualities of the imaginative writer could
possibly have given.

Where Mr Caine particularly shows his
strength in this novel, to my mind, is in the
last part of all—the document written by
Dan just before his death. The situation
offers so many temptations to write in a
falsely pathetic style that one cannot offer
too much praise for the admirably firm and
manly way in which Mr Caine has written
this part of his novel.

I have before me as I write two letters
written in October 1886. One is from Mr
Hall Caine to the late Thomas Edward
Brown (of
Fo’c’stle Yarns
fame),
re
the plot
and
mise-en-scène
of what afterwards became
[111]

The Deemster
; and the other is Mr Brown’s
reply. The letters are too long to reproduce
exactly as they stand, but I give here
sufficiently important extracts to show the
reader what enormous and seemingly insuperable
difficulties Mr Caine had to overcome
before even beginning the actual
writing of the book that brought him
fame. Mr Caine’s letter is dated 3rd October
1886, from Aberleigh Lodge, Bexley
Heath, London.

“
Dear Mr Brown
… You must have guessed
that I have been constantly prompted by a selfish desire
to consult you about my new novel. I am still undecided
as to where the scene should be. The difficulty of determining
the period is no less serious. … I wish to
write a romance in the strict sense of the word and to
be as nearly as possible untrammelled by facts of history
and the like. Your opinion as to the feasibility of the
Isle of Man must have been final with me when I had
briefly explained my scheme. I remember that your
brother Hugh did something to dissuade me from
tackling Manxland in any sort of work. He did not
think the readers of novels would find the island at all
interesting, and he was sure that the local atmosphere
was not such as would attract them. I thought over
this a good deal, and decided, I must say, against your
brother’s judgment. … In the first place, the island
has excellent atmosphere. It has the sea, a fine coast
[112]

on the west, fine moorland above; it has traditions,
folk-talk, folk-lore, a ballad literature, and no end of
superstition,—and all these are very much its own.
Such were its attractions for any romance writer, and
for me it had the further fascination of being in some
sort one’s native place, with types of character that had
been familiar to me since my earliest years. Moreover,
it was unlike the scene in which I had already worked—the
dales of Cumberland—and gave me above all one
great and new element—the sea. So I decided that
even Mudie and his thousands of young ladies might
find Manxland an attractive background for a story. …
The difficulty is whether the Isle of Man is a
possible scene for a real epic. You will judge when
I sketch very roughly my plot, which is still in a
nebulous condition.

“I wish to open with a picture of an island governed
mainly by a depraved nobility, or something equivalent
to a privileged class. The great man (the Dooney
Mooar, is it?) of that class shall be old, anxious (like
King Lear) to give up his share in the government, yet
kept to his post by restless energy. He shall have
lands and be a Hebrew patriarch as to flocks and herds.
His wife is long dead, and the memory of her is the
one vein of tenderness in a nature that seems to be as
hard as granite. He has two sons and a daughter, the
former arrived at man’s estate, the latter just budding
into womanhood. Long ago he had a brother who died
at war with him, leaving a widow and an infant son.
The lad is now five-and-twenty, a reckless scapegrace,
beloved by all children and all dogs, the athlete of the
island, physically a magnificent creature, but constantly
under the ban of the great man, his kinsman. The
[113]

young man is poor, his father having been impoverished.
This young fellow should be the central personage of
the novel. His youth is sketched; his scrapes, his disgraces,
his dubious triumphs come in quick succession.
At length he is a man and only less than an outlaw.
He and his mother are neglected by the old nobleman
(?) and his sons, but the daughter does not repudiate
the kinship. The relations of the cousins must be
delicately handled. On his side the affection is cousinly.
On her side it is imperceptibly deepening into love. …
The daughter of the great man is a noble creature,
educated, too, and great of soul…

“Then comes the time when the great man intends
to lay aside his state. His sons shall succeed to him. …
At this juncture the eldest brother begins to
suspect the relations of his sister and cousin. The men
meet, quarrel and resolve to fight. … It is an unequal
match; it is murder; the brother is backed to the
cliff edge and … tumbles into the sea. … Then
in an instant the soul of the athlete awakes. He
realises what he is, and whither down to that moment
his life has tended. In that moment of awakening
there is only one thing he can think of doing. He will
go to his cousin, the nobleman’s daughter. She is his
good angel, etc. He goes, and sees her alone at night.
He tells her that he has killed her brother—murdered
him—extenuates nothing, etc. … the woman will be
hard to do. What is the part?… I hardly know.
I think she should drive him from her. But she is his
confessor and will not betray him, nevertheless. …
The man gives himself up to the law. He is tried on
his own confession and condemned to death. The death
is to be by hanging, but no man has ever suffered death
[114]

for crime in that island within memory or record.
There is a superstitious dread of hanging. It must
not be begun, or where will it end, etc. … The
criminal is brought out, and … the curse is pronounced:
that no man shall speak to him, that none
shall look his way, that none shall give him food, that
if he is sick none shall minister to him, that when he
dies no man shall bury him. … Then comes a
rupture in the state. The people try to cast off the
rule of the privileged classes. Bit by bit the outlaw
works out his redemption, his slow regeneration, his
gradual renewing of the man within. One after one he
does the people great services, accepting meantime all
his punishment. … At length the regeneration is complete,
and the outlaw becomes the saviour of his people,
and is received in triumph on the scene of his former
disgrace. Love is justified, the cousins are united, the
broken old man dies, as is most fit.

“Now, dear Mr Brown, all this is very vague; but I shall
be curious to hear how far it would be possible to work
some such scheme into the (romantic) history of the Isle
of Man. The House of Keys was, I think, a self-elected
body down to recent years. If I
could
get it into the
present century even by any ordinary liberties I should
be delighted.”

The foregoing is noteworthy not only
because it is the first skeleton of
The
Deemster
, but because (as will be seen from
Mr Brown’s reply), there were many difficulties
opposing the idea of making the Isle
[115]

of Man the
mise-en-scène
for the plot, and
because these difficulties were most skilfully
overcome. These two letters are one of
the most convincing proofs with what extraordinary
care and patience Mr Caine works.

The following is Mr Brown’s reply.

“
Clifton
,
October 14, 1886
.

“
My Dear Sir
,—Thanks for this admission to the
secrets of your workshop. The story is most interesting. …
It could not possibly be placed in the Isle of
Man, nor timed in the nineteenth century.

“The Isle of Man does not give you the remoteness
of the place which you want. Norway might, Kamtschatka
might! but the Isle of Man—no.

“Then as to time—

“The history of the Isle of Man since the Revestment
(1765!) is not legendary, nor has it been otherwise than
very clearly defined since the Reformation. It is an
eventless history, but quite ascertained, and rigid within
its narrow compass. Its constitution has been singularly
unbroken; there is not the faintest hint of any such
revolution as you postulate. The House of Keys was
cooptative in my own time, and the change to the
popular method of election was the merest emigration
‘from the blue bed to the brown.’ The stage is inadequate
for your romance; and, moreover, it is quite
occupied by the most obstinate fixtures. Your Dooiney
(
sic
) Mooar is less than a fable. Where can you get
him in? He is not, I suppose, the Earl of Derby, or the
Duke of Athol; but, if he is not, he ought to be, for
these gentlemen hold the field, and you can’t get rid of
[116]

them. It is impossible to conceive the privileged class,
or nobles, of whom you speak. The fact is, you would
take the Isle of Man as the merest physical basis, and
constand upon it a whole system of manners, institutions,
a social system, in short, which it never knew. It can’t
be done at the distance; it can’t be done at all.

“Now, why not cut away from your socio-politico-revolutionary
setting altogether, and rely, as you no
doubt desire to do, on the sheer humanities? The
Dooiney Mooar need not be a Lear, but he might be
an old Manx gentleman; and, instead of resigning a
seigniory, he might resign his landed estate. Such a
person, and grouped around him nearly all the rest of
your story, you could place about the year 1800. The
Duke of Athol held a sort of court in those days: he
brought over with him to the island a choice assortment
of shwash-bucklers, led captains and miscellaneous
blackguards. There are some fierce stories about these
fellows. Duelling was in vogue.

“It was a very corrupt society, and no doubt greatly
demoralised the native population. … Bishop Wilson
(1710) was an ‘epoch-making’ personage. The Church
and State question was then prominent. He was a complicated
man, or at anyrate, a composite one. Never
was man more beloved, never was there a serener saint,
never a more brutal tyrant. But why seek this sort of
person in the Isle of Man? Think of Laud and his tremendous
stage. Has anyone ever ‘done’ him, and the
robin coming into his study, and ‘all to that’? But
yours is a romance? not an unconditional romance
though, I suppose?…

“But your fiction is splendid; the incidents are quite
magnificent, and, from what I can see, the possibilities
[117]

of character are highly promising. … It must not
be thrown away; it is strong and vital; but the Isle
of Man sinks beneath it. And besides the inadequacy
of the stage there is the fact of its being preoccupied
with social and historical furniture that will in no way
fit with your invented properties.

“For my part, I think the interest attaching to the
‘transition period’ idea is adscititious, and rather vapid.
And as for an epic—just write the words, ‘A Manx
Epic’ and behold the totally impossible at once!

“If you cling to this form, however, take it out to the
red men, and let the scene be the Alleghanies,
temp.
circiter
1730. I hope I have made my meaning clear.
The story is good, but its setting is impossible. Drop
the latter, but stick to the former. If you do, you can
retain the Isle of Man as the scene of your action. …
Most truly yours,

“
T. E. Brown
.”

He hopes he “has made his meaning
clear.” Only too terribly clear! Almost
every point necessary to the proper development
of the plot was promptly knocked on
the head; the vital links in the chain were
broken, the structural backbone of the
romance was destroyed. Ninety-nine men
out of a hundred would have given up the
idea in despair; but not Hall Caine. He
seized on the hint of Bishop Wilson—the
“epoch-making” personage; he altered
[118]

this part of the plot, and developed that; he
substituted one character for another, and
introduced new
dramatis personæ
;—in a
word, he not only recast the plot, but made
it historically convincing, and this in the
very face of the warnings and obstacles
raised by one of the most erudite scholars
the Isle of Man has yet produced. This,
of course, involved immense labour, but it
was done, and done successfully. Even
Mr Brown himself had to acknowledge this.
As Mr Caine has written me: “When the
book was written there was no such sympathetic
reader as T. E. B.”

Another eminent writer who generously
acknowledged the power and beauty of
The
Deemster
was the late R. D. Blackmore, who
wrote the following letter immediately after
reading Mr Caine’s book.

“
Teddington
,
April 3, 1888
.

“
My Dear Mr Caine
,—I thank you heartily for
your kind and friendly letter, which was a comfort to
me. It has always seemed to me that your turn of
mind and power of creation are especially dramatic; and
that you will write (if once you take to that form) a very
grand and moving play. There is no one who can do
[119]

that now, so far at least as I can judge; and I shall be
proud if I live long enough to see you achieve it.

“For novel-writing you have not yet (according to
my small judgment) the sense of proportion and of
variety which are needful for pleasant work. I have
read with great care your
Deemster
, and have admired
and been stirred by it. But to my mind (which is not
at all a critical one) there is not the sliding, and the
quiet shifting, and the sense of pause, which are perhaps
only the mechanical parts of great work, but help to lift
it. I cannot exactly express my meaning, and I have
no science to second it; and I know that I cannot do
the thing myself, and never attempt it consciously.
But it will come to you, with time, and give grace to
your excelling power.

“As for myself, of which you ask, there is little to say
except that all the spirit is taken out of it. I care for
nothing that I do; nor whether I do anything—which
for a man who has not been lazy is a dreary change of
mood; my shame at such a state of mind is useless to
improve it, and I wonder how long it will last. But
this, I hope, you will never understand, except as I
did—before it came to pass.

“If you care to come down to so dull a place, you
will be always welcome, but a line beforehand will help
it. Tuesdays are my absent days, and Saturdays rather
‘throng’ with work.—Believe me, ever truly yours,

“
R. D. Blackmore
.”

“‘Luncheon’—dinner it is to me,—at 2 o’clock daily.
Try to come in time for that, and a look-round afterwards.”

[120]

CHAPTER VI

HALL CAINE AS A DRAMATIST, SHORT-STORY
WRITER, POET AND CRITIC

Hall Caine has written five plays, three of
which have been produced. The drama
founded on
The Eternal City
has been
played for copyright purposes only. The
first of these plays was called
Ben-my-Chree

and was the dramatised version of
The
Deemster
. I venture to quote from an
excellent biographical article by Mr Robert
Harborough Sherard in the
Windsor Magazine

(November 1895): “Irving read the
book (
The Deemster
) in America, and seeing
that there was here material for a splendid
play, with himself in the part of the Bishop,
hesitated about cabling to the author. In
the meanwhile Wilson Barrett had also read
the book, and had telegraphed to Kent to
[121]

ask Hall Caine to come up to London to
discuss its dramatisation. Hall Caine
started, but was forced to leave the train
at Derby because a terrible fog rendered
travelling impossible. He spent the next
ten days in the Isaac Walton Inn at
Dovedale, near Derby, waiting for the fog
to lift, and whilst so waiting wrote the first
draft of the play. Barrett was enthusiastic
about it, and
Ben-my-Chree
was duly
produced for the first time at the Princess’s
Theatre on May 14 (the dramatist’s birthday),
1888, before a packed house in which
every literary celebrity in London was
present. It was, however, by no means a
great success: for some unaccountable reason,
it failed to ‘draw,’ and after running for a
hundred nights, it was withdrawn.” Strange
to say, it was exceedingly popular in America,
and at this moment a company is touring it
in the English provinces.

His next drama,
The Manxman
, was also
produced by Mr Wilson Barrett in Leeds
on August 20, 1894. It was successful
everywhere “except in Manchester and
[122]

New York.” I do not quite understand
Mr Caine’s statement that
The Manxman

was not a success in Manchester, for I
myself remember climbing up on to the
top row of the gallery at the Theatre Royal
(or was it the Prince’s?) because there was
no room anywhere else. On that occasion
the theatre was crowded, and the reception
enthusiastic in every way. Perhaps it was
a “return visit” that I witnessed, and the
Manchester public had had time to gather
its wits and become appreciative.

His third play,
The Christian
, was produced
first in Albany, New York, and afterwards
in Liverpool. In this play the
dramatist’s sister, Miss Lily Hall Caine, took
the part of Polly Love, and afterwards, when
the play was taken on tour, the part of Glory
Quayle. This play is still running, and
meets with enthusiastic applause wherever
it goes. It has been performed in England
and the United States more than two
thousand times.

In passing any criticism on Mr Caine’s
plays, it must at the very outset be confessed
[123]

that he has not yet done himself justice.
For my own part, I have not much faith
in the dramatised versions of novels. A plot
that lends itself to treatment in the form of
a novel is very rarely suitable for production
as a drama; and until Hall Caine is inspired
with the plot of a drama that is at once
cohesive and compact, it seems to me he
will never produce anything worthy of the
powers which he undoubtedly possesses.
Some regard to the unities of Time and
Place is necessary before a drama can be
considered seriously as a work of art, and
it must be acknowledged that Mr Caine
pays very little attention to the technique
of dramaturgy. I do not for one moment
deny that his plays are full of strong and
dramatic situations, that the dialogue is
natural, easy and telling, and that they
are exceedingly well-constructed from a
“popular” standard; but as contributions
to dramatic literature they cannot be seriously
considered. Mr Caine himself would, I feel
sure, be the first to agree with me in all
this. I know that he does not consider his
[124]

dramatic work to be on anything like the
same plane as his novel-writing. It is
rather a matter of surprise that a writer
gifted with so well-developed a dramatic
sense should have been comparatively unsuccessful
in his plays; but, so far as one
can judge, it seems probable that this is due
to the fact that he has only attempted plays
based on novels. When he shall have
developed a plot which obviously lends
itself to stage treatment and no other kind
of treatment, he may be expected to write
a drama which shall take the same position
in dramatic literature that his novels have
attained in the world of fiction.

In the way of short story writing Mr
Caine has done little. A volume entitled

Capt’n Davy’s Honeymoon
, containing three
tales, is his only output in this direction.
Their excellence, and the delicacy of their
treatment, make one regret that he has not
seen fit to devote more time to this particular
branch of his art.
Capt’n Davy’s Honeymoon

refutes conclusively all allegations that Mr
Caine possesses little or no humour. It is
[125]

a Manx tale, full of delicate, beautiful touches
that create the right atmosphere at the very
outset. The second story in the volume,

The Last Confession
, is situated in Morocco,
and in form is based on Rossetti’s blank-verse
poem of the same name. It is a
closely-written piece of work, quietly and
soberly worked out, yet powerful and convincing.

The Blind Mother
is the title of
the third tale, and consists of a slightly
altered episode in his second book,
A Son
of Hagar
. I quote the following extracts
of the dedication to Mr Bram Stoker:—

… Down to this day our friendship has needed
no solder of sweet words to bind it, and I take pleasure
in showing by means of this unpretending book that it
is founded not only on personal liking and much agreement,
but on some wholesome difference and even a
little disputation.
The Last Confession
is an attempt to
solve a moral problem which we have discussed from
opposite poles of sympathy—the absolute value and
sanctity of human life, the right to fight, the right to kill,
the right to resist evil and to set aside at utmost need
the letter of the sixth commandment.
The Blind
Mother
is a somewhat altered version of an episode in
an early romance, and it is presented afresh, with every
apology, because you with another friend, Theodore
Watts, consider it the only worthy part of an unworthy
[126]

book, and also because it appears to be at all
points a companion to the story that goes before it.
Of
Capt’n Davy’s Honeymoon
, I might perhaps say that
it is the complement of the other two—all three being
stories of great and consuming love, father’s, mother’s
and husband’s—but I prefer to confess that I publish it
because I know if anyone should smile at my rough
Manx comrade, doubting if such a man is in nature and
not found among men, I can always answer him and
say, “Ah, then, I am richer than you are by one friend
at least,—Capt’n Davy without his ruggedness and
without his folly, but with his simplicity, his unselfishness
and his honour—Bram Stoker!”

A charming dedication, is it not? and interesting
as a revelation of the motives which
inspired the only three short stories we have
from his pen.
The Last Confession
and
The
Blind Mother
were issued in America under
the title of the former. It is extremely unlikely
that Mr Caine will ever return to the
short story as a means of expressing himself;
the form is of too limited a scope, and of
too ephemeral a nature. A story entitled

Jan, the Icelander
, recently appeared in one
of the weekly papers; but it was originally
prepared by Mr Caine as a dramatic dialogue
which, on one or two occasions, he
recited in public.

[127]

As a poet, Mr Hall Caine has a great
claim to our admiration. It is true, he has
published no poetry in volume form, and
little enough in the magazines, but what has
appeared is of undoubted beauty. I am
able to give here two sonnets which originally
appeared in the
Academy
in the early
eighties. Then, as now, the
Academy
and
the
Athenæum
were the two foremost
literary papers in the kingdom, and at this
time Mr Caine was a critic on the permanent
staff of both papers. It will be seen that
both sonnets reveal a deep and unusual love
of Nature; and it seems to me that that
entitled
Before Sunrise on Helvellyn
ranks
with the very best sonnets of Wordsworth.
Besides its intrinsic beauty, it contains that
“fundamental brain-work” which many
critics hold to be an essential of a fine
sonnet, although Mr Caine’s own criticism
is that “it is wanting in the first quality of
poetic style—flexibility.”

BEFORE SUNRISE ON HELVELLYN

Over the peaks of huge crags uncreate,

Across the stricken stars’ usurped demesne,
[128]

Through mutinous vapours to her realms terrene—

Behold she comes, the morn inviolate.

Girdled with fire, radiant of face, elate,

Leaping the lit waves of the steep ravine—

Here first since eldest time the earth hath seen

Her vesture’s trail, in heaven articulate.

Say not the world grows old: Behold ere long

Forth from the mountains come the swift and strong

Who scale the heights to greet the deathless day;

And in the abysmal plains the sick and sore

Following their feet shall see the imminent grey

Glad dawn has never breathed o’er earth or shore.

This was published in the
Academy
of
January 28, 1882; the following was
published in the same paper on May 12,
1881, whilst Mr Caine was still in his
twenty-eighth year.

WHERE LIES THE LAND?—(
Wordsworth
)

‘Where lies the land of which thy soul would know?’

Beyond the wearied wold, the songless dell,

The purple grape and golden asphodel,

Beyond the zone where streams baptismal flow.

‘Where lies the land to which thy soul would go?’

There where the unvexed senses darkling dwell,

Where never haunting, hurrying footfall fell,

Where toil is not, nor builded hope laid low.
[129]

Rest! Rest! to thy hushed realm how one by one

Old Earth’s tired ages steal away and weep,

Forgotten or unknown, long duty done.

Ah, God! when death in seeming peace shall steep

Life’s loud turmoil, and Time his race hath run—

Shall heart of man at length find rest and sleep?

Other sonnets appeared at about the same
time, particularly noticeable among which
are three to Byron, Keats and Rossetti
respectively.

But though poetry was Hall Caine’s
natural means of expression, and to be a
poet his earliest ambition, yet in his youth
he recognised the fact that in order to reach
a large public some other medium than verse
was necessary. So poetry was more or less
reluctantly abandoned, and fiction soon took
its place.

As a critic, Mr Caine would undoubtedly
have won a foremost place among the

littérateurs
of our time if he had devoted
his whole life to that particular branch of
his art; but soon after his thirtieth year
professional criticism was abandoned in his
absorption in novel-writing. From his
earliest years the young student was a critic.
[130]

He eagerly discussed every book he read
with his friends and acquaintances, and his
first contributions to the Press were in the
form of literary criticism. When Lord
Houghton first saw Caine as a very young
man, he prophesied for him a great future
as a critic, and there can be no doubt that
his powers in this direction are altogether
exceptional. I have read a large amount
of criticism which he contributed to the

Academy
and
Athenæum
in the early
eighties, and I was struck not only by the
mature judgment and catholic taste displayed
therein, but also by the ease and
fluency with which he expressed his views.
Those were the days of signed articles,
and the curious reader may turn up for
himself the back numbers of these two
great literary papers and read those articles
signed “T. Hall Caine.” He will find in
them much to surprise him, for most of
them are truly remarkable as the product
of so youthful a writer.

Mr Caine was particularly fortunate in
obtaining a place on the
Academy
staff. A
[131]

complete stranger to Mr J. S. Cotton (at
that time the editor of this paper), he called
on him and asked for employment. “Certainly!”
replied Mr Cotton, much to the
young man’s confusion, for he had by no
means expected so enthusiastic a reception.
The acquaintance made in this way soon
deepened to a warm friendship which is
to-day valued by both men as much as it
was twenty years ago.

[132]

CHAPTER VII

THE BONDMAN

The Bondman
is a lurid picture of conflicting
passions. Love, of an intense
sadness, is set against hate and mischance.
The strength of the story and the powerfulness
of its narration lay hold of the reader’s
imagination with a shudder, like a grim
masterpiece of Rembrandt. Here is an
extract from the opening book—Rachel, the
Governor’s daughter, has left her home
under the curse of her father, to marry a
peasant Icelander, a good-for-nothing.
Supported by his mother, they live on the
brink of starvation. At last the husband,
in shame, complains that if he had sixty
crowns he would buy a fishing-boat; and
Rachel sells her beautiful hair to procure the
money, handing it over to him to make
the purchase.

[133]

The old woman sat by the hearth and smoked.
Rachel waited with fear at her heart, but the hours
went by and still Stephen did not appear. The old
woman dozed before the fire and snored. At length,
when the night had worn on towards midnight, an unsteady
step came to the door, and Stephen reeled
into the house drunk. The old woman awoke and
laughed.

Rachel grew faint and sank to a seat. Stephen
dropped to his knees on the ground before her, and
in a maudlin cry went on to tell of how he had thought
to make one hundred crowns of her sixty by a wager,
how he had lost fifty, and then in a fit of despair had
spent the other ten.

“Then all is gone—all,” cried Rachel. And thereupon
the old woman shuffled to her feet and said
bitterly, “And a good thing too. I know you—trust
me for seeing through your sly ways, my lady. You
expected to take my son from me with the price of
your ginger hair, you ugly bald-pate.”

Rachel’s head grew light, and with the cry of a
baited creature she turned upon the old mother in a
torrent of hot words. “You low, mean, selfish soul,”
she cried, “I despise you more than the dirt under
my feet.”

Worse than this she said, and the old woman called
on Stephen to hearken to her, for that was the wife he
had brought home to revile his mother.

The old witch shed some crocodile tears, and Stephen
lunged in between the women and with the back of his
hand struck his wife across the face.

At that blow Rachel was silent for a moment, and
then she turned upon her husband. “And so you have
[134]

struck me—me—me,” she cried. “Have you forgotten
the death of Patriksen?”

The blow of her words was harder than the blow of
her husband’s hand. The man reeled before it, turned
white, gasped for breath, then caught up his cap and
fled out into the night.

Stephen never comes back, and the son
born to Rachel is christened Jason and is
the “Bondman” of the tale. He is brought
up by his mother in one of the meanest
huts in the fishing quarter of the Icelandic
capital, and supported by her drudgery.
After nineteen years of flickering belief in
her husband’s return, she comes by the
knowledge that he is indeed living, but
with another wife and another son, in the
Island of Man. Broken-hearted and worn-out
with hard living, Rachel sinks to her
death, and, with her cold hand in his,
Jason swears the oath that forms the
motive of the book.

“My father has killed my mother.”

“No, no, don’t say that,” said the priest.

“Yes, yes,” said the lad more loudly; “not in a day,
or an hour, or a moment, but in twenty long years.”

“Hush, hush, my son,” the old priest murmured.

[135]

But Jason did not hear him. “Now listen,” he cried,
“and hear my vow.” And still he held the cold hand
in his, and still the ashy face rested on them.

“I will hunt the world over until I find that man, and
when I have found him I will slay him.”

“What are you saying?” cried the priest.

But Jason went on with an awful solemnity. “If he
should die, and we should never meet, I will hunt the
world over until I find his son, and when I have found
him, I will kill him for his father’s sake.”

“Silence, silence,” cried the priest.

“So help me, God!” said Jason.

Stephen Orry, on leaving his wife, has
left Iceland as seaman in an English ship,
and deserted from it on touching the Isle
of Man. There he finds a companion in
“the slattern and drab of the island,” and
though vaguely ashamed of her, marries
her. Michael, “little Sunlocks,” is the
offspring of this unhappy union, a union
becoming more degrading and more
horrible to Stephen with every year of
the child’s life. The father’s tortured
brain, after trying every other means
within his knowledge, resolves to kill his
son rather than leave him to grow up
under the influence of such a mother, and
[136]

with that purpose he takes the child out
to sea in his little boat. This passage is
one of most beautiful that Hall Caine has
yet written.

Little Sunlocks had never been out in the boat before
and everything was a wonder and delight to him.

“You said you would take me on the water some
day. Didn’t you, father?”

“Yes, little Sunlocks, yes.”

It was evening, and the sun was sinking behind the
land, very large and red in its setting.

“Do the sun fall down eve’y day, father?”

“It sets, little Sunlocks, it sets.”

“What is sets?”

“Dies.”

“Oh!”

The waters lay asleep under the soft red glow, and
over them the sea-fowl were sailing.

“Why are the white birds sc’eaming?”

“Maybe they’re calling their young, little Sunlocks.”

It was late spring, and on the headland the sheep
were bleating.

“Look at the baby one—away, away up yonder.
What’s it doing there by itself on the ’ock, and c’ying,
and c’ying, and c’ying?”

“Maybe it’s lost, little Sunlocks.”

“Then why doesn’t somebody go and tell its father?”

And the innocent face was full of trouble.

The sun went down, the twilight deepened, the air
grew chill, the water black, and Stephen was still pulling
round the head.

[137]

“Father, where does the night go when we are
asleep?”

“To the other world, little Sunlocks.”

“Oh, I know—heaven.”

Stephen stripped off his guernsey and wrapped it
about the child. His eyes shone brightly, his mouth
was parched, but he did not flinch. All thoughts, save
one thought, had faded from his view.

But no, he could not look into the child’s eyes and
do it. The little one would sleep soon, and then it
would be easier done. So he took him in his arms
and wrapped him in a piece of sailcloth.

“Shut your eyes and sleep, little Sunlocks.”

“I’m not s’eepy, I’m not.”

Yet soon the little lids fell, opened again and fell
once more, and then suddenly the child started up.

“But I haven’t said my p’ayers.”

“Say them now, little Sunlocks.”

Then lisping the simple words of the old Icelandic
prayer, the child’s voice, drowsy and slow, floated away
over the silent water:—

“‘S’eeping or waking, verily we

To God alone belong;

As darkness walks, and shadows flee,

We sing our even-song.’”

“There’s another verse, little Sunlocks—another
verse.”

“‘O Father, we are Thy children all,

Thy little children, so weak and small.

Let angels keep

Guard of our s’eep,

And till we wake our spi’its take,

Eternal God, for Ch’ist His sake.’”

[138]

He finds it impossible to murder the
innocent little one, and returns home to
find his wife dead.

Then he decides to give the child away,
never doubting but that the sunshine of his
broken life would be an acceptable present
to anyone. The Deputy-Governor, a man
of great benevolence and generosity, is his
choice; and the Governor accepts the trust,
thereby estranging his wife and his own six
sons. Adam Fairbrother, the Deputy-Governor,
has a daughter of Michael’s age,
and until little Greeba goes away to be
brought up in the household of the Duke of
Athol, the two children live and play together.
Michael grows up to be his foster-father’s
right hand, and the jealousy of the
six sons and their mother cause a rupture in
the family, the mother and sons taking the
gift of all Adam’s private property and going
away to live on it. At the age of eighteen,
Greeba returns from London, and at the
same time Stephen Orry reappears. He
has gathered together two hundred pounds,
and with it he asks that Michael shall go to
[139]

Iceland, there to search out Rachel and her
child and succour them from the poverty-stricken
life in which Stephen had left them,
so long before. Michael refuses the money,
but accepts the charge, and takes ship for
Iceland on the very day that Jason, in
pursuance of his vow, reaches the Isle of
Man.

Jason lands on the island, only to rescue
his father from drowning and watch over
him as he dies. He takes up life with Adam
Fairbrother’s sons, and for four years grows
in love for Greeba and her father. Then the
office of Deputy-Governor is taken from
Adam; and turning for home to his wife, in
the house that he had given her, is refused
admission. He remembers Michael Sunlocks,
and determines to go to him in
Iceland, leaving Greeba to live with her
mother, and the love of none but Jason.
The mother dies and the sons treat Greeba
very hardly, so that she accepts the love of
Jason. Then comes a letter from Michael
which fans into flame the embers of her love.
He writes to her, tells her of his position,
[140]

and asks her to come out to him to be his
wife. In a scene which shows the height of
Jason’s nobility, Greeba takes back her
love.

“It is no fault of yours, but now I know I do not
love you.”

He turned his face away from her, and when he spoke
again his voice broke in his throat.

“You could never think how fast and close my love
will grow. Let us wait,” he said.

“It would be useless,” she answered.

“Stay,” he said stiffly, “do you love anyone else?”

But before she had time to speak he said quickly,
“Wait! I’ve no right to ask that question, and I will
not hear you answer it.”

“You are very noble, Jason,” she said.

“I was thinking of myself,” he said.

“Jason,” she cried, “I meant to ask you to release
me, but you have put me to shame, and now I ask you
to choose for me. I have promised myself to you, and
if you wish it I will keep my promise.”

At that he stood, a sorrowful man, beside her for a
moment’s space before he answered her, and only the
tones of his voice could tell how much his answer cost
him.

“No—ah, no,” he said; “no, Greeba, to keep your
promise to me would be too cruel to you.”

“Think of yourself now,” she cried.

“There’s no need to do that,” he said, “for either
way I am a broken man. But you shall not also be
[141]

broken-hearted, and neither shall the man who parts
us.”

Saying this, a ghastly white hand seemed to sweep
across his face, but at the next moment he smiled feebly
and said, “God bless you both.”

Greeba goes to Michael and Iceland, and
Jason, remembering his vow, follows her.
A succession of events have made Sunlocks
the Governor of Iceland, for its short-lived
Republic. Knowing that the man he is in
search of is the Governor, Jason now finds
that the Governor is Michael Sunlocks.
Beside himself with the knowledge of
all the man has unconsciously stolen from
him, Jason dogs him with intent to kill,
but, being discovered by Greeba, is denounced
by her and sentenced to penal
servitude in the sulphur-mines.

The six sons of Adam Fairbrother, discovering
the purpose of Greeba’s flight
from their home, decide that in brotherliness
they will go to her and share her
prosperity. Failing in their purpose, they
successfully attempt to poison Michael’s
mind against her, telling him that Greeba
[142]

had loved Jason at the time that she had
left the Isle of Man. Michael, in his revulsion
of feeling, determines to take from
Greeba the position for the sake of which
he believes her to have married, and
summons the
Althing
in order to resign
his office of Governor. While the meeting
is in progress, the doors of the Senate
House are locked, and the building surrounded
by Danish soldiers. The Republic
is overthrown, and Michael Sunlocks, as a
political prisoner, is sent to the mines.

Thus the most touching and at the same
time the most terrible part of the story is
reached. Touching because of the great
love that grows up in Jason’s heart for
Sunlocks, his bondfellow; terrible, because
of the fiendish inhumanities of Michael’s
lot. This is the description of the place
of torment.

It was a grim wilderness of awful things, not cold
and dead and dumb like the rest of that haggard land,
but hot and alive with inhuman fire and clamorous with
devilish noises. A wide ashen plain within a circle
of hills whereon little snow could rest for the furnace
[143]

that raged beneath the surface; shooting with shrill
whistles in shafts of hot steam from a hundred fumeroles;
bubbling up in a thousand jets of boiling water;
hissing from a score of green cauldrons; grumbling low
with mournful sounds underneath, like the voice of
subterranean wind, and sending up a noxious stench
through heavy whorls of vapour that rolled in a fetid
atmosphere overhead. Oh, it was a fearsome place,
like nothing on God’s earth but a mouldering wreck of
human body, vast and shapeless, and pierced deep
with foulest ulcers; a leper spot on earth’s face; a
seething vat full of broth of hell’s own brewing. And
all around was the peaceful snow, and beyond the
line of the southern hills was the tranquil sea, and
within the northern mountains was a quiet lake of water
as green as the grass of spring.

Spurred by the cruel treatment of Sunlocks,
Jason breaks away, carrying on his
shoulders the half-insensible body of his
now blind and maimed companion. They
manage to reach the valley of Thingvellir,
where the biennial of
Althing
is taking
place, and there, as the custom allows,
Jason demands justice and freedom. It is
granted to him as a criminal of Iceland,
but denied to Sunlocks as a Danish
prisoner; and Sunlocks is therefore sent
in his helpless, blind condition to the
[144]

custody of a priest on an outstanding
island. There Greeba, who has followed
him in his wanderings, takes domestic
service with the priest, that she may tend
Michael and win back his love, and there
Jason comes, to lay down his life for his
friend after effecting his escape.

Thus ends one of the most powerful novels
ever written, great by reason of its strength
of thought and directness of utterance.
And yet, here and there in its pages, are
passages of wonderful softness, tender
pictures of the consolation of childhood—little
Sunlocks, little Greeba, and the little
child Michael. This is what we grow to
look for in Hall Caine, the tenderness and
the tragedy of humanity. They form the
strength of his novels, and it is they that will
make them live through the ages, based as
they are on truths and passions that are
old as the world is old.

The publication of
The Bondman
established,
once and for all, Hall Caine’s claims
to genius; it confirmed the impression
created by
The Deemster
, and there was
[145]

hardly one dissentient voice in the verdict
of the critics who proclaimed it as one of
the masterpieces of the century. The late
T. E. Brown wrote the following letter to
Mr Caine immediately after reading
The
Bondman
.

“
Clifton
,
February 1890
.

“
My Dear Sir
,—I have sent a review of
The Bondman

to the
Scots Observer
by same post; and I hope
that it will appear in next Saturday’s issue.

“A thousand thanks for the work sent to me by
Heinemann. How splendidly he has done it! I am
reading it again with fresh interest and admiration.
Nor is it otherwise than pleasant to me to find in your
story some trail of what I must suppose is old inveterate
Manxness. How curious that you should have preserved
echoes, however faint, of your father’s talk! But why

curious
? Still you will agree with me that they ought
to be ruthlessly (!) extirpated. They turn up in your
English, not in your Anglo-Manx. I give an instance—after
the verb
threaten
an inversion as with interrogations,

e.g.
, ‘He threatened what would he do to them.’ Let
me give that in your ear with full Manx flavour, and you
will feel yourself standing very close to the Lob-y-Valley.
But even without the flavouring, you perceive that it is
Manx, though it may be a rusticity common to many
parts of the country.

“Trailing behind her these insignificant appendages,
your book floats forth to certain success, a magnificent
craft, fit for deep waters and the large horizon. Good
[146]

luck to her! Kindest regards to Mrs Caine and
Ralphie, in which my daughters cordially unite.—Ever
yours,

“
T. E. Brown
.”

This letter is but one out of many
hundreds received by Mr Caine from all
parts of the world, congratulating him on
his success. The dramatic tension, so
admirably sustained throughout every page
of the book, took the literary world by
storm, and the sale of the book to-day,
eleven years after publication, is extremely
large.

The Bondman
was written with Mr
Caine’s usual care. With his wife and
child he paid a two months’ visit to
Iceland, there to gather material and local
colour for his book. It was begun in
March 1889, at Aberleigh Lodge, Bexley
Heath, Kent, and was finished in October
of the same year at Castlerigg Cottage,
Keswick. Always greatly attracted by
Cumberland, Mr Caine had now settled
down there permanently; it was not until
a few years afterwards that he made his
home in the Isle of Man.

[147]

Later in this year Sir Henry Irving
commissioned him to write a drama with
Mahomet as the central character. The
subject fascinated him, and in a short
time he was immersed in the study of
Mahomet, his life and his times. Three
acts were written in a fever of enthusiasm;
and then came a great disappointment.
The almighty British Public, hearing of
Mr Caine’s work, took upon itself to be
shocked, and, growing tired of silent indignation,
raised its voice in alarm, and
protested vehemently. The Press took up
the cry and pointed out that British
Mohammedans would certainly be offended.
Sir Henry took alarm, and telegraphed to
Mr Caine that the idea could not be
carried out. But the dramatist was heart
and soul in his work, and only spared the
time to write a vehement article in
The
Speaker
, pointing out that his critics were
too hasty, before he went on with the
writing of his play and finished it. Irving,
of course, was as much annoyed as Mr
Caine, and offered the latter a substantial
[148]

sum to recompense him for the trouble
he had taken; Mr Caine, however, refused
to accept a penny, and offered his
play to Willard for production in America.
It was at once accepted, but has not yet
been put on the boards.

[149]

CHAPTER VIII

THE SCAPEGOAT

Although in comparison with
The Bondman
,

The Deemster
or
The Manxman
,
The
Scapegoat
is not a masterpiece, yet it is in
no sense a failure, or derogatory to the
gifted hand that wrote it. Written next in
order after
The Bondman
,
The Scapegoat

seems to be an aftermath of that, one of the
three greatest works, in our opinion, of Hall
Caine. It is bitter without much sweetness,
and it draws out its long note of human woe
without one cheering ray. Tenderness and
hope are indeed present, and they are the
avenues through which the writer approaches
his story, and the means whereby he enchains
the hearts of his readers, gladdening
and strengthening their souls by his own
fervency of belief. Hall Caine has a
[150]

wonderful power of creating atmosphere.
In this novel of
The Scapegoat
, we tread
the tortuous streets of a Morocco town, we
think in the inflated metaphors of its inhabitants,
we brush against the varied
costumes that denote their myriad nationalities.
We feel religious antagonism to be
a race-element, Oriental cunning and cruelty
matters of course; and we read of the
Spaniards as though they were to us a
strange people from a far-off continent, so
thoroughly has the writer imbibed the spirit
of his tale.

Israel ben Oliel is a man hardened by
circumstance. He is a Jew whose father
married for gain and knew no paternal
tenderness. Brought up in England, Israel
returns to his native country, Morocco, on
the death of his father, and takes the post
of assessor of tributes for the Kaid of
Tetuan. His calling, though pursued at
the first with justice, makes him to be hated
by the over-taxed people, and on his
marriage with the daughter of the grand
Rabbi, they gather before the house to curse
[151]

and prophesy evil. Ben Oliel and his wife,
Ruth, take up their worse than lonely life
in Israel’s house in the Jewish quarter. For
long they have no child and are held in
derision by the Jews their neighbours; but
after the space of three years their prayers
are answered, and on the birth-night of the
child, Israel prepares a feast and invites
his enemies that he may triumph over
them.

Israel … leapt up from the table and faced full
upon his guests, and cried, “Now you know what it is;
and now you know why you are bidden to this supper!
You are here to rejoice with me over my enemies!
Drink! drink! Confusion to all of them!” And he
lifted a winecup and drank himself.

They were abashed before him, and tried to edge out
of the patio into the street; but he put his back to the
passage, and faced them again.

“You will not drink?” he said. “Then listen to
me.” He dashed the winecup out of his hand and it
broke into fragments on the floor. His laughter was
gone, his face was aflame, and his voice rose to a shrill
cry. “You foretold the doom of God upon me, you
brought me low, you made me ashamed: but behold
how the Lord has lifted me up! You set your women
to prophesy that God would not suffer me to raise up
children to be a reproach and a curse among my people;
but God has this day given me a son like the best of
[152]

you. More than that—more than that—my son shall
yet see—”

The slave woman was touching his arm. “It is a
girl,” she said; “a girl!”

For a moment Israel stammered and paused. Then
he cried, “No matter! She shall see your own children
fatherless, and with none to show them mercy! She
shall see the iniquity of their fathers remembered
against them! She shall see them beg their bread,
and seek it in desolate places! And now you can go!
Go! go!”

He had stepped aside as he spoke, and with a sweep
of his arm he was driving them all out like sheep before
him, dumfounded and with their eyes in the dust, when
suddenly there was a low cry from the inner room.

It was Ruth calling for her husband. Israel wheeled
about and went in to her hurriedly, and his enemies,
by one impulse of evil instinct, followed him and
listened from the threshold.

Ruth’s face was a face of fear, and her lips moved,
but no voice came from them.

And Israel said, “How is it with you, my dearest,
joy of my joy and pride of my pride?”

Then Ruth lifted the babe from her bosom and said,
“The Lord has counted my prayer to me as sin—look,
see; the child is both dumb and blind!”

Israel sinks yet deeper in the contempt
of his countrymen because of what seems to
them a manifest judgment of God. And
he, knowing his condemnation to be unjust,
is soured by the knowledge, and, in rebellion
[153]

against God and man, changes his hitherto
upright dealings, becoming in very deed a
persecutor of the people. Meanwhile he
has taken into his household a little negro
waif as a companion for his stricken child
Naomi. He grows up to be the devoted
follower of Israel in his adversities. When
Naomi has reached her seventh year, her
mother dies, and is buried in the Jewish
cemetery by six State prisoners from the jail,
for none other in his isolation can Israel find
to help him. He returns to his orphaned
child and wraps around her all his thought,
all his tenderness. Nightly he reads to her
from the
Koran
, doing his best to dispel the
terrible fear that she, knowing nothing of
God, may stand condemned in the next life;
for in a vision of the night, he has seen
Naomi going out into the wilderness as the
scapegoat for his sins. So seven more
years pass and Israel’s heart softens towards
the people under him, and he begins
to hate the tyrannies that are exercised over
them. And in the disturbance of his heart
he takes a journey out to where the prophet
[154]

Mohammed of Mequinez, a man who has
given up all to the cause of the poor and
afflicted, holds his camp of refugees. The
prophet tells him: “Exact no more than is
just; do violence to no man; accuse none
falsely; part with your riches and give to
the poor:” and with the hope in his heart
that such sacrifice will turn God’s face towards
Naomi, Israel returns home on foot,
giving away all that he carries with him
except that which his necessities require.
He reaches home in tattered Moorish
clothing which at first prevents his recognition.

Then Ali knew him and cried, “God save us! What
has happened?”

“What has happened here?” said Israel. “Naomi,”
he faltered, “what of her?”

“Then you have heard?” said Ali. “Thank God,
she is now well.” Israel laughed—his laugh was like a
scream.

“More than that—a strange thing has befallen her
since you went away,” said Ali.

“What?”

“She can hear.”

“It’s a lie!” cried Israel, and he raised his hand and
struck Ali to the floor. But at the next minute he was
lifting him up and sobbing and saying, “Forgive me, my
[155]

brave boy. I was mad, my son; I did not know what
I was doing. But do not torture me. If what you tell
me is true, there is no man so happy under heaven;
but if it is false, there is no fiend in hell need envy
me.”

And Ali answered through his tears, “It is true, my
father—come and see.”

Naomi has gained her hearing in an
illness, and it is with suffering that she learns
to bear sound. It is long before she can
speak. Israel has sorrowed at her suffering
and almost reproached God with her dumbness.
A plague of locusts is eating up
everything off the face of the land. The
Jews in vain beseech the Almighty to send
His floods, and then turn their thoughts to
the sinner among them whom they believe
to be drawing down God’s wrath on their
nation. They select Israel and assemble with
the purpose of putting him to death. Walking
in the town he stumbles across the
people who are crowded together expecting
him.

With a loud shout, as if it had been a shout out of
one great throat, the crowd encompassed Israel, crying,
“Kill him!” Israel stopped, and lifted his heavy face
[156]

upon the people; but neither did he cry out nor make
any struggle for his life. He stood erect and silent in
their midst, and massive and square. His brave bearing
did not break their fury. They fell upon him, a hundred
hands together. One struck at his face, another tore at
his long grey hair, and a third thrust him down on to his
knees.

No one had yet observed on the outer rim of the
crowd the pale slight girl that stood there—blind, dumb,
powerless, frail, and so softly beautiful—a waif on the
margin of a tempestuous sea. Through the thick barriers
of Naomi’s senses everything was coming to her ugly and
terrible. Her father was there! They were tearing him
to pieces!

Suddenly she was gone from the side of the two black
women. Like a flash of light she had passed through
the bellowing throng. She had thrust herself between
the people and her father, who was on the ground: she
was standing over him with both arms upraised, and at
that instant God loosed her tongue, for she was crying,
“Mercy! Mercy!”

Then the crowd fell back in great fear. The dumb
had spoken. No man dared to touch Israel any more.
The hands that had been lifted against him dropped
back useless, and a wide circle formed around him. In
the midst of it stood Naomi. Her blind face quivered;
see seemed to glow like a spirit. And like a spirit she
had driven back the people from their deed of blood as
with the voice of God—she, the blind, the frail, the
helpless.

Israel rose to his feet, for no man touched him again,
and the procession of judges, which had now come up,
was silent. And, seeing how it was that in the hour of
[157]

his great need the gift of speech had come upon Naomi,
his heart rose big within him, and he tried to triumph
over his enemies, and say, “You thought God’s arm
was against me, but behold how God has saved me out
of your hands.”

But he could not speak. The dumbness that had
fallen from his daughter seemed to have dropped upon
him.

At that moment Naomi turned to him and said,
“Father!”

Then the cup of Israel’s heart was full. His throat
choked him. So he took her by the hand in silence,
and down a long alley of the people they passed through
the Mellah gate and went home to their house. Her
eyes were to the earth, and she wept as she walked; but
his face was lifted up, and his tears and his blood ran
down his cheeks together.

Naomi can now speak, and Israel’s world
is a happier one. Issuing from his house
in the night time, he goes into the poorest
quarters of the town on errands of mercy,
and soon in his liberality becomes a poor
man. The people, seeing his poverty,
account for it by the supposition that he
must be falling from the Kaid’s favour, and
curse and jeer at him all the more openly.
From secret charity, Israel determines to
renounce his position as servant of the
[158]

wicked Kaid, and waits upon him to deliver
up the seal of office. The Kaid receives
him at first with suspicion, then with
contempt, finally with insult. The wife of
the Kaid strikes Israel with her fan.

In the blank stupor of the moment, every eye being
on the two that stood in the midst, no one had observed
until then that another had entered the patio. It was
Naomi. How long she had been there no one knew,
and how she had come unnoticed through the corridors
out of the streets scarce anyone—even when time
sufficed to arrange the scattered thoughts of the
Makhazni, the guard at the gate—could clearly tell.
She stood under the arch, with one hand at her breast,
which heaved visibly with emotion, and the other hand
stretched out to touch the open iron-clamped door, as
if for help and guidance. Her head was held up, her
lips were apart, and her motionless blind eyes seemed
to stare wildly. She had heard the hot words. She
had heard the sound of the blow that followed them.
Her father was smitten! Her father! Her father! It
was then that she uttered the cry. All eyes turned to her.
Quaking, reeling, almost falling, she came tottering down
the patio. Soul and sense seemed to be struggling
together in her blind face. What did it all mean?
What was happening? Her fixed eyes stared as if they
must burst the bonds that bound them, and look, and
see, and know!

At that moment God wrought a mighty work, a
wondrous change, such as He had brought to pass but
[159]

twice or thrice since men were born blind into His
world of light. In an instant, at a thought, by one
spontaneous flash, as if the spirit of the girl tore down
the dark curtains which had hung for seventeen years
over the windows of her eyes, Naomi saw!

Katrina, the Kaid’s wife, pretends to see
in this nothing but imposture. Telling her
husband that Naomi’s defects have been
assumed, she imparts her own rage to him,
and he sentences both Israel and his
daughter to be put out of the town.

“Guards, take both of them. Set the man on an
ass, and let the girl walk barefoot before him; and let
a crier cry beside them: ‘So shall it be done to every
man who is an enemy of the Kaid, and to every woman
who is a play-actor and a cheat!’ Thus let them pass
through the streets and through the people until they
are come to a gate of the town, and then cast them forth
from it like lepers and like dogs!”

In the now driving rain Naomi and Israel
are thus paraded in the streets, and all
the townsfolk mass themselves to follow
in a huge, howling, jeering procession.
Naomi walks with closed eyes, not being able
to bear the light, and for several days she
seeks shade and darkness, almost in terror.
[160]

Once out of the town, they find people who
are kind to them, giving them food and
garments; and they settle in a hut among
their new-found friends. Israel’s little remaining
money is expended on a few sheep
and oxen, and a living is found from the sale
of wool, butter and milk, which they send
into the town with the neighbours’ market
produce. They live in happiness for some
months until a crushing blow falls. One of
Israel’s last acts of mercy while in office was
to liberate a number of prisoners. The
knowledge of this has now come to the
Kaid’s ears, and he orders the arrest of Ben
Oliel. Israel is hurried away to a distant
prison, and Naomi is left alone, a child in
knowledge both of the world and of the
dangerous people around her. The thought
of the evil that may come to her preys upon
Israel’s mind in his helplessness, and gradually
reduces him to insanity. His comrades,
in their sympathy, do all they can to arouse
him, and fresh prisoners as they arrive tell
of the Kaid’s tyrannies, and of how the
people of Tetuan regret their treatment of
[161]

Israel, wishing him back among them. The
kindly efforts are useless, until the wit of the
prison tells a harrowing tale in the hope of
bringing Israel to tears.

That same night, when darkness fell over the dark
place, and the prisoners tied up their cotton
handkerchiefs and lay down to sleep, Tarby sat beside Israel’s
place with sighs and moans and other symptoms of a
dejected air.

“Sidi, master,” he faltered, “I had a little brother
once, and he was blind. Born blind, Sidi, my own
mother’s son. But you wouldn’t think how happy he
was for all that? You see, Sidi, he never missed anything,
and so his little face was like laughing water! By
Allah! I loved that boy better than all the world!
Women? Why—well, never mind! He was six and I
was eighteen, and he used to ride on my back! Black
curls all over, Sidi, and big white eyes that looked at
you for all they couldn’t see. Well, a bleeder came from
Soos—curse his great-grandfather! Looked at little
Hosain—‘Scales!’ said he—burn his father! ‘Bleed
him and he’ll see!’ So they bled him, and he did see.
By Allah! yes, for a minute—half a minute! ‘Oh,
Tarby,’ he cried—I was holding him; then he—he—‘Tarby,’
he cried faint, like a lamb that’s lost in the
mountains—and then—and then—‘Oh, oh, Tarby,’ he
moaned. Sidi, Sidi, I
paid
that bleeder—there and
then—
this
way! That’s why I’m here!”

It was a lie, but Tarby acted it so well that his voice
broke in his throat, and great drops fell from his eyes on
to Israel’s hand.

[162]

Tarby is successful, and with his tears the
old man’s madness leaves him. Hardly has
he regained his sanity when the order comes
for his release, and Israel in joy and thankfulness
hurries away to rejoin his child.

In the meanwhile, much has befallen
Naomi. At first she clings to her lonely hut,
refusing the neighbours’ hospitality; but
little by little she gathers from their talk
some idea of what her father’s life in prison
must be, and finally determines to follow the
custom expected from prisoners’ friends and
relatives, in carrying food to him. She
sets out with a pannier of loaves and another
of eggs on either side of her borrowed mule,
paying no heed to the expostulations of the
good people around her. But as her journey
progresses her heart begins to sink. Knowing
nothing of evil, and expecting friendliness
from all men, she is disheartened by the
knowledge that now forces itself upon her, and
as, by theft, and in payment for her lodging,
her stock of food diminishes, she almost resolves
to turn back. By this time she has reached
Tetuan, and close to the town gates she is
[163]

met and recognised by a former servant of
Israel.

The two might have passed unknown, for Habeebah
was veiled, but that Naomi had forgotten her blanket
and was uncovered. In another moment the poor
frightened girl, with all her brave bearing gone, was
weeping on the black woman’s breast.

“Whither are you going?” said Habeebah.

“To my father,” Naomi began. “He is in prison;
they say he is starving; I was taking food to him, but I
am lost, I don’t know my way, and besides—”

“The very thing!” cried Habeebah.

Habeebah had her own little scheme. It was meant
to win emancipation at the hands of her master, and
paradise for her soul when she died. Naomi, who was
a Jewess, was to turn Muslima. That was all. Then
her troubles would end, and wondrous fortune would
descend upon her, and her father who was in prison
would be set free.

Now, religion was nothing to Naomi; she hardly
understood what it meant. The differences of faith
were less than nothing, but her father was everything,
and so she clutched at Habeebah’s bold promises like
a drowning soul at the froth of a breaker.

“My father will be let out of prison? You are sure—quite
sure?” she asked.

“Quite sure,” answered Habeebah stoutly.

Naomi’s hopes of ever reaching her father were now
faint, and her poor little stock of eggs and bread looked
like folly to her new-born worldliness.

“Very well,” she said. “I will turn Muslima.”

[164]

The two go together to the Kaid, who,
seeing Naomi’s beauty, resolves to ward
off the threatened displeasure of the Sultan
by making a gift of her at the coming
royal feast But in the interim, Naomi’s
former nurse has found her and told her,
that to embrace Mahometanism would mean
separation from her father. The girl halts
long in her distress. She is sent to the
harem, and from the harem to the prison.
She is given her choice of Mahometanism
or death, and is finally overborne by the
Jews of Tetuan, who, coming to her prison
bars, entreat her to renounce her religion.

That night the place under the narrow window in
the dark lane was occupied by a group of Jews. “Sister,”
they whispered, “sister of our people, listen. The
Basha is a hard man. This day he has robbed us of all
we had that he may pay for the Sultan’s visit. Listen!
We have heard something. We want Israel ben Oliel
back among us. He was our father, he was our brother.
Save his life for the sake of our children, for the Basha
has taken their bread. Save him, sister, we beg, we
entreat, we pray.”

Thus it comes to pass that Israel is
released from prison, and hastens in his
[165]

ignorance to the place where he had left
Naomi, only to find it empty. He is told
that she is in the women’s apartments at
the Kaid’s palace, and the news breaks
down his reason; he stays, in the childishness
of insanity, in the home of his former
happiness.

The Sultan enters Tetuan amid much
outward pomp, but there is an undercurrent
of treachery. A rumour of the coming of
the Mahdi, Mohammed of Mequinez, is in
the air, and beneath that, a feeling of something
more—of the revolt which shall abet
the Spaniards in their expected siege of
the town. The Mahdi comes, and demands
the freedom of Naomi, but without success.
Leaving the palace, he decides to follow
the plan at which he had before hesitated,
the plan of co-operation with the Spaniards.
This plot has been contrived by Ali, the
boy whom Israel had trained from childhood;
and he has gained the promise of
support from all the principal townspeople.

[166]

Ali’s stout heart stuck at nothing. He was for
having the Spaniards brought up to the gates of the
town on the very night when the whole majesty and
iniquity of Barbary would be gathered in one room;
then, locking the entire kennel of dogs in the banqueting
hall, firing the Kasbah and burning it to the ground,
with all the Moorish tyrants inside of it like rats in a
trap.

One danger attended this bold adventure, for Naomi’s
person was within the Kasbah walls. To meet this
peril Ali was himself to find his way into the dungeon,
deliver Naomi, lock the Kasbah gate, and deliver up to
another the key that should serve as a signal for the
beginning of the great night’s work.

Also one difficulty attended it, for while Ali would be
at the Kasbah there would be no one to bring up the
Spaniards at the proper moment for the siege—no one
in Tetuan on whom the strangers could rely not to
lead them blindfold into a trap. To meet this difficulty
Ali had gone in search of the Mahdi, revealed to him
his plan, and asked him to help in the downfall of his
master’s enemies by leading the Spaniards at the right
moment to the gates that should be thrown open to
receive them.

Evening falls, and Ali proceeds to carry
out his plans. He passes into the palace,
finds Naomi, and leads her to the Mahdi.
Then he joins the Spaniards, but forgets to
lock the doors of the banqueting hall; and
when the town gates open to the enemy,
[167]

news is carried to the palace and the guests
scatter, most of them escaping. Ali, in his
hatred, hunts the deserted palace for the
Kaid, and in so doing meets with his death.
The Kaid, having stayed behind to secure
his money-bags, finds himself entrapped, and
is stoned to death by the enraged townspeople.

Meanwhile the Mahdi has taken Naomi
to her dying father; and over the deathbed
of Israel they are betrothed. So ends
The
Scapegoat
.

It will be seen that to carry out such a
plot as this, with its almost miraculous crises,
needs a high standard of literary skill.
That the writer has succeeded there can be
no doubt, for Naomi stands out, a creature
of living flesh and blood, in whom nature
and circumstance work to perfection through
suffering. Israel’s character is followed in
its development, with convincing truth:
the sudden rush of joy that elates the man,
the reaction that depresses him, the acts of
mercy that soften him—all lead irrevocably
to the final scene of a soul reconciled to its
[168]

God. In this novel, as in all the best work
of Mr Caine, the keynote is suffering,
but suffering that of itself ennobles and
purifies.

Whilst writing
The Scapegoat
, Mr Caine
suffered severely from neurasthenia; his illness,
of course, had effect upon his work,
making it more sombre and gloomy than it
might otherwise have been. When the
work was published he received an urgent
request from the Chief Rabbi asking him to
visit Russia and write about the persecutions
of the Jews in that country. He went
in 1892, armed with signed documents
from Lord Salisbury and the Chief Rabbi
which were calculated to gain his admittance
wherever he sought to go. The
novelist was most warmly received wherever
he went; but he was never able to
make use of his experiences in the form of
a novel. The subject, he felt, was altogether
too vast for his experience: it would
require years of study which he could not
give. On his return to London, he lectured
before the Jewish Workmen’s Club in the
[169]

East End, “in a hall crammed to suffocation.
I shall never forget that audience, the tears,
the laughter, the applause, the wild embraces
to which I was subjected by some of those
poor exiles of humanity.”

[170]

CHAPTER IX

THE MANXMAN

In
The Manxman
, Hall Caine sounds the
depths of humanity, and brings up the cry
of living men and women to our ears. The
sacred powerfulness of Love is his theme,
the depths of spiritual degradation in which
Love, twisted, distorted, makes its own
punishment—the ennobling beauty of carrying
out its great Unselfishness in simple fearlessness.
And this is shown in the three
characters, Kate, Pete and Philip, which,
as they develop, touch every chord of
sympathy in the reader’s gamut of sensibility.

Kate and Pete are children of one
generation. Life is theirs and the light
of the sun; yesterday has no hold over
them, neither has to-morrow. Philip is the
[171]

aristocrat, knowing his father’s, and his
father’s father, heavy with the knowledge
of their follies and sins; the world calls to
him, for him there is a great To-morrow.
Into the complexity of his nature comes love—love
for a girl who is “of the people”—Kate;
and the alternate yielding to and
resisting his love makes the tragedy of
the three lives.

The scene is laid entirely in the Isle
of Man. Manx characteristics, humours,
eccentricities and pathos making up the
atmosphere so exclusively that when we
are introduced for the moment to an
assemblage chiefly English, we feel ourselves
to be in a foreign element.

Philip Christian is brought up by his
aunt, who in dread lest the principal
weakness of their house should appear in
him, makes it her task to keep in his remembrance
the misery of his father’s life,
who, in marrying beneath him, ruined his
career and lost his self-respect. We are
carried through Philip’s childhood with its
love for little peasant Pete, until, with
[172]

Pete’s child-sweetheart, Kate, the miller’s
daughter, the three stand together on the
borderland of the mystery of manhood
and womanhood. Then Pete, leaving
Manxland to seek a fortune which shall
make him acceptable in the eyes of Kate’s
parents, commits his sweetheart to Philip’s
care and toils his youth away in South
Africa. Philip in his
rôle
of protector and
letter-carrier, visits the inn of Sulby, Kate’s
home, now frequently, now infrequently, as
his hidden love for Kate or the thought
of treason to his friend surges uppermost.
And Kate’s child-love for Pete fades, passes
into woman’s passion for Philip. Understanding
nothing of Philip’s feelings, but
knowing his love for her, and caring for
nothing else, she rebels at his silence and
sometimes consciously, sometimes unconsciously,
uses all her power to tempt him
to break it.

After the lapse of some months, in which Philip had
not been seen at Sulby, she wrote him a letter. It was
to say how anxious she had been at the length of time
since she had last heard from Pete, and to ask if he
[173]

had any news to relieve her fears. The poor little lie
was written in a trembling hand which shook honestly
enough, but from the torment of other feelings.

Philip answered the letter in person. Something had
been speaking to him day and night, like the humming
of a top, finding him pretexts on which to go; but now
he had to make excuses for staying so long away. It
was evening. Kate was milking, and he went out to
her in the cowhouse.

“We began to think we were to see no more of you,”
she said, over the rattle of the milk in the pail.

“I’ve—I’ve been ill,” said Philip.

The rattle died to a thin hiss. “Very ill?” she
asked.

“Well, no—not seriously,” he answered.

“I never once thought of that,” she said. “Something
ought to have told me. I’ve been reproaching
you, too.”

Philip felt ashamed of his subterfuge, but yet more
ashamed of the truth; so he leaned against the door
and watched in silence. The smell of hay floated down
from the loft, and the odour of the cow’s breath came
in gusts as she turned her face about. Kate sat on the
milking-stool close by the ewer, and her head, on which
she wore a sun-bonnet, she leaned against the cow’s
side.

“No news of Pete, then? No?” she said.

“No,” said Philip.

Kate dug her head deeper in the cow, and muttered,
“Dear Pete! So simple, so natural.”

“He is,” said Philip.

“So good-hearted, too.”

“Yes.”

[174]

“And such a manly fellow—any girl might like him,”
said Kate.

“Indeed, yes,” said Philip.

There was silence again, and two pigs which had been
snoring on the manure heap outside began to snort
their way home. Kate turned her head so that the
crown of the sun-bonnet was toward Philip, and
said,—

“Oh, dear! Can there be anything so terrible as
marrying somebody you don’t care for?”

“Nothing so bad,” said Philip.

The mouth of the sun-bonnet came round. “Yes,
there’s one thing worse, Philip.”

“No?”

“Not having married somebody you do,” said Kate,
and the milk rattled like hail.

Kate began to hate the very name of Pete. She
grew angry with Philip also. Why couldn’t he guess?
Concealment was eating her heart out. The next time
she saw Philip, he passed her in the market-place on the
market-day, as she stood by the tipped-up gig, selling
her butter. There was a chatter of girls all round as
he bowed and went on. This vexed her, and she sold
out at a penny a pound less, got the horse from the
“Saddle,” and drove home early.

On the way to Sulby she overtook Philip and drew
up. He was walking to Kirk Michael to visit the old
Deemster, who was ill. Would he not take a lift? He
hesitated, half declined, and then got into the gig. As
she settled herself comfortably after this change, he
trod on the edge of her dress. At that he drew quickly
away as if he had trodden on her foot.

[175]

She laughed, but she was vexed; and when he got
down at “The Manx Fairy,” saying he might call on his
way back in the evening, she had no doubt Grannie
would be glad to see him.

News comes of Pete’s death, and Kate,
knowing nothing of the world’s share in
Philip’s heart, thinks the only barrier removed.
And, for a few hot, passionate
hours Philip does give way, only to be
dragged back at the heels of his ambition,
under the shield of Pete’s home-coming
and the falsity of the rumour of his death.
He tells Kate that marriage with her
would be treasonable to Pete, more than
that, that neither he nor she can in honour
marry either each other or anyone else. In
her despair, Kate falls back upon stratagem.
She sees Pete, allows herself to be considered
his betrothed, and encourages
rather than prevents the wedding preparations.
Still Philip gives no sign, and
Kate is married without fully realising what
she is doing; but, on awakening to her
new life, she sets herself the easy though
bitter task of keeping Pete happy and
[176]

ignorant. Philip absents himself for some
months, and then, returning to his native
island and the career he had laid out for
himself, becomes, on Pete’s happy insistence,
an occasional inmate of the latter’s cottage.
A child is born, and Kate finds it impossible
to keep from Philip the knowledge that
it is his. She tells him, and thence ensues
the tragedy of Pete’s life.

“You are right,” he said, with his head bent down.
“You cannot live here any longer. This life of deception
must end.”

“Then you will take me away, Philip?”

“I must, God forgive me, I must. I thought it would
be sin. But
that
was long ago. It will be punishment.
If I had known before—and I have been coming here
time and again—looking on his happiness—but if I had
once dreamt—and then only an hour ago—the oath at
its baptism—O God!”

Her tears were flowing again, but a sort of serenity
had fallen on her now.

“Forgive me,” she whispered. “I tried to keep it to
myself—”

“You could not keep it; you ought never to have
kept it so long; the finger of God Himself ought to
have burnt it out of you.”

He spoke harshly, and she felt pain; but there was a
secret joy as well.

“I am ruining you, Philip,” she said, leaning over
him.

[177]

“We are both drifting to ruin, Katherine,” he
answered hoarsely. He was an abandoned hulk, with
anchorage gone and no hand at the helm—broken,
blind, rolling to destruction.

“I can offer you nothing, Kate, nothing but a hidden
life, a life in the dark. If you come to me you will
leave a husband who worships you for one to whom
your life can never be joined. You will exchange a
life of respect by the side of a good man for a life
of humiliation, a life of shame. How can it be otherwise
now? It is too late, too late!”

Kate goes, and Pete crushes his grief
to defend her honour. The lies he invents,
that she has gone to visit his
uncle in Liverpool, the letters he writes
to himself, purporting to have come from
her, the wiles he practises to deceive the
neighbours—all intensify his terrible sorrow.

“A letter for you, Mr Quilliam.”

Hearing these words, Pete, his eyes half shut as if
dozing in the sunset, wakened himself with a look
of astonishment.

“What? For me, is it? A letter, you say? Aw, I
see,” taking it and turning it in his hand, “just a line
from the mistress, it’s like. Well, well! A letter for
me, if you plaze,” and he laughed like a man much
tickled.

He was in no hurry. He rammed his dead pipe with
his finger, lit it again, sucked it, made it quack, drew a
[178]

long breath, and then said quietly, “Let’s see what’s her
news at all.”

He opened the letter leisurely, and read bits of it
aloud, as if reading to himself, but holding the postman
while he did so in idle talk on the other side of the gate.
“And how are you living to-day, Mr Kelly? Aw, h’m—
getting
that much better it’s extraordinary
—Yes, a nice
evenin’, very, Mr Kelly, nice, nice—
that happy and comfortable
and Uncle Joe is that good
—heavy bag at you to-night,
you say? Aw, heavy, yes, heavy—
love to Grannie
and all inquiring friends
—nothing, Mr Kelly, nothing—just
a scribe of a line, thinking a man might be getting
unaisy. She needn’t, though—she needn’t. But chut!
It’s nothing. Writing a letter is nothing to her at all.
Why, she’d be knocking that off, bless you,” holding out
half a sheet of paper, “in less than an hour and a half.
Truth enough, sir.” Then, looking at the letter again,
“What’s this, though?
P.N.
They’re always putting
a P.N. at the bottom of a letter, Mr Kelly.
P.N.—I
was expecting to be home before, but I wouldn’t get away
for Uncle Joe taking me to the theaytres.
Ha, ha, ha!
A mighty boy is Uncle Joe. But, Mr Kelly, Mr Kelly,”
with a solemn look, “not a word of this to Cæsar!”

Pete must write back, and orthography
not being his strong point, Philip must
be his secretary.

“Then maybe you’ll write me a letter?”

Philip nodded his head and returned, his mouth
tightly closed, sat down at the table, and took up
the pen.

[179]

“What is it?” he asked.

“Am I to give you the words, Phil? Yes? Well, if
you won’t be thinking mane—”

Pete charged his pipe out of his waistcoat pocket, and
began to dictate: “Dear wife.”

At that Philip gave an involuntary cry.

“Aw, best to begin proper, you know. ‘Dear wife,’”
said Pete again.

Philip made a call on his resolution, and put the
words down. His hand felt cold; his heart felt frozen
to the core. Pete lit up, and walked to and fro as he
dictated his letter.

The letter is finished, and Philip in his
misery returns to Kate, who persuades him
to lead Pete to believe her dead. After
doing this, Philip’s moral degradation seems
to be complete, and Kate, feeling herself to
have been the cause of his ruin, leaves him.
To outward appearance he climbs higher
and higher in his professional career, while
Pete sinks into poverty. Still the two men
are friends. The child is ill; between them
they nurse it, and Pete begins to see its
resemblance to Philip. Little by little the
truth comes to him—from the lips of a
drunkard, he hears that Kate has been seen
in London. Returning to his now poverty-stricken
[180]

cottage, he finds the wanderer
bending over the cradle of her child. In his
stupefaction he watches her as she leaves the
house to end her misery, only to be rescued
and brought face to face with Philip in his
office of Deemster. Burning for vengeance,
Pete seeks Philip—to meet him as he is
borne home unconscious from the courthouse,
and the sight wipes out all feelings but those
of love and friendship in the great-hearted
man. All his thought is for the happiness of
Philip and Kate—to restore Philip to health,
to resign Kate, to leave the island, after
giving up the child that he has tended with
so much love. And all that is best in
Philip’s nature rises, strengthened by its
suffering. As the crown of his brilliant
youth, he is offered the Governorship of the
island; before the assembled court he
refuses it, and quitting the post of honour to
which he has already climbed, acknowledges
Kate, setting out with her, there among the
people that have known them from childhood,
to build up a new life on the ruins of
the old.

[181]

Although the story of
The Manxman

throbs with sadness, yet the unconscious
humour of the minor characters, depicted as
they are with tender appreciation, gives
to the book a completeness which is perhaps
lacking in Hall Caine’s earlier novels. The
quaintnesses of Grannie, of Cæsar, of Pete
himself, do much to sustain the spirit of
optimism, that, rising triumphant in the end,
gives to the story its undying beauty. To
the hearts of all who read, the Manx people
must come closer, the hope of all humanity
shine brighter, because of the evident faithfulness
of this picture of human life.

The first part of
The Manxman
was
written in Greeba Castle, Isle of Man, where
Mr Caine temporarily resided. He afterwards
removed to Peel, and did not return to
Greeba Castle until it was his own property.

In 1895 he visited America, where he was
enthusiastically received. He was
fêted
,
interviewed, bombarded at his hotel, and
entertained almost to the point of extinction.
It was said in one American journal that the
American public had not been so deeply
[182]

interested by the visit of an English author
since the visit of Dickens many years before.
He always speaks of his visits to America
with the deepest gratitude, for the distinguished
attention and overflowing kindness
always shown to him. There is no warmer
admirer of America and American institutions.

His visit to America was undertaken on
behalf of the Authors’ Society, in connection
with difficulties that had arisen with regard
to Canadian copyright. His mission was
highly successful, and on his return to the
Isle of Man his greeting was as hearty
as that which he had enjoyed in America.
He received the following characteristic letter
from “T. E. B.”

“Here’s a health to thee, Hall Caine! I suppose you
are by this time in Peel, and this most interesting episode
in your life attains its close.

“You must be fearfully tired, and I will not weary you
with a long letter. I hope Mrs Caine has thoroughly
enjoyed the busy, exciting weeks. What you both need
now is REST. Take it, and plenty of it! Of course, I
long to see you. But I can wait, and only write this
to bid you a hearty welcome, and assure you of the great
[183]

happiness with which I have heard of your return.—Ever
yours,

“
T. E. Brown
.”

“
Ramsey
,
December 13, ’95
.”

This seems to me the fitting place in
which to insert a hitherto unpublished article
written by Mr Hall Caine on hearing of Mr
Brown’s death. Mr Caine was on his way
to Rome when the news reached him that
his friend had died suddenly at Clifton.

Three or four lines in a Paris newspaper, meagre in
their details, full of errors, but nevertheless only too
obviously authentic, bring me the saddest news that has
come my way these many years. I ought to have been
prepared for it by the long illness he passed through, by
the manifest lessening of his vitality month by month,
and even week by week, by the partial eclipse of certain
faculties (such as memory) once so vigorous, and above
all by his frequent and touching warnings. But the end
has come upon me, at least, with startling, terrible and
overwhelming suddenness, and it adds something to the
pain of this first moment of grief that while the devoted
friend and comrade of many years is being taken home
I am myself far away from it, confined by a passing indisposition
to a little room in a foreign city.

But the splendid soul who has gone from us will
have troops of still older friends to stand about his
grave. The Isle of Man will be in mourning now for
one who loved her and her people with a love that was
almost more deep and disinterested than that of any
[184]

other of her sons. This is no little thing to say, but
there is no Manxman or Manxwoman who will question
it. Without any material interest in the welfare and
prosperity of his native land, with few (alas, how few!)
intellectual associates there, parting from the friends
and the ways of life when the burden of his work was
done, he returned to the Isle of Man because he loved
it, because his affections were wrapped up in it,
because it was linked with the tenderest memories of
childhood and the fondest recollections of youth,
because the graves of his kindred were there, and he
had heard the mysterious call that comes to a man’s
heart from the sire that gave him birth. Five years
only were given him in which to indulge this love of
home, but how much he got into them! How he spent
himself for the people, without a thought of himself,
without a suspicion of the difference between them.
If only a handful of his countrymen called to him he
came. He was at everybody’s service, everybody’s
command. Distance was as nothing even to his failing
strength, time was as nothing, labour was as nothing,
and the penalties he paid he did not count.

The time has been when his friends have thought
that the island did not appreciate all this, did not
realise it to the full, did not rightly apprehend the
sacrifices that were being made, or the generous disproportion
of the man and the work, but there can be
no question of that kind now. Manxmen and Manxwomen
know to-day that the island has lost the
greatest man who was ever born to it, the finest brain,
the noblest heart, the grandest nature that we can yet
call Manx! We do not point to his scholarship, though
that was splendid, or to the place he won in life, though
[185]

it was high and distinguished, or yet to his books, though
they were full of the fire of genius, racy of the soil he
loved the best. None of these answers entirely to the
idea we have of the man we knew and love so well.
But the sparkling, brilliant soul, so tender, so strong, so
humorous, so easily touched to sympathy, so gloriously
gifted, this is the ideal that answers to our recollections
of the first Manxman of this or any age.

When I pass from the island’s loss to my own, I must
be one of a little group who, though not within the
circle of his family, can hardly trust themselves to speak.
Sitting here, in this foreign city, while my countrymen,
for all I know, are doing the last offices for the truest
friend man ever had, I feel how much the island has
lost for me in losing him. The little paragraph in
Le
Figaro
fell on me this morning like a thundercloud from
a cloudless sky, but more than once or twice or thrice
during the past few months the thought has come over
me of what the island would be without him. It came
to me at the moment before I left home, and the last
letter I wrote there was written to him, saying Good-bye
and God bless you, and such other words of farewell
as one sends to one’s friend on the eve of a long journey.
But he has taken the longer journey of the two, and
when the time comes to return home and I see our
beautiful mountains from the sea, I don’t know what it
will be to remember he is there no longer. During the
past ten years I have leaned on him as on an elder
brother, a wiser, stronger, purer, serener nature, on
whom I could rely for solace and counsel and support.
I did nothing without consulting him, and took no
serious step without his sanction. My stories were told
to him first, and he knew all my plans and intentions.
[186]

If I have done anything that deserves to be remembered
it is only myself that can know how much that is good
in it is but a reflection from the light of his genius.
He was the ablest appreciator, the most enthusiastic
admirer, and the most inspiring of critics. To my
moods of depression he brought the buoyancy of hope,
to my weakness of heart the strength of his spirit,
sustaining me amid the despondency of failure, and
the no less real penalties of success. It was a familiar
thought to me at Greeba that I could take the train to
Ramsey four or five times a day, and within an hour
I could be with him. And now he is gone, and I can
go to him no more.

Mr Caine received the following letter
from the late W. E. Gladstone shortly after
the publication of
The Manxman
.

“
Dollis Hill, N.W.
,

“
July 18, 1894
.

“
My Dear Sir
,—I thank you very much for the gift
of your work and I hope the time will not be long before
the condition of my eyes will permit me to peruse it.

“It is very pleasant to me to find that you have again
applied your great talents to illustrating the history and
character of that interesting people the Manxmen.—I
remain, my dear sir, faithfully yours,

“
W. E. Gladstone
.”

He followed this letter up by another,
written on December 4, 1894, from
[187]

Hawarden Castle, Chester, in which he
says: “Though I am no believer in
divorce, I have read your
Manxman
with
great admiration of the power which gives
such true life to Manx character and
tradition.”

[188]

CHAPTER X

THE CHRISTIAN

With the publication of
The Christian

began a new episode in Hall Caine’s career.
Hitherto he had been welcomed on all sides;
praise was literally heaped upon him. The
critics had repeated these eulogies each time
a new book of Hall Caine’s was put into
their hands. First,
The Deemster
; next
The
Bondman
; then
The Scapegoat
. But
The
Christian
changed all this. The critics had
grown tired of praise. Besides, Mr Caine
had dared to criticise the hypocrisies of
modern society. So the critics turned about,
and flatly contradicted nearly everything
they had said before. One pointed out that
Mr Caine had described a certain garment
as red, instead of, say, green; another was
highly indignant because he chose to think
the novelist had said a deacon could be made
[189]

bishop without passing through the intermediate
state of priesthood; and another
cried out because the character of a purely
fictitious nurse was described as being not
particularly moral. I have far more respect
for the reviewer of books than the average
literary person has, but I must confess his
methods are sometimes inexplicable. This
change of attitude, amusing as it was in
many ways, must have been a matter of
some surprise to Mr Caine. But there were
explanations—the novelist had deserted the
Isle of Man and come to London; he had
brought Glory Quayle, fearless, healthy,
beautiful, ambitious, from Manxland and put
her down in a London hospital. By contact
with the metropolis she is, in many ways,
spoiled—vulgarised. And not only that:
London was shown as a terrible place, the
rich trampling on the poor, the immoral
living on the moral, and the strong placing
their feet on the necks of the weak. This
fearless attack of Mr Caine’s was the chief
cause of the change of attitude of the critics.
He had stated his case, and in the opinion
[190]

of his admirers proved it up to the hilt; and
certain of the reviewers, imagining that the
cap was made for them, wore it, at the same
time declaring that it was ten sizes too
large.

Glory Quayle has not been long in London
when she is taken to the theatre by her
friends Drake and Lord Robert Ure. The
play was
Much Ado About Nothing
, and the
actors Henry Irving and Ellen Terry. It is
Glory’s first visit to the theatre, and her
imagination runs riot in utter bewilderment.

But the fourth act witnessed Glory’s final vanquishment.
When she found the scene was the inside of a
church, and they were to be present at a wedding, she
could not keep still on her seat for delight; but when
the marriage was stopped, and Claudio uttered his
denunciation of Hero, she said it was just like him, and
it would serve him right if nobody believed him.

“Hush!” said somebody near them.

“But they
are
believing him,” said Glory, quite
audibly.

“Hush! hush!” came from many parts of the theatre.

“Well, that’s shameful—her father, too—” began
Glory.

“Hush, Glory!” whispered Drake; but she had risen
to her feet, and when Hero fainted and fell she uttered
a cry.

[191]

“What a girl!” whispered Polly. “Sit down—everybody’s
looking!”

“It’s only a play, you know,” whispered Drake; and
Glory sat down and said,—

“Well, yes, of course, it’s only a play. Did you
suppose—”

But she was lost in a moment. Beatrice and Benedick
were alone in the church now; and when Beatrice said,
“Kill Claudio,” Glory leapt up again and clapped her
hands. But Benedick would not kill Claudio, and it
was the last straw of all. That wasn’t what she called
being a great actor, and it was shameful to sit and listen
to such plays. Lots of disgraceful scenes happened in
life, but people didn’t come to the theatre to see such
things, and she would go.

“How ridiculous you are!” said Polly; but Glory was
out in the corridor, and Drake was going after her.

She came back at the beginning of the fifth act with
red eyes and confused smiles, looking very much
ashamed. From that moment onward she cried a good
deal, but gave no other sign until the green curtain came
down at the end, when she said,—

“It’s a wonderful thing! To make people forget it’s
not true is the most wonderful thing in the world!”

But Drake and Lord Robert are merely
friends; it is the Reverend John Storm whom
she loves. He has “a well-formed nose, a
powerful chin, and full lips. … His complexion
is dark, almost swarthy, and there is
a certain look of the gipsy in his big golden-brown
[192]

eyes with their long black lashes.”
Her love is returned, but he has forsworn
the world, and she is longing to become an
actress, to have the world at her feet, applauding
her, and showering on her all the
praise and glory at their command. Which
is it to be?—Love without the World?—or
the World without Love? She cannot
decide. Meanwhile she has left the hospital,
and John Storm has entered a Brotherhood
in the heart of London, and taken the necessary
vows. Meanwhile, Glory is passing
through strange vicissitudes, keeping body
and soul together by different occupations,
serving in a tobacconist’s shop, and selling
programmes at a theatre. But she writes
cheery letters to the old people at home in
the Isle of Man, making them believe that
she is happy and well, and that the world is
a very beautiful place to live in. Here is
one of her letters:—

“But it isn’t nonsense, my dear grandfather, and I
really have left the hospital. I don’t know if it was the
holiday and the liberty or what, but I felt like that young
hawk at Glenfaba—do you remember it?—the one that
[193]

was partly snared, and came dragging the trap on to the
lawn by a string caught round its leg. I had to cut it
away—I had to, I had to! But you mustn’t feel one
single moment’s uneasiness about me. An able-bodied
woman like Glory Quayle doesn’t starve in a place like
London. Besides, I am provided for already, so you see
my bow abides in strength. … You mustn’t pay too
much attention to my lamentations about being compelled
by Nature to wear a petticoat. Things being so
arranged in this world, I’ll make them do. But it does
make one’s head swim and one’s wings droop to see how
hard Nature is on a woman compared to a man. Unless
she is a genius or a jellyfish, there seems to be only one
career open to her, and that is a lottery, with marriage
for the prizes, and for the blanks—oh dear, oh dear!
Not that I have anything to complain of, and I hate to
be so sensitive. Life is wonderfully interesting, and the
world is such an amusing place that I have no patience
with people who run away from it, and if I were a
man… But wait, only wait, good people.”

This is but one out of many delicious
letters that Glory writes to her grandfather
and aunts. Meanwhile she makes a beginning,
singing at a music-hall, and then in
society drawing-rooms. But she is rarely
happy; she is hampered by being only a
woman. Difficulties are placed in her way,
and vice lurks at every unsuspected corner
waiting to pounce out upon her. But eventually
[194]

she succeeds. She becomes a famous
music-hall star, and John Storm has left the
monastery. He is consumed with love for
Glory—and she, she cannot give up the
world she is just beginning to conquer. He
visits the music-hall at which she is performing,
and a day or two after he visits Glory.

“Glory,” he said, “if you are ashamed of this life,
believe me it is not a right one.”

“Ashamed? Why should I be ashamed? Everybody
is saying how proud I should be.”

She spoke feverishly, and by a sudden impulse she
plucked up the paper, but as suddenly let it drop again,
for, looking at his grave face, her little fame seemed to
shrivel up. “But give a dog a bad name, you know…
You were there on Monday night. Did you see anything,
now—anything in the performance—”

“I saw the audience, Glory; that was enough for
me. It is impossible for a girl to live long in an
atmosphere like that and be a good woman. Yes, my
child, impossible! God forbid that I should sit in judgment
on any man, still less on any woman; but the
women of the music-hall, do they
remain
good women?
Poor souls! they are placed in a position so false that it
would require extraordinary virtue not to become false
along with it! And the whiter the soul that is dragged
through that—that mire, the more the defilement. The
audiences at such places don’t want the white soul, they
don’t want the good woman; they want the woman
who has tasted of the tree of good and evil. You can
[195]

see it in their faces, and hear it in their laughter, and
measure it in their applause. Oh, I’m only a priest, but
I’ve seen these places all the world over, and I know
what I’m saying, and I know it’s true, and you know it’s
true, Glory—”

Glory leapt up from the table, and her eyes seemed to
emit fire. “I know it’s hard and cruel and pitiless, and
since you were there on Monday, and saw how kind the
audience was to
me
, it’s personal and untrue as well.”

But her voice broke, and she sat down again, and said
in another tone, “But, John, it’s nearly a year, you
know, since we saw each other last, and isn’t it a pity?
Tell me, where are you living now? Have you made
your plans for the future?…”

But it is of no use. Glory cannot give up
her nights of applause; her increasing fame
is the very breath of her nostrils, and though
love calls in a clear, compelling voice, yet she
pays it no heed, but devotes all her energy
to her profession, and so the tale progresses.
In the course of time, John Storm goes to
live in the heart of the slums, to work among
the poorest of the poor. His mind and soul
are in his work, but his heart is ever with
Glory. She becomes more and more successful,
and once, on a visit to the races, she meets
John Storm. She is driving with friends, he
walking by the roadside. She is flushed with
[196]

joy—radiant with happiness, but he is torn
and bleeding with love. His Glory is in
danger; success and love of the world are
destroying her soul. What can he do to save
her? Nothing, nothing! Yes, but there is
one thing he can do. He imagines himself
called by God to kill her, for only by that
means can her soul be saved from everlasting
damnation.

She laughed, though there was nothing to laugh at,
and down at the bottom of her heart she was afraid.
But she began moving about, trying to make herself
easy, and pretending not to be alarmed.

“Well, won’t you help me off with my cloak? No?
Then I must do it for myself, I suppose.”

Throwing off her outer things, she walked across the
room and sat down on the sofa near to where he stood.

“How tired I am! It’s been such a day! Once is
enough for that sort of thing, though. Now, where do
you think I’ve been?”

“I know where you’ve been, Glory—I saw you
there.”

“You? Really? Then, perhaps, it
was
you who …
Was it you in the hollow?”

“Yes.”

He had moved to avoid contact with her… Then
the wave of tenderness came sweeping over him again, and
he felt as if the ground were slipping beneath his feet.

“Will you say your prayers to-night, Glory?” he said.

[197]

“Why not?” she answered, trying to laugh.

“Then why not say them now, my child?”

“But why?”

He had made her tremble all over; but she got up,
walked straight across to him, looked intently into his
face a moment, and then said, “What is the matter?
Why are you so pale? You are not well, John!”

“No; I am not well either,” he answered.

“John, John, what does it all mean? What are you
thinking of? Why have you come here to-night?”

“To save your soul, my child. It is in great, great
peril…”

“Am I, then, so very wicked? Surely heaven doesn’t
want me yet, John. Some day, I trust … I hope—”

“To-night, to-night,
now
!”

Then her cheeks turned pale and her lips became
white and bloodless.

Trembling from head to foot, she stepped up to him
again, and began softly and sweetly, trying to explain
herself. “John, dear John, if you see me with certain
people and in certain places, you must not think from
that—”

But he broke in upon her with a torrent of words…
Out of a dry and husky throat John Storm answered, “I
would rather die a thousand, thousand deaths than
touch a hair of your head, Glory… But God’s will
is His will,” he added, quivering and trembling.

“We are of different natures, John, that is the real
trouble between us now, and always has been. But,
whether we like it or not, our lives are wrapped up
together for all that. We can’t do without each other.
God makes men and women like that sometimes.”

There was a piteous smile on his face. “I never
[198]

doubted your feeling for me, Glory—no, not even when
you hurt me most.”

“And if God makes us so—”

“I shall never forgive myself, Glory, though heaven
itself forgives me!”

“If God makes us love each other in spite of every
barrier that divides us—”

“I shall never know another happy hour in this life,
Glory, never!”

“Then why should we struggle? It is our fate, and
we cannot conquer it. You can’t give up your life,
John, and I can’t give up mine, but our hearts are
one.”

Her voice sang like music in his ears… She was
fighting for her life. He started to his feet and came
to her with his teeth set and his pupils fixed. “This
is only the devil tempting me. Say your prayers,
child!”

He grasped her left hand with his right. His grip
almost overtaxed her strength and she felt faint. In an
explosion of emotion the insane frenzy for destroying
had come upon him again. He longed to give his
feeling physical expression.

“Say them, say them!” he cried. “God sent me
to kill you, Glory.”

A sensation of terror and of triumph came over her
at once. She half closed her eyes and threw her other
arm around his neck. “No, but to love me… Kiss
me, John.”

Then a cry came from him like that of a man flinging
himself over a precipice. He threw his arms about
her, and her disordered hair fell over his face.

But these two unhappy lovers are only
[199]

married when John is on his deathbed.
He is fatally injured in a riot, and though
“they could not come together in this
world,” yet they are “united for all
eternity on the threshold of the next.” So
ends one of the most enthralling of Hall
Caine’s books—a book that will be read
as long as men and women care to hear
about the love of a noble-hearted, fearless
woman for a pure and high-minded
man.

[200]

CHAPTER XI

THE ETERNAL CITY

This last great novel of Hall Caine’s is not
a picture of Life; it
is
Life. His characters
are more real than those with whom we
meet and talk to every day of our lives; for
not only do we hear them speak, but we see
into the thoughts of their hearts, and sometimes
catch a glimpse of their very souls.
It may be urged that real men and women
are not so passionately pure and self-sacrificing
as David Rossi and Roma, but they
who speak thus forget that the world has
produced as many saints, martyrs and
heroes, as blackguards and criminals. David
Rossi is a hero for the sake of his country,
for the sake of the poor and oppressed;
Roma, purified, ennobled, and uplifted by
[201]

Love, is a martyr for the sake of her
betrothed. They are as passionate as
Romeo and Juliet, Paolo and Francesca;
and as pure as Dante and Beatrice.

The
mise-en-scène
of the story is, of
course, Rome—Rome with its grandeur
side by side with its misery; its ambitious
men and fallen women; its Vatican, its
theatres, its ruins and its shame. The
time is the first months of the present
century. The City is made to live; we
breathe its air and walk its streets. David
Rossi is a member of the Chamber of
Deputies, a friend of the people, a conspirator,
a hero; all his actions are for the
material and spiritual elevation of the down-trodden
and oppressed, and this book is
the story of the martyrdom he has to
undergo, and of his eventual success. This
is his charter, a framed manuscript copy
of which he keeps hanging by his bedside:—

“
From what am I called?

From the love of riches, from the love of
[202]

honour, from the love of home, and
from the love of woman.

To what am I called?

To poverty, to purity, to obedience, to the
worship of God, and to the service of
humanity.

Why am I called?

Because it has pleased the Almighty to
make me friendless, homeless, a
wanderer, an exile, without father
or mother, sister or brother, kith or
kin.

Hoping my heart deceives me not, with
fear and trembling I sign my unworthy
name.

D. L.—
London.
”

Roma is the ward of Count Bonelli, the
young King’s Prime Minister; she is a
beautiful, high-spirited, noble-hearted
woman, who has little or no memory of
either father or mother. She lives a life of
extravagant luxury—happy, thoughtless and
[203]

frivolous, but always kind and generous.
Still, her soul is asleep; she has never
realised that Life is a serious matter, not
to be trifled with or neglected. But when
she meets David Rossi all is changed. She
has called at his rooms with the idea of
laying him in the dust. Ignorantly, and
in the heat of the moment, he has publicly
defamed her character, and she is intent on
revenge.

“If I were a man, I suppose I should challenge you.
Being a woman I can only come to you and tell you that
you are wrong.”

“Wrong?”

“Cruelly, terribly, shamefully wrong.”

“You mean to tell me…”

He was stammering in a husky voice, but she said
quite calmly:

“I mean to tell you that in substance and in fact what
you implied was false.”

There was a dry glitter of hatred and repulsion in her
eyes which she tried to subdue, for she knew that he
was looking at her still.

“If … if you give me your solemn word of honour
that what I said—what I implied—was false, that rumour
and report have slandered you, that it is all a cruel and
baseless calumny…”

She raised her head, looked him full in the face, and
without a quiver in her voice:

[204]

“I
do
give it,” she said.

“Then I believe you,” he answered. “With all my
heart and soul I believe you…”

“This man is a child,” she thought. “He will
believe anything I tell him.”

Soon, however, she has to acknowledge
that no matter how childlike he may be, he
is never for one moment childish; he gives
her proof of his strength, his devotion, his
manly purity.

“I wished to meet you face to face, but now that I
have met you, you are not the man I thought you were.”

“Nor you,” he said, “the woman I pictured you.”

A light came into her eyes at that, and she looked up
and said:

“Then you had never seen me before?”

And he answered after a moment:

“I had never seen Donna Roma Volonna until to-day.”

“Forgive me for coming to you,” she said.

“I thank you for doing so,” he replied, “and if I
have sinned against you, from this hour onward I am
your friend and champion. Let me try to right the
wrong I have done you. I am ready to do it if I can,
no matter at what self-abasement. I am eager to do it,
and I shall never forgive myself until it is done. What
I said was the result of a mistake—let me ask your
forgiveness.”

“You mean publicly.”

“Yes! At ten o’clock they send for my article for the
morning’s paper. To-morrow morning I will beg your
pardon in public for the public insult I have offered you.”

[205]

“You are very good, very brave,” she said; “but no,
I will not ask you to do that.”

“Ah! I understand. I know it is impossible to
overtake a lie. Once started it goes on and on, like a
stone rolling down-hill, and even the man who started
can never stop it. Tell me what better can I do—tell
me, tell me.”

Her face was still down, but it had now a new expression
of joy.

“There is one thing you can do, but it is difficult.”

“No matter! Tell me what it is.”

“I thought when I came here … but it is no matter.”

“Tell me, I beg of you.”

He was trying to look into her face again, and she
was eluding his gaze as before, but now for another, a
sweeter reason.

“I thought if—if you would come to my house when
my friends are there, your presence as my guest, in the
midst of those in whose eyes you have injured me, might
be sufficient of itself to wipe out everything. But …”

She waited for his answer with a beating heart, but at
first he did not speak, and pretending to put away the
idea, she said:

“But that is impossible: I cannot ask it. I know
what it would mean. Such people are pitiless—they
have no mercy.”

“Is that
all
?” he said.

“Then you are not afraid?”

“Afraid!”

For one moment they looked at each other, and their
eyes were shining. She was proud of his power. This
was no child after all, but a man; one who, for a
woman’s sake, could stand up against all the world.

[206]

“I have thought of something else,” she said.

“What is it?”

“You have heard that I am a sculptor. I am making
a fountain for the municipality, and if I might carve your
face into it…”

“It would be coals of fire on my head.”

“You would need to sit to me.”

“When shall it be?”

“To-morrow morning to begin with, if that is not too
soon.”

“It will be years on years till then,” he said.

Her idea of revenge is entirely gone;
she is at his feet, loving him, and aching to
be loved in return. But he remembers his
work: he must not allow worldly matters to
interfere with its progress. So he will not
see Roma again. Love is not for him;
would that it were! And then follows a
series of delightful letters: on his part
serious, kind, and imbued with a high sense
of duty; on her part, humorous, light, wistful,
and sometimes sad. He tells her that he is
in love, the object of his affections being a
lady of beauty, wealth and virtue. The lady
is herself, but the language is veiled, and
at first she hardly guesses his meaning.

[207]

“
My Dear, Dear Friend
,—It’s all up! I’m done with
her! My unknown and invisible sister that is to be,
or rather that isn’t to be and oughtn’t to be, is not worth
thinking about any longer. You tell me that she is
good and brave, and noble-hearted, and yet you would
have me believe that she loves wealth, and ease, and
luxury, and that she could not give them up even for
the sweetest thing that ever comes into a woman’s life.
Out on her! What does she think a wife is? A pet to
be pampered, a doll to be dressed up and danced on
your knee? If that’s the sort of woman she is, I know
what I should call her. A name is on the tip of my
tongue, and the point of my finger, and the end of my
pen, and I’m itching to have it out, but I suppose I must
not write it. Only don’t talk to me any more about the
bravery of a woman like that.

“The wife I call brave is a man’s friend, and if she
knows what that means, to be the friend of her husband
to all the limitless lengths of friendship, she thinks
nothing about sacrifices between him and her, and
differences of class do not exist for either of them. Her
pride died the instant love looked out of her eyes at
him, and if people taunt her with his poverty, or his
birth, she answers and says, ‘It’s true he is poor, but
his glory is that he was a workhouse boy who hadn’t
father or mother to care for him, and now he is a great
man, and I’m proud of him, and not all the wealth of
the world shall take me away.’”

Eventually their love is confessed, and
Baron Bonelli learns the truth. He sets to
work immediately to compass the ruin or
[208]

death of Rossi, and jealousy lives in his
heart every minute of the day, and all the
night through. It is true he is married, but
his wife is a maniac, and he expects to hear
of her death at any time. It becomes necessary
for Rossi to leave Rome: he is surrounded
by a host of enemies ready at any
moment to clap him into prison. So he says
“Good-bye” to Roma, but before he leaves
they are “religiously” married—that is to
say, they take part in a ceremony recognised
by the Church as a substitute for the marriage
service proper, but which the State refuses
to acknowledge. But they are man and
wife for all that, and the thought sustains
them through all the trouble they have to
undergo. The moment the ceremony is
over he leaves her, and she is alone to
face the cunning and duplicity of Baron
Bonelli.

“That you should change your plans so entirely, and
setting out a month ago to … to … shall I say
betray … this man Rossi, you are now striving to
save him, is a problem which admits of only one explanation,
and that is that … that you …”

“That I love him—yes, that’s the truth,” said Roma
[209]

boldly, but flushing up to the eyes and trembling with
fear.

There was a death-like pause in the duel. Both
dropped their heads, and the silent face in the bust
seemed to be looking down on them. Then the Baron’s
icy cheeks quivered visibly, and he said in a low,
hoarse voice:

“I’m sorry! Very sorry! For in that case I may
be compelled to justify your conclusion that a Minister
has no humanity and no pity. It may even be necessary
to play the part of the husband in the cruel story of
the lover’s heart. If David Rossi cannot be arrested
by the authorisation of Parliament, he must be arrested
when Parliament is not in session, and then his identity
will have to be established in a public tribunal. In that
event you will be forced to appear, and having refused
to make a private statement in the secrecy of a magistrate’s
office, you will be compelled to testify in the Court of
Assize.”

“Ah, but you can’t make me do that!” cried Roma
excitedly, as if seized by a sudden thought.

“Why not?”

“Never mind why not. That’s my secret. You
can’t do it, I tell you,” she cried excitedly.

He looked at her as if trying to penetrate her
meaning, and then said:

“We shall see.”

And, indeed, Roma is not so secure as
she imagines. She is relying on the fact
that, according to the law of nearly every
civilised nation, a wife is not permitted to
[210]

give evidence against her husband. The
Baron is ignorant that Rossi and she are
man and wife. But alas! she is not Rossi’s
wife, not even according to the rules of
the Church. She has not been baptised,
and an unbaptised woman cannot be a
daughter of the Church, and a woman
who is not a daughter of the Church cannot
claim the Church’s privileges.

Meanwhile Rossi is in London, Paris,
Berlin, Geneva, addressing meetings, and
organising a tremendous demonstration
which is to take place in Rome. But his
letters are necessarily vague—mere hints of
what is about to come to pass; and gradually
the thought grows in Roma’s mind that the
secret work upon which he is engaged in is
nothing more or less than a conspiracy to
take the King’s life. Terror seizes hold on
her and she knows not what to do. And
all the time she is pursued by a terrible
remorse: she has never told Rossi of the
one dark stain on her life. She has never
told him that, against her will, Baron Bonelli
seduced her, and that she still remained his
[211]

friend. That brief, terrible hour has tormented
her soul with the torments of hell.
Ought she to tell the man she thinks is her
husband? She cannot answer this question,
so she confesses, and the priest refers her
to the Pope himself. And then in an extraordinarily
vivid and beautiful scene the Pope
urges her to confess everything to Rossi;
but this she has already done. However,
her husband has not replied. The letters
she has written have miscarried, but she
imagines that her confession has killed his
love, or roused his anger. The plot is too
intricate and delicately handled at this point
to be related in detail without great risk of
damaging its interest and spoiling its effect;
suffice it to say that, acting on the purest
and most generous motives, but deceived
by circumstance, Roma betrays her husband,
and he is captured by the police when he is
on his way home to peace and happiness.
He escapes, seeks out Roma, and confronts
her with her perfidy. She admits it, but
says she can explain all. In the midst of
her wild, vehement talking, Baron Bonelli
[212]

enters from an inner room. A fight ensues
between Rossi and the Baron. The latter
is mortally wounded, and Roma is left alone
to wait on him—her bitterest enemy—in his
dying hour. This is, perhaps, the most
powerful scene in the book; it is certain it
is the most dramatic. But it would be
an invidious task to select one particular
scene as being more skilful and effective
than any other, when there are so many
supremely skilful and effective scenes.

The rest of the story is of breathless
interest. Roma is found with the body of
the dead Baron, is accused of murder, and
pleads guilty. She receives her sentence of
imprisonment quite calmly, happy in the
thought that in sacrificing herself she is
helping on the cause of her husband, and
suffering in his stead. Meanwhile David
Rossi, on the point of suicide, and suffering
a thousand torments through what seems
to him to be Roma’s treachery, seeks
sanctuary at the Vatican. The Pope receives
him and grants him what he asks.
Too bewildered by the stress of recent
[213]

events to think, he does not realise Roma’s
danger; it never occurs to him that she
may be seized upon as Bonelli’s murderer.
But soon it reaches the ears of the Pope
that Rossi is the guilty one, and not Roma,
and on David asking for an interview the
following scene takes place:—

“Holy Father, I wished to speak to you.”

“What about, my son?”

“Myself. Now I see that I did wrong to ask for your
protection. You thought I was innocent, and there was
something I did not tell you. When I said I was guilty
before God and man, you did not understand what I
meant. Holy Father, I meant that I had committed
murder…”

The Pope looked at the young face, cut deep with
lines of despair, and his heart yearned over it.

“Sit down, my son. Let us think. Though you did
not tell me of the assassination, I soon knew all about it…
Partly in self-defence, you say?”

“That is so, but I do not urge it as an excuse. And
if I did, who else knows anything about it?”

“Is there nobody who knows?”

“One, perhaps. But it is my wife, and she could
have no interest in saving me now, even if I wanted to
be saved… I have read her letters.”

“If I were to tell you it is not so, my son—that your
wife is still ready to sacrifice herself for your safety…”

“But that is impossible, your Holiness. There are so
many things you do not know.”

[214]

“If I were to tell you I have just seen her, and, notwithstanding
your want of faith in her, she has still faith
in you…”

The deep lines of despair began to pass from Ross’s
face, and he made a cry of joy.

“If I were to say that she loves you, and would give
her life for you…”

“Is it possible? Do you tell me that? In spite of
everything? And she—where is she? Let me go to
her. Holy Father, if you only knew! I’ll go and beg
her pardon. I cursed her! Yes, it is true that in my
blind, mad passion, I … But let me go back to her
on my knees…”

“Stay, my son. You shall see her presently.”

“Can it be possible that I shall see her?… Is she
at home still?”

“She is only a few paces from this place, my son.”

“Only a few paces! Oh, let me not lose a moment
more. Where is she?”

“In the Castle of St Angelo,” said the Pope.

A dark cloud crossed Rossi’s beaming face and his
mouth opened as if to emit a startled cry.

“In … in prison?”

The Pope bowed.

“What for?”

“The assassination of the Minister.”

“Roma?… But what a fool I was not to think
of it as a thing that might happen! I left her with the
dead man. Who was to believe her when she denied
that she had killed him?”

“She did not deny it. She avowed it.”

“Avowed it? She said that she had…”

The Pope bowed again.

[215]

“Then … then it was… Was it to shield me?”

“Yes.”

Rossi’s eyes grew moist. He was like another man.

The close of the story is deeply pathetic.
David rushes off to save her, and gives
himself up in her place. But Parliament
acquits him of all guilt, and he is once
more a free man. Roma is seized by
some terrible internal disease, and it is
only a matter of a few weeks before she
is overtaken by death. Her last hours
are spent with David by her side in
peace, quietness and gladness.

I have given but the barest outline of
the plot, for it hinges more on the
conflict of one character against another,
than on the intricacies of coincidence and
unlooked-for event, and many of the
phases of modern thought and feeling
indicated in the different characters are
of too subtle and delicate a nature to
be dealt with in a short notice. This
much may be said: it is a book that
should be read. No one can afford to
pass it over. It contains some of the
[216]

most descriptive and dramatic writing of our
time, and, quite apart from its literary value,
will go down to posterity as one of the
most popular achievements of the twentieth
century. All careful readers must admit
that this is the strongest, the most
mature, and yet the most daring novel
that Hall Caine has yet written. The
strongest, because not only does it deal
with individuals, but also with masses of
men representing the most conflicting
thoughts, feelings and passions of the
present day; the most mature, because it
contains the expression of his thought on
subjects which have compelled his study
for more than thirty years; and the most
daring, because it introduces the Pope
and the Prime Minister of Italy as central
characters with complete and indisputable
success.

I venture to quote two paragraphs from
the
Bookman
(August 1901) which give,
so it seems to me, an extremely lucid
account of how Mr Caine fixed on Rome
as the scene for his latest story.

[217]

“When Mr Hall Caine first decided
upon the central idea, he had thought of
setting his story in London, or Paris, or
New York. He tried all cities and found
them impossible. The civil and social
conception which is behind the story has
its rightful home in the Third Italy. To
Mr Hall Caine Rome is typical of the
new democracy. According to his observation,
the force which in the past
century has most vigorously asserted itself
is the power of the peoples, wide, liberal,
and democratic in contrast with the absolute
power of the kings. But over the new
power which has destroyed the reality of
absolutism, continues the pomp and ostentation
of the old rule of things, and not
only continues, but daily attempts to gain
a new vigour, a resurrection by three
systems, in which Mr Hall Caine recognises
the re-incarnation of the Philistine against
the modern Samson, who stands for the
rights of the peoples—imperialism, militarism,
and the question of temporal
power.

[218]

“Rome is the metropolis of the Christian
world, not only by reason of its religious
connections, but also by reason of its
geographical position, its history, its
glorious traditions, the fascination of its
art, and the mystery of its eternal life
which pervades and surrounds it. Rome
alone seems to Mr Hall Caine the city
worthy, in the dawn of an immense social
revolution, to be the heart and soul of
humanity, renewing itself in hopes and
aspirations now, and promising in the
future pacific civil and moral glory.”

Whether or not Mr Caine is right in his
supposition that a tremendous social upheaval
in Europe is imminent, it is not for
me to say; but it is certain that his picture
of the working of the antagonistic social
forces of the present day in Rome is a
truthful one, and that the feverish unrest
and disorder of the people has not been
brought about by the Italian Government
only, but by the Church itself.

The Eternal City
is not only a history:
it is a prophecy also. It contains a solemn
[219]

warning, and states the case of the people
with unparalleled insight and sympathy.
If the next few years do not witness a
mighty change in the mode of Government
of the peoples of Europe, it will be because
some tremendous outside force, which has
not yet been reckoned with, has intervened,
and changed the current of social and international
politics.

In looking at Mr Hall Caine’s future it
is impossible to see with any certainty
what he is likely to achieve. A novelist
he is, and a novelist he will always remain,
for he is a born writer, and could not
separate himself from his work even if he
desired to do so. Besides, he has a worldwide
public to address—a public that increases
in large numbers year by year—and
to sacrifice an audience of millions of human
beings would be the very height of folly.
And there can be no manner of doubt that
he realises that the written word has immeasurably
greater power than that which
is merely spoken. The responsibility of
[220]

his position often weighs heavily upon him,
for he feels that his power over the destinies
of those who love his works is almost
illimitable, and a single false step might
mean ruin to the lives of hundreds of his
fellow-creatures. Yet, in his later works,
I see a desire on his part to enter more
closely into the lives of the masses: he
seems to be obsessed by the ambition to
make easier the lives of the ignorant and
uneducated, and to be anxious to reach
those into whose hands a book of his can
never fall. I have very good reason to
suppose that he contemplates entering
public life as a politician or as a lecturer
on social reform—but a career of that kind
would mean sacrificing an audience of
millions that he reaches by his novels, for
an audience that could certainly be estimated
in thousands. But still there are many
whom he wishes to aid who are, in the
present condition of things, beyond his
reach; how to bring himself in touch with
this section of humanity, he cannot yet
perceive, but I have no doubt that in the
[221]

course of time he will find a way out of
the difficulty.

This gradual dawning of sympathy on
the part of Hall Caine with the suffering
and oppressed is one of the most interesting
features in the study of his life and
work. That he has always sympathised
with the poor and ignorant we have ample
evidence in the account of the Reverend
William Pierce of his early life in Liverpool;
but this sympathy did not begin to
evince itself in his work until
The Deemster

was published, where in parts it was clearly
seen that the lower classes were gaining a
strong hold upon his heart and imagination.

The Christian
eventually showed
the depth of this sympathy, and in what
way he thought it advisable to put it into
practical form.

From time to time it has been rumoured
that Mr Caine has the intention of dealing
with the drink question in a novel; but I
am able to state that, though he has been
and is profoundly moved by the misery and
shame which are caused by the too free use of
[222]

alcohol, yet he has been unable to see
his way to treat it in a work of fiction.
It is true, the subject has engaged his
attention for some considerable time, and
on my last visit to him he spoke long
and earnestly on this question. Whatever
he may decide to do in the future, it is
certain that for the next two or three
years he will be occupied with another
Manx novel. He has thought of making
the recent Bank failure the subject of his
work, but before he decides definitely he
is to take a long rest. Each fresh novel
he writes drains away his strength, for to
him writing means a constant struggle, a
bitter emotional experience which almost
prostrates him. Of late he has also been
turning his attention to the
Life of Christ
,
which he wrote some years ago, but which
has never yet been published in spite of
the many tempting offers which he has
received for the copyright. It has not
been my privilege to read this book, but
I may say that Mr Caine believes it to
contain some of his best work. Speaking
[223]

of the year 1890, he says: “I had read
Rénan’s
Life of Christ
, and had been
deeply impressed by it, and I had said
that there was a splendid chance for a life
of Christ as vivid and as personal (if that
were possible) from the point of belief as
Rénan’s was from the point of unbelief.”
It is perhaps unnecessary to point out
that such a work from the pen of Mr
Caine would be of absorbing interest to
all his readers, and it is to be hoped that
he will be prevailed upon to give it to
the world.

And now I come to the end of my
work. I have attempted no comparison
between him and his contemporaries, for
his place in the literature of England
must be left for future generations to
decide. Suffice it to say, that it seems
to me he must be placed in the very
front rank of all novelists, living or dead;
for in few writers do I see such sympathy,
such depth of knowledge of human nature,
such insight, such power, and such discrimination
as I see in the work of Hall
[224]

Caine. However this may be, it is certain
that no novelist—of this or past generations—has
so profoundly stirred the masses
of England and America as Hall Caine
has done. He has influenced his own
generation to a greater extent than can
possibly be estimated; that his influence
has been of an ennobling, purifying nature
few will deny, and those who find evil
in his books must look into their own
hearts and cast out the wickedness that
they find there. “To the pure all things
are pure”; well, not quite all, but one
cannot help suspecting that those who
have such keen noses for scenting evil
odours are not themselves so free from
corruption as they would have us believe.

THE END

Colston & Coy. Limited, Printers, Edinburgh

ENGLISH WRITERS OF TO-DAY

A Series of Monographs on living Authors

The following are the first volumes in the Series
:—

RUDYARD KIPLING

The Man and His Work. Being an attempt at an
“Appreciation.” By
G. F. Monkshood
, Author of “Woman
and The Wits,” “My Lady Ruby,” etc. Containing a portrait of
Mr Kipling and an autograph letter to the author in facsimile.
A new and cheaper edition. Crown 8vo, cloth gilt, 3s. 6d.

Daily Telegraph.
—“He writes fluently, and he has genuine enthusiasm for his
subject, and an intimate acquaintance with his work. Moreover, the book has been
submitted to Mr Kipling, whose characteristic letter to the author is set forth on
the preface. … Of Kipling’s heroes Mr Monkshood has a thorough understanding,
and his remarks on them are worth quoting” (extract follows).

Globe.
—“It has at the basis of it both knowledge and enthusiasm—knowledge of
the works esteemed and enthusiasm for them. This book may be accepted as a
generous exposition of Mr Kipling’s merits as a writer. We can well believe that
it will have many interested and approving readers.”

Scotsman.
—“This well-informed volume is plainly sincere. It is thoroughly
well studied, and takes pains to answer all the questions that are usually put about
Mr Kipling. The writer’s enthusiasm carries both himself and his reader along in the
most agreeable style. One way and another his book is full of interest, and those
who wish to talk about Kipling will find it invaluable, while the thousands of his
admirers will read it through with delighted enthusiasm.”

BRET HARTE

A Treatise and a Tribute. By
T. Edgar Pemberton
,
Author of “The Kendals,” “Life of Sothern,” etc., with a new
portrait of Mr Bret Harte and a Bibliography. Crown 8vo,
cloth gilt, 3s. 6d.

Spectator.
—“A highly-interesting book.”

Daily Mail.
—“An interesting biography full of good things.”

Sunday Sun.
—“A pleasant and interesting memoir.”

Whitehall Review.
—“A truly delightful book. … Written in no mean spirit
of adulation, it is a well-balanced, characteristic, and fair estimate of a personality
and a mind far above the average.”

Sunday Special.
—“It is an intensely interesting life story Mr Pemberton has
to tell. … This little volume is eminently readable full of excellent stories and
anecdotes, and is, in short, a very admirable commentary upon the work of one of the
brightest masters of the pen that the great continent over sea has produced.”

Daily Express.
—“Every true lover of Bret Harte ought to get Mr T. Edgar
Pemberton’s book. There are not many authors, alas! that would bear study at
close range, but here certainly is one where knowledge of his early struggles and
trials will only increase our affection and interest in the man himself and his stories.
Mr Pemberton has shown in this book the qualities of an ideal biographer. His
touch is light, his figure stands clear, and we find in his work a strong human note
we learned long years ago to associate with the creator of M’Liss.”

ALGERNON CHARLES SWINBURNE

A Study. By
Theodore Wratislaw
(Dedicated to Theodore
Watts-Dunton), with a new portrait of Mr Swinburne and a Bibliography.
Crown 8vo, cloth gilt, 3s. 6d.

Daily News.
—“Mr Wratislaw’s work is always dignified and eloquent, and not
without critical acuteness.”

Review of the Week.
—“It is not only a study, it is an entertainment. It has
dignity and no dulness. … Though an appreciation, it is not an exaggeration.
The summing up, though masterly, is not tyrannical. It is concise and sufficient,
and is as artistically written as artistically informed. Author and publisher have
combined to make the book one not only to peruse, but to possess. The price is
more than moderate, the
format
more than presentable.”

Court Circular.
—“This little volume forms an excellent handbook to his (Swinburne’s)
writing. It is not simply an eulogy, but rather a discriminate appreciation
and a loving analysis of the poet’s works which are dealt with chronologically as they
were published. The exposition helps greatly to elucidate many of the poems, and
the criticisms are fair and unbiassed. Those who know their Swinburne well will find
a new pleasure in the poems after reading this book, and those who have hitherto
been deterred from studying him are put in possession of a golden key to unlock the
gateway of an enchanted garden. Mr Wratislaw has fulfilled his task ably and well,
and has earned the gratitude of all lovers of English poetry.”

HALL CAINE.
By
C. Fred Kenyon
.

VOLUMES OF E. W. O. T. (in active preparation.)

George Meredith.
By
Walter Jerrold
.

Arthur Wing Pinero.
By
Hamilton Fyffe
.

W. E. Henley
, and the “
National
Observer
” Group. By
George Gamble
.

Geo. Moore and Bernard Shaw.
By
C.
Fred Kenyon
.

Mrs Humphrey Ward
} In One Volume.

Mrs Craigie

}
By
W. L. Courtney
.

Thomas Hardy.
By a well-known Critic.

Realistic Writers of To-day.
By
Justin
Hannaford
.

The Parnassian School in English Poetry.

(
Andrew Lang
,
Edmund Gosse
and
Robert Bridges
.)
By
Sir George Douglas
.

Richard Le Gallienne.
By
C. Ranger Gull
.

should read the book of the hour.

ROMANCE OF A HAREM

translated from the French by
Clarence
Forestier-Walker
.

Romance of a Harem

is a true and faithful story of life as it really is in
Turkish and Egyptian Harems.

Romance of a Harem

is written by a French lady who lived for many
years in the Imperial Harem at Constantinople.

Romance of a Harem

records all the exciting events which led to the
sensational assassination of the Sultan Abdul Aziz.

Romance of a Harem

may be obtained at all booksellers and libraries.
Very handsomely and artistically bound in crimson
art vellum, lettered in white, tied with white satin,
and gilt top.

Price FIVE SHILLINGS nett.

THE NEW NOVEL

BACK TO LILAC-LAND

By a Well-known Author

Back to Lilac-Land

is the most daring and most realistic story of the
stage ever written. Even the realism of Mr George
Moore will pale before the revelations of

Back to Lilac-Land

which is written by a well-known London Journalist,
who has a very wide and intimate knowledge
of theatrical affairs, both before and behind the
scenes.

Back to Lilac-Land

is not a depressing and morbid study, but a powerful,
vigorous and dramatic, yet bright and entertaining
tale which will keep the reader interested
from the first line to the last.

Back to Lilac-Land

may be obtained at all booksellers and libraries.

Price SIX SHILLINGS

London: GREENING & CO. LTD.

20 CECIL COURT, CHARING CROSS ROAD

End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Hall Caine, by C. Fred Kenyon

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HALL CAINE ***

***** This file should be named 57564-h.htm or 57564-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/7/5/6/57564/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.