The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Murray River, by Arthur Kinloch

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Murray River
Being a Journal of the Voyage of the "Lady Augusta" Steamer

Author: Arthur Kinloch

Release Date: August 1, 2018 [EBook #57618]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MURRAY RIVER ***

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from scans of public domain works at The National
Library of Australia.)

CLEARING CLAIM.

“The surface-soil is usually first skimmed off before digging is properly commenced.”

MARKING CLAIM.

“In all directions men were engaged in marking out their claims, which were eight feet square.”

THE MURRAY RIVER:

BEING A

JOURNAL OF THE VOYAGE

OF THE

“LADY AUGUSTA” STEAMER

FROM THE

GOOLWA, IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA,

TO

GANNEWARRA, ABOVE SWAN HILL, VICTORIA;

A DISTANCE FROM THE

SEA MOUTH OF 1400 MILES.

BY ARTHUR KINLOCH,
Esq.
,

CLERK OF THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.

LONDON:

HOPE & CO., 16, GREAT MARLBOROUGH STREET.

1856.

2

TO

HIS EXCELLENCY SIR HENRY EDWARD FOX YOUNG, KNIGHT,

LIEUTENANT-GOVERNOR OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA,

WHO HAS KINDLY AUTHORISED

MY PUBLICATION OF A JOURNAL OF THE EXPEDITION ON THE MURRAY,

I RESPECTFULLY

DEDICATE THIS SHORT NARRATIVE OF THE VOYAGE

OF THE

FIRST STEAMER ON THE WATERS OF THAT NOBLE RIVER.

ARTHUR KINLOCH.

3

PREFACE.

Lest this description of the River Murray should appear in some
points to differ from the accounts of other travellers, it may be
necessary to observe that the present little work is merely a
Journal

or daily record of what the writer observed during his voyage up
the River, which was at the time considerably flooded, though it
had not then attained its highest elevation, which occurs about
December.

The English reader may also bear in mind that rivers in England
are not the scale whereby to estimate the streams of other portions
of the globe, or even of Europe, and that some of the larger rivers
of that Continent are in like manner subject to the vicissitudes of
dry seasons and partial floods.

This occurs particularly in Spain and in the South of France, as,
for example, in the Rhone, which is materially influenced by the
seasons in its volume of water.

In more tropical climes the difference is still greater; thus, the
rise of the Nile is sometimes not less than thirty-eight feet, that of
the Euphrates twelve feet, that of the Tigris twenty feet; whilst
in India the large rivers are also increased or diminished in a considerable
degree during the dry and wet seasons.

The English reader, therefore, the writer would again repeat,
should not be surprised at hearing of the easy navigability of the
greatest Australian river, or wonder that other works have stated
the stream of the Murray as quite insignificant and ill adapted for
steamers.

The voyage of the
Lady Augusta
steamer has proved the fact of
the navigation being open for at least six months during a very dry
season, and no doubt can exist that in ordinary years the River
Murray may be used by steamers for at least seven months.

A system of embankments and occasional canals at a more distant
day, when labour shall become abundant, will probably lay open
the course of the river for a still longer period, although the present
navigability has been deemed sufficient for all immediate
purposes of traffic.

4

The first Navigators by Steam of the River Murray; or, a List
of the Passengers, Officers, and Crew of the “Lady Augusta”
Steamer and the “Eureka” Barge.

Passengers.

His Excellency Sir H. E. F. Young, Lieutenant-Governor of South Australia.

J. Grainger, Esq., M.L.C.

Wm. Younghusband, Esq., M.L.C, and Agent for the Murray Steamers.

R. Davenport, Esq., M.L.C.

A. Kinloch, Esq., Clerk Executive Council.

Geo. Palmer, Esq., Indian Civil Service.

Geo. Mason, Esq., Sub-Protector of Aborigines.

E. W. Andrews, Esq.,
South Australian Register
.

Travers Finnis, Esq.

James Allen, Esq.

Regd. Bright, Esq., (left the party at Swan Hill).

H. Jamieson, Esq., of Mildura (joined the party on the river, at his own station).

Mrs. Finniss.

Mrs. Younghusband.

Mrs. Irvine.

Miss Sarah Younghusband.

Miss Eliza Younghusband.

Miss Louisa Younghusband.

Isabella Williamson.

Officers and Crew of the “Lady Augusta” and the “Eureka” Barge.

Commander, Francis Cadell.

Lady Augusta.

Wm. Davidson, Master.

Wm. Webb, Chief Officer.

R. Napier, Engineer.

Thomas Nevin, Seaman.

Henry Petrie, ditto.

Robert Robson, Stoker.

Evan Thomas, ditto.

Wm. Cruise Teague,
[1]
Stoker.

Lewis Chandler, Chief Steward.

John McAulay, Second Steward.

Jemy, Native of China.

Wm. Gylmour, Cook.

Eureka.

Edmund Robertson, Master.

J. H. Copeland, Chief Officer (a native of New York).

John Nelson, Purser (native of New South Wales).

Jimmy (South Sea Islander).

Tee Harry (South Sea Islander).

Hy. Winsby, Carpenter.

Neil McGregor, Carpenter’s Mate (from New Brunswick).

Arman (Madrassee).

Kurreem (Bengalee).

James Giles.

Three Wellington Blacks.

One Police Trooper, John Phillips, joined the party, on duty, at Mr. Chapman’s Paringa.

Total—Forty-five persons.

5

JOURNAL

OF

VOYAGE ON THE MURRAY.

Amongst the anomalies which may be said to distinguish the continent
of Australia from other inhabited portions of the globe, not the
least remarkable perhaps has been the almost unnoticed existence
of one of the longest and most navigable rivers in the world. This
river is the Murray, which, deriving its sources from the deep gorges
over which Mount Kosciusko, the loftiest of the Australian Alps,
rears its snowy crest, pursues its placid course for upwards of two
thousand
[2]
miles through the Colonies of New South Wales,
Victoria, and South Australia, until, losing its channel in the broad
but shallow Lake Alexandrina, it eventually finds a passage for its
waters through the boisterous surges which beat upon the shores
of Encounter Bay. This great stream, exceeding in the extent of
its course the Ganges, the Indus, or the La Plata, three of the
longest rivers in the world, and with thrice the development of the
Rhine, the Rhone, or the Elbe, is fed also by tributaries, which, in
magnitude and, during certain seasons, in navigability, may not be
much inferior to those European streams. These are the Darling,
the Lachlan, and the Murrumbidgee; of which the first, rising in
the vicinity of Moreton Bay, in about latitude 28° and longitude
152° 30′ (and with tributaries reaching almost to the tropic), after
stretching for about half its course, or near one thousand miles, in a
west and south-west direction, descends at length to join its waters
with the Murray, in latitude 34° 10′ and longitude 142°.

The second, the Lachlan, rising in the Blue Mountains, near
Bathurst, trends to the north-west, but eventually unites with the
main river, about 200 miles in a south-easterly direction from the
junction of the Darling, and after having been previously swelled
by the waters of the Murrumbidgee for a distance of 150 miles.
This last river, which issues not far from the Maneroo Plains, east
of the Australian Alps, at a point more distant still than the sources

6

of the Murray, has a tortuous course in a westerly direction for
many hundred miles, with a stream described by Captain Sturt as
rapid and impetuous until its junction with the Lachlan, in longitude
144° 20′. If it should prove navigable by steam, the advantages
that would accrue to the adjacent province could hardly be
inferior to those anticipated from the opening of the water communications
of the Murray.

In addition to the streams which thus increase the waters of the
Murray throughout its sinuous course, it enumerates among its
tributaries many rivers which, from their length, if not from the
varied country they traverse, cannot but be deemed interesting, if
not important. Such are the Lodden, Campaspe, Goulburn, Mitta-Mitta,
Ovens, and others, including the Lindesay, first noticed by
Captain Sturt, and which, passing through much auriferous country,
severally and conjointly water about two-thirds of the province of
Victoria, or a superficial extent of more than 50,000 square
miles.

Independent, moreover, of these minor affluents which swell the
drainage amount of the river Murray—a basin stretching from near
the 25th to the 36th parallel of latitude, and from the 139th to beyond
the 152nd degree of east longitude, an estimated extent of 540,600
square miles,
[3]
or nearly seven times the superficial extent of Great
Britain—there exists in close connection with the main stream a
network of rivers which may perhaps have been destined to fulfil
those purposes which the vagaries of Nature have transferred to
the parent river. These are denominated the Edward, Logan,
Wakool, and Neimur Rivers; which, having a more direct course
than the Murray itself, would, but for their unfortunate termination,
after some hundred miles in a shallow creek, at no very distant
period, have proved themselves of inestimable value to the internal
prosperity of the adjacent provinces. As it is, nothing but a
superabundant population will probably succeed in turning these
streams to a useful or, at least, a navigable end.

The Murray, thus combining within its basin nearly the entire
drainage of the province of Victoria, with a large portion of that of
New South Wales, and much of the eastern part of South Australia,
appears to have been unknown to British Colonists before 1830, when
Captain Charles Sturt, of the 39th Regiment—one of the most ardent
and intrepid explorers the world has ever seen—whilst tracing the
source, or rather course, of the Murrumbidgee, by order of the Sydney
Government, came upon this noble river; to which, in honour of the
then Colonial Secretary, the distinguished Sir George Murray, he
gave its present name. His party, on this occasion, consisted, himself
included, of no more than eight individuals, a portion of whom were
convict prisoners, the main body of the expedition having been left

7

(January 7th) in depôt at the Murrumbidgee, with instructions to
repair, after a few days’ delay, to the Goulburn Plains, from whence
a communication might be maintained with Sydney. Captain
Sturt’s means of transport were comprised in a whale boat and
small skiff, built in seven days on the Murrumbidgee, and with
these means and a stock of provisions barely sufficient, it afterwards
appeared, for subsistence, this determined man did not hesitate to
follow the course of the Murray to its mouth; this, after many obstacles,
in the Murrumbidgee, from the “snags” or sunken logs with
which it was encumbered, and, at that season, it appears from the
rapidity of the current, and in the main river (which averaged 200
yards in breadth) from the unequivocally hostile demeanour of the
numerous tribes of natives encountered on its banks, he reached in
thirty-two days, from the depôt. Thence, after traversing the
broad but shallow lake in which the Murray terminates before
reaching the sea, finding it useless to attempt to force a passage in
his frail boat through the dangerous navigation of the sea mouth,
or hopeless of any advantage to his party, even were it effected, he
took the decided, though perhaps inevitable, course of retracing his
steps up the stream and thus returning to the depôt of his party;
who, he conceived, would then be in search of him. With an
aching heart, but a firm will, as Captain Sturt himself relates, was
this resolution carried into effect, and after thirty-nine days from
the sea, on the very day his stock of flour had failed him, and
when his party were all but incapable of further exertion, he fell
in with his people, who had been summoned to his aid by two
of the heroic crew who had shared his dangers and privations;
and whom, as a last resource, he had dispatched to seek the
depôt.

The length of the water passage thus effected was eighty-eight
days; and Capt. Sturt estimated the distance traversed on the different
rivers at 2,000 miles, during which, with the exception of
the timber on the Murrumbidgee, and the rare occurrence of a
sandspit on the main stream, no obstacle to steam navigation was
discovered. The official report was forwarded to Sydney, and published
by the Government, and is to be found appended to Capt.
Sturt’s own narrative of his adventurous voyage.
[4]
No steps, however,
appear to have been taken by those in authority to render
available the great discovery which the energies of this brave man
had thus rendered patent to all.

At length, in the year 1850, Sir Henry Young, the Lieutenant-Governor
of South Australia, an officer of enlarged ideas and considerable
knowledge of geographical subjects, acquired during a
lengthened service in many parts of the world, appears to have
taken up the matter, and brought it before the Colonial Legislature.

8

In September and October, 1850, accompanied by the Surveyor-General
of the Province, and some friends, including ladies, His
Excellency ascended the Murray as far as its confluence with the
Darling, or above 600 miles, and found it navigable with ease
throughout that extent, with a breadth varying from 180 to 300
yards, and a depth of water of from two to four and even five
fathoms. The project, in the mean time, had been opposed by the
Legislative Council; who, actuated, it would seem, by mistaken
views of the real interests of the Colony, objected especially to the
appropriation of £20,000 from the Land Fund, in the construction
of a tramline to connect the Murray at the Goolwa with the conveniences
of the harbour at Port Elliot—a distance of nearly eight
miles. Sir Henry Young was, however, fortunate enough to obtain
the approbation of the Secretary of State for the Colonies to the
proposed scheme, as also the general good opinion of the Colony in
favour of the Murray navigation; whilst, with regard to interference
with the supply of labour, as alleged by the opponents of the
project, the recorded opinion of Earl Grey, that “the execution of
the work could not fail to promote the sale, at an enhanced price,
of the land benefitted by the proposed communication,” must have
been particularly gratifying to His Excellency. Moreover, as His
Lordship observed, “the funds applicable to the purposes of
emigration would assuredly be increased, and labour itself economised
by providing for a more expeditious and less costly mode of
conveying produce to a place of shipment, from an extensive and
important district.”

The necessity of the harbour at Port Elliot arises from the difficulty
of navigating the Murray sea-mouth at all times or seasons;
nor, indeed, is it probable that any undertaking will thoroughly
overcome this obstacle, until a crowded population or an overflowing
treasury shall be enabled to cope with the difficulty by concentrating
the waters of the Murray in a narrow and more rapid
channel in place of their, at present, vague and diffused passage
over the broad but shallow surface of Lake Alexandrina. A natural
breakwater has rendered the formation of the port in this locality
inexpensive; but to be perfectly secure in all winds, the barrier
against the sea should be extended by a further addition to the
present ridge of rocks, in the shape of a breakwater arm. Labour
is, however, at present so costly, that no likelihood exists of this
purpose being speedily effected. An application to the Admiralty
for the assistance of a man of war’s crew in the formation of a
secure port at a point likely soon to become of considerable importance,
might perhaps be deemed irregular: though with the existing
dearth of labour, if likely to be attended with success, it were well
worthy the consideration of the Executive. Indeed, it may here,

en passant
, be observed that, in all human probability, the day
is not far distant when to the exertions of the sister services of

9

the Mother Country—the British Army and Navy—Australia must
owe the greatest and most beneficial changes her destinies have as
yet demanded.

As to the tramline to connect Port Elliot with the Goolwa, it will
probably be finished in less than six months’ time; and at a total
cost, all necessary expenses included, of about £23,000.

To return to the more immediate subject of the Murray navigation.
The descent of this river was partially effected from the
township of Albury, situated 400 miles south-west from Sydney, by
Mr. Richard Gerstacker, in a gum-tree canoe, at a time when “the
stream was lower than ever it had been since the white man
approached its banks.” Mr. Gerstacker, whose progress was stopped
by the sinking of his canoe on a “snag,” informs us that he left
Albury, on the 5th May, 1851, in a gum-tree canoe, drawing about
eleven inches water; and that throughout the distance he accomplished,
there would have been water for three or four inches further
draught. The river, however, being unusually low, the stream
appeared filled with “snags,” or dead gum trees, some of which
obstruct the navigation to such a degree that steam power would be
necessary to dislodge them. Below the Murrumbidgee these impediments,
the writer reports, for the most part ceased, and after
the junction of the Darling scarcely one was to be seen; whilst the
sharp bends, so embarrassing to steam navigation, were no longer
met with—the river, though tortuous, offering wide sweeps which
afford plenty of “sea room” in mid-channel, even for steamers of
considerable size. Sandbanks, however, occasionally occurred up to
the North-west Bend, but not in mid-channel.

Mr. Gerstacker, whilst confessedly unacquainted with the resources
of the Murray district, or the probable requirements of the settlers
on its banks, is yet of opinion that the navigation of the river would
be the means of drawing a largely increasing population to the
Murray, not to say, the probable cause of augmenting in an incredible
degree the zeal and efforts of the present inhabitants, no
longer left in a state of isolation and comparative abandonment.
Moreover, it may be added, the dray journeys for the transport of
wool, produce, and supplies, being not only most tedious, but beset
with difficulties, considerable returns for goods and passengers
would be the certain result of a regular water communication.
[5]

Mr. Gerstacker, after referring to the energetic efforts which, in
North America, have cleared almost impassable streams from the
impediments of fallen timber, &c., concludes by saying, that except
in an extraordinarily dry season, even the upper part of the Hume,
or Upper Murray, as far as Albury, usually contains sufficient water,
during eight months of the year, to float boats drawing four or five

10

feet; but he leaves it to those acquainted with the resources of the
country bordering these rivers to decide whether sufficient remuneration
would be afforded to steamers thus accomplishing the
navigation.

The favourable statements of many settlers on the Murray might
be added to the statements of Mr. Gerstacker, but the question has
now received a more direct solution by the successful voyage of the

Lady Augusta
steamer; before narrating which, some retrospective
glance is perhaps requisite.

The opposition in the Legislative Council of South Australia to
the immediate navigation of the Murray and the consequent outlay
at Port Elliot and the Goolwa appears, after a time, to have ceased;
and in June, 1851, a premium of £4,000 was offered by the Legislature
to the first and second iron steamboats of not less than forty
horse power, or more than two feet draught of water, which should
succeed in navigating the Murray from the Goolwa to, at least, the
junction of the Darling. This liberal offer, it seems, however, was
not taken up, possibly from the difficulty of providing boats of the
requisite material, and the Murray navigation was apparently
deferred
sine die
. At length, Captain Francis Cadell, formerly
commander of the
Queen of Sheba
and the
Cleopatra
steamer
(1,500 tons), entered into the matter with an evident determination
to carry it through. He laid on a small steamer at Sydney, of above
eighty tons burthen, forty horse power, and three feet draught of
water when loaded
[6]
—proposed to the Legislature of South Australia
to carry his boat through the sea mouth—to navigate the river to
the Darling (600 miles) twelve times in the year; or to perform
six trips as far as Swan Hill, a distance of 1,250 miles from the
sea. For the first performance he was to receive £500; for the
passage up to the Darling, £1,000; and for the subsequent eleven or
six trips, a further sum of £1,000—the whole in quarterly payments.
These terms, proposed by himself, having been recommended
to Sir Henry Young by an address from the Legislative Council,
were approved of by His Excellency, who gave his assent to the
apportionment of the stipulated premium for the prescribed
object.

Captain Cadell then proceeded to the river, carrying with him

11

from Melbourne a canvas boat, twenty-one feet in length and three
in breadth, which, on arrival at Swan Hill, he put together, and
having obtained a crew of four returning diggers, dropped down the
Murray, and after visiting every station and ascertaining the
probable traffic to be derived from each, in the matter of wool,
produce, rations, stores, &c., reached the Goolwa in twenty-one days.
There he arranged the construction of a small vessel of about 100
tons capacity, to accompany, as a lighter, the little steamer
Lady
Augusta
, which in July, 1853, was navigated round from Sydney,
by Mr. Davidson, formerly master of the
Hawk
schooner; and,
indeed, not the least extraordinary portion of this undertaking has
been the voyage in midwinter by so small a vessel, of nearly 1,100
miles, through a sea at all times boisterous, and often most adverse
even to the best and most weatherly craft. The round-house which
occupies three-fourths of the
Augusta’s
deck, renders her on this
account by no means fitted for the open sea; whilst it affords
admirable accommodation on board for sixteen cabin passengers,
including ladies, for whom a commodious after-cabin has been
reserved.

These preliminary matters having been duly arranged, and the

Lady Augusta
pushed through the sea-mouth by Captain Cadell, a
party including His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor, some
Members of the Legislative Council, with ladies and other friends,
was arranged to accompany the meditated expedition up the Murray,
which, the return voyage included, it was supposed would occupy
about five weeks.

August the 19th, accordingly, His Excellency, accompanied by
Mr. J. Grainger, of the Legislative Council, and the writer, left
Adelaide to ride to the Goolwa, a distance from the capital of rather
more than sixty miles. The road—generally indifferent, after
ascending some fine open downs—passes through Noarlunga, on
the Onkaparinga, a thriving and most promising township; and the
first day’s halt took place at Willunga. This is one of the prettiest
spots in the province, and well adapted to become, at a future and
not very distant day, the resort of those inhabitants of Adelaide,
who shall have the good taste or the leisure to exchange the dust,
the heat, and the glare of a provincial town for the pleasing verdure
of a country scene, rendered here particularly attractive by park-like
glades and a charming sea-view.

A new inn would, however, be required; the accommodation of
the “Bush” being quite insufficient for the traffic. On this occasion,
the house being otherwise occupied, His Excellency took up his
quarters for the night at Mr. Kell’s; Mr. Grainger finding a bed
with the clergyman of the district, a Mr. Burnett.

A few miles beyond Willunga, the country is of the richest
description, combining the most attractive forest scenery with far
extended land and sea views. From thence onward, however, it

12

deteriorates sadly, terminating in that dreary expanse of bush and
sand, which is here denominated “scrub.” Descending to the
Encounter Bay coast, a slight improvement takes place; and after
emerging on the tract of land, over which runs the new tramline
from Port Elliot to the Goolwa, some excellent pasture appears,
which must soon assume a valuable character in connexion with the
River Murray and the works in progress in this district. His
Excellency repaired at once on board the
Lady Augusta
, which we
reached about three p. m., there to await the arrival of Captain
Cadell and party, who were to come down the following day and be
present at the launching of the
Eureka
, as the new vessel built on the
Goolwa by Messrs. Wisby (two brothers), formerly the carpenters of
the
Cleopatra
steamer, had been styled. Some delay, however,
occurring with regard to this ceremony, Sir Henry Young repaired
to the house of Mr. Laurie, the harbour agent at Port Elliot, where,
with Mr. Grainger, he remained some days. The launch commenced
on the 23rd; but, rather to the disappointment of the
young lady destined to perform the bottle-breaking ceremony, and
with the expenditure of some pretty tri-coloured silk, the
Eureka
[7]

was only finally brought alongside the steamer on the morning of
the 24th.

On the evening of the 25th, the
Lady Augusta
, with a full complement
of passengers, and including the
Eureka
, which was
towed alongside, an aggregate number of forty-three persons,
steamed off from the Goolwa Jetty, amidst the cheers of the
assembled settlers of the district, many of whom had traversed long
distances to witness the departure of the first steamer on the waters
of the Murray.

It was calculated that 300 persons were present at the launch;
and, previous to the departure of the boat, a
déjeûner
, by a large
and respectable number of the community, had been given to
Captain Cadell, in honour of the enterprise he had engaged in, and
as a mark of the sense entertained by the public of the zeal and
energy with which he had carried on his measures.

To particularize the features of this trip by a diary of the daily
proceedings on board, or by the diurnal progress of the little vessel
against the stream, would be tedious and uninteresting. Comprising
good cheer in abundance, and, with hardly the exception of an
unfavourable day, unvaried fine weather, our passage up the river
could not afford much scope to the imagination, or offer a prolific
subject even to the highest descriptive powers.

MELBOURNE.

ADELAIDE.

13

The Murray is a noble stream; but, at the present day, not a
particularly interesting, or, at any rate, a highly picturesque river.
The banks throughout are pretty, sometimes even romantic, but
from the sameness of the forest trees—consisting chiefly of gum
tree glades—and the expanse of flooded surface through which, at
this season, the vessel passed, the scenery cannot but be regarded
as generally tame. The reaches, nevertheless, at times are fine,
and, here and there, cliffs of moderate height, varied colours, and
perhaps grotesque shape, occur to break the monotony of an otherwise
interminable flat. The volume of water rolled down by the
Murray is imposing, the breadth of the stream after passing Lake
Alexandrina (a sheet of water about thirty miles in length and
twenty-five in breadth), averaging from 150 to 300 yards; the
current is ordinarily from two to three knots per hour; and the
course of the river, after the first 250 miles, tortuous in the extreme.
The steamer generally came to anchor in the evening, about nine or
ten o’clock; and started in the morning, before dawn. Wood had
been provided, at certain stations, by previous arrangement; at
other points, parties from the vessel went ashore to provide fuel,
the consumption of which averaged about three fourths of a ton
per hour. It took 168 hours steaming to reach the Darling, where
we arrived at midnight, on the 6th of September, under sail and
steam; the distance being calculated at about 650 miles from the
Goolwa. On the point of reaching this station, we managed to
upset a native canoe or “mungo,” propelled by a black and his
“lubra,” or spouse. The former scrambled up the vessel, but the
female was compelled to swim to the shore. The man being asked
why he had not attempted to assist his dusky helpmate, answered,
with the utmost composure, “Plenty cold; black lubra walk well!”
So much for native gallantry. The blacks on the Murray are not now
so numerous as formerly, infanticide prevailing among them, it is
said, to a great extent; indeed, we observed but one child in our
passage up to the Murrumbidgee.

The principal stations, up to this point of the voyage, had been
Mr. Mason’s, Wellington; Mr. Walsh’s; Mr. Scott’s, Moorundee;
Messrs. Chambers’, Wigley’s, Chapmans’, Moruna, the Jackson’s
(commonly called Bob and Harry’s), and the inn at the Darling
(McLeod’s). Here blacks were generally found in greater or less
numbers; and, as far as we could learn, they had everywhere proved
of service to the settlers. They are protected by the Government,
and to a certain extent fed and clothed; but the issues of blankets
and flour, in South Australia at least, are as yet too scanty. Several
of these people were taken by Captain Cadell up the river, to assist
his crew in procuring fuel, and they proved useful and obliging
upon these occasions.

14

No accident, save the temporary indisposition of some of the
ladies of our party, and Captain Davidson’s unfortunate entanglement
of his foot in the machinery, occurred to interrupt the serenity
of our voyage; some atrocities, however, committed by the natives
upon white men, had, it appeared, disturbed the tranquillity of the
river. Mr. Scott, the Government officer from Moorundee, we
found, had been in pursuit of some of these malefactors, and from
this gentleman, whom with his brother we encountered at Chapman’s
Station (Paringa), we learned that one of these natives had
been wounded desperately in an attempt to escape from the police;
and that another had been killed by the settlers, whilst endeavouring
to arrest him. A third, captured by one of the Adelaide police, we
conveyed to the Darling, where he was handed over to Mr. Fletcher,
a Magistrate of New South Wales
[8]
, whose professional services (for
he had formerly been a medical practitioner) had been called in
request on Mr. Davidson’s account. This gentleman, who lived
fifteen miles from McLeod’s, where a tolerable inn and some good
horses were discovered, was sent for at His Excellency’s request,
and in obeying the requisition unfortunately received a fall from
his horse, which, though inflicting no severer injury than a bruised
forehead and face, must have been sufficiently annoying to spoil the
pleasure which, in common with all other settlers upon the river,
he evidently derived at the arrival of the steamer. His services,
I may also mention, were called into play by the sudden illness of
one of the ladies of our party, whose rashness in bathing, at an
early or unseasonable hour appears to have been followed by serious
though brief indisposition. Mr. Fletcher spoke with some degree
of feeling of a barbarous murder committed by a black, about ten
days before, upon a white man, whose horse he had undertaken to
guide through a ford. Indeed, these acts of reiterated villany call
for the active interference of the Sydney authorities.

The land on the Murray to this point (the Darling) is all
occupied, chiefly by large stock proprietors or squatters; for
agriculture, whether on account of the excessive dryness of the
soil, or for want of labour, appears little attended to. The settlers
seem to want energy in their pursuits, but perhaps the badness of
the communications hitherto with a market, and the uncertain
tenure of their runs, may explain their inactivity. Irrigation and
embankment could not fail to improve the land, but if there existed
no means of disposing of produce, it is easily imagined why these
labours have not been tried.

On this subject, or rather with regard to the present system of
land allotment, I may here observe, that His Excellency, after
proclaiming, as the “Hundred of the Murray,” the two miles

15

frontage on each bank, proposes to offer for public sale blocks of
land of from ten to 640 acres, granting to the occupiers a commonage
in rear of their property for pastoral purposes. It is
probable that such an alteration in the existing system of leases
may induce a larger proportion of settlers to look to the Murray for
their locations.

With respect to the much-engrossing pursuit of gold digging,
which now occupies so large a portion of the population of these two
Provinces (Victoria and New South Wales), it would seem that
further discoveries are likely to take place. A Mr. Paterson, or a
Mr. Walsh (I am not certain of the name), who visited us at the
Darling, mentioned as a fact that a nugget of three or four ounces
weight had been picked up on the upper Darling, by one of the
settlers, in the ranges which abut on that river, and as quartz hills
exist still further back, it is not improbable that considerable gold
deposits may be found in these localities.

The animal and vegetable kingdom of the Murray is apparently
not productive in uncommon or very peculiar productions. Of the
four-footed inhabitants of the bush, up to this point of our trip (the
vicinity of the Thirteen Lakes
[9]
), I have heard of none being seen
by our party, save and except one solitary kangaroo. Ducks and
quail are abundant; the former comprising the musk, black, and
wood duck, teal, and widgeon. These are netted by the natives
with considerable success; the plan of action being, I understood,
to spread the nets over the mouths of the creeks or brooks, and
then drive the birds towards them. Wild turkeys are said to
be plentiful near the lakes, which are numerous on some parts of
the banks, but none have as yet been seen. The white cockatoos
are numerous, and occasionally a pretty parroquet has been observed.
These, with pelicans, cranes, and sometimes, though rarely, a swan,
comprise the chief portion of the feathered inhabitants of the
Murray and its banks, but very small birds, unknown by name to
those on board, have been also seen.
[10]
The fish of the Murray
consist chiefly of the cod, perch, and cray fish, with a few small
turtles, and, in the adjoining lakes, a kind of smelt. The cod is
of large size and weight, and well tasted. The most delicate fish
is, however, found in the Darling—the name I could not gather.

16

The timber on the Murray is almost entirely confined to the
gum, of which there are three varieties—the white, red, and
flooded; and occasionally a few pines. Edible roots are found by
the natives, and comprise a considerable portion of their food; but
the only fruit, as far as I could learn, in use amongst the whites, is
that called the “quandong”—a species of wild peach, which is
largely used as a preserve. Wild flowers are generally abundant.

At MacLeod’s we embarked some cargo for Mildura; and several
natives were taken on board, and one woman whose conjugal affection
seemed very prominent. The males were, many of them,
fine tall men, with very muscular limbs, huge beards, and unsightly
countenances. It is a pity the Governments of the respective
provinces, which occasionally issue blankets and rations to the
Aborigines, do not extend their protecting cares still further. A
supply of clothing, however scanty—were it only a long blue shirt—would
be a blessing to these poor savages, who appear at times to
suffer considerably from the keen cold air of the Australian wilderness;
nor would it, we may presume, render them less disposed to
the ameliorating influences of civilization and mental improvement.

In South Australia, considerable progress has been made in the
intellectual and moral training of these degraded people, which has
been chiefly owing to the exertions and indefatigable zeal of Archdeacon
Hale, at Port Lincoln, where the seminary for their instruction
exists. Many failures, of course, have taken place, particularly
amongst the females; some of whom, after serving as domestics for
several years, apparently most contented with their lot, have suddenly
disappeared from their houses to seek refuge in the woods,
and then relapse into their pristine barbarism—nature is invincible,
it would seem.

From the Darling junction our course was marked by as few
incidents as had hitherto fallen to our lot. I find my daily memoranda
somewhat to the following effect:—

Wednesday, September 7th.—Left the Darling, which we found
a fine broad stream with considerable depth of water,
[11]
after having
taken in a large quantity of very indifferent wood—the steaming, in
consequence, slow.

During the night and following morning, heavy rain fell, penetrating
even to the interior of the cabin, probably owing to the
excessive dryness of the decks, caused by the heat.

17

Thursday.—Towards four p.m., arrived at the Messrs. Jamieson’s
station, Mildura, pleasantly situated on a turn of the river, about
fifty miles by water from Macleod’s. Mr. Jamieson, who appears
to be thoroughly acquainted with the resources and commercial
statistics of the river, which he most obligingly has communicated
without reserve to all on board, joined us here with a native servant,
in order to accompany the expedition as far as Swan Hill,
600 or 700 miles further. About this man hangs a tale, establishing,
I think, a fact, which, though generally credited with regard to
native propensities, has not perhaps been thoroughly authenticated.
I allude to their cannibal habits. The man, who goes by the name
of Mickie, himself tells the story. He says, that, returning on
one occasion from Melbourne, where he had been serving as a
police trooper, he fell in with some natives of the Loddon tribe,
one of whom, following him, and threatening to spear and eat him,
he attacked and killed.
[12]
This effected, he was not content with
his triumph, but did actually eat a portion of the man’s body—a
part of his kidney fat—which he pronounced good eating, and not
unlike pork and duck. Nor does it appear that Mickie was thus
prompted for want of food, or from a specific predilection for such a
meal; but rather because he imagined that thus would be infused
into him his enemy’s strength; and that, moreover, the skin which
he lavishly distributed amongst the natives of his tribe, would
prove a charm for his fishing nets.

The settlers about the Darling appear desirous of coming under
Adelaide jurisdiction. The fact is, they are so distant from Sydney,
that they imagine themselves quite neglected by authority, and
entirely cut off from all legal jurisdiction. What difference the
advent of the steamer upon their waters may cause in their ideas,
is yet to be seen. Undoubtedly, it is a source of unmingled satisfaction
to all settlers here; indeed, we are told of some who actually
meditated the abandonment of their runs, in utter despondency at
the impracticability of transporting their wool produce to a port,
[13]

or even of obtaining the supplies necessary for their subsistence.
Dancing on board the
Eureka
till half-past ten.

Friday.—Took in a quantity of pine wood, about five tons, for
fuel; and, after passing Williams’s, arrived at (Carwarp) Messrs.
McGrath’s, a station occupied by three brothers; who, from the
condition of common labourers, have raised themselves, by their
industry, to a position of comparative affluence. They are the possessors
of 10,000 sheep on this run, about the numbers which are
depastured at Mildura. The weather continues cold, though
dancing was kept up for an hour in the evening. The cabin was

18

much crowded at this station; and some of our party addicted to
going early to bed, complained a little of the disturbance on board.

Saturday.—Morning cold. Reached Messrs. Keane & Orr’s
(native name Kulkyane), where we remained till early on Monday
morning. The natives at this station were numerous, and some
of them apparently intelligent, but in appearance disfigured, if that
is possible, by the circles of white clay which they had drawn round
their eyes and noses. This, we are informed, is symbolical of mourning
for deceased relatives—perhaps the unfortunate children who
are, it is said, so often slaughtered.

Monday.—Steamed on to wooding station, in a picturesque
country with high banks.

At four a.m. on Tuesday, September 13th, the Captain reported
a comet in sight, which, after considerable incredulity on behalf of
some of our party, was at length acknowledged to be a most brilliant
meteor. Euston Township (Nowong), so called after the Grafton
family, we reached at ten a.m. It is a Government reserve, and
seemed a fine clearing, though as yet the settlement is comprised
in the Commissioner’s house, an inn, some huts, and a black encampment.
Mr. Cole, the Crown Commissioner, received nearly
all our party with great politeness, showed the ladies over his
quarters—a log house, not impervious to the weather, but otherwise
comfortable, if not pretty, which, indeed, none of the stations are;
he then produced some wine, eggs, and lastly a salad. Here we
obtained a sight of some newspapers, the latest from Melbourne, of
the 23rd of the previous month.

The ladies were invited to see two specimens of the “lowen” or
“luanna,” a bird resembling in some degree the pheasant of Europe,
and also reckoned of delicious flavour.
[14]
The peculiarity of these
birds is, that the hen does not hatch her own eggs, but buries them
in layers of sand, whence, after a little time, the process is effected
by heat. The Commissioner—whose district contains about 70,000
sheep, 15,000 or 16,000 head of cattle, and nearly 300 horses—complains
of the impossibility of completing his establishment of
white police, notwithstanding the liberal allowance of the Government
to troopers, which amounts to 5
s.
6
d.
daily, in addition to
rations and quarters; he is, however, he tells us, to be joined by a
European sergeant immediately.

From this point, Euston, there was, until lately, a post to Sydney
and back, which, while it lasted, was conducted with rapidity; the
floods, however, have been so troublesome, that it has been recently
given up. The blacks here were numerous, and two-thirds of them,
at least, disfigured with their mourning marks. Some of them
were dressed in uniform as police troopers attached to the Commissioner.
Mr. Cole, with a Mr. Morey, who has 7,000 sheep contiguous
to the Government reserve (twenty-five square miles), came on board

19

to dinner, when our commander’s champagne flowed freely; they
afterwards accompanied us up the river some miles. The comet
was reported very brilliant about four a.m.

Wednesday.—We reached the station of a Mr. Ross at an early
hour. Here some shearers, who were rather the worse of their
early potations, were inclined to be troublesome. Captain Cadell
turned one of them out of the fore cabin without ceremony; and,
shortly after, three of these men, endeavouring to aggravate some of
the crew whilst taking in fuel, and to prevent the natives from giving
their assistance, received from them a well-merited chastisement,
which, though to a looker-on it might appear unnecessarily severe,
had yet a well-timed and useful result. Nothing but a rough and
summary mode of proceeding would be effectual with such people,
whose conduct might destroy the comfort of all decent classes of
passengers. They were probably
ci-devant
convicts, or, as they are
here termed, “old lags.” At this station, we heard that 7,500 store
[15]

sheep had been brought over from Bathurst (500 miles), for the
convenience of shearing, and afterwards transshipping the wool clip
to Adelaide. We took in a stock of wood lower down the river, and,
after passing Mr. McCullum’s station (Wella), where there are
13,000 sheep, pursued our onward course towards Swan Hill.

From the junction of the Murrumbidgee, or rather of the Logan
or Wakool,
[16]
up which we steamed a short distance, the volume of
the Murray diminishes, and its sinuosity increases; but the steamer
made good progress on her way, anchoring about half-past twelve
a.m., on Thursday morning, the 15th September, in mid-channel,
with a strong tide running. Here we had lain perhaps an hour
and a-half, when all on board were awakened by an awkward lurch
of the
Lady Augusta
, which upset the cabin tables, and created
considerable confusion in the dark. Some inquiries were made as
to the cause of the unusual position of the steamer (for she did not
right herself), but no steps were taken to ascertain the real cause of
the accident, and all was attributed to the strength of the tide.
Some, however, were not satisfied with this solution, or found sleeping
on an inclined plane disagreeable; and, after the lapse of nearly
half an hour, it was discovered that the
Lady Augusta
had made
considerable water, which, rushing to one side, had caused the “list”
complained of. The pumps were then set to work, as also buckets,
and the hold eventually cleared of water. It appeared that some
valve connected with the engines had been left unclosed—whence
the shipment of so much water. At dawn, we had been passed by a
little steamer, called the
Mary Ann
, which indeed had been seen
lying off-shore the previous night. We found her again at the
station of a Mr. Phelps. She is an open boat, apparently about

20

fifty feet in length, carrying two masts, and fitted with an engine,
by her owner, a Mr. Randall, whose enterprising talent, and skill in
navigating his little craft, are highly to be lauded. At this station
we found an old “man-of-war’s man,” a Mr. Reynolds, who had been
so long away from civilised pursuits, that he said he hardly knew a
steamer by sight. He supplied us liberally with milk and butter.
I understood him to say that he had been thirty-six years in the
Colony. Mr. Phelps’s brother is accounted a large sheep owner in
this district, being the possessor of an extensive “run,” and about
17,000 sheep.

Lest the term “run” should not be clearly intelligible to some
non-Australian readers, it may be here observed, that it is an extensive
tract of country devoted to sheep-breeding, and held on lease
from the Government for a term of years. Its chief excellencies
are, of course, pasturage and good water; moreover, it must, at least,
be capable of carrying 4,000 sheep, or an equivalent number of
cattle—extra £2 10
s.
per annum for every additional 1,000 sheep,
or proportionate increase of cattle.

For this run, the owner takes out a licence of occupation, at a
rental proportioned to the number of sheep or cattle which the district
is calculated to support. The capabilities of the location are
estimated by a Commissioner of Crown Lands, and a half-yearly
assessment is also laid on all the live stock at the station—a halfpenny
per head for sheep, three halfpence for cattle, and threepence
for horses. Formerly, the holder had the option of purchasing,
at any time, the entire run at twenty shillings an acre;
but this law has now been altered and, as some think, amended, by
the impossibility, under the present system, of the existence of a
race of licensed settlers, or leaseholders, in perpetuity, who might
have been likened to the Crown feudatories of the middle ages, and
paid an annual quit-rent for their possessions. These landholders
are termed in Australia, “squatters.” In these runs, which sometimes
equal in extent an English county, and usually about the
centre or frontage, stands the homestead, a rude wooden building,
with a garden, stores, offices, and adjacent stock or farm yards. A
spacious grass paddock, and some smaller ones for tillage, all enclosed
with a post and rail fence, with a large shed for shearing
the sheep and storing the wool, are also necessary adjuncts of the
head-quarters. The two great epochs of pastoral life are the
lambing and shearing seasons; the latter duty having been performed
annually by a distinct class of persons, who went about from
station to station to be hired for this work. Since the gold discoveries,
however, this duty has been in some degree performed,
with considerable difficulty at times, by the settlers themselves.
Independent of the head-quarters or head-stations on these runs,
there are usually what are called “out-stations,” with small flocks
of from 500 to 1500 sheep, in charge of two shepherds and a hut-keeper;

21

who, whilst the former tend the sheep, looks after the
yards, cooks the victuals, and watches by night against the attacks
of the “dingo,” or wild dog—the most destructive of Australian
vermin.

The cattle grazing is carried on generally in a different part
of the run, by a stockman, who is provided with a hut-keeper. The
chief requisite here is a firm seat on horseback, and great activity
of body, as the cattle are much disposed to run wild, and are
often with difficulty collected. Both cattle and sheep were annually
slaughtered in great numbers, and boiled down for tallow, which
was readily bought up, by foreign merchants, for the London market,
and became an article of large export. The price of wool and
mutton has, however, now put an end, or nearly so, to this custom.
To improve the feed of a cattle or sheep run, recourse is often had
to firing the country; and this practice, apparently singular in so
dry a soil, is said to be effectual.

As a remarkable instance of the nature of Australian occupations,
or the ups and downs of fortune, the list of shepherds given by a
writer, in a certain district, is worthy of notice. They comprise
“an apothecary, a lawyer’s clerk, three sailors, a counting-house
clerk, a tailor, a Jew, a Portuguese sailor, a Cingalese, a barman, a
gentleman’s son, a broken-down merchant, a former Lieutenant in
the East India Company’s Service, a gipsy, a black fiddler, a dancing
master. Of these the gentleman’s son, the Jew, and the barman
made the best shepherds.”
[17]

This summary of sheep farming—the substance of which is taken
from a series of very good papers upon Australia, relating chiefly
to New South Wales—is also applicable, in most respects, to the
banks of the Murray, and I therefore introduce it here.
[18]

Leaving this digression, our first station yesterday (September
15) was that belonging to Mr. Hamilton. It appeared very
populous. Towards evening the river became tortuous in the
extreme; indeed, with the breadth the
Lady Augusta
and
Eureka

occupy upon the water (forty-two feet), steering the vessels, without
a check, through the narrow curves and opposing branches,
which continually met us at every point, was almost an impossibility.
The weather, which had been lowering since morning, in
the evening became perfectly tempestuous; and, amidst flashes of
lightning, occasional peals of thunder, and sudden gusts of wind,
little else was heard but the crashing of the opposing trees, or, in

22

the deep tones of our commander, the often repeated words, “stand
by, below;” “stop her;” “turn a-head, slow;” and at length the
welcome order, “full speed.” Thus, for some hours, did we advance,
dimly lighted by an overcast moon; and the storm at length
abating, without any other mishap than some slight damage to
the
Augusta’s
funnel, and the destruction of part of the
Eureka’s

rails—thanks to Captain Cadell’s perseverance—we were enabled to
hold on till two a.m., about which time we made fast alongside the
station of a Mr. Coghill.

To-day (Friday, September 16), steamed on, with some difficulty,
through the endless sinuosities of the river, now narrowed to an
average breadth of seventy or seventy-five yards, but still affording
near four fathoms’ depth of water. At some points, indeed, we
were delayed a considerable time, from inability to stem the current
in so contracted a space, without becoming entangled in the surrounding
wood. Altogether, I am inclined to think that the passage
of the river for steamers, such as that in which we now voyage, will
be difficult above the Murrumbidgee, except during the flooded
season, or about five months in the year. To improve the navigation,
however, much might be done by the passage up the stream of
a small boat (such, for instance, as the
Mary Ann
) provided with
means to clear away the “snags” or sunken trees, to cut the overhanging
branches, &c.

In course of time also, canals, were it only a few yards in length,
might be formed for the purpose of connecting the stream by a more
direct channel, instead of compelling ascending vessels to navigate
the continued sinuosities of the river throughout its entire course.

Swan Hill, a green oasis rising amidst what is, apparently, a desert
of reeds, is a valuable station, containing some excellent pasture.
Indeed, from these very reeds, which are annually burnt, springs
up a “second growth,” affording admirable food for cattle; whilst
the flats, at present flooded in all directions, are in summer perfectly
dry. On the crest of the hill, 119 feet only above the sea, is
now building a sort of lock-up, or wooden gaol. Lower down stands
the inn, which appears comfortable, and a store, where the prices of
goods and articles were denounced by some of our party as extravagant,
even for the neighbourhood of the diggings.
[19]
I heard 2s.
mentioned as the price of a wine-glass of brandy, and 1s. 6d. or 2s.
a pound for flour; but do not vouch for the correctness of my information.

We arrived at Swan Hill about mid-day on the 17th September,
after 112 hours’ steaming from the Darling (a distance of about
600 miles), having left our consort, the
Eureka
, on the run of a
Mr. Coghill, some miles behind, to commence loading wool for the
return voyage. There being a police force here, consisting of six

23

mounted troopers, and a Lieutenant and Clerk of the Court, his
Excellency availed himself of it to forward his report to the Secretary
of State, and copies of the document to the Governors of New
South Wales and Victoria. We remained on this station during the
whole of Sunday, hearing Divine Service performed in the verandah
of the latter by a travelling ex-member of the Church of England,
who read us our beautiful Liturgy in a blue Jersey shirt, and had
the good sense or good taste (which, perhaps, are synonymous) not
to weary his congregation with too long a sermon.

The
Mary Ann
joined us on the Saturday evening, and both vessels
remained stationary until Monday afternoon, September 19th,
when the
Lady Augusta
proceeded up the river, stopping about
twelve miles from Swan Hill to take in some fuel. The country
continued reedy and flooded; but the banks of the river were lined
with gum trees. Our party, I should mention, has been diminished
by one member, a Mr. Bright, who left us at Swan Hill to ride to
Melbourne (210 miles), where he purposes taking passage to
England.

A few miles from Swan Hill, we observed several of the native
turkey, or, more properly, the bustard; they are reckoned delicious
eating, but are approached with difficulty on the open plains, where
they love to feed. Birds are now more plentiful; and I should
have said that three wild swans were seen near Swan Hill.

Tuesday, September 20.—After wooding for two or three hours
where we had anchored the previous night, we steamed on as usual;
the river widening and presenting beautiful reaches overhung with
trees,
[20]
whilst the continued volume of this noble river, at so great
a distance from the sea, has surprised all on board. This morning,
we passed a connecting offshoot, or, as it is termed here, “backwater”
of the Loddon, which flows into the Murray, near Swan
Hill. We are now cramped a little on board for walking room, the
deck being too high for many to promenade upon at once, as it
causes the vessel to heel over from too much of what is termed
“top-hamper;” nevertheless—the weather continuing delightful,
even for Australia—and no European climate can surpass, I believe,
the Australian mornings or evenings, nor Naples itself, at
times, equal the wondrous tints of the sky—all get on, to use an
expressive word, “swimmingly,” though none seem to know as yet
to what distance our exploration is to extend. On Tuesday evening,
the 20th September, we reached the station of a Mr. Hogg, and
made fast for the night. A Mr. Dickens, who presented a letter
of introduction to His Excellency, joined us here. He was one of

24

the
Melbourne
steamer passengers, but appears to retain no ungrateful
recollections of his detention at Lisbon.
[21]
The country
through which we have passed is flat and reedy, but occasionally
sprinkled with gum trees, and now and then offering glimpses of
forest scenery of a more open kind than the dense forests which
distinguish the lower part of the river.

Wednesday, September 21.—We took on board wood and played
some games of quoits; leaving Mr. Hogg’s station about noon.
The river, as we advanced, passes through a flat but pleasing and
open country, with occasional patches of reeds. “Snags” became
rather frequent in this part, and doubtless, if the stream were low,
would seem almost to interlace its bed; otherwise, the river is broad
and fine. About dusk, we stopped for some wood at Gannewarra,
the lands of a Mr. Campbell. This—about six tons weight—employed
all hands yesterday; the Captain and Mr. Jamieson proceeding
up to the house. The following morning, we found that
Mr. Campbell had invited the whole party to his dwelling; and
about ten o’clock, the arrival of eight horses and a double gig
enabled every one to accept the invitation. To reach the settlement,
distant about three miles from the river, we passed through
a forest of fine open glades of very lofty timber, and partook of an
excellent early dinner in Mr. Campbell’s rude but commodious
habitation. Then we had some music from the piano, which must
have tended to enliven us after a month’s imprisonment on board
the steamer. Somewhat late, the boat of the
Lady Augusta
arrived
with three of the party, who had pulled up the winding creek on
which the settlement stands. Nothing occurred in the way of adventure,
but the destruction of the shafts of Mr. Campbell’s gig;
which, entrusted to a black, got smashed by the horse running into
an adjacent pile of wood. Fortunately, no one was within. In
the afternoon, we rode back, accompanied by Miss ——, Mrs.
Campbell’s pretty sister, who remained on board, as also Mr. Campbell.
This gentleman is the possessor of 4,000 or 5,000 head of
cattle and 10,000 sheep, and has been in the colony eleven years.

Friday morning (September 23rd) was distinguished by the fall
of two majestic trees, each exceeding 110 feet in height, and which,
hollowed by age, had been set on fire, and then partially sawn
asunder. The effect was very grand, for, truly, “great was the
fall thereof.” About eleven, accompanied by Mr. and Mrs. Campbell
and Miss C., we steamed a few miles up the river, returning
to drop them near Gannewarra, where their horses, brought down
by some natives, took them home.

Mr. Campbell seems to be one of the most flourishing settlers on
the river; and complains only of his inability to grow vegetables—though
his garden has been made on the banks of a fine creek.

25

His station—the farthest extent of the
Lady Augusta’s
exploration—may
be estimated at about 1,400 miles from the sea-mouth
of the Murray. Leaving Gannewarra, we proceeded down the
river—the return homewards having been at length resolved.
Our pace, going with the current, was rapid, but some malign influence
appeared this day to beset the
Lady Augusta
. We had
gone but a few miles when we encountered a huge tree, blocking
up nearly the entire stream; this we broke through, by sheer force
of steam, but not without almost sweeping the deck of the passengers,
who with difficulty avoided the branches as they passed over
the vessel. The after bulkhead was also stove in. Arriving at
Mr. Hogg’s station, one of the funnels was considerably damaged,
and slight injury received by the upper deck. Leaving this station,
we did not leave our ill luck behind us, for, rounding a moderately
sharp turn, a few miles below this run, we managed, when about
to “haul up” for the night, to run so violently in upon the land,
that the steamer, instead of floating alongside, as intended, remained
hard and fast, nor could all the efforts of the crew get her off. In
the morning, the wood being taken out of her, she floated without
any difficulty, much to the satisfaction of the crew, who, both
officers and men, have had hard work in carrying in our wood,
splitting it, &c. Now we are going down the stream, at the rate
of ten or twelve knots an hour. This is very good steaming for a
small vessel like the
Lady Augusta
; though Captain Cadell is not,
I understand, as yet quite satisfied, and purposes, or expects, by
means of a condenser and feather floats, to obtain three miles an
hour greater speed. This would be a great advantage on a river
so circuitous as the Murray; and, as a further improvement, if a
disconnecting engine, by which one paddle would work forward and
the other backward, were provided, boats of greater length, power,
and tonnage, might be employed. Whilst upon this subject, I perhaps
ought to mention, that our engineer (Mr. Napier) has declared
that, for boats of shallow construction—such as the
Lady Augusta
—tubular
boilers should be used, by which means a space of from
six to eight feet only would be required, where, at present, thirty or
more is entirely occupied.

On Monday (September 26), we left Tyn-Tyndyer,
[22]
the station
of a Mr. Beveridge, who is the owner of 11,000 sheep, 2,000 or
3,000 head of cattle, and what he calls a “mob” of horses, or about
100. The only thing remarkable about his run, which was some
fifty miles in extent, appeared to me to be his garden, the aspect
of which, adorned with some willows, introduced on the river by
himself, was particularly refreshing to our eyes, fatigued as they
had been with the endless monotony of the sombre foliage of the

26

gum tree. Shortly after leaving Tyn-Tyndyer, we rejoined the

Eureka
, which was lying very snugly in a pretty bend of the river,
a few miles lower down, and adjacent to the run of a Mr. Coghill.
The next morning, taking her in tow, the
Lady Augusta
proceeded
down the stream for the purpose of ascending the Wakool, there to
take in 220 bales of wool; a process, by effecting which, instead of
waiting on the Murray, much time would be saved.

The navigation towards the junction was most intricate, and so
continued throughout nearly the whole day. All the
Eureka’s

starboard rails were carried away, and continued stoppages,
whether owing to the current, the sharpness of the bends, or defective
steering, detained us for some hours. However, if the improvement
of the navigation of the river be seriously taken up by
the three Governments, many of the obstacles now experienced will
be removed. During the last week we have passed several points
where a little labour, concentrated in cutting fresh channels, would
cause a saving of many miles’ distance, and, moreover, obviate the
angles which at present it is so difficult to navigate, at least, with
anything like speed.

The Wakool is a most navigable river,
[23]
not so broad, indeed, as
the Murray, being scarcely ninety yards wide, but deep and without
current, and singularly free from “snags,” or overhanging
branches.

We passed Turora, Messrs. Grierson’s station, on the Tuesday
evening, and the next morning the public house and ferry, kept by
Mr. Talbot; the soundings gave four and a-half fathoms and “no
bottom.” Very shortly afterwards, Poon Boon, or Westmeath, the
station of the Royal Australian Bank, appeared in sight; and here,
awaiting our arrival we found the wool, consisting of 220 bales,
averaging 200 lbs. the bale. This, the first fruit of the river, and
the first cargo of the
Lady Augusta
, was received with all due
ceremony, the first bale being hoisted up with one of the crew to
the mast-head of the
Eureka
, where “three times three” was given
in its honour. Some bottles of champagne, and “Success to the
commerce of the Murray,” followed in the cabin; and in the evening
a dance, at the head station on shore, terminated the day.

The superintendent, or person in charge here, informs me that
his drays, with the supplies for this year, have not yet returned;
and that to transport his wool to Melbourne by that mode of conveyance
would cost him £45 per ton. The arrival of the steamer
has, however, to use his own expression, “quite set the settlers on
their legs again;” and although the freight, £25 per ton, is as yet
rather high, there is no doubt that it will soon fall, whilst the land-transport

27

from the Goolwa to Port Elliot will be performed per
tramway, at the moderate rate of sixpence per ton per mile.

The stock of sheep belonging to the stations of this Company,
[24]

recently amounting to 50,000, is now reduced by extensive sales
to 12,000, but the number, so rapid is the increase, it is expected
will again amount to that quantity in two or three years. The
present value of sheep (for sale) is from fifteen to eighteen shillings;
during the bad times of the colony it was as low as two shillings
and sixpence.

After leaving Poon Boon, we regained the Murray without any
difficulty, save the passage of one shallow bar, where extreme precautions
were exercised successfully.

At Canally, one of the stations of Mr. Phelps, wool to the
amount of forty-nine heavy bales was taken in; and leaving this on
Friday, September 30th, we again steamed down the river, having
left the two carpenters and the Chinaman near the mouth of the
Wakool, there to prepare the frames of two more barges, as tenders,
to be used for the further navigation of these rivers. This day,
however, was doomed to be one of melancholy remembrance to all
on board, for an accident, not less sad from its sudden occurrence
than by its tragical issue, did then happen, in a manner most painful
to all who witnessed it. About four o’clock, or rather later,
whilst sitting in the cabin, I was disturbed by hearing an outcry,
and tumults on the deck above; and running out, I discovered by
the preparations for casting off the boat, then towing astern, that a
man was overboard. Looking further astern, the steamer having
now reversed her engines, I discovered what must have been the
top of the unfortunate man’s head floating about forty or fifty
yards behind us, and distinctly saw his hands upraised, and as it
were waving in a convulsive manner for help. This position he
maintained for a minute or two, but the boat was not easily cast
loose, and the steamer had drifted with the current, which here
runs perhaps two and a-half knots per hour. Shortly afterwards
I again looked, but nothing was visible, for the wretched man had
sunk never again to rise; though one of those in the boat declared
that they were so close to him that from the bow he might have
been touched with an oar. It was, however, too late, and after
waiting vainly for the chance of his reappearance, we were at
length obliged to continue our course without even the satisfaction
of discovering his body. The man’s name, I afterwards learned,
was William Crewse Teague, a native, it was supposed, of Cornwall,
and he had been employed as a stoker on board. The cause
of the accident, as far as I could ascertain, was the giving way of

28

one of the gangway rails, against which the man must have leaned
whilst drawing a bucket of water; the rail, which is usually fastened
by a peg and chain, having fallen into the water with
him.

On the first of October, we took in fifty-one bales of wool at Mr.
Ross’s (Meilman), and remained alongside this station until Monday
morning, the 3rd, when we proceeded down the river, touching at
Messrs. Grant’s, who had some wool awaiting transport on the
banks. The Captain’s previous arrangements prevented, however,
his taking these bales on the present trip. Leaving this station
(Bombany), Messrs. Grant and their friends being on board, the

Eureka
managed to tilt some of her load into the water, from
whence it was rescued, not without considerable labour. It appears
the two vessels had been kept on a level by two spars, one of which
having been moved, the strain on the other became too great, and
it snapped, thus destroying the equilibrium of the barge. In the
evening, we reached Euston, the Commissioner’s station, where we
halted for the night; the little steamer
Mary Ann
, which passed
us during our difficulties, being anchored a short distance ahead.
It seems, from the owner’s account, that she had reached Maiden’s
Punt, about 250 miles beyond Swan Hill, without a check. At
Euston, the Crown Commissioner, Mr. Cole (styled by some of our
party “King Cole”) received us with his wonted urbanity; and
some dancing was achieved in his quarters. The functions of this
officer consist in superintendence of the lands belonging to the
Crown, on which he is bound to prevent all trespass in the way of
cutting timber or depasturing cattle. He is also authorized to prevent
the intrusion of people on the lands of their neighbours; to
estimate the capabilities of the land for grazing purposes; and he
has allotted to him a certain force of police—white or native
troopers—to assist him in his duties, which comprise those of a
magistrate with extraordinary powers, together with a general
supervision of an extensive district. The salary of these officers in
New South Wales is £500 a year, and there are not less than fourteen
of them.

Mr. Cole accompanies us to the Darling; which, after taking in
100 bales of wool the previous day, we reached on the evening of
the 6th—having left McGrath’s before dawn in the morning, and
Mildura (Messrs. Jamieson’s) about four p.m.

The weather, which yesterday was cold and boisterous, is now
again “Australian,” and I have no recollection of a finer morning
in any climate than to-day. Personally, perhaps, as in some degree
invalided for the last five years, I feel more the luxury of this
matutinal freshness; having passed, I am told by my next neighbour,
Mr. Grainger, who sleeps in the berth under me, a most uneasy
night; which I can attribute only to the deleterious effects
of the
tea
, of which, contrary to my usual abstinence, I last night imbibed

29

rather more than one-third of a cup.
[25]
It is very annoying
to be subjected thus to the caprices or the malicious propensities of
cooks, stewards, or others whose duty it may be to infuse these our
evening potations; and most unjust that the innocuous or even the
independent members of society should be exposed to the chance of
a nightmare or an apoplexy by such proceedings. Nor can the
evil be without remedy; for, without coinciding with the Rev.
Sydney Smith, “That a bishop must be burnt before railway accidents
are prevented;” or agreeing with Mr. D’Israeli, “That an
architect should be sacrificed to ensure a National Gallery worthy of
a great nation;”
[26]
I must be pardoned for the suggestion, that
society generally—and all are concerned in the suppression of such
annoyances—might visit with a kind of moral
decimation
, all the
perpetrators of these iniquities.

The country, as we approach South Australia, is now improving
in appearance, as the waters having receded, the forest appears
more open, and even the “Mallee scrub” is less monotonous than
before. We learn, however, that this subsidence has not taken
place on the upper part of the river, the Murray having risen some
feet at Maiden’s Punt, probably from the floods on the Campaspe
and Goulburn, for as yet the Alpine snows have not contributed
their quota to the stream. With respect to the “Mallee,” which
covers so large a portion of the vicinity of this river, it may not be
uninteresting to mention that there is a root of a particular kind of
this shrub well-known to the natives, which, being cut into strips
and placed in a pannikin or other vessel, has the property of exuding
water from within, which, slowly dripping out of the wood, is
thus preserved for the thirsting traveller.

Friday, October 7th.—We reached the Darling last night, at
eleven p.m., notwithstanding the cloudiness of the sky; and about
one, despatches, papers, &c., came on board for His Excellency
and some members of our party. The news does not seem of importance,
the South Australian journals being too much occupied
with our trip, and the English, especially the beautifully
Illustrated
London News
, with the mimic war at Chobham.

This morning (Saturday), the steamer took in some tons of wood
and nine bales of wool, which, besides some sheep skins and tallow,
completes the cargo to 441 bales, of an average weight of 300lbs.,
and an aggregate value of £9,000 or £10,000, with which we trust

30

her owners will for the present remain satisfied. We are now steering
on for Mooruna, the station of the Crown Commissioner of the
Albert District, where we are to leave Mr. Cole—having dropped
the Messrs. Jamieson, with most hearty farewells, at the Darling
junction. One of these gentleman, the Mr. Hugh Jamieson, who
has accompanied us thus far on our expedition, has been successfully
exerting himself in moving addresses to His Excellency and
Captain Cadell, which, with Sir Henry Young’s rejoinder, are as
follows:—

“
Address presented by the Murray Settlers of New South Wales and
Victoria to Sir Henry Young, when approaching the boundaries
of South Australia, on his return to Adelaide, in the

Lady Augusta,
steamer.

“To
Sir Henry Edward Fox Young
, Knight, Lieutenant-Governor
of South Australia, &c., &c., &c.

“May it please your Excellency—

We, the undersigned, proprietors of stock in New South Wales and
Victoria, resident on the Murray and surrounding districts, hail
with satisfaction the present opportunity afforded us by the safe
return to this part of the Murray of the
Lady Augusta
steamer from
her inauguration voyage from the Goolwa to beyond Swan Hill,
and beg to congratulate your Excellency on your safe return to the
frontiers of your own Province; and respectfully desire to convey
to your Excellency some record expressive of our opinion with reference
to the opening up of these extensive districts, by means of
inland steam navigation, throughout the interior of Australia.

“We deem it unnecessary, on this occasion, to enlarge on the importance
of this enterprise, the great public and varied interest
therein involved, and the very evident advantages to arise from it;
but would desire to convey to your Excellency our unanimous
opinion, and just appreciation, of the liberal and enlightened policy
of the Legislature of South Australia in encouraging so highly important
an undertaking; and, at the same time, we would desire to
express to your Excellency our acknowledgments, not only for the
persevering exertions and valuable support which the enterprise has
all along received from your Excellency, at the seat of your own
Government, but also for the favourable manner in which you
have brought under the consideration of the Home Government,
the Governor-General in Sydney, and the Lieutenant-Governor of
Victoria, the importance of the early establishment of steamers on
the Murray, on a scale commensurate with the requirements of so
large a river.

“As the successful accomplishment, so far, of the first voyage of
the steamer
Lady Augusta
permits us to look forward, with some
confidence for the future, to the easy transit of goods and produce, to
and from South Australia, by means of steam navigation, we may
here, perhaps not improperly, retrospectively allude to the difficulties

31

and tedious delays we have all, for so many years, encountered
in reaching a market for our produce; and, in doing so, we are unwilling
to forego the pleasure of assuring your Excellency that we
shall ever look back with satisfaction to the time when, in these
remote parts of the Colony, and surrounded by many discouraging
circumstances, we had, in the year 1850, the strongest proofs afforded
to us of the interest taken in the Murray and its navigation by
finding your Excellency undertake and accomplish, at considerable
personal exertion and inconvenience, a voyage of exploration, in an
open boat, from the junction of the Darling with the Murray
to the Goolwa.

“We would only, further, beg to express to your Excellency that
we recognize, with much satisfaction, the permanent honour, which
in after years, must attach to you, for having so successfully aided
the accomplishment of the Murray navigation; and we would offer
you our cordial expression of hope, that, whether you may be resident
in this or in other and more distant parts of the world,
you may, for many future years, learn, with equal interest, the
permanently beneficial results of the Murray navigation; convinced,
as we are, that these results will prove highly important, not only
to the best interests of your own Province, and to the Australian
Provinces generally, but also to England, and other parts of the
world; affecting, as they most indisputably will do, thousands of
the population who may, in future years, make choice of Australia
as the land of their adoption.

D. Fletcher
, J.P.

H. Jamieson
, J.P.

J. Lecky Phelps
, J.P.

Sylvester & Smith

Edward Lintott

James A. Liscombe

Joseph J. Phelps

N. Chadwick

James Hamilton

William Ross

John Grant

John Grant
, jun.

Simon Grant

Edmund Morey
, J.P.

Bushby Jamieson

Thomas McPherson

John McNichol

Crozier & Rutherford

Andrew Beveridge

Peter Beveridge

George Beveridge

Albion Gibbs

J. J. Keene

K. Nox

R. H. Jones

James Rutherford

M. McGrath

James McGrath

Thomas McGrath

Henry Williams

George B. Fletcher

James McLeod

“On board the
Lady Augusta
,

River Murray, near the junction of the Darling,

October 7, 1853.”

Reply of His Excellency Sir Henry Young to the foregoing Address.

“Gentlemen—I have the honour to acknowledge, and to thank
you for, the Address which you have presented to me.

“The steam navigation of the great River Murray and its tributaries—of
which this voyage has been the auspicious commencement—is
an object of such general and permanent importance, that,
had any exertions to promote its prosecution been awanting on my
part, I should have considered the omission a dereliction of my
duty.

32

“It is a great gratification to me that you have appreciated the
utility of the enterprise, and have been enabled to witness its accomplishment.

“My earnest hope and belief are, that it will realise for the future
all the great and permanent advantages which are so reasonably to
be anticipated.

“I feel highly honoured by the obliging terms in which you have
expressed yourselves in regard to myself personally, and

“I have the honour to be, Gentlemen,

“Your very obedient and faithful servant,

“
H. E. F. Young.

“River Darling, October 7, 1853.”

At the same time was addressed to Captain Cadell the following
letter, from the same place:—

“We, the undersigned, proprietors of stock on the River Murray and
its tributaries, appreciating the very great benefits which cannot
fail to result from the introduction of a line of steamers for passengers
and produce, on the Murray, desire to congratulate you on the
personal distinction of being the first successfully to accomplish
this important work.

“Our earnest wishes and expectations are, that, however extended
the field of this enterprise may hereafter become, your share of
the benefits may at least bear due proportion to the energetic spirit
which has acquired for you the permanent honour of opening up
the trade and commerce of this great river, by means of steam
communication.

“Whilst we recognize with satisfaction the enterprising spirit you
have displayed in carrying out so successfully the establishment of
this important undertaking, in the midst of difficulties of no ordinary
description, consequent upon the vast and well-known changes
which have arisen from the gold discoveries throughout Australia,
we beg to assure you, that we feel it alike a duty and a pleasure, on
the present occasion, to take this the very earliest opportunity to
intimate to you, that a certain amount of money has been equally subscribed
by us, for the purpose of being applied in any manner most
agreeable to yourself, in the acquisition of some memorial of your
first steam voyage on the River Murray.

“You are aware of the extreme distances at which our respective
stations are situated, and the consequent difficulty of our waiting
upon you and ascertaining personally when and where it would be
most suitable to you for the presentation of the testimonial to take
place.

“We shall, therefore, feel much indebted by your communicating
your wishes on this subject to the Hon. Secretary, at
your earliest convenience.

“Foregoing Signatures.

“Francis Cadell, Esq., Commander,
Lady Augusta
.”

AN AUSTRALIAN FARM SCENE

33

Sunday, October 9.—The weather, rather oppressively warm
during the day, is now overcast and threatens some continuance of
rain. Having, however, fortified myself with Roscoe’s admirable
Memoir of Lorenzo di Medicis, I feel in some measure independent
of clouds and sunshine. The books we have on board are numerous,
and many of them excellent, but, after seven weeks, some
novelty is refreshing. We passed Mooruna, the station of the
Albert Commissioner, about 3 p.m., and left there some articles and
stores for that official. It has not a pleasing aspect, being, even at
this season, almost denuded of verdure, and, moreover, fiercely red.
About dusk, we were hailed by a native from Messrs. Rutherford
and Crozier’s station, and accordingly “lay-to,” taking Mr. Crozier
on board. This detention, though at the time it appeared unnecessary,
was of service to the Captain, as he was enabled to obtain,
through Mr. Crozier and the natives of the station, the exact
“whereabouts” of a sunken rock,
[27]
which lies nearly in mid-channel,
and opposite to Rutherford’s Ferry. During the night, heavy
rain fell, which wetted us a little in the cabin; but has not, we
trust, injured the cargo.

Saturday, October 8th.—The morning wet and cheerless, and
so continued till we deposited Commissioner Cole at the station
called Bob and Harry’s, which is not far distant from Lake
Victoria—a sheet of water of some extent, connected with the
Murray by a stream called the Rufus. At night, we anchored
under some high sand cliffs, of singular formation, near the
boundary of South Australia—which province, it is presumed, we
have now entered. On Monday morning early, we expect to be at
Mr. Chapman’s, remaining here all Sunday—which, to us, is a
dies
non
. It now occurs to me, that I commenced these notes with a declaration
and determination not to chronicle our daily proceedings on
board, which, I had imagined, could not but prove “flat, stale, and
unprofitable.” As, however, I have infringed on this rule, it may,
perhaps, be now excusable to continue in transgression, by giving
the routine of our river life.
Pour commencer
, then, we—that is,
the gentlemen of the party, who sleep in the main cabin, the sofas
of which form two tiers of berths—rise about six, sip some coffee,
and dress in the fore cabin.
[28]
At a little before nine, is breakfast,
a
déjeûner à la fourchette
; about twelve, bread and cheese, with a
glass of ale or wine; at four is dinner, a substantial and most
abundant meal, of which, good curry is a predominating feature;
at seven, comes tea, which does not appear to be so favourite a

34

beverage as it deserves—partly, perhaps, for want of milk, which
is only occasionally obtained; at nine, the beds are made up; and
about eleven, most on board appear to sleep. These particulars
will also answer, in most respects, for the ladies of our party, whose
cabin (the after one) opens into the main saloon. The deck of the

Lady Augusta
is now the only place for walking on board, but it
serves well enough for a few at a time; as, however, the vessel
must stop almost daily to take in wood, there is no want of opportunities
for exercise—the real mainstay of health, I certainly
believe, in every climate. On this subject, however, I feel compelled
to say, that though I most willingly accompanied His
Excellency—as in deference to his wishes I was bound to do—and
although, I doubt not, the river voyage may eventually prove of
service to my health, yet, had I been aware of some of the
dèsagrémens

which I have since encountered, I might, perhaps, have been
enabled to shorten my stay on board. “It is wrong to look a gift
horse in the mouth;” and it would be ungenerous to find fault where
no wrong has been intended; but though Captain Cadell’s attention
to all his guests has been as unremitting as his navigating energy,
the courtesy of his officers (who, from the extent of our party, must
have been somewhat incommoded) universal, and the disposition of
the crew most obliging, yet have we all, I think, without exception,
been found at times to complain of the effects, it is to be presumed,
of our daily meals. I believe, myself, the ladies have been the
greatest sufferers; but they have borne their trials with such
endurance through this picnic voyage of more than seven weeks,
that it may seem a bold assertion to admit it all.

Sunday.—During the whole of this day we have had continual
showers, and the weather has been altogether cold, and most unlike
Australia, particularly at this season, and on the Murray, where it
is said, it never rains. Most of our party, however, managed to
climb the cliffs under which we lay, and from whence an extensive
and pleasing view of the river was obtained.

On Monday morning, early, we cast off, having taken in a small
stock of wood, which was procured by the officers and crew cutting
down the pines above us, and hurling them over the cliff. The
blacks, brought by Mr. Mason from Wellington, then carried it on
board, and afterwards sawed and split it asunder. These three
natives, I may add, have proved particularly useful whilst on
board.

About one we reached Mr. Chapman’s (Paringa), conspicuous
from afar by a tri-coloured flag with the words “
Cead mille failthea
”
inscribed thereon—having passed this morning through a more
open country, and if not more picturesque, certainly of a bolder
character. This consisted of ranges of bold red cliffs, which, at a
distance, bore some resemblance to the Avon or the Wye. On a
nearer approach, however, their rugged aspect and scanty verdure—a

35

few scrub bushes, interspersed with pines and gum trees—belied
so soft a simile; and, but for their waterworn appearance, I
would now rather liken them in feature to the wilder scenery of
portions of the rivers in the west of Brittany. We wooded again
in the evening, and then steamed on till one or two a.m., of
Tuesday, the 11th of October, having been all rather disturbed
during the night by an awful crash amongst the gum trees; this,
however, appeared more formidable than it really was, and committed
no other havoc but an addition to the honourable scars which
the
Lady Augusta
—now “stove in” in various places—bears upon
her sides. Now, we pursue our way through a more varied country,
particularly about Talibka (Mr. Wigley’s), to the “North-West
Bend,” which we hope to reach this evening; the weather remaining
cool and cloudy, and far more like an English than an
Australian climate. Our wooding place this evening bears quite a
resemblance, the sandy soil excepted, to an English park; and
sweeping round it, above the stream, is a fine range of bold
cliffs.

Last night we managed to get the
Eureka
aground, and she
was not set afloat again without considerable exertion of steam force.
The shadows cast by the trees, which overhang the water, render
night navigation somewhat difficult, and though we pressed on with
full power we did not succeed in reaching the Bend, as we anticipated.
Meanwhile the stores are getting less, and yesterday we
had nothing but champagne at dinner, instead of the accustomed
layer of good draught port. This is something like the guardsman
roughing it on his beefsteak and his bottle of port, but that, in this
part of the world, there is never any fear of being without the
staple commodity—good mutton.

The
Lady Augusta
left her boat this morning at the wooding
station,
[29]
and we were consequently unable to land at Mr. Walsh’s,
which appears one of the prettiest stations on the river. Mr. W.,
however, came on board in a nice little wherry, reminding one
more of the Thames than the Murray, and left some newspapers,
which have again put us in possession of the state of affairs in
Adelaide. Our party, however, complain that they contain no
news; though I have, myself, been much amused, I may say
interested, by a journal of our trip up to Swan Hill, which appears
in the
Register
; nor am I sorry to find therein, from the report of
the Select Committee of the Legislative Council on the proposed
Civil List, that my salary, amongst others, is likely to be
doubled.

36

We reached Moorundee about two p.m., and found it almost
surrounded by water. Mr. Scott was from home, and the fair
mistress of the demesne engaged, I suppose, within; as, however,
I did not myself join the party on shore, I must delay, till the
ladies return, my inquiries after Mrs. Scott and the news of the
Murray.

We left Mr. Scott’s about five p.m., and steamed on all night,
the weather still rather cold. About sunrise, I found the steamer
had entered the magnificent valley below the Reedy Creek, comprising
Mr. Baker’s “run”—a tract of great extent, named, I
believe, Wall—and where, in point of scenery, the character of that
river becomes wholly changed. Here, the Murray, leaving the
confined channel of forest, which for so many hundred miles has
enclosed its course, issues into a wide vale, terminating in an extended
basin, which though much encumbered with reeds, yet in
the contour of its outlines, and the diversified variety of its wooded
or rocky slopes, far surpasses any other portion of the river we had as
yet seen. The volume, too, of the stream is here very considerable,
its breadth being nearly 350 yards; whilst sailing majestically on
its surface we descry numerous black swans in close and amicable
contiguity with flocks of unsightly pelicans. Continuing to pass
through a country of this kind, we soon leave behind us the granite
formation, with the huge “boulders” of rock which mark its
character; and after meeting an island, in mid-stream, again enter
upon an Arcadian country, which, undulating in small rounded
hills, dotted with trees of moderate height, bears some resemblance
to the shores of Greece. Strange to say, however, as the land
appears good, even if occasionally rocky, there is scarcely a habitation
to be seen; though here, one would say, is quite the scene to
realize the poet’s dream, the

“Speluncæ vivique lacus, ac frigida tempe,

Mugitusque boûm, mollesque sub arbore somni.”

About twenty-four measured miles (according to Mr. Mason)
from Wellington, in the vicinity of the granite masses, visible from
the deck, is a large rock, at present under water, but visible when
the river is low. The next object I find worthy of notice is a
“mob” of sixty or seventy horses, seemingly lost in wonder at the
smoking and noise-making intruder upon their wonted solitude.
After a time they lose their fears, and, fascinated as it were with
the novel sight and sound, follow us in wild confusion along the
rugged shores.

Thursday, October 13th, quarter to one p.m.—We are now at Wellington,
where, amongst the spectators on the sandy banks, I observe
His Excellency’s police-orderly, who, coming on board, informs us
that the horses are here. Sir Henry Young having, however,
determined to terminate his voyage only at the completion of the

37

enterprise, by the arrival of the steamer with her first cargo, the
Golden Fleece,
[30]
at her starting point, the Goolwa, the horses are
ordered to that point. Being, however, myself, desirous of returning
to Adelaide at once, and his Excellency spontaneously giving
me the option of so doing, I here determine to bid adieu to the
river, and place myself with the least possible delay on one of the
horses which the trooper brought from Adelaide some days ago.

Here then, I leave the Murray! and I do so in the firm belief
that, whether it is to become in the future—as it has been, perhaps
prophetically, designated—the “Australian Nile;” or whether it is
to be the connecting link and general highway of the Australian
capitals, existing and to be; this river is of incalculable advantage
to the whole of Australasia, and its steam navigation, thus far successfully
accomplished, an event worthy of record and narration by
far abler pens than mine.

After a glance at Captain Cadell’s canvas boat, I left Wellington
a little after two p.m. on the 13th, mounted on a horse hired by
Mr. Grainger, and by no means remarkable for speed. The excellent
natural road runs for some miles over fine plains covered with
wild flowers, and affording, I should imagine, rich pasturage, with
some lakes adjacent. Thence you arrive at a tract of dreary and
sandy scrub, rendered still more disagreeable by a road which is
quite a reflection upon a civilized district, and from the number
of stumps, which like “
trous de loup
” project from it, is really
a most dangerous thoroughfare. At about eighteen or twenty
miles from Wellington, is Langhorne’s Creek, a settlement, near
which I was shown the finest wheat in the Colony, and where there
is a tolerable inn, with moderate charges and prompt attendance.
Leaving this, the road—one place excepted, a most superior natural
one, passes through a fine open forest country, fed over by abundant
cattle, whose condition testifies to the quality of their food.
Strathalbyn is then reached; it is a most flourishing settlement,
and boasts a good inn; in the vicinity are some mines, worked for
seven years, and shortly to be turned to more profit by the introduction
of expensive machinery, which, possibly may be transported
thither
via
Wellington and the Murray, the approach from
Adelaide, being, I am told, scarcely passable for heavily loaded

38

drays. I arrived at Strathalbyn a little after six! and about nine,
a further detachment of our party, consisting of Messrs. Davenport,
Andrews, and Allen, came in, having left Wellington just after me
in a sort of dog-cart. The following morning between seven and
eight, I left for Adelaide; the trooper, with his Excellency’s
horses, proceeding onward to the Goolwa, distant about twenty
miles. I found the country from Strathalbyn to the capital
exceedingly beautiful, combining, indeed, every variety of forest
scenery, water alone excepted. Its aspect is Devonian; but
between Strathalbyn and Macclesfield is encountered a conglomerate
of hills, heaped together in such wild and mountainous confusion,
that to construct a highway might have puzzled General
Wade himself. It must, however, at some time or other be done,
for at present the road is execrable; and when the land is so fine,
and the settlements between Adelaide and the Murray so important,
it is perhaps bad policy, not to say almost an injustice, to leave the
inhabitants without good means of communication. Some miles,
however, beyond the Echunga diggings—a tract of gravelly waste,
honeycombed as it were with pits, there is now constructing a
new line of road, passing Crafer’s (ten miles from Adelaide), which,
though cut through a difficult country, and not apparently formed
in strict accordance with “Henry Law,” will, doubtless, be made
highly available to the interests of the settlers of Mount Barker,
Strathalbyn, &c.

About Glen Osmond, for a distance of some miles, the views are
splendid, comprising the whole of the Adelaide plains, and a vast
and magnificent sea-view extending completely across the Gulf of
St. Vincent. The town itself lies spread out below the hills as
upon a map; but perhaps from the want of spires or lofty buildings,
the City of Adelaide is not, from a distance, very imposing
in appearance. Descending Glen Osmond, three or four miles
of hard, if not good, road, brings the traveller to the town, which—rather
tired, I confess—I reached about half-past four p.m.; my
horse being equally knocked up with myself, though the distance
from Strathalbyn is not more than thirty-eight miles.

Sir Henry Young left the steamer the same evening (Friday,
October 14), at the Goolwa, after a smooth passage across the Lake,
and took up his quarters for the night at Port Elliot. The next
day, accompanied by Mr. Grainger, His Excellency rode into
Adelaide, a distance of about fifty-eight miles.

By way of postscript to my journal, I append a letter from Mr.
Randell, the enterprising owner of the little
Mary Ann
.

Adelaide, October 21, 1853.

A. KINLOCH.

Gumeracka Mill, October 17, 1853.

Sir,—In answer to yours respecting the character of the River
Murray, above Swan Hill, I beg leave to state, that for some distance

39

above the Point the
Lady Augusta
reached (Campbell’s), the
flats by the river side improve in quality, and are more extensive.
I observed many which were not flooded, which looked beautifully
green and thick with herbage as far as the eye could reach. Many
of the flats, as usual, were entirely covered with water; and even
those that I before spoke of are very low, being only a few inches
above the level of the river. For the last three days before
reaching Maiden’s Punt (the highest point we attained), the river
begins to narrow, and to be particularly sinuous, though not so
incommoded with fallen trees or overhanging branches as many
parts we had passed, both above and below Swan Hill. The
banks begin to rise rather suddenly, and are clothed in many
places with thick jungles of the mimosa or wattle; though of a
different kind from any in the Adelaide district. I am told the
kind is plenty at Rivoli Bay, also in Van Dieman’s Land. The
bark is as good for its tanning properties as the Adelaide wattle.
Gum and box trees abound as below. The depth of the river at
Maiden’s Punt we found to be thirty feet, and forty to fifty yards
broad; the river rose two feet while we were there, and was still
rising when we left. I consider Maiden’s Punt to be a much more
important place than Swan Hill, from the fact of its being much
nearer all the diggings than that place (fifty-five miles from Bendigo,
forty from Goulburn, and 100 miles from the Ovens), and
from its being on the high road from Melbourne to the Murrumbidgee,
Edwards, and indeed all the country northward. Maiden’s
Punt is situated one and a-half miles from the junction of the
Goulburn; and, from information I received, I consider that river
navigable for small boats, like ours, within twelve miles of the
Goulburn diggings.

I was informed, by Mr. Maiden, the proprietor of the punt and
inn, bearing his name, that some short distance above his place, at
the junction of the Edwards and Wakool—or rather where these
rivers leave the Murray—that, at flood time, the channel of the
river is lost among large reedy lakes, and that its course could not
be found without native assistance—that the country is quite destitute
of trees for a considerable distance. After leaving this part,
the timber becomes plenty again, and continues so; the banks keep
high, and continue to improve in quality; the river becoming more
sinuous still, and the current much stronger. I do not think I
have anything more of importance to mention, but should anything
strike you, on which I could render you any information, I shall be
most happy to do so.

I remain, dear Sir,

Yours respectfully,

WILLm. RICH. RANDELL.

Arthur Kinloch, Esq., Clerk Executive Council.

40

APPENDIX.

Enumeration of the quantity of sheep to be shorn in the
present year (1853), upon the Rivers Murray and Lachlan,
as far as Swan Hill, in the Provinces of South Australia,
Victoria, and New South Wales.

Owners.
Sheep.

Mr.
Pyke
20,000

Westmeath
40,000

Messrs. Sylvester & Smith
15,000

Mr.
Lintott
6,000

Grierson
3,000

Messrs. Phelps & Connolly
12,000

Mr.
Beveridge
10,000

Hamilton
5,000

McCallum
13,000

Grant
6,000

Ross
7,000

Morey
7,000

Gibbs
5,000

McPherson
6,000

Keane
16,000

McGrath
10,000

Jamieson
10,000

Messrs. Crozier & Rutherford
13,000

Mr.
Paterson
7,000

Bagot
5,000

Chambers
6,000

Mr.
Walker
6,000

Coomar
5,000

Hart
6,000

Walsh
6,000

Haywood
3,000

Scoott
4,000

Fletcher
12,000

Scott
7,000

McLennan
7,000

McLean
6,000

McFarlane
4,000

Cameron
4,000

THE LACHLAN.

Mr.
Peters
10,000

Messrs. Phelps & Co
20,000

Mr.
Wentworth
50,000

Laing
15,000

Firebrace
6,000

Messrs. Firebrace and Brown
10,000

Mr.
Nyne
40,000

Total number of sheep
443,000

To this number may be added an unestimated amount of sheep
upon the Darling River, amounting certainly, to 17,000; which at
a very low calculation will give 460,000 sheep; yielding a supply
of wool—at 2 lbs. per sheep, and an average of 250 lbs. weight per
bale—of 3,680 bales; or, at a rough estimate of £20 per bale,
£73,600; or, at the not unusual yield of 2¼ lbs. per sheep,
£82,080.

41

This estimate extends no further than Swan Hill, about 1,300 miles from the sea. To give a correct idea of the probable amount of wool to be derived from Swan Hill and north of the Murray, onwards, is not easy, but including the runs to Albury and Gundegai, and from thence again to near the junction of the Lachlan, it may be estimated at
280,000

Again, on the north bank of the Murrumbidgee there may be set down twenty stations, depasturing each 4,500 sheep, or
90,000

In Victoria, and on the south side of the Murray, from Swan Hill to Albury, not embracing the stations at the Campaspe, Goulburn, or Ovens, excepting those at their respective junctions
220,000

Total
590,000
[31]

In this calculation, out of 124 stations, seventy only have been
put down as cattle stations, or unlikely to send their wool to Adelaide.

A third estimate of produce likely to go to the Adelaide market,
and taking Swan Hill as a depôt, would bring in a very large quantity
of wool,
via
Lake Lalbert to Swan Hill.

The stations producing this wool are situated on the Rivers Loddon,
Avoca, Avon, Richardson, and the Wimmeira country, towards
Lake Hindmarsh; and a good road, with a little trouble, might be
made available to Lake Lalbert, which is distant only twenty-five
miles from Swan Hill.

From the above enumeration, it is evident that the opening of
the Murray navigation by steam cannot be otherwise than most
advantageous to the interests of the settlers.

In previous years they were necessitated to forward their wool by
dray to Melbourne, at a cost of £40 or £45 per ton. In many
cases these drays, instead of bringing back the annual supplies of
provisions, &c., have been detained, broken down, or delayed by
the loss of bullocks, or other difficulties. The settlers are now to
pay £20 or at most £25 per ton for the same purposes, and even
this freight will gradually come down. In a word, as has been
before observed, “the steamer has quite set the squatters on their
legs again,” many of them having actually resolved, in consequence
of the difficulties attending labour and transport, to abandon
their runs.

It may, at the same time, be mentioned that, in all probability,
the steamer’s profit returns will be highly remunerative, which, indeed,
would be requisite, as the daily expenses during our stay have
been estimated at £30.

42

SUPPLEMENT.

Referring to the remarks which, at the opening of this Journal,
have been directed to the circumstance of the navigation of the
Murray having been left so long unserviceable, in spite of the early
exploration of the river, I am gratified to find myself supported in my
conclusions by the high authority of the Lieutenant-Governor of
the Province, whose opinions, extracted from a letter to a Mr. Hull, a
gentleman at that time interested in forming a company to purchase
land in the vicinity of the River Murray, are thus declared:

Writing from Government House, June 29, 1852, Sir Henry
Young observes:—

“That this extensive navigability of the River Murray should
have remained so long unserviceable to the Continent of Australia,
and especially to South Australia, within whose territory flow
so many hundred miles of its course to its final exit on the
Southern Ocean, requires some explanation to persons ignorant,
perhaps, of the first and present condition of this infant Colony;
and figuring only to their own imagination how the labour,
wealth, art, science, and enterprise, teeming in Great Britain,
would, without loss of time, have been engaged in improving
this gigantic ‘water privilege.’ The memorable and important
discovery of the River Murray by Sturt, and the arduous and
courageous exploration of it, which his enterprise first carried to
the ocean, and his fortitude retraced, despite the uncertainty of
ever safely returning through a wilderness peopled with unknown
tribes, no doubt gave a powerful incitement to the subsequent
colonization of South Australia.

“In the early days, however, of the plantation of this Colony,
the impracticability of the sea-mouth of the River Murray—its
shifting and narrow channel—its fearful surf and heavy rollers—its
unmitigated exposure to the swell of the Great Southern Ocean—the
disappointments and fatal accidents which attended all attempts,
save one, to enter it from the sea—the ignorance then felt of
the power and disposition of the aborigines on its banks—the
supposed insufficient depth of water through Lake Alexandrina—the
absence in those days of steamers of light draught of water,
adapted to the navigation of rivers—the then scanty number
of Colonists, who found for their immediate purposes a more
than sufficient extent of agricultural and grazing land adjacent to
Port Adelaide, Gulf St. Vincent; all these causes sufficed to render
the solitary instance of the success of Captain Pullen, in 1841 (in
entering the river from the sea, in a little cutter of thirty tons,
which has never made its exit again), unproductive of further efforts
in South Australia at that time, to penetrate the interior of New
Holland from the sea by the navigation of the Murray. Nor was

43

this great object, whilst left unachieved for all practical purposes by
enterprise from hence, likely to engage the attention of the less-interested
Colonists of New South Wales. Indeed, the squatters on the
Australian Continent—those useful pioneers of colonization—were
otherwise profitably employed. The occupation of new country,
which led to the settlement of Port Phillip, in 1837, and of Twofold
Bay, in 1839, had been carried, in 1840, 300 miles to the north,
beyond and behind Moreton Bay—whilst to the south and west,
sheep and cattle stations extended beyond Port Phillip to the
very confines of South Australia; thus, colonization and the attendant
investment of commercial speculation were chiefly directed
to these outlets to the sea, alongside the eastern side of the ridge
of mountains parallel to the Pacific, between the 26° and 32°
of latitude.

“An inspection of the map of New Holland will show that the
streams which rise from the eastern side of this mountain ridge (aback
of Sydney) have but comparatively a short course to the sea; moreover,
from this side of the ridge the descent to the sea is steep and
difficult. The ports north of Sydney are Moreton Bay, the Clarence
River, and Port Macquarrie; south of Sydney, Bateman’s Bay, Twofold
Bay, Port Phillip, and Portland Bay. Whilst, therefore, the
remote interior, on the opposite or western side of this mountain
ridge, can have no other exit to the sea, eastward than the above-mentioned
ports, accessible only by a long, expensive, and difficult
land-carriage, it is obvious that the export of wool could not, beyond
certain limits of distance, be continued with profit, because of the
difficulty and cost of transport to its places of shipment: and this
limit to the wool-producing region becomes practically the terminus
of the squatter’s enterprise—the boundary of the location of Europeans—the
end of the war on the wilderness; because the beginning
of a solitude untenanted by civilised man. But, when we again
revert to the map, and view the western side of this mountain ridge,
it is at once perceived that there is a remedy for this arrest of the
progress of settlement. The waters of the Darling River, after a
long circuitous course, unite themselves with the River Murray, and,
reinforced with other tributaries, maintain continuous course to the
Southern Ocean, near Port Elliot. The great trade, then, which is
likely to result from the steam navigation of the River Murray, comprises
all that present and future pastoral produce on the western
side of the mountain ridge, aback of Sydney, which it will be difficult
and costly to send for shipment to the enumerated ports on the
coast line of New South Wales and Port Phillip.”

Speaking of Port Elliot, in the enclosure to the same Despatch
(No. 77), his Excellency continues:—

“With respect to Port Elliot, the criticisms which have been
passed, in doubt of its capaciousness and safety, are such only as new
and untried ports frequently receive until they become better known.

44

Until this experience shall have been gained, it is satisfactory to
know that Captain Lipson, R.N., the Naval Officer of the Province,
after frequent visits to it, and enquiries respecting its character, reports
two vessels of from 500 to 1,000 tons may lie at the existing
moorings, which are in six and four fathoms of water respectively,
sufficiently sheltered by the breakwater to be considered in a safe
anchorage; that, after the port is better known, five or six large
ships may anchor there; and that it would probably prove safe to
extend the anchorage, for large ships, much farther out. A remarkable
verification of this last-expressed opinion has recently
been furnished to Captain Lipson in the case of the Ameer, a vessel
of 400 tons, which in a gale of wind, blowing in on the shore, came
to anchor outside the moorings, and beyond the shelter of the breakwater,
where she remained safely, although greatly underhanded,
both as to the number and the efficiency of the crew. Ever since
the Colony has been founded, coasters have been in the habit of
going in and out of Port Elliot, at all seasons of the year, whenever
freights have offered, and no accident has ever happened, or has any
vessel ever been driven on shore, although furnished, as they generally
are, with very inferior ground tackle. The holding ground,
then, being thus proved to be so good, even outside of the moorings,
it is only necessary to place additional moorings beyond the site of
the present ones, whenever the exigencies of commerce may require
this accommodation. The trade of Port Elliot will, however, probably
for a long while, in connection with the River Murray, not
require more tonnage than can, at any one time, at present safely
find anchorage there. Of the readiness with which mails may be
landed at Port Elliot, as compared with mails to be landed (especially
in winter time) in Gulf St. Vincent, and of the great use, to vessels
bound to Port Elliot, of the Sturt Light, on Cape Willoughby, Kangaroo
Island, it is only necessary that I should refer you to Captain
Lipson’s report, published in the Government Gazette of the 10th
February last:”—

Extracts from the Report of Captain Lipson on Port Elliot.

“Harbour Master’s Office, Port Elliot.

“I know, from long experience of this coast, that the strong
winds, which prevail during the winter, are from south-west, west,
and north-west, and that when the wind shifts to south it invariably
moderates; and being assured, by all the masters of whalers in that
district, that the south or south-east winds were only during the
summer months, and that the shelter from the Murray beach prevented
any fetch into Port Elliot, I feel assured that, after a time,
it will be found quite safe to extend the anchorage for large ships
further out.
* * * * * * *

“Port Elliot lies in lat. 35° 32′ 45″ south, and long. 138° 43′ 15″
east, and is about six miles from Rosetta Head. The new lighthouse

45

on Cape Willoughby, Kangaroo Island, is situated in lat.
35° 49′ 20″ south, long. 138° 43′ 15″ east; and, with respect to
it, Port Elliot bears north 55 east, twenty-nine miles. I do not consider
it necessary to give any particular sailing directions for making
this port, as there is nothing remarkable with regard to headlands,
&c., to point out to the attention of mariners. As a port of refuge
from south to north-west, which are our usual winter winds, I have
never met a person who did not acknowledge the safety and ease of
riding under the island. In proof of this, ever since the Colony has
been founded, our coasters have been in the habit of going in and
out at all seasons of the year, whenever freights have offered, and
no accident has ever happened, or has any vessel ever been driven
on shore, although furnished, as they generally are, with very
inferior ground tackle.”

Referring to the eligibility of Port Elliot as a mail-station, Captain
Lipson’s report thus concludes:—

“It must be well known to those who are in the habit of trading
between Adelaide and the different ports along the coast, that, now
there is a good light on Cape Willoughby, with the west and northwest
gales which blow so frequently during the winter season, they
may go into Port Elliot, and oftentimes back again, either to Van
Diemen’s Land or Port Phillip, in less time than they could beat
through Backstairs Passage; besides the difficulty of returning
down the Gulf against the south-west gales. I have no hesitation
in saying, that two mails may easily be delivered at Port Elliot, for
one at Port Adelaide, during the winter months, &c.

“I have, &c.,

“THOS. LIPSON,

“Naval Officer and Harbour Master.

“Hon. the Colonial Secretary.”

NAVIGATION OF THE MURRAY.

Message No. 24, from His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor to the Legislative Council.

Lieutenant-Governor Sir Henry Young has the gratification to
announce to the Legislative Council the arrival, at the Goolwa, of
the first river-borne wool, the produce of the vast basin of the
Murray.

In congratulating the Council on this auspicious commencement
of the steam navigation and commerce of the great River Murray,
the Lieutenant-Governor is happy to state that Captain Cadell’s
voyage reached to one hundred and fifty miles beyond Swan Hill, a
distance of about fourteen hundred and fifty miles from the sea; and
was also extended to sixty miles up the Wakool—an important

46

branch of the Murray. The first cargo comprises wool of the Murray,
the Darling, the Murrumbidgee, and the Wakool Rivers.

H. E. F. YOUNG, Lieutenant-Governor.

On board the
Lady Augusta
steamer,

Goolwa, October 14, 1853.

Address of the Legislative Council to his Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor.

To His Excellency Sir Henry Edward Fox Young, Knight, Lieutenant-Governor
of Her Majesty’s Province of South Australia,
&c. &c.

May it please your Excellency—

The Legislative Council has experienced sincere gratification in
the announcement made to it by your Excellency, of the arrival, at
the Goolwa, of the first river-borne wool, the produce of the vast
basin of the Murray.

The opening up of the navigation of the Murray has long been
anxiously desired; and your Excellency’s earnest and undeviating
exertions to promote that important object well deserve the warmest
thanks of this Council and of the Colonists of South Australia.

Your Excellency’s personal superintendence of the first practical
experiment—which has resulted in demonstrating that that great
river is navigable by steam, for commercial purposes, for at least
fourteen hundred and fifty miles of its course—must necessarily
connect the name of your Excellency with that successful enterprise;
and the Council think that so great a public service should
be appropriately acknowledged.

The Council, therefore, requests your Excellency to cause three
Gold Medals to be engraved, with suitable device and inscriptions—commemorating
the auspicious opening up of the steam navigation
and commerce of the Murray, and the first arrival at the Goolwa of
river-borne wool. And the Council requests that—as the Lieutenant-Governor
of South Australia, whose personal exertions promoted
this great enterprise, and in whose administration it originated and
has been successfully accomplished—your Excellency would be
pleased to receive one of the said Medals.

And the Council further requests that your Excellency will be
pleased to cause one of the said Medals to be conferred on Captain
Francis Cadell, who completed the first commercial voyage, as owner
and commander of the
Lady Augusta
steamer and
Eureka
barge,
with a cargo of Murray wool; and the remaining medal may be
deposited with the records of the Legislature of South Australia,
under whose sanction the necessary pecuniary aid was voted in encouragement
of the steam navigation of the River Murray.

JOHN MORPHETT, Speaker.

Legislative Council Chamber, Adelaide,

21st October, 1853.

47

Reply of His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor.

Mr. Speaker and Gentlemen—

I receive with great gratification the Address which you have presented
to me.

In conformity with your request, I shall cause Medals of South
Australian Gold to be struck, in commemoration of the opening up
of the commerce and navigation of the river Murray.

I shall have great pleasure in conferring on Captain Cadell the
Medal by which the Lieutenant-Governor and Legislature desire to
distinguish him with honour, in having successfully accomplished
the first commercial steam voyage on the river Murray.

I concur with you in deeming this important event to be worthy
of permanent record in the annals of South Australia; and I shall
cause a commemorative medal to be placed conspicuously among the
public archives.

I shall not fail to seek Her Majesty’s gracious permission to accept
from the Legislative Council the honour of one of the Medals for
myself, as a memorial of the happy fortune by which I have been
privileged to be a co-operator with the Council in opening up the
steam navigation of the river Murray, and thereby establishing a
bond of commercial and social union between three prosperous
Colonies of Australia.

H. E. F. YOUNG.

Government House, October 24, 1853.

PROCLAMATION

By His Excellency Sir Henry Edward Fox Young, Knight,

Lieutenant-Governor of Her Majesty’s

Province of South Australia, and Vice-Admiral
of the same, &c. &c.

(
L S
)

H. E. F. Young.

Whereas, in order to provide for the interests of future settlers,
and the probable course of future settlement along the banks of the
now-ascertained navigable waters of the River Murray, it is expedient,
that as respects the River Murray, and its Lakes Alexandrina
or Victoria and Lake Albert, in South Australia, there should be
adopted and applied the principles recognised and acted upon in the
Royal Order in Council of the 9th March, 1847, by which it was
declared that in New South Wales and Victoria there shall not be
included in leases for pastoral purposes any lands lying and being
within the distance of three miles from the sea coast, and within the
distance of two miles from either of the opposite banks of certain
rivers then named in the above-mentioned Royal Order: And
whereas, for these and other purposes, it is expedient that the portion
of the Province of South Australia hereinafter described should
be created a Hundred: Now, therefore, I, the Lieutenant-Governor,
in the name and on the behalf of Her Most Gracious Majesty, by

48

virtue of the powers and authorities in me vested, do, by this my
Proclamation, declare and appoint that the several parts of the said
Province of South Australia, hereinafter more particularly described,
and which are in part bounded by the shores of Lake Alexandrina
or Victoria and Lake Albert, and by the banks of the River Murray,
shall, from and after the first day of July next ensuing the date of
this Proclamation, be, and I do by this my Proclamation constitute
the same a Hundred of the same Province by the name of the
“Hundred of the Murray:” And I do by this my Proclamation
further proclaim and declare that—All those lands which lie within
the distance of two miles from either of the two opposite banks of
the River Murray, within the Province of South Australia, together
with all those lands which lie within the distance of two miles from
the north shore of Lake Alexandrina, between Salt Creek Trigonometrical
Station and the Murray, and two miles from the east shores
of Lakes Alexandrina and Albert, and also all the land in the
County of Russell lying west of Lake Albert, as the same are
respectively delineated in the public maps deposited in the office of
the Surveyor-General of the Province, shall be within and shall
constitute the said Hundred.

Given under my hand and the public seal of the said Province, at
Adelaide, this ninth day of November, in the year of our
Lord one thousand eight hundred and fifty-three, and in the
seventeenth year of Her Majesty’s reign.

By command,

B. T. FINNISS, Colonial Secretary.

God save the Queen!

Colonial Secretary’s Office, Adelaide, Nov. 9, 1853.

The margins of Lake Alexandrina and Lake Albert, and each
bank of the River Murray, for two miles inland, having been constituted
and proclaimed the “Hundred of the Murray in South
Australia:”

Notice is hereby given that applications will be received by the
Surveyor-General for the survey of sections on the said lands, in
blocks of 10, 80, and 640 acres, according to the wishes of intending
purchasers.

Access from the back lands to the water, and necessary roads for
the convenience of the public, will be reserved in the usual manner.

Purchasers of land will have the customary privilege of commonage
within the Hundred, according to the regulations.

By His Excellency’s command,

B. T. FINNISS, Colonial Secretary.

Footnotes

[1]
This poor man was unfortunately drowned, September 30th.

[2]
According to Balbi, the course of the Murray is nearly 3,000 miles.

[3]
This calculation can only be approximate.

[4]
Expeditions into the Interior of Australia: 2 vols.

[5]
The return of supplies taken each trip up the river, it is calculated, will be
equivalent to about one-half the value of the cargo brought down; the orders
for goods amounting already to £3,000 and upwards.

[6]
The dimensions of the
Lady Augusta
(so called in honour of Lady Young),
are as follows:—Extreme length on deck, 105ft.; extreme length of keel, 98ft.
6in.; depth of hold, 5ft 6in.; breadth of beam, 12ft.; on the cross guards, 21ft.
She is built altogether upon the American principle and model, and cost about
£5,000. Her engines, furnished from Sydney, are of twenty horse power each,
and of best workmanship. Her total tonnage, including engines which weigh
thirty tons, is ninety-one tons. Her beams and planking are of New Zealand
pine, and her timbers are of honeysuckle. She draws 3ft. water when full,
and 2ft. 4in. when light. She possesses accommodation for sixteen first-class
passengers and half as many second. There is also accommodation in the

Eureka
barge, which tows alongside.

[7]
The
Eureka
launch is built of blue gum below, her upper planks of New
Zealand pine, and her decks of Baltic deal. Entire length on deck, 106 feet;
entire length of keel, 96 feet; breadth of beam, 12 feet; breadth of cross
guards, 21 feet; depth of hold, 8 feet. Her dimensions were:—Estimated
measurement tonnage, 87 tons; draught of water, with cargo, 3 feet; draught
of water, without cargo, 13 to 15 inches. The deck, which is covered with an
awning, is, from her peculiar construction, large enough for a vessel of 300 or
400 tons.

[8]
This man, for want of evidence, was released, and sent back from whence
he came.

[9]
From those lakes, salt, in considerable quantities, is gathered and transported
into the interior, or to the nearest towns.

[10]
October 4th, above Euston, three emus or cassowaries were observed
swimming across the river. Amongst the Australian aborigines there has
been an evident desire to preserve this gigantic bird, and for this purpose its
flesh is forbidden, it is said, to their young men. The Europeans, however,
hunt it down without any consideration, unless it be for the sake of its feathers
or for a steak of its flesh. An emu, we are told, with a kick can kill a dog or
break a horse’s leg, and to judge from the size of their claws (some of which we
have on board) this can be no exaggeration. Dogs are, however, trained to
seize them by the neck, and, in this way, overpower them easily.

[11]
The Darling, during more than half the year, would, it appears, be navigable
for upwards of 150 miles from its junction with the Murray. A few
years ago indeed, it was settled as far as Lake Minindie, a Government Reserve,
200 miles from the mouth; but the outrages of the blacks—the distance
from an available market—or other causes—led to the abandonment of these
runs. It has now only 50,000 sheep upon its banks; but would, it is said, depasture
four times that number, and might be occupied up to Fort Bourke, 500
miles from the junction. The waters of the Darling, at times fordable, begin
to rise about July, and subside again in February.

[12]
According to Mr. Jamieson, Mickie had a companion; and the native
was alone.

[13]
In Victoria, as much as 35s. had been demanded for one day’s stabling and
food for one horse.

[14]
These birds were afterwards brought on board and conveyed to Adelaide.

[15]
These “store” sheep, as they are called, are sent overland to be fattened
on the banks of the river, whence the clip is easily transported to Adelaide.

[16]
In the Wakool we found three and a-half fathoms water.

[17]
As in some degree confirmatory of this last extract, it may be mentioned
that on taking in wood, at the Great Bend, we were informed that, of the
woodcutters who had been working for us, one had been a West India proprietor,
and the other the nephew of a noble Earl, whose ancestors have borne
a prominent place in Irish history.

[18]
It is worthy of remark, that the sheep on the Murray appear to be singularly
exempt from disease—neither catarrh, scab, nor foot rot, being now known
amongst them.

[19]
The nearest diggings to Swan Hill are the Koorong, about 100 miles
distant.

[20]
On this voyage, up the Murray, has been remarked by more than one of our
party the singular resemblance to Gothic arches presented by the overhanging
trees. It is not impossible that the idea of their construction has thus originated;
at any rate, of the notion we may, I think, say with the Italian,
si non
è vero è ben trovato
.

[21]
The Company, it appears, allowed the passengers 8s. a-day during their
detention.

[22]
Near this station, on the borders of a lake, is found a quantity of a kind of
gypsum or talc, perfectly transparent, which possibly may yet be turned to
some useful purposes.

[23]
Strange to say, the Wakool is stated in the dry season to be quite salt; if
so, the salt springs must predominate over the waters of the Murray, of which
it receives the “backwaters.”

[24]
The Royal Australian Bank have two other sheep stations in the vicinity
of the Wakool, as also two cattle stations on the Neimur and Murray; the
whole being under the superintendence of Mr. Walter Murray.

[25]
It is not fair to inflict upon the public the minutiæ of one’s daily ailments;
but when one has not enjoyed a day’s health for five years—have suffered
partial blindness for four years—and for nearly two years have lain down
nightly with the chance of falling into a fit—as has been my case, I think this
note may be pardoned.

[26]
I crave the forgiveness of these gentlemen, if I have incorrectly quoted their
opinions or their words; but am reminded, as I write, of the witty words of
Voltaire, when told that Admiral Byng had been shot by order of the British
Government,—“
C’est pour encourager les autres.
”

[27]
The Captain called it a spiral rock, and I understood there is only four feet
water over it.

[28]
The excellent arrangement of which (small as it is), it is but just to say,
was chiefly due to the exertions of Mr. Younghusband’s valet, groom, and
coachman; for, I believe, “James” combines these three capacities in his own
person.

[29]
The trees on the Murray being of large size and lofty growth, it cannot be
doubted that timber cutting and rafting in all its branches will erelong be
introduced on the stream; on parts of which saw mills might with advantage
be erected: the timber, when cut down and sawn, being formed into large
rafts, and floated down, as on the rivers of Europe and America.

[30]
The result of this expedition to the Colony of South Australia may truly
be called the discovery of the Golden Fleece; for by the successful achievement
of the navigation of the Murray by Captain Cadell’s steamer, Sir Henry
Young has obtained an immediate increase to the exports of the Province of
certainly 1,000,000lbs. of wool, of the value of about £80,000. I limit the
amount to about this sum, because, for another twelve months, I doubt the
steamer being able to carry the estimated quantity of wool even from Swan
Hill—and amounting, with two years’ clip, to £162,000—unless, indeed, the
boats navigated, as is expected, from England, for the Murray, should arrive.
But when the boats are equal to the freight, I conceive the addition to the
exports of South Australia will not fall short of £350,000.

[31]
For these statistics, with much other information, I am indebted to Mr. Jamieson, of Mildura.

Transcriber’s Notes

Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook is public-domain in the country of publication.

Generated cover and spine images (based on graphic elements in the printed book) for no-cost, unrestricted use with this eBook.

Silently corrected a few palpable typos.

In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by _underscores_.

End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Murray River, by Arthur Kinloch

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MURRAY RIVER ***

***** This file should be named 57618-h.htm or 57618-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/7/6/1/57618/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from scans of public domain works at The National
Library of Australia.)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.