The Project Gutenberg eBook, Mixed Grill, by W. Pett Ridge

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Mixed Grill

Author: W. Pett Ridge

Release Date: August 16, 2018  [eBook #57704]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)

***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MIXED GRILL***

This etext was transcribed by Les Bowler

MIXED GRILL

BY

W. PETT RIDGE

AUTHOR OF “MORD EM’LY,”
ETC.

“If you can’t make up your mind what
to

order,” said the City waiter, “how about trying

the mixed grill?  You may not like all of it, but

what you don’t care for you can easily leave!”

HODDER AND STOUGHTON

NEW YORK AND LONDON

p. iv
Printed in
1913

p.
v
CONTENTS

PAGE

I

Third Person Singular

1

II

A Benevolent Character

17

III

The Wonderful Start

29

p. vi
IV

Slow Recovery

44

V

Loose Cash

57

VI

Price of James McWinter

88

p. vii
VII

A Case of Suspicion

111

VIII

Question of Temperature

130

IX

Foreign Affairs

148

X

Before Lunch

160

XI

Counter Attractions

176

XII

Hero of Hammerton Street

189

XIII

Damages for Libel

202

p. viii
XIV

The Rest Cure

218

XV

Reward for Courage

242

p.
1
I—THIRD PERSON SINGULAR

I
met
him when I was in town at a
party, where he and I were about the only grownups; he took a
good deal of trouble over the youngsters, doing conjuring tricks
to amuse them, and singing songs at the pianoforte that made them
laugh.  Later in the evening, when some of the kids had been
fetched, he and I became friendly, and we had a most interesting
chat.  He agreed with my views regarding the Australian team
of the previous summer; he was in full sympathy concerning the
difficulty of making one pair of white gloves do for two
evenings.  I asked for his name and address.

“Don’t think I have a card to spare, old
chap,” he said, in his easy way.  “Daresay we
shall meet again.”

“I’d awfully like to make sure of it,” I
p. 2
said.
“My mother may want you to run down to our
place.”

“That’s a different matter.  Here’s a
pencil; write it on something.  Or allow me.  I’m
coming back here at ten,” he went on.  “You
won’t be gone before that, I hope?”

“I must,” I replied.  “My governess
will call at half-past nine to take me home.”

“What an existence we men about town do live, to be
sure.  Always hurrying from one place to another.”

“If my mother writes to you, Mr. Cartwright,” I
said, offering my hand, “you won’t fail to come
along.”

My mater is peculiar; she has a fixed and permanent idea that
any suggestion coming from me must necessarily be overruled and
treated as of no serious importance; I fancy this comes from the
feeling, often expressed by her, that she has to be both father
and mother.  It is rather a lonely life for her, with only
my governess and the servants for company.  I have heard the
maids saying more than once to each other that they wondered
mistress did not marry again.  “She could well afford
to,” remarked cook.

p. 3
I do
think I showed cleverness and tact—something very like high
diplomacy.  I reminded my mother of the parties I had
attended, and said I felt glad there was no necessity for us to
have our house turned upside down and to give an evening in
return.  At lunch time I referred to the matter again.
Later I said good-night to her, and once more made similar
allusion to the subject.

Cards of invitation went out the next day, and my governess
started on the preparation of a charade.  My governess is
not, if I may say so, possessed of incredible cleverness, and
after writing out the charade and starting rehearsals, she found
she had forgotten the word, and as no one could guess it, and she
appeared unable to think of another, it became evident that we
could not rely upon this as a source of entertainment.  It
was then I announced to my mother that I had already sent a note
to a friend of mine, a man whose equal for entertaining a party
was rarely encountered, and that I expected a reply from him in
the course of a post or two.  She blamed me for taking the
step without asking permission, and praised me for coming to the
rescue with such an excellent idea.

p.
4
“Did you say Cartwright—Mr. Cartwright,
dear?”

“Yes, mother.  Do you know him?”

“I don’t think I have met the name.”

When Mr. Cartwright’s postcard arrived, and the maid put
it by the side of my plate, my mother, glancing down the table
before opening her own letters, asked quickly from whom it had
come, and when I told her she contradicted me, quoting, rather
excitedly, the usual Biblical and historical cases where severe
punishment had been given for the telling of lies, or
commendation awarded for the statement of exact truth.  I
ventured to repeat the information, and passed the card to her as
a document in support; she looked at it, cried a little, and
asked me to forgive her for being so cross.  I begged her
not to mention it.

“Just for the moment,” she explained, “it
took me back about twelve years.”

“Before my time, mother?”

“Yes.  You were not thought of then.  Does
your friend sign himself Cartwright?”

“My dear mother, how else could he sign
himself?”

“Send him another line, and say that your
p. 5
mother is
looking forward to the pleasure of making his
acquaintance.”

“You must tell me how to spell some of the words,”
I said.

The carriage was to meet some of the guests who came from
London, and I went down to the station myself and arranged with
one of the cabmen there, so that Mr. Cartwright should be brought
up alone and without being crowded by the children.  My
mother said I could ask him to stay the night, and ordered a room
at the hotel; but he wrote to say he had another engagement in
town, and he desired to catch the seven fifty-four back.  I
remarked that this showed how popular he was in society; my
mother gave a word approving businesslike habits.  It seemed
exactly like Mr. Cartwright that he should arrive in the cab at
the precise hour arranged.

“Had a good journey?” I cried, running to him in
the hall as he was getting out of his thick overcoat.
“I was afraid, somehow, that you’d back out of it at
the last moment.”

“Never disappoint the public,” he replied
cheerfully.  “Sometimes I disappoint myself, but that
is another matter.”

p. 6
I asked
what he had in his large bag.

“Brought down a figure; thought perhaps a little
ventriloquism would be a novelty.”

“Anything you do will be sure to be appreciated.
I’ve been thinking ever since I met you of the perfectly
splendid way you entertained at that party.”

“Good man!”

“And I do feel it’s most awfully kind of you to
come all this distance just to oblige me.  Let’s go
upstairs, shall we, Mr. Cartwright?  I’ll take you to
the room that used to be called the nursery.”

He got rid of his overcoat there, and, asking me for a pair of
scissors, went carefully with them around the edge of his shirt
cuffs.  I inquired whether he had been going out to many
parties since I last saw him: he replied that he had no right to
complain; there were plenty of exceedingly clever people about
and he could only regard himself as cleverish.  I exhibited
the soldiers that mother had given me for my birthday.  He
took the blue men, I took the red, and he was Napoleon and I
Wellington.  We sat upon the floor, and he was so very good
as to show me exactly what happened at the battle of
p. 7
Waterloo, an
incident of peculiar interest to me, because it occurred on one
of the few dates I am able to retain in my memory.

“But, Mr. Cartwright, how is it you know so much about
this?”  He was moving some dominoes up from the right
to represent the approach of Blucher and the German troops.

“Used to be a soldier man,” he replied.

“Why ever didn’t you stay in the army, and become
a Field Marshal?”

“By Jove!” he cried, “that would have been a
rattling good idea.  Wonder I didn’t think of it at
the time.”

“Is it too late now?”

“Surely not,” he answered promptly, “for
such an exceptionally fortunate person as I am.  Anyway, so
far as 1815 is concerned, Blucher, you see, had Grouchy to
compete with—this double-six is Grouchy, with thirty-five
thousand men—but Blucher outmarched him, came up,
and—”  He swept the rest of his blue men down
with a wave of the hand, and hummed “Rule,
Britannia.”

I expressed a wish that he had selected the reds, so that he
might have won; but he
p. 8
remarked in a change of mood that
anything like success in any game would, by reason of its
novelty, have given him serious alarm.  I asked how the time
was going.

“Lent my watch to a relative,” he mentioned.
“A rather distant relative; but I see a good deal of him,
from the waist upwards.”

And he went to the mantelpiece to inspect the clock.

“Little man,” in a sharp voice, “who is
this?”

“That?  Oh, that’s dear mother.”

He looked at it closely, whistled a tune softly.

“I shall have to catch an earlier train,” he
announced suddenly.  “I’m sorry.  You make
my apologies to every one, and say the muddle was entirely
mine.”

“But you can’t, Mr. Cartwright.
There’s nothing before the six minutes to eight.”

My governess came in, and he replaced the frame quickly.
My governess has sometimes complained that the house is lacking
in male society; she took advantage of this opportunity to talk
with great vivacity, and, in tones very different from those she
uses in
p.
9
addressing me, inquired with affectation concerning the
theatres in town, and entertainments generally.  Fearing she
would try Mr. Cartwright’s patience, as she has often tried
mine, I endeavoured to detach her; but the task proved one beyond
my abilities, and she went on to submit, with deference, that
what was required was an increase of merriment in life, a view
that, coming from her, amazed me into silence.  Mr.
Cartwright answered that in his opinion life was full of
rollicking fun, completely furnished with joy.

“What a gift,” cried my governess, “to be
able always to see the cheerful side!  It means, of course,
that you have been singularly free from anything like
disaster.  Tell me, now, what is the nearest to a sad
experience that you ever had?”

“I expect we ought to be getting downstairs,” he
remarked.

In the hall I introduced Mr. Cartwright, with pride, to my
mother.

“Charmed to meet you,” she said, offering her
hand.  My mother can be very pleasant, and if, at the
moment, she gave signs of agitation, it was not to be wondered
at; I myself felt nervous.  “My boy tells me that
p. 10
you are going
to be so very kind—”  She appeared unable to go
on with the sentence.

“I was glad,” he said, “to find he had not
forgotten me.  It isn’t everybody who has a good
memory.”

“It isn’t everybody who cares to possess
one,” she said, with some spirit.  “I have heard
of cases where men forget their real names.”

“I have heard of cases,” he remarked, “where
women have been in a great hurry to change theirs.”

It struck me they were not hitting it off, as one might say,
and I took his hand and led him into the drawing-room, where the
children were having refreshment between the dances.  He
made himself at home with them at once, danced a quadrille with
the smallest girl, consulted with my governess about the playing
of some accompaniments, and amused her by a remark which he
made.  A man who could make my governess laugh was a man
capable of anything.  Going to the end of the room, he took
a figure of a boy in a Tam o’ Shanter cap out of his bag,
and, setting it upon his knee, started absolutely the best
entertainment I have seen
p. 11
in the whole course of my
existence.  We all rested on the floor; my mother stood near
the doorway, but I was too much interested in Mr.
Cartwright’s performance to pay attention to her.
When I did look around once, to get her to join in the applause,
I found she was looking hard at my friend, trying, I suppose, to
find out how he did it.  He began to sing, with the figure
making absurd interruptions that sent us all into fits of
laughter; my mother, still serious, took a chair.  Mr.
Cartwright had a good voice; I don’t know whether you would
call it a baritone or a tenor, but it was so pleasant to listen
to that I half agreed with a sensible girl sitting just in front
of me, who said she wished the figure would cease
interfering.

“Lor’ bless my soul,” said the figure,
“thought you’d never get that note, Mr.
Cartwright.  Only just managed it.”  And, in a
confidential way, “Aren’t you a rotten singer,
though?  Don’t you think so, strictly between
ourselves?  Have you ever tried selling coke?  That
would be about your mark, you know!”

We clapped hands and stamped feet when he finished, and even
the girls declared they
p. 12
would rather hear something more from
him than go on with the dances.  He looked at his watch, and
I called out to him that he was all right for his train; he had a
quarter of an hour to spare.  He came back to the
pianoforte.  There he touched the keys, making a selection
in his mind.

“No, no!” cried my mother, as the prelude to a
song began.  “Please, not that one!”

He changed the air at once, and went off into an Irish
song.  You know the kind of tune—one that makes you
keep on the move all the time you are listening.  About a
ball given by Mrs. O’Flaherty, where the fiddler, once
started, declined to stop, and the couples kept on with the hop,
hop, hop, so that the dance lasted for I forget how
long—three weeks, I think.  The couples gradually
became tired, the tune went slower and slower.

“Mr. Cartwright,” cried my governess, in her high
voice, “you ought to be a professional.”

“I am a professional,” he replied.

I rushed like mad out into the hall.  I wanted to get the
opportunity of thinking as hard and as swiftly as possible.
There was
p.
13
no time to lose; the station cab stood outside the door,
waiting for him I went up, three stairs at a time, and opened the
door of my room; it had been used as a temporary cloak-room, and
jackets and hats were littered all over the place.  As I
threw these about—everything had been moved by the servants
with some idea of making elaborate preparations—it struck
me it was not unlike a nightmare; one of those nightmares where
you are in a most terrific hurry, and everything slips away and
eludes you.  I could have cried with annoyance at the
thought that Mr. Cartwright was now preparing to leave, asking
for me, perhaps, and certainly wondering when and how he was to
receive his fee for making the special visit from town.  In
my excitement I took the pillow and threw it into the air;
underneath I found my money-box, and some other articles which
had been shifted from the dressing-table.  I seized one of
my dumb-bells, smashed the box, counted out the money with
trembling fingers.

“Four and three,” I said to myself.  “I
shall give him four shillings, and tell him I’ll send the
rest on.”

p. 14
I slid
down two flights.  As I neared the landing above the hall I
could hear that music had started afresh and dancing had
recommenced.  I was engaged to a rather sensible
girl—already referred to—for the polka, and she would
be looking out for me; but for the moment I was too full of
troubles of my own to consider those of other people.  The
front door was open, and my mother was waving her hand.

“Mr. Cartwright!” I called out, running past
her.  “Mr. Cartwright!  Oh, do let me speak to
you for a minute.”

“Can’t stop, old boy,” he said from the
cab.  He seemed rather quiet.

“But I must speak to you.  Mother, may I go down to
the station with him?  Oh, you are a good sort,” as
she nodded her consent.  I jumped in, and the cab
started.

I felt so thankful when I saw in his hand an envelope with
some pieces of gold, and I felt proud of her.  I might have
guessed mother would know how to do the right thing.

“Little man!”  He was looking at a slip of
paper with some pencilled words which the envelope also
contained.  “Do you ever take advice, I
wonder?”

p.
15
“Do you, Mr. Cartwright?”

“I find it easier to give.  People have been
filling me up with it ever since I was about your age, and some
of it has been good, but I have always done exactly as I
pleased.”

“I suppose that’s the best plan.”

“No!” he replied.  “It has some
advantages, but not many.”

“But aren’t you”—I scarcely knew how
to phrase it—“aren’t you exactly what you want
to be, Mr. Cartwright?  You’re so good-humoured and
jolly.”

He gave a gasp and looked at the window.

“I don’t lose my temper now,” he said.
“I used to, and the last time I lost with it everything
that was worth having.  Here’s the advice I want to
give you.  Forget me, but try to remember this.
Quarrel, if you must quarrel, with the people who don’t
matter.  Never quarrel with your friends.  I had fierce
words once with the best friend a man ever had.”

“What was his name?”

“It has taken her twelve years to forgive me, and in
that time I’ve gone to pieces.  All just for the
luxury of five minutes of wild talk.  Here’s the
station; my wife will be
p. 16
waiting for me at the other end, to
take the money I’ve earned.”  He laughed in a
peculiar way.  “Goodbye, old chap.  Not too big
for this, are you?”  He placed his hands on either
side of my face.  “I wish—oh, I wish you were my
boy!”

My mother asked me, when I got back and told her, to show her
exactly where he had kissed me, and she pressed her lips for some
moments to the place on my forehead.  Then we went in and
brightened up the party.

p.
17
II—A BENEVOLENT CHARACTER

A
youth
came into the small
tobacconist’s and inquired, across the counter, whether
there happened to be in the neighbourhood a branch establishment
of a well-known firm (mentioned by name) dealing in similar goods
and guaranteeing to save the consumer thirty-three per
cent.  He required the information, it appeared, because he
contemplated buying a packet of cigarettes.

No, said the proprietor (after he finished his speech and the
youth had gone), not quite the limit.  Near to the edge, I
admit; but remembering my friend, Mr. Ardwick, I can’t say
it’s what you’d call the highest possible.  It
was a privilege to know Ardwick; he was, without any doubt
whatsoever, a masterpiece.  I’ve give up all hopes of
ever finding his equal.

p. 18
He was
a customer here at the time Mrs. Ingram had the shop—and
when I say customer, of course I don’t mean that he ever
handed over a single halfpenny.  Mrs. Ingram had only been a
widow for about a twelvemonth, and naturally enough she liked
gentlemen’s society; and Ardwick, after he got his
compensation out of the County Council—that, by the by, was
one of his triumphs—he had nothing else to do, and he
became very much attached to that chair what you’re sitting
on now.  He’d call in to have a look at the morning
paper, and read it through from start to finish; later in the day
he’d call to see the evening paper, and keep tight hold of
it till he’d come to the name of the printers at the foot
of the last page.  Between whiles he’d pretend to make
himself handy at dusting the counter, and help himself to a pipe
of tobacco, out of the shag-jar.  It was a pretty sight to
see old Ardwick, before he left of an evening, talk, as he filled
a pocket with matches out of the stand, about the way the rich
robbed the poor.

Having caught sight of Mrs. Ingram’s pass-book that she
was sending to the bank—he offered to post it, and walked
all the
p.
19
way to Lombard Street and stuck to the
twopence—Ardwick makes up his mind to take the somewhat
desperate step of proposing to Mrs. I.

“Very kind of you,” she says, “but I fancy,
Mr. Ardwick, you’re a shade too stingy to run in double
harness with me.  Poor Ingram,” she says, “was
always freehanded with his money, and if I should ever get
married again it will have to be to some one of a similar
disposition.  But thank you all the same,” she says,
“for asking!”

Ardwick ran across his friend Kimball in Downham Road that
evening and lent him a match, and said Kimball was the very party
he wanted to meet.  They had a long, confidential sort of
talk together outside the fire-station, and they came to such
high words that a uniformed man, who was talking to one of his
girls, threatened to turn the hose on them.  The two
strolled down Kingsland Road in a cooler frame of mind, and when
they said “Good-night” at the canal bridge Kimball
promised to do the best for Mr. Ardwick that lay in his
power.  Kimball explained that he was not going to do it out
of friendship, but mainly because his wife
p. 20
had recently
docked his allowance, and, in consequence, he felt a grudge
against the sex in general.

“I promise you,” said Mr. Ardwick, still shaking
his hand, “that you won’t lose over the
transaction.”

“Knowing you as I do,” remarked Kimball, “I
quite recognise that it’ll take a bit of doing to make
anything out of it.”

Mr. Ardwick was in the shop, here, the following
afternoon.  Mrs. Ingram felt surprised to see him at that
hour, and she locks up the till pretty smartly and moves the box
of World-Famed Twopenny Cheroots.

“Something you said, Mrs. Ingram,” he began,
“has been worryin’ of me, and I’ve called round
to talk it over.  You seem to have got the impression in
your mind that I’m, if anything, a trifle close with my
money.  I should like to convince you, ma’am, that you
are doing me an injustice, and to prove it I’m going to
adopt a very simple plan.”

“Have you brought back that watch of mine I gave you to
get mended?”

“One topic at a time,” urged Mr. Ardwick.
“My idea of benevolence is something wider and broader than
that of most people.”  He
p. 21
glanced at the clock.
“What I propose to do is this.  To the first customer
what enters this shop after half-past three I shall present the
sum of five pound.”

“Five what?”

“Five quid,” he said, in a resolute sort of
manner.  “The first one, mind you, after half-past
three.  It wants two minutes to the half-hour now.  All
you’ve got to do, ma’am, is to stand where you are,
and to judge whether I’m a man of a generous disposition or
whether I’m the opposite.”

As the clock turned the half-hour an old woman came in and put
down four farthings for snuff; when she had gone Mr. Ardwick
mentioned that he knew for a fact that the clock was a trifle
fast.  An elderly gentleman in workhouse clothes came for a
screw of tobacco; Mr. Ardwick pointed out to Mrs. Ingram that he
never proposed to extend his offer to those supported by the
State.  Kimball arrived at twenty-five minutes to, and Mr.
Ardwick glared at him privately for not keeping the
appointment.  Kimball bought a box of wooden matches, and
was leaving the shop when Mr. Ardwick called him.

“My man,” he said, “your face and your
p. 22
general
appearance suggest you are not one of those who are termed
favourites of fortune.  Tell me, now, have you ever been the
recipient, so to speak, of a stroke of luck?”

“Not to my knowledge, sir,” said Kimball,
answering very respectfully.

“Never had a windfall of any kind?  No sudden
descent of manna from above?  Very well, then.”
Mr. Ardwick took out his cheque-book and asked Mrs. I. for pen
and ink.  “Be so kind as to give me your full name,
and it will be my pleasure to hand you over a handsome
gift.  I hope you will lay out the sum to the best
advantage, and I trust it may prove a turning-point, a junction
as it were, in your life!”

Mr. Ardwick was talking across the counter to Mrs. Ingram
about the pleasures of exercising charity, and the duty of those
who possessed riches towards them who had none, when a most
horrible idea seemed to occur to him, and he darted out of the
shop like a streak of lightning.  In Kingsland Road he just
caught a motor-omnibus that was going towards the City, and on
the way through Shoreditch he complained, whilst he mopped his
forehead, because the conductor did not
p. 23
make the bus
go quicker.  Near Cornhill there was a block of traffic, and
he slipped down and ran for his life.  As he came near the
bank he caught sight of Kimball descending the steps.  Mr.
Ardwick threw himself, exhausted, across a dustbin on the edge of
the pavement, and burst into tears.

He mentioned to me afterwards that it was not so much the loss
of the money that affected him as the knowledge that a fellow man
had broke his word.  That was what upset Mr. Ardwick.
He tried to explain all this at the time to a City constable.

“You get away home,” advised the City constable,
“and try to sleep it off.  That’s your best
plan.  Unless you want me to take you down to Cloak Lane for
the night.”

Mr. Ardwick felt very much hurt at this insinuation on his
character, because, partly on account of his principles and
partly because he hated giving money away, he was strict
teetotal; but the remark furnished him with an idea, and he acted
on it without a moment’s delay.  He returned to
Dalston Junction, and there, by great good luck, he found
Kimball—Kimball smoking a big cigar and trying to persuade
a railway-porter to accept one.
p. 24
Mr. Ardwick went up to him and took
the cigar.

“I congratulate you ’eartily,” he said,
slapping Kimball on the shoulder in a jolly sort of way.
“There isn’t many that could brag of having done
Samuel Ardwick in the eye, but I always admit it when I come
across my superior.  There’s only one favour I want
you to grant.”

“You gave me the cheque, and I’ve got a perfect
right to it.  What we may have agreed upon beforehand has
nothing whatever to do with the matter.”

“All I ask you to do,” went on Mr. Ardwick,
“is to allow me to celebrate the occasion by inviting you
to have a little snack at a restaurant close by.  A meal, I
mean.  A proper dinner.  Food, and a bottle of
something with it.”

“This don’t sound like you,” remarked
Kimball.

“I shan’t make the offer twice,” warned Mr.
Ardwick.

Kimball strolled along with him rather reluctantly and
somewhat suspiciously up Stoke Newington Road.  Mr. Ardwick
stopped outside an Italian eating-place, had a good
p. 25
look at the
prices of everything in a brass frame near the doorway, gave a
deep sigh, and led the way in.

It was here that, in my opinion, Mr. A. made a blunder; he
admitted himself to me later that he was not acquainted with the
quality of the wine or the capacity of his friend Kimball.
The foreign waiter, being told confidentially that price was an
object, recommended a quarter-bottle of what he called Vin
Ordinaire at sevenpence.  It was only when Kimball was
starting on the fourth of these that Mr. Ardwick discovered he
could have sent out for a full bottle at the cost of
one-and-nine.  He himself took no food and no beverage of
any description, but just sat back, smoking the cigar, totting up
the expenses, and keeping a watchful eye on his guest.

“Is it a fruity wine?” asked Mr. Ardwick, when the
last quarter-bottle was opened.  Kimball lifted up his
glass.

“I shouldn’t like to say there was much of that
about it,” he answered.  “As a matter of fact,
it doesn’t taste of anything.”

“But surely it goes to your head!”

“It goes to my head,” agreed Kimball,
p.
26
“because I put it there; but it don’t seem
to have any effect on the brain.  Sheer waste of my time, so
far as I can gather.”

“Look here!” said Mr. Ardwick, with a determined
effort.  “I want to have a quiet talk with you.
I’ve stood this very excellent meal, and it’s only
right you should do something for me in return.”

“Anything within reason.”

“I’m not the man to ask you to do anything
else.  You’ve had your little joke at my expense and
now my suggestion is that you hand across the five pounds, and
we’ll both have a good laugh over the transaction.  I
admit you played your part uncommonly well.  You ran it
rather close, and if you’d been a minute or so later, my
lad, you’d have found the bank closed, and then I could
have stopped payment.”

“I got there,” said Kimball, “at one minute
past four, and the doors were shut!”

Mr. Ardwick settled up, and told Kimball exactly what he
thought of him.

“Imposing on generosity,” he said
heatedly—“that’s your game!”

He went off home to write a letter to the bank, and to
recognise that matters had,
p. 27
after all, turned out better than he
might have expected.  In the evening he made his usual call
here, dressed up special, and evidently anxious to find out what
sort of an effect his display of benevolence had made on Mrs.
I.

“I can’t help seeing,” she said
confidentially, taking the evening paper from another customer
and handing it to Mr. Ardwick, “that I’ve, all along,
done you an injustice.  I liked your conversation, and I had
no fault to find with your general behaviour; but somehow I had
an idea that you rather over-did the economical.”

“If I come across a really deserving case,”
remarked Mr. Ardwick modestly, “I’m prepared to give
away my last penny.  I don’t say I scatter my money
broadcast, but when I do give I give liberally and with both
hands.”

“I was telling the poor man,” said Mrs. Ingram,
“that he ought to feel very much indebted to you.
You’ve stood him on his feet, so to speak, and, whatever it
may lead to, he’s only got you to thank.”

“Don’t make too much of a mere trifle.”

“I advised him to put half of it away in
p. 28
the Post
Office, and use the other half to rig himself out in a new suit
and look respectable.”

“Excuse me,” interrupted Mr. Ardwick, rather
anxiously, “but when did you say all this to
him?”

“About a hour or so ago,” she replied, “when
he came in and asked me to change the cheque for him.
Knowing all the circumstances, of course I didn’t hesitate
a single moment!”

I was doing a bit of debt-collecting at the time, said the
proprietor of the tobacconist’s shop, and that was how I
became acquainted with Mrs. Ingram.  She felt grateful over
my success with what was undoubtedly a tough job, and one word
led to another, and eventually I consented to propose to
her.  She’ll be down directly.  Wait and have a
glance at her, and tell me if you think I acted wisely.

p.
29
III—THE WONDERFUL START

Dazed
by sudden introduction to a
distinguished company, he glanced eagerly and confusedly around
in the hope of finding some one who would give him a smile of
encouragement.  The most distinguished of all, seated
opposite to him, acknowledged his bow and gave the order that a
chair should be offered, and this was accepted.

Conversation did not immediately turn upon his affairs, and
the delay enabled him to lean back and compose his mind;
presently, no doubt, the others would switch discussion to the
subject which excused his presence in this magnificent
building.  It had a strong scent of newness, a suggestion of
the slate pencils used for the purpose of calculations in his
early youth, calculations which were so often incorrect that he
remembered
p.
30
how frequently in setting down a total he instinctively
rubbed it out, under the impression that whatever he had written
must be wrong.  He did not become really clever in the
management of figures until his London life began in Tooley
Street, and that seemed a good many centuries ago.  What was
it, ’80 or ’81?  February of ’80 it must
have been; early part of February.  Thirty-two years, that
made him forty-six.  He could remember the start quite
clearly.

*  *  *  *
*

As he stepped out into a wooden shed that was called London
Bridge Station, a matronly woman, to whom he gave assistance in
finding an outside porter for her deal box, referred to him in a
sentence of thanks as a smart little nipper, and this, an
auspicious compliment, sent him to the barrier and out into
Railway Approach with a good conceit of himself.  In the
telegraph-office he wrote on a form in a confident way, as though
he had been used all his life to the dispatching of
telegrams:

“Arrived safely.  Good journey.  Best
love.—
Ben
.”

p. 31
The
clerk on the other side of the counter mentioned that it would
stand a better chance of reaching its destination if the name and
address of the recipient were filled in.  This constituted
something in the nature of a check, and in the adjoining
parcels-office he endeavoured to apply a remedy by knocking
peremptorily with twopence and demanding instant attention.

“In a hurry?” asked the porter, nettled.
“Because, if so, you’d better wait till your
hurry’s over.  Bad enough to be ordered about by
grown-ups; I’m certainly not going to be dictated to by
slips of boys.  D’you hear?”

He urged that no harm had been intended.

“What you intend,” said the porter, giving a
snatch at the parcel, “and what you do are very different
things.  Now then, don’t stand there all day
gazing!  What d’you want me to do with this?
Boil it, or what?”

The lad answered, with respect, that he desired it should be
sent by Parcels Delivery to the Peckham address given on the
label; the man inspected very carefully, in the evident hope of
discovering some flaw or
p. 32
defect that would enable him to
decline the commission.  He had to be content with throwing
it, with a whirl, through the air into a corner, snatching at the
twopence and giving a curt order, “Now be off with
you!”  To the question concerning the whereabouts of
Tooley Street, he replied that if the lad could fly, he might
reach it in two seconds; assuming him not to be so exceptionally
gifted, the time could be given as two minutes.

“Thank you, very much indeed, sir, for all your
kindness.”

The man looked at him narrowly, to make certain that this
remark was not intended as chaff, and, reassured on the point,
came out of the office and walked with him down the slope, where
they faced a large corner public-house plastered over with orange
bills and, above, a banner which said imperatively “Vote
for Clarke.”

The porter explained the meaning of all this, and made two
prophecies: first, that Dizzy would, as a result of the
day’s election, get a valentine; second, that Gladstone
might be taken down a notch.  Returning confidence for
confidence, the lad told him this was his first day in London,
and his
p.
33
father had urged him to be honest and straight.
They parted on excellent terms.

The incident proved a faithful sample of the happenings of a
wonderful day.  On the first floor of the number which he
held in his memory, the surroundings were so much at variance
with early anticipations that he feared he had made some
disastrous blunder, until Mr. Cruttwell, head of the firm,
slapped him joyously on the shoulder, declaring he had arrived
just in time to see the fun.  The office was rather dark,
because the windows were covered with election bills, but gas
flared generously.  Everybody, from the head down to a clerk
only slightly older than the new lad, smoked pipes or cigars;
some appeared inclined to smoke both at once.  The head,
raising his voice that it might be heard above the clatter,
introduced him, and six men came over at once, saying:

“How do, young Stansfield?  Wish you could manage
this for me.”

And the lad found himself in the very thick of it, so to
speak, without a moment’s delay.  Cheering from the
street below came now and again, startling him and causing him to
rush to the windows in the endeavour to
p. 34
ascertain the
cause; gentlemen with silk hats at the backs of their heads ran
up two stairs at a time to ask how things were going, or to give
news of how things were going, bringing tasks or appealing for
them, roaring suggestions or shouting advice, talking privately
in one corner and illustrating their arguments by pencilling
figures on the wallpaper.

At eleven o’clock Mr. Cruttwell took him out, and,
carrying a square brown-paper parcel of cards, he made the
acquaintance of Southwark under lively circumstances.  Mr.
Cruttwell did not seem to know exactly what to be doing, but his
plan was never to cease doing something, and he constantly
appealed to the lad.

“Come along, come along, come along!  Don’t
lag, my boy, don’t lag!” or, “Now then,
slowcoach!  Have you gone to sleep again?  Keep your
eyes open, for goodness’ sake, or we shall never
win!”

A most unfair suggestion, for the only founded charge against
young Stansfield was that he stared at everything going on; shops
arrested him, sandwichmen proved an effective bar to
progress.  In waiting outside a
p. 35
leather merchant’s in St.
Thomas’s Street, a detachment of Borough youths of about
his own age came up with a threatening air.

“Who you for?” they demanded menacingly.

“Find out!” he answered.

“Want your ’ead punched?”

“Yes!” he said.

Disinclined to comply with any request, they conferred amongst
themselves.

“What’s inside that parcel?  What’s
inside that parcel?  Going to tell us, or ain’t
you?”

He began to feel terrified, and looked around for
assistance.  The people who were standing by did not seem to
have any prejudices on one side or the other, and he was
preparing to use his left arm as a guard and the parcel in his
right hand as a weapon, when Mr. Cruttwell fortunately
reappeared.  The lads scampered off.

“You’re a plucky little chap,” said Mr.
Cruttwell, in good humour after his call and slightly more rosy
in complexion.  “Some country youngsters would have
been afraid.”

He proceeded to give a short political lecture as they
strolled back under the arches to Tooley Street, asserting that
the manner
p.
36
in which Stansfield had tackled the Borough lads should
be the method adopted by Great Britain in dealing with
Russia.  Prince Gortschakoff might have counted himself
clever, and was, no doubt, uncommonly wily, but we, too, had men
just as ingenious, and this Gortschy had discovered, and others
would discover to their cost.  Mr. Cruttwell began to use
oratorical gesture, and in one fine sweep of the arm sent the
lad’s bowler hat into the roadway, restoring it with an
apology that made the owner feel on a manly level with the
best.

“Don’t go out to lunch,” said Mr. Cruttwell,
“in case anything crops up.  Send for it, and charge
it to the office!”

*  *  *  *
*

He awoke from these thoughts on hearing his name mentioned,
but some one interrupted with a deferential, “Will you
excuse me, my lord, if I—”  Leaning back, he
went on with the glance over his shoulder at the past.

*  *  *  *
*

Easy to recall everything that stood on the table at the lunch
in Tooley Street, partly because he assisted at the
preparation.
p.
37
Acting under orders, he spread the sheets of a financial
paper and, still obeying commands, accepted a sovereign, and,
scurrying across the roadway, went up the steps, bolted over the
Approach (with a dreadful fear that he might be run down by
twenty omnibuses), and at the hotel made cautious purchases,
rejecting so many cold fowls that the lady who served him called
the manageress, demanding whether, as she had always understood,
the birds were to be sold in chronological order, or whether a
customer was to be permitted to make selection.  The
manageress decided that both parties to the contest were right,
and encouraged the young woman with the reminder that, in view of
the pressure of the day, everything that could be called eatable
would probably be sold out before closing time.

So young Stansfield, taking the parcels and dear life in his
hands, made once more the risky journey across the
Approach.  This over, the skating horses on the descent of
Tooley Street gave him no terrors.

“No, no, no!” whispered one of the other
juniors.  “You mustn’t sit down with them, my
rustic friend.  We shall have to
p. 38
wait on them, and what they leave
we—”  He gave the remainder of the sentence in
pantomime.

“Then I hope they won’t overdo it,” remarked
the lad.  “I begin to feel peckish.”

As lunch proceeded, the juniors cutting bread and filling
glasses, men wearing favours who looked in at the doorway,
crying, “Hallo, hallo!  Feeding-time at the Zoo,
eh?” were immediately invited to take knife and fork and
help themselves, which they did with such enthusiasm that the
juniors were near to the edge of tears, when Mr. Cruttwell stood
up and said:

“Now, then, let’s bustle about, or we shan’t
get our man in!”

The three clerks under twenty appeared to have some idea of
compelling young Stansfield to attend upon them, but he pointed
out that this arrangement would leave nobody to wait upon him,
and he expressed a strong and decided preference for the
principle of share and share alike.  They gave in, robbing
the act of some of its grace by pointing out that this must on no
account be taken as a precedent, and that his good fortune in
beginning London life on such a wonderful
p. 39
day did not
mean that his business career would consist entirely of a
beanfeast.

They also introduced him, rather severely, to certain table
manners which he had not hitherto met, and he found himself
greatly obstructed by a rule which prevented one from holding the
leg of a fowl and dispensing with the assistance of a
knife.  The remains of a very fine old Stilton struck him as
possessing a flavour entirely different from the American or
Dutch to which he had been accustomed at home; the drawback was
that you could not eat much of it.

“Do you smoke, Stansfield?”

“I’m not a slave to it!”

“You soon will be,” they prophesied.
“Find the matches for us.”

As they puffed at their pipes, he read the financial journal
spread upon the table, beginning with a casual attention,
presently becoming interested.  One or two points were dim
to him, and he asked questions, but the others were either not
completely informed, or they preferred to reserve the knowledge
for private use, and they failed to explain to him why, if the
newspaper people were aware that certain investments could
p. 40
not fail to
be remunerative, the newspaper people gave the valuable tip away,
instead of reserving it for their own personal benefit.

The three appeared more at home on another question, and he,
having once drawn Silvio in a Derby sweepstake, could contribute
something to this discussion.  They told him a useful man
was always to be found near the cab-rank in front of the Brighton
Company’s station, to whom a shilling or more could be
safely confided.

The talk on this subject became animated; they gave the new
lad some absolutely safe and certain news concerning a horse
running in the next month, news which had come to them in a
roundabout way, but starting, so they declared, from the brother
of a jockey whose name they mentioned with bated breath.
Young Stansfield suggested it would look well if they were to
affect some engagement on business affairs; but the rest said,
“Not for Joe!”  They, however, agreed, very
handsomely, that he could do as he pleased.

He cleared the table, filled waste-paper baskets with
remnants, set desks in order, placed empty bottles out of the
way.  Thus he proved the only one who was giving any
p. 41
signs of work
when Mr. Cruttwell returned, in a state of some disturbance
because of news he had received concerning the prospects of one
of the two opposition candidates.  Mr. Cruttwell distributed
blame on the others by praising young Stansfield.

“This lad is going to get on in the world!” he
asserted emphatically.  “I flatter myself I’m a
judge of character, and I don’t have to look twice at
anybody.  Simply disgraceful the way you youngsters loaf
about and take no interest in anything but how to avoid
work.  Now then, set to, all of you, and follow his
example.  No wonder trade’s so bad.  I shall be
in again directly, and if I find any of you lolling about I shall
simply—”.

They reproved the lad severely for marring an otherwise
perfect day, and he hastened to inform them he had no more
considerable taste for labour than that which they possessed; his
only idea had been to avoid, by use of ingenuity, the disaster
that had fallen upon them.  He knew as well as they that
nothing was to be gained by a too persistent attention to the
desk, and he hoped time would succeed in persuading them he was
worthy of their companionship.

p. 42
They
gave in reluctantly, and before the seniors returned had given
him some useful hints, which he stored carefully in the recesses
of his brain.

The arrangement made by his mother was that he should reach
Peckham by seven o’clock, and he felt anxious to do this,
for Aunt Mabel was a cheery, irresponsible person who, on her
rare visits to the country, always brought a budget of amusing
songs and some excellent riddles; there seemed good reason to
hope that life at Peckham would be free from the close and rigid
supervision exercised at home.  But the others said the
announcement of the election result would be the event of a
lifetime, something that might never happen again, and he stayed
on till a late hour, enjoying the noisy crowds and the turbulent
rushes, and responding to shouted appeals for three cheers.
When the poll was declared, he joined in the exultant shrieks of
triumph, and a stout old lady from Long Lane insisted upon
teaching him an Irish jig.  Mr. Cruttwell found him, shook
hands heartily, and told him the nation was perfectly sound at
heart.

p. 43
As he
went in the direction of Peckham he found in his pocket the
change given at the International Hotel.  It had not been
asked for, it would probably not now be asked for.  Before
reaching Bricklayers’ Arms he came to the decision to
invest a part, and to back Vendetta.  A wonderful
beginning!

*  *  *  *
*

His name was again mentioned.  He stood up, gripping the
bar in front of him.

“Benjamin Stansfield,” recited the clerk, seated
below the judge, “you are charged for that
you—feloniously and fraudulently—”  A
rumble of words.  “How say you, Benjamin Stansfield:
are you guilty, or not guilty?”

“Guilty!” he replied.

p.
44
IV—SLOW RECOVERY

Mrs. Marchant
offered a pointed
remark concerning the indolent habits of London folk as compared
with the early rising and the continuous industry shown by people
living in the country.  Called by a boy who required a
weekly journal, she, without leaving the pavement, instructed him
to look over the contents of the counter and help himself, adding
a warning that sweets were not to be touched.

“I don’t want to miss nothin’,” she
remarked.

Her neighbour, absorbed in the subject previously under
discussion, replied to the effect that there was not so much
going on in Hayford that one could afford to evade incident.

“I see her blind move,” screamed a small
p. 45
child
excitedly.  “I did!  I see it move, quite
plain.”

Her elders were giving reproof, and pointing out the risks
incurred by children who told stories, when the green venetians
of the first-floor room at the Windmill Inn went up.
Interest in the one street of the village at once
reawakened.  A message was sent to the forge, and Sprules,
the blacksmith, strolled out, drinking tea from a saucer.  A
tall girl stepped from the porch of the inn and whistled several
times, called the word “Fuzzy!” in varying tones of
insistence and appeal.  Banks, the young grocer and draper,
peered through his window over columns of flannel, and then came
to the doorway, where, acknowledging her salutation, he bowed and
blushed.

“Morning, everybody,” she said.  “Any
news?  Has any one—”

“He’s been seen again, miss,” remarked
Sprules, setting down his saucer on a windowsill, and advancing
with respect.  “Old Joe Baldwin were up at four this
morning, and he caught sight of your dog; somewheres, so far as I
understand him, away in that direction.”  Sprules gave
a vague flourish of
p.
46
his bare arm.  “Consequently, you can take it
from me that he ent left the neighbourhood up to the
present.”

The others nodded.

“Unless I find him to-day,” announced the girl
definitely, “I shall have to continue my
journey.”

They made way for Mrs. Marchant.  That lady gave up her
broom to gain more freedom in argument, and stepped forward.

“My dear,” she said, in a motherly way,
“I’m a tidy bit older than what you are, and it
stands to reason I know more of the world.  People come from
far and wide to get my advice, they do, and none can’t ever
complain that I sent ’em empty away.”

The rest gave a murmur that sounded like confirmation.

“Moreover, you’re only a Londoner, and that sort
of hampers you.  My experience, my dear, tells me that it
don’t do to expect everything to ’appen all at
once.  Your dog—or rather the dog belonging to a
gentleman military friend that you was taking charge
of—slips his collar three days ago, whilst your train was
stoppin’ at the station, and makes off.  You, being
tur’bly upset,
p. 47
you gives up your journey, and you
offers ten shillin’ reeward.  On my suggestion, you
next day makes it two pound.  Still acting on my
racommendation, you, the foll’ing day, increases it to
five.”

“That is more than I can really afford.”

“Never you mind ’bout that,” said the other,
with a touch of impatience.  “I’m only
tellin’ you what happened.  I’m a business
woman, and I like to have everything straightfor’ard, and
above board.  I know all that occurs in Hayford, and if you
leave yourself in my hands, you won’t go fur wrong.
Your dog’s been seen, and that ought to be enough for you,
to go on with.”

“If he could only catch sight of me, he’d come
directly.  Fuzzy is as fond of me as he is of his
master.”

“But not near so fond, miss, I lay a pint,”
interposed Sprules, with a wink to the others, “as what his
master is of you.”

She regarded him with a steady gaze; the blacksmith tried to
hum a tune, and failing in this, mentioned it was high time he
went back to finish his breakfast.

“I have been walking around the neighbourhood,”
the girl went on, “every day in the
p. 48
hope of
finding him, and I haven’t succeeded.  To-night, by
the 6.37, I must go on, and—” with a break in her
voice,—“I shall have to face Captain
Stamford.”

“My dear,” said Mrs. Marchant encouragingly,
“you make it ten, and some’ing seems to tell me
you’ll get your dog back.”

“That would mean giving up my holiday,” she
answered doubtfully.  Young Banks, draper and grocer,
stepped forward: some one pulled at his apron.  “But
if you think it will increase the efforts of the villagers,
I’ll do as you suggest.”

“Ten pound,” announced Mrs. Marchant, addressing
the others in tones of authority, “to any one what brings
this lady’s dog back here to The Windmill afore six
o’clock this very evening.”

The small crowd broke up.  Children were sent off to
school, and instructed in audible voices to keep a wary look-out
for Fuzzy.  The constable came from his headquarters at a
neighbouring village, and was told of the increase in the reward;
he went on to communicate the information, far and near.
Mrs. Marchant took the cork from a bottle of red ink and made a
correction in the
p.
49
handwritten bill headed “Lost, Stolen or
Strayed” that rested on a box of caramels in her
window.  At half-past nine the London girl in a brown
costume with a conveniently short skirt and carrying a
walking-stick, left The Windmill and strode off in a northerly
direction, the landlord wishing her, with great heartiness, good
luck in her search; she sang out that she would return for
tea.  Ten minutes’ grace, and a meeting was held near
to the porch of the tavern, with Mrs. Marchant in a standing
position, but obviously in the chair.  She glanced around at
the four men present.

“Some one go for Mr. Banks,” she ordered.

Sprules took charge of the task, and returned with the message
that the young draper and grocer was making up his books; Banks
had suggested the deliberation should go on as though he were
present.

“I don’t want to complain of nobody,”
commented Mrs. Marchant, “but Mr. Banks don’t seem to
take the interest in public affairs like what he ought to
do.  Howsomever,” dismissing this point, “what
we’ve got to consider now is whether we’ve come to
what they call in the newspapers the crucial
p. 50
moment, or
whether we ought to go on a bit further.”

“Young party seems fairly bent on getting away this
evening,” remarked the owner of The Windmill.
“In fact, I may tell you all she’s settled up her
bill.”

“My idea is,” said Sprules, “that
we’ve arrived at the limit.  Enough is as good as a
feast.”

“Is the dog all right?” asked Mrs. Marchant.

“Safe and sound,” replied the blacksmith,
“where it’s been since it first slipped the
collar.  And I hope you won’t none of you forget that
I’ve had to bear the axpense of feeding it.”

“That amounts to a mere trifle,” commented Mrs.
Marchant curtly.  “From what I know of you, Mr.
Sprules, I’ll be bound you ent overdone it.”

“What might you mean by that, ma’am?”

“I mean what I say.”

“A civil question,” persisted Sprules,
“requires a civil answer.”

“You’ve come to the wrong shop for that,”
retorted the lady, with increasing heat.  “When I
speak, I speak plain, I do.  If you
p. 51
must know
what I was driving at it was that, ’cording to all reports,
you’re the only one in your ’ouse who enjoys a hearty
meal.  What you can’t eat, you give to your wife and
the children.”

The proprietor of The Windmill, an experienced man in the
settlement of disputes by arbitration, and one frequently called
upon to decide knotty points (such as the exact height of the
late Lord Randolph Churchill, or the winner of the Oaks in
’94) found some trouble in bringing the discussion back to
the item on the agenda.  Before he succeeded in effecting
this, Sprules had managed to tell Mrs. Marchant what he thought
of her, and Mrs. Marchant told Sprules what she thought of
him.  Even when the original topic was again approached, the
two eyed each other from opposite sides of the pavement; their
lips continued to move without producing words.

“No occasion to quarrel,” said the innkeeper
soothingly.  “The amount ent large enough to justify
that.  When it’s all divided out
equally—”

The tumult recommenced, and Mr. Banks, leaving his books, came
to his doorway, a pen over each ear; he seemed tempted to give up

p. 52
business
for pleasure, but, with an effort, returned to his shop.
This time Mrs. Marchant and Sprules found themselves, by the
sport of circumstances, in agreement; the rest, with the
exception of the proprietor of The Windmill, nodded approval of
their contention.  The Windmill, they argued, had made a
good profit out of the young lady; The Windmill must take this
fact into consideration in formulating its claim.  Fair was
fair, all the world over.  Similarly, right was right, no
matter where you lived.  The proprietor of The Windmill,
almost in tears, declared that his habit was to charge customers
the merest trifle over cost price; an error in addition had, he
told them, been detected by the young lady in settling the
account.  Perceiving that the general sense of the meeting
was against him, he mentioned that he had no desire to become
unpopular, and he therefore left himself in their hands.

“By the by,” remarked some one,
“didn’t the young party buy a couple of old brass
candlesticks from Mr. Banks’s mother?”

The fact had escaped memory, but only this hint was necessary
to recall it.  It was not known how much had been paid for

p. 53
the
articles, but the village felt justified in assuming they were
not given away, and the question was how much ought to be
deducted.  Foreheads took additional wrinkles at the
prospect of mental arithmetic, and Sprules had found, in his
pocket, a short stump of wood which was once a pencil, when Mrs.
Marchant, lowering her voice, made a proposition which instantly
met with a chorus of approval.  Young Banks had taken little
or no share in the whole business; he was evidently entitled to
no share in the profits.  Young Banks, a strict Wesleyan,
had, in the hearing of one, characterised the affair as shady,
and he could scarcely object to being left out.  It was
agreed that nothing should be said to young Banks for the
present, and the meeting broke up with smiles, expressions of
mutual regard, warning fingers that urged secrecy.  A small
sub-committee went to inspect the captive dog at the back of
Sprules’s forge.

Mr. Banks was noticed to be giving instructions at two
o’clock that afternoon to his assistant: a few minutes
later shutters went up and Banks, straw-hatted, and carrying a
light cane, went off, at a good pace, as one determined to enjoy
a long walk.  The
p. 54
assistant, answering inquiries, said
the procedure was in the nature of an experiment, and could be
taken as part and parcel of the Early Closing scheme.  At
four o’clock Sprules brought out Fuzzy, and tied the
defiant-looking Irish terrier to the anvil; in the forge, Sprules
rehearsed to a smoked portrait of Mr. Gladstone, tacked on the
wall, an account of the capture of Fuzzy, to be given to the
young woman upon her return.  Sprules was in the third
repetition of this (for improvements occurred to him) when his
name was called.  He unfastened the dog and took it out,
shading eyes with the disengaged hand from the afternoon sun.

“I’m oncommon glad to inform you, miss, that our
efforts have at last—  Oh, it’s you, Mr.
Banks!”

“Yes,” said the young draper and grocer,
“it’s me.  I happened to meet the lady up near
Watbury, and she asked me to come back here, to save her the
walk, and to see about sending on her portmanteau.
She’s found her dog.”

“She’s done what?”

“You know them nut trees as you go down the hill, on the
left-hand side?  Just beyond
p. 55
the bridge I mean.
Extraordinary pleased about it, she is, naturally.  And
Fuzzy, of course, half off his head at seeing her
again.”

“Mr. Banks,” said the blacksmith, distressedly,
“let’s get this all clear.  Do I onderstand from
you that the dog I’ve got here, at the end of this piece of
string, isn’t the animal the reeward was offered
for?”

“The lady only lost one.”

Sprules rubbed the top of his head.  Mr. Banks patted the
dog, and tried to induce it to stand on its hind legs.

“Then what’s to be done with this yer
animal?  I’ve got no use for him.  ’Sides
which, he tried all he knew just now to bite me.”

“I’ve got an aunt living down the line,”
said young Banks, regarding the dog critically, “and I owe
her a birthday present.  I had intended to give about five
shilling for something.”

“The dog’s yourn!” said the blacksmith
promptly.

Mr. Banks carried the portmanteau off in good time for the
6.37, and the dog, with a label bearing the address of his
relative, went with him.  At the station, he made an
alteration in the wording of the label, and took the
p. 56
ticket for it
that is furnished when a dog accompanies a passenger.  There
were no other customers for the train, and he and the one porter
had an animated discussion concerning the new minister whose name
was on the plan to take up duties shortly.  The train came
in; the porter went to the brake van to see to arriving
luggage.

“You dear old Fuzzy!” cried the girl delightedly,
as the dog with a single bound jumped into her compartment.
“Mr. Banks, how can I thank you, and how much do I owe
you?”  She took charge of the portmanteau, and opened
her purse.

“You don’t owe me nothing,” replied young
Banks, reddening.  The engine whistled.  “But if
you want to pay me, and you think your friend Captain Stamford
wouldn’t object, you might—you might jest blow me a
kiss as the train goes out!”

p.
57
V—LOOSE CASH

A
Prince of Wales
was born, and Mr.
Rollinson re-christened a row of houses which he had
acquired.  The original builder had gone incautiously on a
certain evening in the early part of ’41 to inspect his
property—an act nobody else thought of performing—and
stumbled into one of the numerous holes that lined the
approach.  His widow found herself unable to carry on the
building operations, and Mr. Rollinson, who, owing to popular
prejudice, had just given up a career on the turf and some
profitable transactions near the prize ring, offered her two
hundred pounds ready cash for the lot.

“Could you make it two fifty, Mr. Rollin-son?”

“I’ll make it three hundred, because I like your
manner.”

p.
58
“Oh, you dear good generous soul!” she
cried.

He paid in rather greasy-looking banknotes, and, later on,
married her, and thus secured a return of the amount.

The Albert Edward estate was announced as specially suitable
for newly married people, and these came, in pairs, attracted by
the title and by the health statistics of the neighbourhood; a
few carping critics pointed out that the agreeable figures were
due to the sparsity of the population, but no one troubled to
follow the argument.  Meanwhile Mr. Rollinson ordered that
building should go on with haste to meet the demands of would-be
tenants, who, by an ingenious scheme of payments, became in a
term of years responsible owners of the property, and he only
relinquished the task when children began to arrive and the
dwellings, in consequence, showed signs of wear and tear.
He then went to Finsbury Park, and laid out the Princess Alice
estate; later he proceeded to Hammersmith, and planned and
carried out the Duke of Edinburgh estate.  These houses
might be exhibited at the present day, a tribute to
Rollinson’s loyalty and industry, but for the interference
of borough
p.
59
officials.  By the time these steps were taken, Mr.
Rollinson had disengaged himself from interest in the various
properties, but one can understand the pain given by the action
of the authorities to a man whose official letter paper bore the
heading, “Not for an Age, but for all Time.”

Ernest Napoleon, the son, was born in ’43, and the event
is registered at the church in Hart Street, Bloomsbury; his
father, despite activities concerning new dwellings, preferred to
reside in an older quarter of town.  Mr. Rollinson found
time to take a part in public life, and I have ascertained that
he was one of 170,000 special constables sworn in at the time of
the threatened Chartist riots; unfortunately, on the day of the
meeting at Kennington Common, he was suffering from a slight
headache, and he advised his neighbour, Dr. Fennell, to order him
to stay in bed.  Friendship between himself and his medical
man increased as Mr. Rollinson spoke of his fortunate
investments.

“Want you to do me a great favour, George,” asked
Dr. Fennell, meeting him one day near the Museum.  “My
idea is that I ought very soon to be able to retire, and
cultivate a
p.
60
garden in the country.  But progress in my
profession is slow.”

“You’re as safe as ’ouses,” remarked
Mr. Rollinson,—“safe as some ’ouses, I
mean—providing you’re not fool enough to go in for
speculation.”

“Speculation,” declared the doctor warmly,
“is the last vice I should indulge in.  All I want you
to do, the next time you see a good thing in prospect, is just to
let me come in with you.  I’ve five thousand pounds
put by, and—call me ambitious, or what you will—I
should like to make it ten.  Promise me you’ll do your
best.”

“Can’t guarantee success, mind you!”

“My dear George,” protested the other, “give
me credit for a fair amount of common sense.”

The Great Exhibition was a year or two distant, but
preparations were already being made, and Mr. Rollinson heard of
several investments in regard to it that promised well; a scheme
for obtaining all the printing work sounded so excellent that he
brought it to the notice of his friend; the drawback was that
only five thousand pounds appeared to be required.  On
Fennell’s earnest appeal he
p. 61
agreed to stand aside, and allow the
doctor to take full advantage of the opportunity.

“But don’t you go forgetting that I warned you
there was a risk.”

“Nothing venture, George,” said Fennell
contentedly, “nothing have!”

When the auction took place in Bloomsbury Square, Mr.
Rollinson acting, so it was rumoured, from motives of generosity
towards an old and valued friend overtaken by misfortune, made
arrangements with dealers, and purchased nearly all of Dr.
Fennell’s furniture.  He also bought the remainder of
the lease.  The goodwill he obtained at a fair price, and
sold at another, and the ground floor was let to a new man who
was told to keep the practice going for sixteen or eighteen
years.

“What’s the idea of arranging that, Mr. R.?”
asked his wife respectfully.

“Don’t you ask questions,” he
retorted.  “I’m looking well ahead!”

“If it’s something in store for our boy, I’m
quite satisfied.”

“It is something for my boy, but I don’t care a
hang whether you are satisfied or not.”

“Do you think we ought to get a governess in for him,
Mr. R.?”

p.
62
“I shall take charge of his education, and I
don’t want no one interferin’.  I’m a
going to have him brought up proper, so as he’ll turn out
to be a credit to me, later on.  And, although it’s
got nothing to do with you, I don’t mind mentioning that
trouble will be no object.  No object, whatsoever.
I’ve got along pretty well without much beyond
readin’ and writin’ and figurin’, and it stands
to reason he’ll have a better chance than what I did, if
he’s fitted out more complete.  But don’t you go
putting your spoke in, or else me and you’ll have
words.  Quite enough for you that he’s going to be
brought up to be a doctor and a gentleman.  Especially a
gentleman!”

Although the printing scheme had ended in disaster, owing to
the action of a mysterious gentleman in the City, there were
others of a more solid nature in connection with the Hyde Park
show, and it was said at this time that it was only necessary for
Mr. Rollinson to be mixed up in any transaction to ensure
success, so far as he was concerned.  Some might endure
stabs at the hand of Fortune, but Rollinson always came through
safely.  Oftentimes his name did not appear, and knowing
p. 63
folk
therefore multiplied his gains by twenty to make sure they were
well within the mark.

We are now at ’51.

It was during this year that the boy Ernest first gained
special attention, and caused his father’s pride to
increase.  Mrs. Rollinson, with the improvement in income,
and aided by a dressmaker of Theobald’s Road, cultivated a
definite note in apparel, and her favourite costume was one of a
tartan pattern, full in the flounces and so tightly stayed at the
waist that the poor lady’s complexion was sometimes
scarlet, sometimes purple.  At the start, she had, for
motives of economy, herself made the child’s clothes, but
the boy reported to his father that these, by reason of their
amplitude—

“You must allow for growing,” urged his
mother.

—These caused him to become the object of ridicule, and
his father at once put a stop to home manufactures.  Ernest,
thereafter, during Exhibition year, wore suits of velvet with
frilled knickerbockers, and a stiffly carded cap with a blue
tassel dependent, and his appearance extorted nothing but
admiration as he walked, hand-in-hand with
p. 64
his father,
along the transept of Mr. Joseph Paxton’s great building of
glass.  The boy had been furnished with several facts and
arguments in connection with the place, and these he recited in a
clear, distinct voice.

“Looking around, dear papa, at this striking scene, it
seems impossible to think that war will again occur in our
time.”

And,

“I believe this immense building covers twenty acres of
ground, and is no less than two thousand feet long.  Please
correct me, papa, if I am in error.”

Quite distinguished-looking ladies and gentlemen took notice
of the boy’s intelligence, and some gave him fourpenny
pieces, patting him on the cap, and telling him he was a fine
little fellow; a well-known politician prophesied of him, on one
occasion, that he would grow up to be an Englishman in the best
sense of the word.  You can imagine Mr. Rollinson’s
delight at these compliments, and the satisfaction in finding his
own views confirmed from responsible quarters.  It was his
method, in regard to domestic affairs, to ascertain Mrs.
Rollinson’s wishes and then to give instructions that the
exact opposite
p.
65
should be adopted, but, returning home after one of
these gratifying afternoons in Hyde Park, he took the unusual
course of inviting her to his study, where, in smoking-cap and
dressing-gown (a change from the restraint of out-door clothes)
he bade her take the easy-chair, whilst he himself stood near the
empty fireplace and leaned an elbow on the mantelpiece, in an
attitude imposed by more than one artist upon the Prince
Consort.

“You will no doubt say, Mrs. Rollinson,” he
remarked, “that making money as I do now, and not doing
much work for it, we ought to go on a steppin’ up the
ladder.  Allow me to remind you that sometimes I don’t
retain all the cash I receive.  Sounds peculiar, but
it’s a fact.  I find the money that takes the most
trouble to get is the money that stays with me longest.
Putting that all aside, your view, womanlike, is that we’ve
only got one life to live in this world, whatever ’appens
to us in the next, and that we’re entitled to make the most
of it.  You’ll tell me that we both of us had a hard
time in the early days, and we’re justified in claiming our
reward.  And mind you, there’s something in your
argument.”

p. 66
Mrs.
Rollinson, much astonished at this commendation of her presumed
opinions, could find no words either to protest or to
agree.  She smoothed her crimped hair and bowed.

“But perhaps,” he went on in the same amazing
tones of deference, “perhaps you won’t mind if I
point out that we’re living now in a very fair state of
comfort.  We have roast meat every other day; if you feel
inclined to go now and again to see Mr. Wigan at the St.
James’s, why, you’ve only got to say so.  And
this brings me to the point of what I’m talking
about.  Why shouldn’t we go on as we’re going
now, not wasting money specially, not ’oarding it to any
special degree, but going a reg’lar buster in regard to the
boy?  Giving him chances that his father never had, seeing
that he has every opportunity of growing up so that he can take
his place amongst the ’ighest of the land?  Now then,
Mrs. R.!  If you’ve got anything further to remark on
the subject, here’s the time to say it, or ever after hold
your peace.”

“Sometimes,” she ventured to remark,
“you’ve pitched into me and told me I was spoiling
him.”

p.
67
“There’s a right way of doing it,” he
retorted, “and a wrong way of doing it.”

“And you’ve said, more than once, that to make a
man of him he ought to go through the mill, same as what you
did.”

“There again, there’s two ways open.”

“If you can find the right way, Mr. R., I’m
perfectly agreeable.”

“You’re a wise woman,” he declared,
“although very often you manage to conceal the fact.
And I promise you faithfully that if you leave it all to me, you
won’t have no reason to be sorry!”

Ernest grew up tall, slim, good-looking, and with fair, curly
hair; it was therefore reckoned impossible to make him a
doctor.  Apart from this, he showed no special intelligence,
and at the new military college at Sandhurst the masters said
caustically it was a pity the lad had not been born in America,
for then the Civil War there would have been of very short
duration.  Discouraged by these comments, Ernest, of his own
accord, left the College, thus depriving the British army of his
services, and, coming back to town, took rooms in Jermyn Street,
and mentioned to his father and mother that he proposed to look
about
p. 68
him,
a task which it is well known cannot be done in a hurry.
Money was supplied from Bloomsbury Square, and it appeared to
have some peculiar quality, for it all slipped through
Ernest’s fingers with the greatest possible ease.
Having, in spite of his defects, an amiable disposition, he soon
found acquaintances, mainly amongst other men who were also
looking about, and when they discovered he had money at his
command, and that his cheques were always—after sometimes a
brief delay—honoured, their admiration of his qualities
knew no bounds.

“You’ve got a simple manner,” they said,
“but, by gad, underneath that there’s any amount of
cunning and cleverness.”

“Really think so?” inquired Ernest, pleased.

“Enough for ten ordinary people,” they
declared.  “Got a fi’pun note about
you?”

Also, they gave him sound advice in regard to keeping well in
with the governor: a dinner was arranged at a club to which one
of them belonged, and, at the expense of Ernest, Mr. Rollinson
was entertained, and made much of; Wilner (who had been twice
through the Bankruptcy Court, using up several pails of
p. 69
whitewash and
coming out not quite clean)—Wilner made a speech, proposing
old Rollinson’s health, declaring that their guest was one
of the bulwarks of the nation, and that his well-equipped son
would, later on, when he had finished looking about, become one
of the foremost men in the State.  Privately, Wilner told
Mr. Rollinson that all our best politicians had sown their wild
oats in early days, and gave an amusing and little-known anecdote
concerning a member of the Cabinet.

“What he wants,” said old Rollinson, glancing at
his son, “is concentration, if you know what it means,
sir.”

“That will grow on him,” remarked the other
lightly.  “All he has to do just now is to make plenty
of friends.  And it isn’t for a mere amateur like
myself to give advice to an experienced man of the world like
George Rollinson—”

Oddly enough, the term had never before been applied to
him.  Old Rollinson fixed his cigar at a more rakish
angle.

“But if I were you, I should see that, for a year or two
at any rate, he was not stinted of money.”  Wilner
gazed reflectively at his glass of claret.
“I’ve seen so many
p. 70
youngsters, fine, promising,
delightful lads, go to the deuce just for want of a few paltry
hundreds.  And you needn’t begrudge it, you
know.  By all accounts you make it easily enough.”

The rest of the dinner-party, once they had, as Wilner neatly
phrased it, put off the old man, went to the Argyll Rooms, and
later to Bob Croft’s in the Haymarket (no use in going to
Croft’s until midnight), where Ernest insisted upon playing
the harp, with the aid of his walking-stick; when the police came
to make their usual nightly round, Ernest demanded the company of
the Inspector in the Varsoviana.  Wilner and the others were
satisfied with the efforts of their pupil and allowed him, at his
special request, to pay for everything.  This was the
occasion when Ernest lighted a cigar with one of the notes given
to him by his father, and found some difficulty in making the
paper burn.

There were times when Ernest, troubled with remorse and a
severe headache, spoke of giving it all up, and returning to
Bloomsbury Square; the bodyguard had to use their best powers of
derision.  An accusation of want of pluck generally proved
effective; later, a slip of the pen on the part of Ernest gave
them
p. 71
a
better hold, and they had only to draw his attention to the
punishment awarded by the law for forgery.  Old Rollinson
fell ill, in consequence of a chill sustained on the steamboat
returning from Greenwich after his new doctor had ordered him a
sea voyage, and the remittances stopped.  A new and
promising-looking pigeon flew into the district of the Circus;
Wilner and his colleagues dropped the acquaintance of Ernest, who
could find no better companion than a wise young housemaid at
Jermyn Street.  The girl gave him good advice and went with
him to Bloomsbury Square, waiting at the railings whilst he
entered to see his father, to make frank avowals, and to
impersonate the prodigal son.  He came out in less than half
an hour, and it seemed at once evident that the fatted calf was
still alive.

“Says I’ve disappointed him,” reported
Ernest tearfully, “and that he never wants to see me
again.  Declares he did his best for me, and all I’ve
done has been to spend nearly every penny he gained, and
there’s nothing to show for it, excepting a
good-for-nothing, broken-down young man.  And mother agreed
with him.”

p.
72
“Appears to me,” remarked Helen, “some
one is going to have the responsibility of looking after
you.”

“I wish you’d marry me.”

“That will be about the best plan,” she
agreed.

Ernest Rollinson died in ’64, and soon after the old
people went.  Young Mrs. Rollinson, putting her baby boy
away with some working people in Clerkenwell, entered service
again.

A Home for Indigent Bookmakers found itself benefited by the
terms of the Bloomsbury Square will; nothing was left to the
son’s family, in spite of the device used in christening
the baby.  Helen worked hard in her good situation and saved
money, paying the folk in Corporation Lane weekly, and now and
again snatching an hour off to see her boy.  She was there
one afternoon in December watching with amusement his celebrated
impersonation of a policeman on the track of a Fenian (he had
some new piece of cleverness each time she paid her furtive
visits) when a tremendous clatter came from the wall of the
prison opposite, the house trembled, plaster of the ceiling fell
in a thick white shower, and then the place collapsed.
Helen
p.
73
Rollinson found herself pulled out of the débris
and screamed loudly for her George; they brought to her a maimed
child, and she, almost demented, was nursing the poor thing in
the confusion of the street, and begging it not to die, when
Master George himself trotted up, safe and sound, demanding of
his mother whether she had noticed the splendid fireworks.
She placed the injured child in the hands of one of the doctors,
heard that the woman of the house was not expected to recover,
and rushed away with her boy from the disastrous scene.

“Well for you, Helen,” said her excellent
mistress, “that you are able to show me your marriage
lines, otherwise it would be my duty, as a strict Churchwoman, to
turn you out of the house, neck and crop.  As it is, you
have practised deceit on me, and I am afraid we must look upon
this dreadful affair at Clerkenwell as a judgment for your
sin.”

“They seemed to suspect some Irish people,
ma’am.”

“Heaven has its own way of punishing evil-doers,”
declared the lady, “and it isn’t for us to question
its methods.  You cannot stay here any longer.”

p.
74
“I must find another situation, I s’pose,
ma’am.  But I shan’t get such a good one as
this.”

“Deceit,” insisted the other, “is one of the
things that must, on no account, be encouraged.  What is
your boy like?”

The child, brought from the kitchen, repeated for the benefit
of Helen’s mistress his account of the explosion, a
performance that had been well received downstairs.  The
lady was impressed.

“A clever boy,” she said.  “Would you
like me to adopt him, Helen, and thus leave you free?”

“I’d rather starve than let him go away from me
again.”

“Supposing, then,” said the lady, getting over her
surprise at this attitude, “supposing I set you up in a
small business of some kind; will you promise me never to be
deceitful again?”  Helen gave the required guarantee,
and her mistress put the small boy through a viva-voce
examination; his replies concerning the award meted out to
naughty people fortunately coincided exactly with the
lady’s own views.

Helen Rollinson, widow of Ernest Rollinson,
p. 75
and mother of
George Rollinson, saw her name painted over a shop in Southampton
Row, with the words added, on either side of the main
inscription, “Newsagent” and
“Tobacconist”; she let the rooms above, giving some
personal attendance, used the apartment at the back of the shop
as a living-room whence she could see when a customer entered,
occupied spare moments by making clothes for George, preparing
necessary meals, and telling him to be a good lad.  She
slept for about six hours every night, giving the remaining
eighteen to hard work, and to the considerable task of minding
her own business.  Mr. Forster carried his Education Act
just in time to enable George to take advantage of it, and the
boy was one of the earliest to pay sixpence a week and become a
pupil of the State at a superior school; in his spare time he
delivered newspapers and ran errands, sometimes going so far as
the City and making use of the new Viaduct at Holborn; he was at
first terrified by these important missions, but overhearing his
mother speak of him to a customer as a boy who knew his way
about, he determined to keep his fears to himself, and to
overcome them.  Moreover, there was
p. 76
the knowledge
that undertakings of the kind, perilous as they might be, saved
expense.  Mrs. Rollinson watched every penny, every
halfpenny, and spoke with genuine regret when disbursements had
to be made to the Parcels Delivery Company.

“Throwing away good money!” she declared.

She explained to George, in answer to his question, a theory
she held in regard to the coinage of the United Kingdom, and he
embodied these views in an essay at school the following
morning.  His teacher, greatly diverted, read the paper
aloud to the class, and the boys followed the lead, glad of an
excuse for boisterous amusement.  George flushed, and kept
his head down.  It gives some notion of the difficulties
experienced by the State in its early days of keeping school when
I mention that George ranged himself on the side of his parent,
and declined to accept the opinions of educational authorities;
the teacher, noting his attitude, spoke to him later in the
playground, and assured him again that his argument was based
upon error.  Money, said the teacher, was manufactured at a
place called the Mint situated east of the
p. 77
City; the
gold coins were actual value, whilst the rest were called tokens,
representing a value only by agreement.  Notes were made on
special paper, and printed under the supervision of the Bank of
England.  To write, as George Rollinson had done, that there
were two kinds of money, one dry and the other slippery, one easy
to retain and the other impossible to keep, was to make an
assertion that, in the light of facts, could not possibly be
supported.

“So get that nonsensical idea out of your head, my
lad,” advised his teacher earnestly, “as soon as you
possibly can.  You have a good deal to learn yet,
remember.”

On most subjects George accepted the instructions of the
representatives of the State, bringing home to Southampton Row
items of geographical information and snips of historical news;
his mother nodded approvingly and hinted that all the particulars
had once been learnt by her, but, owing to pressure of other
matters, forgotten.  When the boy asked about his father she
constructed for his encouragement, and her own content, an ideal
man, dogged, wise, and industrious, never wasting a moment of
valuable time,
p.
78
always thrifty.  Upon George inquiring why, in
these circumstances, they had not been left more comfortably off,
she fell back on her old theory regarding cash, and told him in
conclusion that little boys who did not ask too many questions
would find their appropriate reward in not being told too many
lies.

The profits of the business were small, but they were
sure.  The newspaper and magazine side increased slightly
year by year with nothing in the nature of a set-back, excepting
the occasional defalcation of some customer with a poor memory,
and lightly furnished in the way of luggage.  Mrs.
Rollinson, when the lad was of a sufficient age, showed him the
results of the business, and George said they ought to sell
letter paper at the tobacco counter, seeing that the figures
there were stationary.  Mrs. Rollinson gave this remark as
“George’s latest” to a customer, a short,
clean-shaven man, who patronised the shop for lucifer matches,
and the customer pronounced it good; later, in calling, he
mentioned he had worked it into a burlesque at the Strand Theatre
where he was playing, and that it went fairly well.  He
added that he had never yet found the perfect tobacco, and
p. 79
now almost
despaired of doing so; described the different flavours which he
desired.  George, listening from the shop parlour, asked
permission of his mother to make a few experiments; she gave her
consent, on the understanding that there should be no
waste.  The results, tried in the celebrated actor’s
pipe, gained emphatic approval, and George suggested a letter
should be written from the Theatre embodying these compliments
and bearing a signature.  The letter was framed, set in the
window.  Within a week Mrs. Rollinson found herself
compelled to engage the services of an assistant on the tobacco
side, a worthy, well-favoured man who thenceforth for many years,
in accepting his wages on Saturday nights, made a proposal of
marriage to her.  Mrs. Rollinson declined, in set form, on
the grounds that she wished to look after George.

“Very well then,” he would say resignedly.
“Then I s’pose I must wait.”

On a Saturday when George brought a young lady from High
Street, Marylebone, to the shop, and introduced her to his mother
with the remark, “I want you two to be friends!” Mrs.
Rollinson, greatly
p.
80
upset, perturbed the assistant by giving in reply to the
usual question an unusual answer.  He went out of the shop
in a dazed condition, and on the Monday morning a letter came
from him, stating that, on reflection, he decided he was unworthy
of the great honour, and he hoped Mrs. Rollinson would not mind
if, instead, he sailed for Canada.

“It’s all for the best!” said Mrs.
Rollinson.  After going to chapel twice on the intervening
Sunday, she was regarding the possibility of the engagement of
her son with greater calm.  “George will have to work
harder, and I’m good for several years yet.  We shall
rub along all right.  He needn’t get married until
he’s thirty.  It’s quite fashionable nowadays
for gentlemen to wait until they’re getting on in
life.”

She told him that her first criticism of the girl had been
made on the impulse of the moment: she now begged to withdraw the
word “minx” and to substitute a more flattering
noun.

“Very glad to hear you say that, mother.
She’s a girl with most wonderful ideas in her
head.”

p.
81
“That doesn’t matter,” replied Mrs.
Rollinson tolerantly, “so long as she leaves them
there.”

“What I mean is, extraordinarily ambitious.”

“I’m like that, too,” she remarked.
“I’ve set my ’eart on having the front of the
shop done up this spring.  Me and her will get on capitally
together.  Make your mind quite easy.  She can come
here every Christmas day and now and again on Sundays—but
not too often—and when eventually you get married, why, if
all goes well, I’ll retire and I’ll leave you the
business.  Can’t say fairer than that, can
I?”

“Mother,” the lad blurted out, “she wanted
it to be a secret for a time, but I can’t keep it back from
you.  We’re married already!”

“No, George, my boy.  That isn’t true,
surely!”

“I take all the responsibility,” he went on,
“but she said it was no use letting the grass grow under
our feet.”

“I wish,” said Mrs. Rollinson aside, to the negro
figure in the corner, “that grass was growing over her
head!”

p. 82
This
was the final word of a vehement nature that George’s
mother used in regard to her daughter-in-law.  When she took
some of the furniture, and rode away on the tail of the van to
Chalk Farm, she told the middle-aged man with the green baize
apron that there was nothing like retiring from business whilst
one was still capable of enjoying life: to the lady who owned the
house where the furniture was unloaded she mentioned, in taking
possession of the two rooms on the ground floor, that her only
visitors would be her son and her son’s wife; she hoped
they would be in and out of the place frequently.  Mrs.
Rollinson gave a short, enthusiastic description of the bride and
remarked that she already looked upon the girl as her own
daughter.

“It’ll be a comfort to me, ma’am,”
said the landlady mournfully, “to have a merry party about
the house.  The only thing is—I don’t mean
anything personal—but I’ve generally found that when
parties were cheerful, they turned out to be rather bad
payers.”

Mrs. Rollinson produced her pass-book; exhibited figures
showing the balance to her credit.

p.
83
“That’s good enough,” said the other,
with something like rapture.  She was leaving the room, but
curiosity detained her at the edge of the carpet.
“You must have had some rare strokes of luck, in your day,
ma’am!”

Mrs. Rollinson shook her head resolutely.
“It’s all been saved out of hard work,” she
declared.

“I was half hoping,” remarked the landlady,
relapsing into gloom, “it was a case of easy come, easy
go!”

The expected callers did not arrive on the first Sunday
afternoon, although tea was prepared, crumpets ready, and Mrs.
Rollinson had rehearsed several amiable speeches to be addressed
to her daughter-in-law.  So soon as it became dusk she
walked down to Southampton Row, and from the opposite side of the
roadway took a view.  The shop was shuttered, and, alarmed
by this—Sunday evening was one of the best times for
receipts—she crossed, and read the notice.  Retail
Department Closed, said the bills.  Central Office of the
English Tobacco Syndicate.  Branches all over the
Country.  Capital—and here so many figures (mainly
noughts) that Mrs. Rollinson could not reckon them.

p.
84
“Slippery money,” she said, on the way
home.  She paid the cabman in threepenny pieces, and he
remarked that she might as well also hand over the offertory
bag.

Young Mrs. George Rollinson delayed her call for nearly two
years, and then she had no occasion to pay a fare; her manner
when, on leaving Chalk Farm, she said to the coachman—

“Home, Watson!”

—Was, in itself, proof of the ease with which cultured
habits can be acquired by those who set their minds to the
task.  Before going she, prefacing by the remark that she
had called for a quiet chat, spoke at length and with great
rapidity.  They were living, George and herself, up West;
Mrs. Rollinson observed that the exact address was not tendered,
and a return call was evidently unnecessary.  The present
scheme was going on remarkably well, astonishingly well,
amazingly well, and young Mrs. Rollinson had special cause for
gratification in that it originated with her.  For various
reasons that her mother-in-law would not understand, if
explained, the present scheme had taken the place of the old one,
and a still newer one was in contemplation.  George
p. 85
and his City
friends knew how to manage these affairs to the best
advantage.  Unfortunately, it seemed likely the public might
exhibit a certain reticence when the new idea was submitted to
them, and investors would only become eager when they discovered
that the shares, or most of them, had been privately
subscribed.  Just as many people only wanted to go to
theatres where the notice “House Full” was exhibited,
so some did not apply for shares unless they anticipated
difficulty in procuring them.

“And George,” said young Mrs. Rollinson,
refastening her fur coat, “is anxious to show he had not
forgotten you, and he asked me to say that, for the sake of old
times, he is quite willing to let you take up—”

“You tell George,” interrupted his mother,
“that whenever the time arrives that he wants to be kept
out of the workhouse, he can come along to me!”

I think I said something in approval of young Mrs.
Rollinson’s manner of giving instructions to her
coachman.  To be exact, it ought to be mentioned that there
was a distinct trace of asperity in her tones.

Young Mrs. Rollinson said “Home,
p.
86
Watson!” on a good many occasions, and at various
places, before the one evening when she gave to the coachman a
different destination; the two well-matched horses broke down the
austere behaviour of a life-time by winking at each other.
George arrived at Chalk Farm by yellow omnibus, that night, after
his mother had gone to rest in the back room; she came out with
no indication of surprise, and started at once to make up a bed
for him on the sofa.  He seemed inclined to retain
possession of his silk hat, partly that he might gaze into it as
he gave halting explanations, but his mother wrested this from
him, and ordered him to make himself at home.

“I never heard for certain,” she said, when he had
come to an end of the list of disasters, “but are there any
children?”

George shook his head negatively.

“That’s just as well,” she remarked, with
cheerfulness.  “Now promise me, George, before we
settle anything else: don’t divorce her.”

“I’m willing to give you my word,
mother.”

“Good!” she said.  “That means the
trouble is over.  No more Rollinsons will have to undergo
the test.  Other people will, but
p. 87
not a Rollinson.  Something
seems to tell me that I shall out-live you, and I shall make it
my business to see that you earn honestly every penny you
require.”

The single worry that came later was when Merry Hampton won
the Derby.  Mrs. Rollinson allowed George one speculation a
year in the form of a half-crown ticket for a sweep-stake;
prospects of success appeared sufficiently remote.  George,
on the canal bridge in High Street, was exhibiting to a friend
his winnings when the sovereigns slipped through his fingers, and
disappeared in the water below.  The friend, taking the
situation with great good-humour, remarked that it looked like a
case of
felo s. d.

p.
88
VI—PRICE OF JAMES McWINTER

They
came separately, and rather
stealthily, to the restaurant in Little Compton Street, giving a
cautious look up and down the street before entering.  Many
folk in Soho wear the brims of soft hats flattened down over
eyes, carry hands deep in overcoat pockets, and walk close to
shop windows, hesitating slightly before turning a corner.
The restaurant patrons did not belong to this type.  Some of
the early-comers spoke to a constable, and said, exhibiting an
envelope, because they mistrusted their French accent:

“Which do you reckon now is my best way to get to this
address?”

The policeman, pointing a gloved hand to the large window that
had muslin curtains of the previous summer, replied:

“If you ain’t careful, sir, it’ll bite
you.”

The constable, after the first inquiries, was
p. 89
able to
recognise the type and, interrupting the question, indicated the
doorway silently with a nod of his helmet without interrupting
the task of slapping his shoulder; he mentioned to an anxious
younger colleague who came up and put an inquiry that they were
not in his opinion so much Anarchists as country gents out on the
spree.  Inside the Restaurant Chicot the head waiter had
also gained experience, and, as the visitors arrived, he said,
“Mr. Aumairst, yes?” and with a bow led the way to a
long table, that had originally been three, at the end of the
large room.  Chairs leaned forward in the attitude of saying
grace, and these were pulled back by the head waiter, whilst a
short page-boy stood on tiptoe to assist the guests in removing
overcoats, mufflers, and hats.  Guarded
salutations—“Hullo, Burnham, old man!  What sort
of an east wind blew you in here?”—and newcomers
examined the menu card with a puzzled air, giving it all up after
a cursory examination excepting the plum-pudding item, and joined
the rest in taking a seat and in looking over the shoulder.

“I’d no notion we were to be all of us
invited.  What’s the idea?”

p.
90
“H. A.” was the reply, in confident
tones.  “H. A. knows what he’s up to.”

“I quite feel that about him.  Apart from liking to
show off, and not being able to afford to do it, old Amherst is
no fool.  But whilst I know that he knows what he’s up
to, I can’t say that I always know what he knows about
knowing—  See what I mean, don’t you?  Is
this him, in the Russian-bear costume?”

Mr. Amherst, in a brand-new fur-lined overcoat, was scarcely
the man to deprive the public of a full view of it, and he
resisted the page-boy’s attempt to take possession at the
door.  Diners at other tables glanced up.  Two matronly
ladies at the corner said something in a foreign language and
suspended the rule which orders that one should not laugh at
one’s own jokes.  Men gave their closer attention to
the trim young figure in a small sealskin cap and warm costume
who followed so soon as Mr. Amherst’s whirling arms made it
safe to do so.

“Gentlemen,” he said, advancing to the long table,
with the air of making a speech, “I have to apologise for
being somewhat late on the Rialto, so to speak, but—
You’ve
p.
91
met my daughter.  Waiter, another
chair!”  They rose, and she nodded pleasantly, giving
to one her muff, another her cloak, a third her gloves.
“I particularly wanted her to come along, and it occupied
some little time to induce her to obey my request.
She’s all I’ve got now, you see.”  He sat
down heavily at the top of the table.  “Now then, my
lad,” to the attendant, in a pained manner, “we all
seem to be waiting, except you.  How much longer before the
soup comes?”

Miss Amherst, at the other end of the table, explained to
neighbours that her father’s account was inexact in certain
particulars.  What had really happened was that she found he
intended her to stop at the hotel and dine alone.

“He generally gets his own way,” remarked one.

“Not if it happens to differ from mine,” she
said.

“Did he tell you, by any chance,” lowering voices,
and speaking confidentially, “what the motive was for
asking us all here this evening?”

“I understood it was that you should eat a
dinner.”  They shook their heads to convey
p. 92
that the
information was not complete, and followed her lead in the
management of the whitebait.

Near Mr. Amherst, the talk, managed and directed by him, was
devoted to the political situation.  The host submitted a
practical method of solving the difficulty of which he spoke as
one owning the patent rights; put more briefly than he explained
it, it was to convey the principal members of the party with
which he was not in agreement to Newgate on a convenient Monday
morning, and hang them, one after the other.  Near Miss
Amherst conversation was on a less remote subject, and her
admirable acquaintance with details enabled them to speak
freely.  Once she disputed a question concerning the
Tottenham Hotspurs, and, obtaining silence by rapping a spoon,
submitted it for decision to her father.

“My dear,” he answered deferentially, “we
don’t want to talk shop.  Not just yet awhile, at any
rate.”

His guests glanced meaningly at each other.

“Good gracious!” he cried, to a good-looking
waiter with a large black moustache
p. 93
and a head of hair like a clothes
brush, “what are you standing there gazing at me in such a
melancholy way for?”

“Ver’ sorry,” said the young waiter.

“You look it!”

His nearest guests applauded the wit and readiness of the
retort.  Other tables cleared; folk hurried off to
theatres.  The head waiter ordered the moustached youth to
turn off some of the lights.

“Now, gentlemen!”  Mr. Amherst, leaning
elbows on the table as coffee and liqueurs were served, cleared
his throat, and sent a commanding glance up and down.
“My dear”—to his daughter, who was looking at
the waiter—“have I your attention?”

“Not yet, father.”

“The presence of a lady,” he said to the others,
“need not interfere with the flow of conversation.  I
want you to make yourselves thoroughly at home, and do just as
you please.  We can wish each other a happy New Year later
on in the evening.  But first of all there’s one small
matter I wish to bring before your notice.”  They put
hands to ears, in the attitude of men anxious to gain every
word.  He leaned back in his chair and came
p. 94
forward once
more; his chin went out and he fired a name down the table.
They twisted chairs promptly in his direction.

“Yes,” gratified by their astonishment, “big
game, I admit, but it’s what I’m after.  Other
clubs may be on the same track, and therefore what we want first
of all is absolute secrecy.  If you’re prepared to
back me up I’ll promise to see it through, but there must
be no cackle, no chatterboxing, no talking to wives, or what
not.  Not a single word uttered away from this
table.”

“They won’t let him go.”

“Who said that?”  The others, much in the
manner of schoolboys, indicated Burnham.

“I believe,” said Mr. Amherst—“set me
right if I’m wrong—but I believe I’m
Chairman.  Unless I’m woefully mistaken, I was made
Chairman about four years ago, at a time when the club was right
out on the rocks.  It had got a past, but no present.
If my memory serves me right, I made it a small present.  I
bought shares when no one else was prepared to do so.  And
since that time, what has the club done?”  He put out
the fingers of one hand and prepared to recite the
successes.  His daughter coughed.

p.
95
“I was only going to run through the list, my
dear.”

“You can save yourself the trouble,” she said.

“Now, having arrived at this point,” addressing
the table, “I ask myself the question, where are we
weak?  Where are we deficient?  Where are
we—”

He was so much annoyed at their impatience in anticipating him
by giving the answer, that he found himself obliged to apply a
match to his cigar, which was still alight.

“Very well, then,” reluctantly.
“Discovering this, I look around and I endeavour to find
out the best man available.”

“Mr. Pangbourne,” said Burnham, taking heart,
“would no more think—”

Mr. Amherst snapped finger and thumb.

“That for Master Willie Pangbourne,” he
shouted.  “No, no,” irritably, to the moustached
waiter, “I didn’t call you.  Go away and catch
flies.  I think, gentlemen,” turning to the others,
“that when I tell you I’ve known young Pangbourne
since he was so high, and that not long ago I had to order him
out of my house—”

“Did he go?” asked the quiet voice at the other
end.

p.
96
“In point of fact he didn’t go, Mary, my
dear; but I distinctly ordered him to go.  I don’t
mind a young man differing from me about politics, but
there’s a way of doing it.  What I want to say is that
Pangbourne isn’t everybody.  I can bring influence to
bear on his directors.  I’ve been accustomed to
opposition all my life, and I’m not afraid of it.  The
only question is,”—he took a pear from the glass dish
and shook it threateningly—“how to raise the
money.”

The guests glanced at each other and became intent upon
cigars.  One or two wetted fingers and adjusted an unbroken
leaf, thus escaping the inquiring look sent by Mr. Amherst.

“Tell you what,” he cried, “I’ll put
down a trifle to make a start.”  He called to the
waiter and said in a loud, distinct voice,
“Onker.”  The other seemed puzzled, and the girl
translated.  The waiter brought ink, and on it being pointed
out, somewhat bitterly, that this, by itself, was of little use,
found pen and paper.

“There you are,” said Mr. Amherst jovially.
“Now pass it down this side and up the other.  This is
a tiled meeting, remember.”  He sat back and gazed at
some cupids painted
p.
97
high up on the walls; the models apparently engaged
after they had dined at the restaurant.  A nudge presently
at his elbow told him the list had returned.  He put on his
pince-nez and inspected it.  “Henry Amherst,
£50,” was the first item; the only other entry was in
pencil, “Mary Amherst, threepence.”

“And this,” he said bitterly, “is, I
suppose, what you call backing up the Chairman.  Well,
you’re the best judges of your own actions.  I never
dictate to other people.”

A murmur indicated doubt.

“Idea seems to be, sir,” mentioned Burnham,
“that we ought to leave well alone.”  A few shy
“Hear hears.”  “We’re very much
obliged to you, Mr. Amherst, for your kind hospitality, and
we’ve enjoyed meeting at your festive board—if I may
be allowed to use such an expression at this time of the
year—but you must understand we’ve none of us got
money to throw away.  We’re devoted to footer, same as
you are, and we’ve planked down as much as we could
afford.  We’re pretty safe to cut a very fair figure
this year, and—”

“Burnham,” interrupted Mr. Amherst,
p.
98
“you’ll excuse me, but perhaps you
don’t mind if I just say one syllable.”  He
appeared to be under the impression that his voice had not
hitherto been heard.  “I’ve a great respect for
you.  You’ve got a shop in the borough that
you’ve worked up from small beginnings, and, so far as I
know, you’ve always paid your way.”

“Come on,” said Burnham desperately.
“Let’s hear what you are going to say on the other
side.”

“What I’m going to say on the other side is simply
this.  That, with all your estimable qualities, I’ve
never, for a single, solitary moment, looked on you as anything
but a fool.”

“Father,” reminded the girl, “these
gentlemen are your guests.”

“If you are so jolly keen on it,” said Burnham,
with spirit, “and if you particularly want to strengthen
our team next season, why don’t you put all the money down,
and buy James McWinter for us?”

Mr. Amherst struck the table with the side of his large
fist.

“Just,” he declared emphatically, “just
exactly what I intend to do.”

p. 99
The
waiter came forward in the character of a hat-stand, and Mr.
Amherst, grabbing at the nearest, found his irritation in no way
lessened on discovering that it was headgear of insufficient
size.  Mary Amherst, turning to the waiter who stood now
arms filled with overcoats, remarked pleasantly that a night like
this must surely make him think of the clear blue skies and the
dazzling sunshine of his native country; the waiter appeared to
have acquired some of the useful idioms of the country, for he
said in appealing undertones, “Half-time,
half-time!”  The head waiter came with the bill, which
Mr. Amherst, in his annoyance, had forgotten.  Miss Amherst
was called upon to check the addition, and it became her duty to
point out that the head waiter had by an excusable oversight in
making a total reckoned the date at the top.  This remedied,
with profuse apologies, the party was conducted to the
doorway.

“Also I don’t mind telling you,” said her
father, speaking outside as though no interval had occurred since
his last decisive remark, “exactly how much I’m
prepared to go up to.”  He named a figure.
“Not a farthing more,” he declared resolutely.
“What’s that, my dear?”

p.
100
“Only saying, father, that I was quite sure you
couldn’t afford it.”

“That is my business, Mary.”

“It was the business I was thinking about.”

Mr. Amherst, never one to allow pasture land to flourish
extensively under his boots, wrote a letter that night, posted it
at the corner of Trafalgar Square, and walked three times around
the pedestal of the Nelson Statue, partly because he had a great
belief in the value of exercise, partly to enjoy the thought that
he had, in sending the note, started the ball a-rolling.
Coming into the hotel he was told by the porter that Miss Amherst
had retired to rest, and he went upstairs humming
cheerfully.  The porter, it would seem, had been
misinformed, for later the girl was leaning over the low balcony
chatting with a youth who carried a kit bag.  You would have
said he was the young waiter at the Soho Restaurant, only that he
wore no moustache and she called him Willie, which, as one knows,
is rarely counted an Italian name.

“It’s all right, dear girl,” he said.
“Now that I know his limit, I can easily
arrange.”

“I don’t want him to waste his money,” she
explained.

p.
101
“Leave everything to me,” he begged.
“Don’t forget the match to-morrow.  By the by,
just go in and borrow a lucifer for me.  My box is
empty.”

She returned with a supply taken from the smoking-room, and
leaning over the balcony struck one and just managed to reach his
cigar.  No one was about, excepting the driver of a
four-wheeler on the rank opposite; the cabman remarked
confidentially to his horse: “Romeo and Juliet.
Played nightly all over the blooming world.”  The
horse waggled his nose-bag to show that he, too, was acquainted
with standard literature.

Mr. Amherst had announced the intention of taking his daughter
home by the eight-thirty the following morning, and she was to
knock at the wall not later than half-past seven; Miss Amherst
was able at nine o’clock breakfast to exhibit her watch and
blame it for her omission.  She read from a morning paper
the fixtures of the day, repeating the announcement concerning
the match, whereupon her father announced that he was as ready to
be hanged for a sheep as for a lamb, and gave her permission to
catch the ten-five, and to travel alone.  Miss Amherst
agreed,
p.
102
but finding in another part of the journal an account
of a deplorable case of a communication cord refusing to act,
became suddenly terrified and begged her father to accompany
her.  He said “No!”  There was reason in
all things.  Devoted as he was to his daughter, and ready as
he might be to make sacrifices, this was asking too much.
He had decided to see James McWinter play once more, before
advancing a further stage in the negotiations, and the
opportunity was one not to be missed.

“But I tell you what, Mary,” he said firmly;
“you do some shopping, buy presents for relatives, and we
can both go back together this evening.”

“The best places in London close on Saturday
afternoons.”

“Then come to the match with me.”

“I suppose I’d better,” she said.

In London you see no such spectacle as can be witnessed in
Midland and Northern towns, with the entire male population
walking solidly in one direction, returning later in less regular
order, and excited or depressed according to the fate of the home
team.  All the same, the compartments of the suburban train
were well filled, and Mr. Amherst, fearful of being
p. 103
delayed,
shouted on the crowded platform an instruction to his
daughter.

“Look after yourself!”

An instruction she complied with the more readily because a
hand waved to her from a carriage next to the engine.  Half
a dozen young men sprang up and offered places; she thanked them,
and, apparently anxious not to be accused of favouritism, decided
to hold by the rack and talk to young Pangbourne.  As the
train took a curve he had to hold her by the arm, but this she
did not seem to mind.  Pangbourne’s directors were, of
course, to be present at the game.  A hurried conference had
taken place that morning in the waiting-room of a London terminal
station, and the price of James McWinter, on Mr.
Pangbourne’s urgent suggestion, had been fixed at a price
that far exceeded the limit mentioned by Miss Amherst’s
father.

“That’s capital!” she declared
gratefully—“capital in more senses than one.
You see, Willie, I can remember the time when we were hard up at
home, and I recollect how my mother had to scheme and
contrive.  I don’t want to find myself going
back.  And the sum represents such an awful lot of
money.
p.
104
Football’s a good sport, but there are other
games.”

“Marriage, for instance?”

“We can talk of that,” she said composedly,
“later on.  Let’s settle one matter first.
We mustn’t be seen talking to each other, mind.”

Mr. Amherst apologised to his daughter, as they made their way
to the entrance to the ground, for his apparent neglect, and she
accepted his excuses so readily that he felt bound to point out
that, in a general way, he did look after her very carefully,
adding that there was no one else to do this.  Everything,
said Mr. Amherst, with a touch of importance and a hint at real
affection, devolved upon him, and he was not the man to flinch
responsibilities.  She inquired, deferentially, whether he
considered it wise to pay out such a large sum of money for James
McWinter.  He replied that James was worth the figure
mentioned the previous night, but not a penny, not a halfpenny
more.  If the other club began to haggle and bargain and
huckster, he, Mr. Amherst, would instantly withdraw.

“And what I say,” he declared, “as you
p. 105
very well
know, is what I stick to.  My first word is my last
word.  Is that so, my dear, or isn’t it?”

“You’re an extraordinary man, father.”
He appeared content with this vague admission.

Quite a good number had taken advantage of the hospitable
offer to ladies, and Mr. Amherst, in spite of his recent
declaration, showed relief on encountering the wife of another
director, willing and ready to take charge of his daughter.
Silk hat at back of head, he hurried off.  “Highly
important business!” he explained.  Mrs. Burnham, a
matronly person, confessed that she knew nothing and cared
nothing for the game, but had to affect an interest in order to
make opportunity of keeping an eye on her husband.  Husbands
required a lot of watching.  Husbands were kittle cattle, if
the truth was known.  Husbands being what they were, the
wonder was that any married lady remained in possession of her
senses; she herself foresaw clearly the time when she would be
taken away to the County Asylum.  Having said all this, and
having mentioned that she counted herself among the few who could

p. 106
respect
and keep a secret, Mrs. Burnham lowered her voice that folk
around might not hear, and urged it was high time Miss Amherst
thought of getting married.  Mrs. Burnham’s advice was
that Miss Amherst should pick out some desirable young gentleman
of good birth and excellent prospects.

“And then go for him,” recommended the matronly
lady, with earnestness.  “Go for him, for all you
know.  Takes a bit of doing, of course, but it’s worth
while.”

The commencement of the game did not interrupt Mrs.
Burnham’s counsel, but it interfered with the girl’s
power of giving attention.  Standing on a chair she watched
eagerly, describing the progress in brief ejaculatory sentences
to her chaperon; joined in the appeals of a few members of the
crowd addressed to the visiting team; refrained from giving
assistance to the majority in cheering and encouraging the home
side.  Privately, she criticised James McWinter, who, a
large young man, appeared to be doing as little as possible, the
while the rest scurried about on the slightly frosted turfed
ground, doing everything in a strenuous manner with no
result.  What a football crowd likes is the
p. 107
scoring of
goals, and when at half-time it proved that not one had been
recorded on either side, the two teams, exhausted and limp (with
the exception of James McWinter) were followed by regretful
looks; men described what they themselves would have done, if
they were but a few years younger or older, and less occupied
with other affairs.  Mr. Amherst bustled around, fanning
himself with his silk hat, and looking greatly perturbed.
He mentioned to his daughter that they (meaning
Pangbourne’s directors) had the cheek to ask so
much—quoting the large figure—that he would see them
further before planking down that amount; he went so far as to
hint at the well-warmed direction they could select.

The teams took up their new positions.  The whistle
sounded.  Before Miss Amherst had disengaged herself from
her companion’s inquiries and counsel, the outside left,
amidst erroneous cries of “Off-side!” centred across
to the inside right, who centred again, and James McWinter
trapped the ball, dodged the two backs and shot hard; the
goalkeeper fumbled it, and even supporters of the home side could
scarce restrain a cheer.  The other team prepared for a
change of tactics, and in
p. 108
exactly four minutes precisely the
same thing happened, and the goalkeeper dealt with the ball in
almost the same manner; tears stood in his eyes; he glanced with
reproach at his gloves, and bowed his head penitently to the
observations of colleagues.  Miss Amherst had to apologise
more than once when crying “Shoot!” for kicking the
back of a stout gentleman standing just in front of her.
When at the end of the ninety minutes’ traffic the visiting
side had scored five to none, and four of these goals were to be
credited to James McWinter, she turned to her companion.
Her father was in a kind of scrum not far off; she recognised the
light in his eyes of one to whom money was of no consequence, and
into her eyes came the light of one resolved to act
promptly.  Under cover of the cheering, she made an
enthusiastic and apparently genuine declaration.

“Oh, but, my dear,” cried Mrs. Burnham alarmedly,
“you mustn’t talk like this.  This is
dreadful.  When I said what I did just now, I never meant
you should go and throw yourself away on a great clumsy hulk like
that, earning not more than £4 a week.  Besides, his
people are meat salesmen.”

p.
109
“I’m not a vegetarian.”

Mr. Amherst, scarlet, almost blue with eagerness, was hurrying
by.

“Not a word, please,” begged the girl, with
extravagant signs of distress, “not a syllable to my
father.  Promise me you won’t tell him.  My
mind’s made up; but I don’t want him to
know.”

Mrs. Burnham put out the hooked handle of her umbrella and
caught Mr. Amherst neatly.

“Very sorry,” he panted, “can’t spare
a moment.”

“You just come here first,” ordered the lady
resolutely.  “There’s something you’ve got
to know, and I mean to tell it to you before I go and look after
my husband.  I’m not going to be blamed afterwards,
and have you say it was my fault.”

“Do hurry up,” begged Mr. Amherst piteously.
“If you knew how urgent it all was, you wouldn’t
chatter on like this.  I’m going to give them whatever
they ask for him.  He’s a bachelor, and he won’t
mind where he lives.”

“Your daughter,” said Mrs. Burnham, speaking with
tragic emphasis, “tells me—that she’s fallen in
love—at first sight—with
p. 110
that six foot three—called
James McSomething—who’s been kicking the
ball—like a young demon—between the two posts.
And my advice to you is—keep ’em well
apart—keep ’em hundreds of miles apart from each
other!”

*  *  *  *
*

Mr. Pangbourne’s club, with the aid of James and the
rest, made its way later into the Second League, and he himself
secured three well-paid official appointments from the
Corporation and other bodies, who were probably actuated by
feelings of gratitude; the entire town joined in giving him and
Miss Amherst a notable wedding present.  Mr. Amherst, now
honorary secretary of the Bowling Club, has married a lady of
forty-five, hitherto interested only in deep-sea fishermen.
And all intend to live more or less happily ever afterwards.

p.
111
VII—A CASE OF SUSPICION

It
was pleasant to get about the
square of the station—where luggage had to be labelled and
heated passengers stormed at porters and a rather stout brass
bell was rung, and where at moments of pressure it did seem that
the world had suddenly gone mad—pleasant to stroll there
and to feel you were one of the few who recognised the identity
of the quiet man smoking a briar pipe and carrying an umbrella,
over near the label case.  He was middle-aged, with an
unobtrusive manner; in the summer he wore a straw hat sedately;
he seemed to be always waiting for a train that never
arrived.  If a loiterer made his way into the station and
stood about the bookstall longer than seemed necessary, the quiet
man would go near to him, moving when he moved, stopping when he
stopped, and losing no sight
p. 112
of him until he went off.  The
quiet man had apparently no friends, and the staff addressed him
rarely.

Now the Station Master’s boy knew that this man was a
retired member of the police force, the plain-clothes detective
attached to the terminus.  And in connection with a
predecessor of this mysterious official they told him, in the Up
Parcels Office, an incident.

*  *  *  *
*

Sergeant Bellchambers had not succeeded in gaining the
popularity that most men, in this world, desire, but one or two
of his first investigations received favourable comment from the
General Manager, and this repaid him for lack of sympathy from
others.  It was said that in the M division they had been
glad to see him take his pension and go, the opinion of the
Inspector’s desk being that Bellchambers was a born
muddler.  This might have been the invention of the station
staff; what was quite certain was that in his reports on blue
paper in the early cases referred to he fixed blame on men whom
the station considered innocent, and these men were, in
consequence, fined or reduced.  Moreover, he had not been
content with singling out
p. 113
individuals and recommending them
for the stocks, but he condemned an entire department; for which
reason the station said darkly:

“We shall ’ave to get our own back.”

This was the state of things when the cigar robberies
began.  Parcels of cigars came up regularly from a certain
firm and from a certain local station, sometimes for delivery in
London, sometimes for transfer to another railway; one parcel in
four reached its destination in good appearance outwardly, but
with part of the contents abstracted.  The firm made heavy
claims, wrote furious letters, and at last managed to get a
communication into the public press in which bitter reference was
made to the supineness and slothful behaviour of the railway
company.  The Superintendent of the Line sent for
Bellchambers, withdrawing him from easy duties on the station
square.

“The only question is—” said the high
official.

“Where do these robberies take place?” suggested
Bellchambers.  “That’s the point,” he
added sagely, “that’s what we’ve got to get
at.”

p.
114
“What is your opinion, Sergeant?”

Sergeant Bellchambers made a fine pretence of taking thought
before he answered.  Then with red-ink pen he wrote on an
envelope and passed it across the table.

“Up Office,” read the Superintendent.

“’Ush,” said Bellchambers warningly.

“Do you think you can find the thieves?”

“If I’m given a free hand,” said
Bellchambers, “and no quibble raised, sir, about my petty
disbursements.”

“Go in and win,” said the Superintendent.
“When do you start?”

“This very night, sir?”

“Let me have a report in the morning.”

That evening the head of the department sent to the Up Office
a new hand to assist the late-duty men.  He was
black-bearded with a very ruddy face, and he wore a uniform that
had apparently belonged to a shorter and a slimmer person.
His name, he said, was Edward Jones, but the Up Office seemed not
contented with this and decided on the suggestion of a junior
clerk to call him by the title of “Sunset.”  He
settled to the work with moderate determination, calling off
parcels and sorting them into bins for
p. 115
delivery
with perhaps more intelligence than the raw amateur usually
showed: he spoke in a hoarse voice, and this he accounted for by
confessing himself a slave to tobacco; he discussed the matter
with the other men, between the arrival of trains, and seemed,
not unnaturally, more interested in those who smoked than in the
one or two who limited themselves to a cigarette a week, consumed
after dinner on Sundays.  The Up Office always had a
composite scent, in which fruit, game, cheese, and other things
mixed, with sometimes one gaining ascendancy, sometimes another;
a new flavour of a more pleasant and a vaguer character was
contributed presently by a small brown-paper-covered box, brought
in from an arrival platform, bearing a proud label:—

VALUABLE CIGARS.

KEEP DRY.

“’Ere’s a chance for some one,” said
the porter, as he called it off.  “Sunset, old chum,
these’d do your palate good.”

“Silly thing to mark ’em like that,”
remarked the new man.  “It’s throwing
p. 116
temptation
in anybody’s way.  I should say they’re likely
enough worth about fifteen pence to one-and-six
a-piece.”

“How d’you know?”

“I don’t profess to know,” said the new man
hurriedly.  “I’m only giving a rough
estimate.  But bless my soul,” he went on after a
pause, “what a refining influence a cigar has.”

“If it’s a good one,” suggested a boy
porter.

“They’re all good,” declared the new man
with enthusiasm.  “They’re like the ladies in
that respect.  Some are better’n others, but
they’re all good.”

“Not a married man, then?” asked a foreman.

“I’m a bloomin’ bachelor,” said the
new chum.  “And what a thing it is on your Sunday off,
when you’re waiting at the end of her road, to light up a
cigar with a fine aroma to it.  It not only gives you an air
of belonging to the ’igher aristocracy, but it also carries
away any suspicion of corduroy that might be ’anging
about.”

“I’ve never give less than twopence,”
remarked the boy porter.

“I’m sorry for you,” said the new man.

p. 117
“I
should have thought a chap with your fore’ead had got more
ambition.  Why, when I was a lad of your
height—”

“Pardon me,” interrupted the foreman, “you
seem to ’ave a most extr’ordinary flow of
conversation.”

“I’m celebrated for it.”

“I wonder,” said the foreman curiously,
“whether you’d mind stopping it for a moment and
doing a bit of work instead.  Reason I suggest it is that
the Company pays you for what you do and not for what you
talk.”

“I can take a ’int,” said the new man
coldly.

There seemed a desire on the part of the others that night to
make Porter Jones work as hard as it is possible for a man to
work.  The heaviest hampers were confided to his care; the
slimiest cases of fish were placed upon his shoulder; he it was
who was told off to see to some consignments of rather advanced
venison.  The parcel of valuable cigars remained in the
Number Five bin to be transferred to another Company by the first
delivery in the morning, and it was observed that whenever Porter
Jones came into the office he glanced in that direction.
Now
p. 118
the
Up Office, as I have hinted, had been perturbed over the recent
complaints, and the mere fact that they had to fill up memoranda
in regard to the various investigations, to the effect that,
“I beg to say in reference to the attached papers that I
know nothing whatever of the matter, I am, sir, your obedient
servant,” this in itself was enough to put a keener edge on
observation.  Wherefore, a secret meeting was held near the
gas-stove by the booking-up desk, and it was decided that the new
man should be watched closely; it was felt it would be a proud
and estimable thing for the office, the character of which was at
this period slurred, if it could itself detect a wrong-doer and
take him to justice.  And should it happen that the detected
one proved to be a new man with no friends in the department to
lament his fall, then the most doubtful would have to revert to
old beliefs in a wise and thoughtful Providence.  Their
suspicions were increased by the fact that whenever Porter Jones,
in the brief intervals between work from nine o’clock
onwards, resumed conversation, he invariably bent its direction
towards the subject of cigars.

“Take no notice,” whispered the foreman
p. 119
to his
colleagues.  “At least when I say take no notice, I
mean take all the notice you can, but keep your little heads shut
as tight as possible.”

“Shall one of us lay up for him?”

“Who’s the smallest?” asked the foreman,
with an air of having already thought of this device.

“I are,” said the boy porter.

“Evidently,” remarked the foreman, looking down at
him, “evidently a chap of superior education.  Country
born, ain’t you?”

“I were.”

“Then,” said the foreman, “up you jump
behind them ‘books off’ and you watch, my lad, watch
Sunset for all you are worth.”

The Up Office closed at midnight in order to sleep for a few
hours.  Before that time the men had made preparations for
departure, packing shining hand-bags and exchanging the official
cap for a bowler hat, and brushing their boots; this last act is
one of which the railway man never tires.  Porter Jones
alone seemed to be taking no preliminary steps, and when asked
where he lived replied lightly and evasively that he should
probably finish up at the Carlton Club.  The gas lights were

p. 120
turned
down one by one and darkness increased its possession of the
office.  Porter Jones went up to the end where Bin Number
Five was situated; the others hummed to give a suggestion of
unconcern.  Suddenly there was commotion at the darkened end
of the office, and seizing hand lamps, they hurried forward.

“’Old him, ’old him,” cried the boy
porter.  The counsel seemed unnecessary, for he gripped
Porter Jones most effectively by the collar of the corduroy
jacket.  “Set on his ’ead.  Lam him
one.”

“What’s all this fuss about?” demanded the
foreman.

“He’s got it,” screamed the boy
porter.  “Sunset’s got it hid under his
jacket.”

“Got what hid?” asked the foreman.
“Let’s ’ave the facts first of all.”

“I can easily explain,” gasped the new man.
“I only wanted to see if—  Make him leave
go.  He’s—he’s throttling me.”

“He’s a-trying to,” admitted the boy
porter.

“Let him loose,” ordered the foreman.
“Men, stand around him so as he can’t make his
escape.  What’s that bulging under your arm,
matey?”

p. 121
The
new man gave an awkward laugh, as he withdrew the labelled
parcel.

“I can explain it all to you,” he said, addressing
the foreman and trying to rebutton his torn collar, “if you
will favour me with two minutes alone outside.”

“Don’t you do it,” advised the others.
“See him ’anged first.”

“Whatsoever you ’ave to say,” declared the
foreman steadily, “you’d better say it here and
now.”

“Well, it’s like this.  I’m the
detective.”

“Ho!” said the foreman satirically.
“Detective and thief in one, eh?  Vurry ’appy
combination, I must say.”

“See here,” said the other, annoyed at the
incredulous tone, “I’ll take off this beard and then
you can some of you identify me.”

As he did so the foreman held up his hand lamp, examining the
features carefully.

“Do any of you chaps recognise him?”

The staff replied at once that to the best of their belief
they had never before in this world set eyes on him.

“Don’t play the goat,” he urged
anxiously.  “We’ve all got our duties to
perform.”

p.
122
“That’s true; we shall ’ave to lock
you up for the night.”

“Right you are,” said the other gleefully.
“Take me round to the nearest police station and
then—”

“That would mean losing our last train
’ome,” pointed out the foreman.

“I s’pose,” said the boy porter
respectfully, “it wouldn’t do to put him in the lamp
room?”

“Chaps,” said the foreman, “my idea is
we’d better, I think, put him in the lamp room.  Get
Porter Swan to lend you the keys, my lad.  As for you, you
scoundrel—”

“If you so much as dare to lock me up there I’ll
see that you regret it every day of your lives.”  He
argued vehemently.

“Look ’ere, me man,” said the boy porter,
returning with the keys, “we want none of your empty
threats.  If you think we’re going to be bluffed by a
chap of your calibre—”

“My what?” shouted the indignant man, struggling
to get at the lad.

“Go on, my child,” said the foreman
approvingly.  “Let him have some of your long
ones.”  The foreman turned to the others.

p.
123
“This is where your school teaching comes in
’andy,” he whispered.

“A chap of your calibre,” repeated the boy porter,
encouraged; “you’re labouring under the very worst
misapprehension—”

“Good!” said the others.

“Worst misapprehension that you ever suffered from or
endured or tolerated or submitted to or underwent
or—”

“That’s enough for him,” interrupted the
foreman, “we’d best not overdo it.  Got his arms
tied, lads?”

“You’ll suffer for this,” he cried.

“I’ll take me oath you will,” said the
foreman.  “Now then, two of you at each arm
and—march!  Boy, blow out the gas and lock
up.”

No one was encountered on the way to the lamp room who had
authority to interfere with the plans of the Up Office, and the
unfortunate man was conducted at a sharp walk to that gloomy,
sooty, greasy haven.  The place reeked with oily waste, and
some appeared to have been smouldering, giving a result that nice
people would call displeasing.  The uneven flooring was laid
out with lakes of dirty water; zinc counters did not permit
p. 124
themselves
to be touched.  The foreman turned out the one glimmer of
light as though by accident.

“Got a match on you?” he asked the prisoner in a
kindly tone.

“Only one box.”

“Hand it over,” ordered the foreman, “for a
moment.  Thanks,” slipping it into his pocket.
“Now we can catch our twelve-fifteen.  Good night, old
sort.”

“’Appy dreams,” cried the others.

“Don’t be late in the morning,” called out
the boy porter.

The imprisoned man, not daring to trust himself to reply,
heard the door close, heard the lock shoot.  He groaned, and
began to reckon the black hours that he would have to endure in
the place; at the least, the number would be six; he did not care
to think what it might be at the most.  Throughout the whole
of the time he was unable to close his eyes, and his only relief
to the length of the hours came by thinking of the report that he
would indite the following morning.  He polished up in his
mind some of the references to the boy porter, and to the man who
gripped his arm in bringing him from the Up
p. 125
Office; it
seemed that his suspicions in regard to the pilferages were
centred, for some reason, on those who had most aggrieved
him.  Before daylight began to grin at him through the
barred window of the lamp room he had mentally completed his
report, and the last paragraph he felt was especially good.

“I am able to speak with absolute certainty,
and I can go so far as to say the men who are undoubtedly
responsible for the recent pilferages are those I have named, and
I beg to suggest respectfully that steps be taken to relieve them
of their present duties at the earliest possible moment.
The only alternative is a clean sweep of the whole of the Up
Office staff, and this, sir, I hesitate to recommend.  But
for reasons that I have stated, and for others which I think it
wise not to place upon paper, I earnestly hope that the
recommendation I have made will be acted upon without delay.

“W.
Bellchambers
.

“P.S.—Especially the foreman and the
junior.”

“Can’t make it hotter for them,” said
p. 126
Sergeant
Bellchambers to himself regretfully, “without it looking as
though I’d got some personal spite.”

The night seemed endless, but it proved to have a finish, and
Bellchambers, when the lamp-man opened the door in the morning,
went out, a tired, oil-scented, yawning, but a determined
official.  A wash and a shave increased the last quality,
and when the Superintendent arrived at nine o’clock,
morning paper under his arm, Sergeant Bellchambers was waiting
for him in the lobby of the office with confidence written all
over his face in large letters.

“Evening, sir.”

“Good-morning, Sergeant.”

“I mean morning,” corrected Bellchambers.
“I’ve been up all night over that little affair you
spoke about.”

“Ah!” said the Superintendent, sitting down in his
arm-chair, “with no result?”

“On the contrary, sir,” said Sergeant Bellchambers
importantly.  “If it isn’t troubling you too
much I’ll trouble you to cast your eyes over this report of
mine.”

The Superintendent let his glasses flick
p. 127
open and
adjusted them on his nose.  The Sergeant, leaning one arm on
the mantelpiece, watched his superior officer, waiting for the
sign of gratified approval.  This, to his great
astonishment, did not come, and the Superintendent’s face
remained unchanged when he had thrown the report on the shining
table.

“Do you mean to say that you want me to get rid of these
men?”

“That was the impression,” said the Sergeant, with
a touch of acidity, “I intended to convey.”

“And you think they’re guilty?”

“I’ll stake my reputation on it, sir,” said
Sergeant Bellchambers.

“That is not much of a bet,” remarked the
other.

“You can take it from me that these pilferages will
never cease until the men I’ve referred to are turned
out.”

“I’m very anxious to do something,” said the
Superintendent, taking up a ruler thoughtfully.

“Like myself, sir,” said Bellchambers.
“That’s me all over.”

“But not,” said the Superintendent, hitting
p. 128
the table,
“not in the direction you suggest.  Read
this!”

He handed over the morning paper to Sergeant Bellchambers,
pointing to a letter headed “Recent Complaints of
Pilferages.”

“Ah!” said the Sergeant exultingly,
“they’re going for us again, then.  ‘Dear
Sir,’ he read.  ‘With reference to our letters
to you complaining of abstraction from our parcels of cigars sent
by railway, we think it only right to inform you that we have
discovered these pilferages were made by one of our own
men.  It appears that after delivering the parcels at the
station here, and after they were weighed, he was in the habit of
offering to take them to the train, and whilst doing this
effected the robberies to which reference has been made.  We
need scarcely point out that if the station had been wisely
managed these lamentable occurrences would in all probability
never have taken place; the only question is, who is
responsible?  We are, dear sir, yours
faithfully—’”

“A paltry trick to play on anybody,” said the
Sergeant.  “At the same time, sir, I think
there’ll be no harm in making a change in the
staff.”

p.
129
“I intend to do so.  Will you keep your eyes
open, Sergeant—”

“Ain’t they always?”

“And,” said the Superintendent, “look out
for another berth.  Shut the door quietly after
you.”

p.
130
VIII—QUESTION OF TEMPERATURE

L.O.M. caught sight of M.R. two or three times on the journey,
and M.R. made more than one effort to obtain completer details by
inspection of the blue card label on L.O.M.’s bag.  A
certain coolness on M.R.’s side marked their first meeting,
but this was the fault of the English Channel; it certainly
looked like a practical joke, not quite in good taste, when a
sudden lurch of the steamer sent him against her on the upper
deck; despite his apologies, there was about the incident a
suggestion of Holloway Road on Sunday evenings.  M.R. told
her married sister that she considered him a bounder; the married
sister replied that this description could be applied to men in
general, with one single exception.

“Be very careful, Margaret,” she added,
p. 131
“how
you make acquaintances.  We shall run up against all
sorts.”

“All sorts,” complained the girl, “seem to
be running up against me.”

At the Paris Station of the Lyons railway, L.O.M. appeared in
a more favourable light, rescuing the married sister’s coat
which had been taken from a peg in the buffet by a Frenchwoman
who was either short-sighted or deficient in honesty.  At
Vallorbes, it was he who came to the window of their
compartment—the hour being five a.m., and snow on the
ground—and gave the welcome news that their registered
luggage was not amongst the packages selected for examination at
the Swiss frontier.

“Do you think I might get you some coffee?” he
asked.

“Certainly not!” answered the married sister
promptly.

The incident constituted a subject for discussion, the younger
girl contending that the obliging male should never be curtly
repulsed; the other arguing that a difficulty would have been
found in persuading the youth to accept cash for refreshments
supplied, and, consequent on this, the trouble in
p. 132
preventing
him from becoming intrusive could scarcely be measured.  At
Lausanne, where passengers took breakfast, he very properly kept
his distance.  At Bex, in the tram-cars, which were to make
the climb with the aid of motive power at the back, he gave up
his place to the elder of the two and sat side by side with the
girl in the crowded luggage van.

“Yes,” she replied, “I skate, and I should
like to learn to ski.  Do you?”

“Moderately good at it,” replied L.O.M.
“Did some in Norway.”

“Then, perhaps—”

“You will find an instructor up there,” he
said.

She turned away huffily.

It was not, however, easy to avoid joining in the general
conversation.  Everybody had projects for the filling up of
the winter holiday; the conductor, as the car went slowly up the
hill, was appealed to for information concerning weather, and
being a man of cheerful temperament, gave exactly the particulars
that were hoped and desired, without allowing truth to mar the
effect.  Thus an atmosphere of hopefulness pervaded the
luggage van, and even retiring military men
p. 133
perched
upon trunks became vivacious, talking of desperate deeds already
accomplished in other places on toboggans, and speaking with
relish of the appetite that came after these exercises.  The
two were soon again in conversation, and the girl mentioned that
her sister’s maiden name was Rodgers, a fact which enabled
him to perceive acutely that this must be also the girl’s
name.  Turning the label on his valise, he introduced
himself.

“Masterson,” he said.

“I like names of three syllables,” she
remarked.

The hour and a half occupied by the journey was lessened by
all this, and by the increasingly snowy aspect of the mountains
on either side of the track; the conductor derided this as
trifling, and endeavoured to give some idea of the downfall that
had taken place up near the summit.  At Gryon the steep part
finished, and the cars went on with the assistance of overhead
wires.

“You play and sing, I suppose?”

“I perform no parlour tricks of any description,”
said Miss Rodgers definitely.  “I leave these
accomplishments to others.”

p.
134
“Really?”  Rather taken back, and the
movement of his forehead slightly lifting his cap.  “I
had an idea—I’d got the notion that every girl
did.  My sisters—”

“I am the exception,” with pride.
“Outdoor sports constitute my strong point.  I could
live for ever in the open air.”

“What about the bad weather?” inquired
Masterson.

“How can you talk of bad weather at a time like
this?  Look back and see that dear, white, delightful little
village.  Tell me, do you think there will be a carnival on
the ice rink?  I’ve brought the sweetest fancy dress
you ever saw.  You won’t find me staying indoors,
excepting for meals.”

When the cars reached the destination, the two alone out of
the whole party exhibited scarcely any signs of the twenty-five
hours’ journey from Charing Cross and London; the married
sister compensated by showing every symptom of collapse, and he
very courteously assisted her up the wooden steps and over the
bridge to the hotel.  There the flurried manager checked
names as they entered; assigned the double room on the first
floor to Mr. Masterson, and the single
p. 135
room on the
third floor to Miss Rodgers and her exhausted sister; they united
forces in protesting against this, and became more friendly in
the presence of a common grievance.  Despite the warmth of
arguments used by visitors, the thermometer near the pile of
brushes and toboggans registered four degrees of frost.

Lunch was served at once, and immediately after the meal the
married sister, discovering that she had eaten veal under the
impression it was mutton, announced her intention of resting
indoors during the afternoon.  The other two came down in
jerseys and white caps, and the married sister gave Masterson
gracious permission to escort Miss Rodgers to the rink.

“Mind you bring her back safely,” she
commanded.

“I’ll do my best,” he said.

“Quite capable of taking care of myself,” remarked
the girl.  “Just lace up my boots for me,
please.”  They left the lady in the vestibule perusing
a Cardiff journal bearing date of a Tuesday in the previous
month.

One could see on their return that the afternoon on the rink
had reached highest expectations; their animation caused some
p. 136
compression
of the eyebrows on the part of sedater folk taking tea.
Everything had happened as the flushed, excited girl wanted it to
happen.  Her ability had excited favourable comment from
other skaters; one of the professionals gave a compliment; the
band played delightfully, and she—not caring for indoor
dancing—completely and thoroughly enjoyed a waltz.
Sun shining all the time.

“After tea,” she explained, “we are going
out to do some ski-ing.”

“Who is meant, pray,” asked her sister carefully,
“by the word ‘we’?”

“Mr. Masterson and myself, of course!”

“Oh!” commented her sister, giving an inflection
which the printed word cannot convey.

“What’s your objection, Ellen?”

“It would be useless for me to offer any.  I shall
stay in and write.  Does he know that you neither play nor
sing?”

“I’ve told him,” snapped the girl.

Folk at the hotel attended meals with regularity, but their
impatience towards the finish was something not easily
concealed.  A tall woman seated opposite at dinner, and
possessing a complexion which looked almost
p. 137
natural,
hinted that she was arranging some amateur theatricals, and Mr.
Masterson gave to the announcement an interest which Miss Rodgers
considered so excessive that she turned from him and listened
with attention intended to be equally extravagant to her
sister’s talk concerning Henry.  The lady with the
complexion had been searching the hotels for some one who could
sing and act; up to the present, she had found three able to
sing, but not greatly desirous of doing so; they were more
definite in their replies to her invitation in regard to
acting.  Also, she required some one who could play the
pianoforte readily.

“Please help me if you can,” she begged, passing
the French mustard across to Mr. Masterson, and assuming an
ingratiating smile.  “I shall be so
grateful.”

“There’s a good deal to do out-of-doors,” he
mentioned.

“Then,” said the lady, with resolution, “I
must pray for mild weather!”

The concierge announced in the vestibule, as folk returned who
had been out for moonlight tobogganing after dinner, that the
frost was hard, the thermometer promising well;
p. 138
bridge
players ordered him to close the doors, and keep them closed, but
Masterson and Miss Rodgers coming in, flushed with exercise on
the snow run, congratulated each other on the good news, and in
the corridor, before saying good-night, made full and complete
plans for the following day.

Masterson slept the sleep of a well-tired man until six
o’clock, when the bell rang to arouse servants.  He
heard a drip, drip, drip from the roofs, and turning over dreamt
of an amazing leap on skis from the top of Mont Blanc to the Dent
du Midi, an exploit that created in his mind, not surprise, but
genuine satisfaction.  When he awoke again, it was to find
the hour late, and in dressing hastily, to avoid the fifty
centimes fine inflicted on those who took breakfast after ten, he
shared the blame between himself and the heating apparatus which
kept the room at a too comfortable temperature.

“Really very sorry,” he cried, entering the
dining-room.  Severe faces looked up from the tables; young
Miss Rodgers helped her sister to honey and sighed.
“You can’t think how full of regret I am.”

“It is a pity,” she said.

p.
139
“I was awake early, mind you,” he went on
eagerly.  “Wide awake as I am now.  And then I
dozed off, and when I—”

The waiting maid brought his coffee and he poured it into the
cup with the air of a man not deserving refreshment.

“You have been out alone, I suppose?” he
remarked.

“Apparently,” interposed the married sister,
“you are not aware that there has been a most wonderful
thaw during the night, and that there is now a thick
mist.”

The weather was not the only thing affected by the
change.  After breakfast, folk stood about in the corridor
examining the notices there with a doleful expression.
“Rink Closed” stood out in definite capital letters,
and eyes turned from the stern announcement to gain some comfort
from the slips which recorded loss of decorative articles.
A few proclaimed intention of devoting the morning to sending
postcards, and to the clearing off of arrears in correspondence,
and stalked resolutely up to the drawing-room; others went to see
if they could induce the concierge to make a cheerful prophecy
concerning the weather, returning with the news that
p. 140
the
official, discouraged by failure, refused to hold out anything
that looked like hope.  One or two inspected time tables and
talked of going back to Lausanne.

“Why don’t you suggest something, Mr.
Masterson?”

“Wish I had the necessary intelligence, Miss
Rodgers.  Is there anything we can arrange indoors, I
wonder, to make the time go quickly whilst the weather is sorting
itself?  Think of something that you’re good
at!”

“If you possessed a memory,” retorted the girl
warmly, “you would recollect that I distinctly told
you—”

The lady with the very fresh complexion interposed, with an
apology.  Would Mr. Masterson give her three minutes of his
time in a corner of the vestibule?  Masterson looked at the
girl for directions, but she turned away, and he followed the
other obediently.

Great mystery surrounded the ball-room, and especially the
stage of the ball-room, that day, with janitors at doors, asking
those who arrived: “Excuse me, but are you taking
part?” and when a negative answer was given, adding:
“Then will you kindly stay outside, please?”
The pianoforte could be
p. 141
heard being played with the soft
pedal down, and a sound came of choruses; occasionally, the voice
of the made-up lady crying: “Oh, that’s not a bit
like it!” and “We must try the first act all over
again!” and “Do take up your cues smartly,
please!”

At lunch she escorted Masterson into the dining-room,
conveying him past the chairs occupied by Miss Rodgers and the
married sister, and induced him to sit beside her during the
meal.  The doyen of the guests rapped three times on the
table between the veal and the chicken course, and made an
announcement.  Volunteers were required to sing in the
church choir.  A bracelet had been found on the billiard
table.  To-morrow evening there would be a theatrical
entertainment in the ball-room under the joint superintendence of
Miss Ellicott and Mr. Masterson.  Ladies willing to sing in
the chorus were requested to communicate immediately with Mr.
Masterson.  The doyen sat down; the buzz of conversation
recommenced.

Masterson, note-book in hand, stood at the doorway when the
meal was over, taking names.  As Miss Rodgers and her sister
came near, he looked up inquiringly, but the girl
p. 142
stared at
him in a distant manner, and went past, ignoring the
half-completed question which he put to her; Masterson gazed
after them with the abashed look of one who has discovered that
he does not fully understand women, and to the next offer
replied, rather brusquely, that the list was now complete.
He proceeded to the ball-room and gave up the afternoon to
rehearsal, interspersed with gusty arguments with the leading
lady.  Outside, the rain came down in a quiet, orderly
manner, as though it were doing exactly what was required, and
the concierge went about assuring visitors that the fault was not
his.

Young Miss Rodgers, wearing defiance as a cloak to
nervousness, knocked at the door of the ball-room and asked to
see Mr. Masterson.  The amateur door-keeper replied that the
gentleman was busy.  Miss Rodgers, with a smile that would
have persuaded even a professional, induced the door-keeper to go
and make further inquiries, and immediately that he had started
on this errand, not only slipped inside the room, but at once
slipped up on the polished floor.  Now, she was a
sure-footed girl, not accustomed to tumble, and it was fortunate,
in view of her record, that no one
p. 143
happened to witness the
incident.  She had resumed an upright position when the
doorkeeper returned.

“You go across to the drawing-room,” he whispered
importantly, “and in about ten minutes he’ll see
you!  Quarter of an hour at the outside.”

The entire strength of the company was on the stage, and as
she walked up and down the carpeted room, snatches of the
dialogue came to her ears.  The leading lady, and Masterson
were about to go through once again the scene which had startled
the girl on entering the ball-room; the lady suggested
improvements.  “When I rush into your arms,” she
said, “how would it be for you to catch me like
this—” here evidently followed an
illustration—“and I’ll lean my hand on your
shoulder like this”—another
illustration—“and then we can start the
duet.”  Masterman’s voice said he was ready to
try this plan.  “That’s better,” remarked
the lady presently, “but I think we may as well do it
again.  Give me the word, somebody.”

The girl peered through the cracks of the set scenery on the
stage, and, her hand at her throat, watched and listened.

p.
144
“That’s about right.  Now for the
duet.  Play the symphony, please, Miss Jenner.”
After this, “Thank you.  Just once more.”

Masterson’s voice, a strong baritone, started:

“As I look into eyes that gaze up into
mine,

I know that your dear heart is beating for me.

I know you’re as true as the stars that do shine,

As the sun and the moon and the earth and the
sea.

Yet I ask for one word—”

Miss Rodgers, fearful of being discovered and unable to endure
contemplation of the scene any longer, crept away to the other
end of the drawing-room, where, regarding herself in the mirror,
she found an extremely cross-looking face with a line or two on
the forehead.  As the lady’s reply rang out, the girl
took up an illustrated journal from the table and endeavoured to
divert her thoughts by concentrating on fashion, only to find
that she could not be quite sure whether she was inspecting a
page of drawings or a page of letterpress.

“For I love thee,
I love thee, ’tis all I can say.”

The chorus, standing around with a strange want of delicacy
during this affectionate argument, now threw off all restraint,
and
p.
145
acknowledged the interest they had taken in the
proceedings by singing confidentially to each other:

“She loves him, she loves him, ’tis
all he can say,

He loves her, he loves for a year and a day.

Pray see how affection has come their direction,

Oh, thrice happy twain to be wedded in
May.”

“Hullo!” cried Masterson, astonished, coming off,
“you here?”

The question seemed to be one of those not requiring a reply,
and Miss Rodgers ignored it.

“I wanted to know whether there was a chance of being
able to help,” she said.

“Rather!” he declared readily.
“We’ll soon see about that.  I’ll go and
arrange.”

He went at a good rate; returned with leaden footsteps.

“I’m sorry!” she said, receiving his
message.

“If you had only offered earlier,” he remarked
apologetically.  “You see, I’m not in charge of
the affair, or else I’d manage it like a shot.  And I
thought you said—”

“It occurred to me,” explained Miss Rodgers, her
voice faltering slightly, “that I’d like to
try.  But it doesn’t really matter in the
least.”

*  *  *  *
*

p. 146
Her
sister was in a convalescent state, ready to talk of subjects
other than Henry, and when the girl burst into the room which
they jointly occupied, and throwing herself on the red couch,
gave way to tears, comfort was close at hand.  The sister
wisely refrained at first from putting questions, allowed the
girl to have her cry out, and only said soothingly,
“It’s all right, dearie.  Don’t worry more
than you can help.”  When composure returned, the
solace of the confessional was utilised and the married sister
listened, interjecting now and again, “Yes, I
understand,” and “I quite see what you
mean.”

“You don’t mind, I hope, if I point out,”
she remarked, when the last word had been said, “that
mother and I have always been persuading you to take up music or
singing or some accomplishment of the kind.”

“I know,” admitted the girl penitently.

“And you have always said there were plenty of girls who
could do these things, and that you were not going to bother
about them.  Now you see how important it is that you should
keep them level with others.  You must make hay whilst the
sun shines,” quoted the married sister.

p.
147
“I shall have to make a start.”

“And when we get back to London, you are going to set to
work at once and learn some of these useful
accomplishments?”

“I promise,” declared Miss Rodgers
resolutely.  “And I think, too, I should like to take
up cooking.  One never knows when it may come in
handy.”

*  *  *  *
*

The performance went well, and nothing could have exceeded the
graciousness of young Miss Rodgers towards the leading lady; few
of the later compliments exceeded hers.  Indeed, when, on
the following day, the frost returned succeeded by a pleasant
sprinkling of snow, she offered to take the leading lady out on
the rink and charge herself with the responsibility of teaching
the art of skating.

“No, dear,” replied the other.  “Thank
you very much, but no.  As a matter of fact, although I try
my best not to look it, I’m too old.  Look after Mr.
Masterson, instead.  He admires you, and you mustn’t
lose any chance of persuading him to continue to do so, indoors
or out.  I know what men are!”

p.
148
IX—FOREIGN AFFAIRS

We
parted from Mr. Peter A.
Chasemore at Bologna owing to a slight difference of
opinion.  Carolyn Stokes and myself had the notion that we
should find Venice damp and possibly cold; Mr. Chasemore declared
that to go home without seeing a gondola would give him a pain
compared with which rheumatism might be considered a sensation of
acute delight.  There is no use denying the fact that we two
women missed Mr. Chasemore a good deal.  Confusion took
place on the journey, for which I blamed Carolyn Stokes, and she
blamed me.  When with the assistance of luck we did reach
the Belvedere our tempers were not improved by the fact that a
young man and an elderly lady occupied, for the moment, the
attention of the hotel people.

“Norman,” she said to him, as the
p. 149
proprietor
eventually came to us, “you can consider yourself free for
the remainder of the day.”  He bowed.
“Give me that; I will take charge of it.”  Both
Carolyn Stokes and myself noticed the name on the label as the
leather case was being transferred.

I suppose the fact that there are no such titles where we come
from caused the encounter to make an impression upon us; we
watched her as she went up in the elevator, and noticed the
special consideration paid by attendants.  At home we reckon
everybody to be equal, with a few exceptions, but here it was
evident that to be called Lady Mirrible counted for something,
and we naturally fell in with the local view.  When you are
in Rome you should do as the Romans do; the remark applies
equally well to Florence.  The young man gave way to us at
the desk of the concierge, and Carolyn Stokes offered him a large
smile.

“Have you come far?” she asked.

“Fairly good distance.”

“Are you going soon?”

“That doesn’t quite depend upon me,” he
replied.

I mentioned when we were in our room that
p. 150
a
considerable amount of information had not been extracted, and
Carolyn Stokes said no doubt I should prove more successful in
the game.  I replied that this seemed highly probable, and
we did not speak to each other again until the gong sounded in
the corridor announcing that the meal was almost ready.
Downstairs in the reading-room we encountered a nasty jar in the
discovery that none of the rest of the people had dressed
specially for dinner.  This was one of the small
difficulties caused by the absence of a man capable of making
inquiries beforehand.

“I beg your pardon,” he remarked.  He had
taken the
Herald
from the table just as my hand went out;
he replaced it and selected a London journal.  I was
determined to let Carolyn Stokes see that I could manage the
situation better than she had done.

“You are not an American?” I asked.

“I am only English.”

“We have met several very pleasant folk from your
country in the course of our travels.”

“How extremely fortunate.”

“What startles us amongst you is your class
distinctions.  You should, I think, make an endeavour to
break down the barriers.”

p.
151
“Something ought certainly to be done,” he
agreed.  And went off with his newspaper.

Carolyn Stokes mentioned—not for the first
time—that she was old enough to be my mother, and went on
to argue that whereas it was quite permissible for a woman of her
age to speak at an hotel to a stranger, the case was entirely
different where a girl of twenty was concerned.  All the
same when she found him seated at the next table in the
dining-room she allowed me to take the chair which enabled me to
speak across to him without twisting my neck.  From what I
heard him say to the waiter I gained that her ladyship was taking
the meal in her own room.

Carolyn Stokes has many estimable qualities, but I have more
than once had to point out to her that she does not exercise a
sufficient amount of restraint over her conversational
powers.  Also she pitches her voice somewhat high, rather as
though she, being at Liverpool, were addressing a public meeting
in New York.  I am myself a good and fluent talker, but my
chances are small if I enter into competition with Carolyn.
It was difficult, however, to overlook the fact that he preferred
listening to me, and when we both spoke at
p. 152
once it was
I who secured his attention.  I asked him what there was to
be seen in Florence of an evening when the picture galleries were
closed, and he said we could not do better than stroll down the
Lung ’Arno, see the Vecchio bridge, returning by way of the
Piazza Vittore Emmanuele.

“We should scarcely dare to go out alone,” I
remarked.

He crumbled his bread for a moment.

“I think,” he said, “it will be possible for
me to place myself at your disposal.”

“That is perfectly sweet of you,” cried Carolyn
Stokes.  We arranged to meet at nine o’clock in the
entrance hall.

Taking our coffee in the drawing-room Carolyn and myself came
to the conclusion that there was more in the wisdom of Providence
than some people care to admit.  If Mr. Chasemore had
decided to come on with us to Florence the likelihood was that we
should have had no opportunity of making this very fortunate and
delightful acquaintance; there would have been less to record in
our diaries under the heading of that day.  Carolyn’s
impression was that the son of a titled lady was a viscount, but
she could not be
p.
153
certain; she had on some far-distant occasion studied
the matter thoroughly, but most of the information then acquired
seemed to have been erased from her mind.  Anyway the chance
was too good to lose, and Carolyn Stokes said the great thing was
to exhibit not too much eagerness, but to allow friendship to
ripen, so to speak, in the course of the next twenty-four
hours.  Carolyn has a distinct streak of sentimentality in
her character, and she spoke of the influence of blue Italian
skies and the moon shining on the water, and Dante and Beatrice,
and the new hat I had purchased in the Via Condotti at
Rome.  We went upstairs to put on some wraps.

In the passage her ladyship’s head was out of her door,
and she was calling in an imperative kind of way.

“Norman, Norman!  Where on earth has he got to
again?  Never here somehow when he’s
wanted.”  One of the hotel maids came along and she
gave her a message.  “The lad really,” she said,
taking her head in, “is perfectly useless.”

Carolyn Stokes was occupying a few minutes later a central
position at the mirror in our room when she suddenly gave a
shriek; I
p.
154
assumed it was only the presence of a moth in the
room.  As she did not shriek again I considered the hideous
danger was past and done with, and I requested her to permit me
to share the mirror for a moment.

“Child,” she announced in a subdued sort of voice
and still gazing into the glass, “I have seen it all in a
flash.  You are under the impression that he is some sort of
a nobleman.  He is nothing of the kind.  He is merely a
footman or a courier, paid a moderate amount per week to attend
on this Lady Somebody.  That’s what he is,” she
said, striking the dressing table, “and I am more thankful
than I can express that I have discovered it in time.”

“The question can be easily decided,” I
mentioned.  “We have only to glance in the book kept
at the desk below.”

“I did that, but they have not yet
registered.”

“Then a question must be put to the people of the
hotel.”

“That I also did,” replied Carolyn Stokes,
“and their acquaintance with the American language made
them assume that I required a postcard with a view of the
cathedral.
p.
155
They have no right,” she went on vehemently,
“in these foreign hotels to allow a footman to dine with
the other guests.  I know it is done, but no one will
persuade me that it is right or fair to respectable
visitors.  It ought to be stopped.”

I sat on the rocking chair and took some violent exercise for
a few minutes in order to collect my thoughts.  It seemed we
were in a somewhat difficult corner.  To stay in our room
only meant that he would come and knock at the door; the wisest
plan appeared to be to effect an escape.  Carolyn Stokes,
for once, agreed with me.

“I wish Mr. Chasemore were here,” she said.

We went along the corridor very quietly and crept down the
staircase.  From the last landing we could see him waiting
near the desk of the concierge.  There was no means of
slipping past without being seen.

“I tell you what to do!” I whispered.
“You must go and inform him that I have been taken suddenly
ill.”

“A good idea,” she said, “but I would so
much rather you went and told him that I was ill.”

He tapped with his walking-stick
p. 156
impatiently on the floor, moved to
examine letters in the rack.  I pulled at Carolyn
Stokes’s arm in order to persuade her to make a run for it;
before I could arouse her dormant intelligence he had returned to
his former position.  He glanced at the clock and at his
watch; Carolyn Stokes sat on the stairs.

“Meanwhile,” I grumbled, “we are missing
valuable moments in a most interesting and historical
city.”

“Think,” she said impressively, “think of
the fate from which I have saved you.”

The call of “Norman!” came again, but apparently
it did not reach his ears.  I am a creature of impulse and,
without thinking, I imitated the call.  He whipped off his
cap at once, laid down his walking-stick and started up, taking
two steps at a time and coming near to us.

Carolyn Stokes and myself will never be able to decide which
of us took the initiative, which gripped at the other and used
some amount of force.  We discovered ourselves in the
nearest room, where an elderly gentleman was about to retire to
rest; I had never thought the time would come when I should be
thankful for not understanding a foreign language.
p. 157
The young
man rushed by; we made our escape just as the aged person was
about to throw a hair brush.

We tried to persuade ourselves, in walking along the side of
the river, that all was well that ended well.  Carolyn
Stokes said the experience was one she wished never to undergo
again, and for some reason reproached me.  We walked as far
as the Trinity Bridge, turned to the left, found ourselves in the
Via del Moro, came later to the Piazza de St. Maria Novello, took
what we thought would be a short cut for the hotel, and lost
ourselves.  Carolyn Stokes asked the way of two or three
people in tones quite loud enough to enable them to understand,
but success did not crown her efforts.

“Why, here you are!” cried an English voice.
We turned, and for the moment we both forgot how anxious we had
been not to meet him.  “Now, how in the world did I
manage to miss you?  My fault, I’m sure.”

“It would be kind of you,” said Carolyn Stokes
with reserve, “to put us in the right direction for our
hotel.”

“But, of course, I’ll see you back there with the
greatest pleasure.  Unless you like
p. 158
to allow
me, even now, to show you round the town.  As a matter of
fact, the hotel is just round the corner.  There’s the
Garibaldi statue.”

“I am somewhat fatigued,” she said, “and I
would prefer to return.”

“And you?” he said, turning to me.

“There has been a mistake made,” I answered
resolutely.  “We took you for somebody else.  You
must allow us to close the acquaintance here and now.”

“No idea I had a double,” he remarked.
“This matter must be looked into or complications may
ensue.”

“We jumped to the conclusion that you were the son of
the lady you are travelling with.”

“I am,” he answered.  Carolyn Stokes and I
began to talk together; he appeared to do his best to understand
us, but presently gave up the attempt and led the way to the
hotel.  There in the entrance hall he spoke again.

“So it was because I showed some attention to my dear
mother that you thought I was a courier.”

We interrupted, and endeavoured once more to explain.

p.
159
“I’m sorry,” he said.
“Had an idea this was going to be quite a pleasant
friendship.  Goodbye.”

I kept awake half that night making my plans.  But in the
morning fresh English visitors—more titles—had
arrived, and some of them knew him, and they surrounded him, and
the girls made a fuss of him, and there was no chance of my
getting near.  A letter came for me from Venice saying that
the writer would be in Milan on Wednesday.  “Yours
with affectionate regards, P. A. C.”

I have now to rely upon my tact and my industry and my own
bright, intelligent young mind to assist me in marrying Mr. Peter
A. Chasemore.

p.
160
X—BEFORE LUNCH

Other
travellers were becoming
jammed in the corridor of the train, their tempers taking the
tone of acerbity easy to those about to start on a railway
journey.  A determined young woman came up the step, and
supported the conductor in an appeal for order, addressing
herself more particularly to the English passengers; quiet
obtained, she took the first advantage of it by presenting her
ticket.  The conductor showed gratitude by escorting her at
once to her place.

“You don’t mean to say—” stammered the
occupant of seat Number Twenty.  “It can’t
be!  I shall begin to think I’m losing my
senses.”

“If you’re Mr. Chiswell,” she replied
briskly, “there’s no reason to be afraid of
that.”

p.
161
“A remark,” protested Mr. Chiswell,
“so unkind that I can tell it comes from nobody but Miss
Everitt.”  She lifted her bag to the rack, and when
she had succeeded in placing it there, he made a gesture of
assistance.  Glancing at herself in the mirror below the
rack, she remarked that she looked a perfect bird frightener.

“I don’t agree with you,” he said.

“So far as I remember,” she said, “you
seldom did.”

“We won’t exaggerate,” urged Mr.
Chiswell.  “For my part, I’m very glad that
we’re to be fellow travellers, and I trust we shall have a
pleasant journey.  It’s clear enough to me, Miss
Everitt, that fate has brought us together again.”

“Then I wish to goodness fate would mind its own
business.”

The last passenger came into the saloon; the conductor’s
forehead cleared of wrinkles, and he hung up his brown peaked cap
with a sigh of relief.  The train moved out from the Gare de
Lyon in a casual way, as though it were going for a short stroll,
and giving no indication that it intended to occupy the day by
racing down the map of France.  Folk
p. 162
on the low
platform of the station waved handkerchiefs, blew kisses,
cried.

“Is Freddy with you?” asked Miss Everitt.

“Need you ask!  Is Emily with you?”

“Course she is.”

“Neither of ’em married?”

“Neither of them married,” agreed Miss
Everitt.  “Just as well perhaps.  There are
people who, so long as they remain single, can keep up a certain
style and position; once they get spliced, first thing they do is
to cut down expenses.”

“Exactly the view I took of it,” he cried
eagerly.  He leaned forward, and gave a glance around the
saloon to make certain that no one listened.  “Just
the way I looked at the matter.  Between ourselves, it was
because of that I acted as I did.”

The attendant from the dining-car came to inquire whether the
passengers wished to lunch in the first series, or in the second
series; the two, after consultation, settled to take the meal
together at the later hour.  They found new grounds for
agreement in the view that coffee and rolls at half-past seven in
the morning, at a Paris hotel, formed but a mere imitation of a
breakfast.

p.
163
“I know perfectly well that what I’m going
to tell you,” said Chiswell confidentially,
“won’t go any further.  I recollect how in the
old days when we were—well, friends—you always knew
when to keep your mouth shut.  A great quality, that, in a
girl, and I don’t want to flatter you when I say that one
very seldom comes across it.  What I’m about to tell
you refers to—”

He jerked his head, and she nodded.

“They might meet,” she said.

“It wouldn’t matter,” he replied
confidently.  “They’re not on speaking terms
now.”

“Fire away with what you were going to tell
me.”

“As a Member of Parliament,” began Mr. Chiswell,
“Freddy was not what the world might call a roaring
success.  Used to take a lot of trouble, and the Duke, his
old father, was always getting at him, and asking when he was
going to be asked to join the Cabinet.  As a matter of fact,
his speeches sounded all right when he said ’em off to me
in Curzon Street, but apparently when he tried ’em in the
House they didn’t go for nuts.  I never went down
there to hear him—got too much
p. 164
respect for myself to go near the
place—but I always read the Parliamentary reports, and
there, when he did get the chance of speaking, the papers
mentioned his name amongst the ‘Also spokes,’ and
that was about all.  Whatever faults he may have had as a
Member of Parliament, he was, and he is, a first-class chap to
valet, and I don’t care”—Mr. Chiswell gave a
resolute gesture—“I don’t care where the next
comes from.  I’ve only to say one word against a suit
of clothes, and that suit of clothes is virtually handed over to
me on the spot.  I know to a penny what his income is, and I
know to a penny what his expenses amount to.  A peculiar
chap, mind you, in some ways; never able, for instance, to bear
the idea of being in debt.  Most extraordinary, with people
of his class.”

Chiswell dismissed this problem.

“Now you must understand—you know me well enough
to realise it—that I’m not one of those who want to
be always chopping and changing.  If I’m in a nice
comfortable easy-chair like this, I’m not the kind of chap
to give it up, and go and sit out there in the corridor on a
tip-up wooden seat.  I’m the sort
that—”

p.
165
“Leave off bragging as soon as you’re
tired,” suggested Miss Everitt, “and get on with your
story.”

The young man, an elbow resting on the ledge of the window,
and giving no attention to the scenery which flew past, with a
straight road curling up like a length of white ribbon, applied
himself to the task of describing the course of procedure
adopted.  The girl gave now and again a cough of criticism,
here and there a slightly astonished lift of the eyebrows.
Occasionally she sniffed at a bottle of Eau de Cologne with the
air—obviously copied from some superior model—the air
of having temporarily lost interest in the subject.  Stated
with a brevity that Chiswell, the day before him and personal
exultation behind, could not be induced to show, the particulars
might be fairly stated thus.  Chiswell—

“Mind you,” he said firmly, “no one can call
me a Paul Pryer.  I look after myself; I don’t profess
to look after others.”

—Chiswell happened, by chance, to come across a note
addressed to his master which, so far as he could judge, had no
reference to his master’s Parliamentary duties, or to any

p. 166
scheme
for improvement of the masses; he founded his opinion on the fact
that it commenced “My dearest.”  Chiswell, a man
of the world, would have been prepared to exercise tolerance and
to pass it by with a wink, but for the fact that the
communication was dated from an exclusive ladies’ club; the
fact that the writer adopted a pen name baffled him and aroused
his curiosity.  He left the letter on the table, and
concealed inquisitiveness until he should be entrusted with
letters for the post.  Looking through the bundle handed to
him at four o’clock he felt pained and grieved to find that
his master had not trusted him fully and entirely; the envelopes
were addressed either to Esquires or to ladies known to the world
as seriously interested in the work of the party.  He
particularly asked whether there were any other communications to
be placed in the pillar box for despatch, and his master, on the
point of running off to the House, distinctly and formally
answered:

“No, Chiswell.  That’s the lot.
Don’t forget to post them.”

“Quite sure, sir?”

The reply to this polite and deferential
p. 167
question
came in the form of a request, first that Chiswell should not be
a fool, second that if he could not help being a fool, he would
at any rate take steps to hide and to mask the
circumstance.  Chiswell was affected by these remarks as a
duck is concerned by water running over its back; what did
perturb him was the want of confidence shown between master and
man after an acquaintance that had lasted for years.
Chiswell, pondering on this, was placing the letters singly in
the pillar box and giving to each a final examination when he
discovered that one, addressed to—

“I know!” said Miss Everitt, much interested.

—Bore a special sign on the flap of the envelope.
Mr. Chiswell, scarce hoping that he had struck the trail,
retained this and kept it back for further consideration.

The custom of placing scarlet wax on the flap of an envelope
and impressing the wax with a seal is probably an old-fashioned
tradition dating from the days when gum could not be
trusted.  In the case of an envelope fastened in the
ordinary way, Chiswell would have had to take the trouble of
p. 168
placing a
kettle on the gas stove; in the present instance his work was
rendered easy by the help of a penknife and, later, the use of a
stick of wax and the seal.  The matter appeared to be
serious.  A passing flirtation Chiswell might have
permitted, although that he would have held undignified in a
Member of the House of Commons, but within the few lines of the
letter before him there seemed a plain hint of marriage.  He
was about to tear up the letter in the hope of thus giving a
start to a misunderstanding when it suddenly occurred to
him—

“An inspiration,” said Chiswell contentedly.
“That’s what you may call it.”

—It suddenly occurred to him that the insertion of two
words in the brief note, just two words in a space that seemed to
have been left temptingly for them, would entirely alter the
meaning: changing it from a hurried message of affection into a
hasty intimation of dislike.  “Do not” were the
two words, and Chiswell took the pen and wrote them as quickly as
he now, in the Cote d’Azur express, spoke them.

“You’re not blaming me,” urged Mr. Chiswell
apprehensively.

p.
169
“Go on,” she ordered.

Little else to go on about.  The letter, resealed, went
to its destination; the General Election came, and that meant a
quick departure for the country.  Freddy, greatly worried
with one matter and another, seemed, so far as his valet could
judge, to enter upon the contest in anything but a whole-hearted
fashion; Chiswell managed to intercept and cancel a telegram sent
to the same young party, urgently begging her to come and
help.  The meetings were noisy, and the candidate, who but a
few years before made retorts which became classical, and
delivered speeches the reports of which had to be decorated by
reporters with “Loud laughter” and “Long and
continued cheering,” gave no signs of alertness, falling
back on dreary statistics which he himself could not understand,
and his audiences declined to accept.  Now that it was all
over, they were on their way to Nice, where Chiswell hoped to
meet no one but other defeated candidates and attendants who, it
might be hoped, would, in their own interests, abstain from the
vulgar chaff to which he and his master had been subjected in
town.

p.
170
“But what I want to point out to you, my
dear—beg pardon—what I want to say is that I managed
to stop him from entering upon marriage, and in doing so, I
reckon I did a good turn for myself, and that I did a good turn
for you.”

“She was very much worried and upset.”

Chiswell stretched himself luxuriously.

“It don’t do to share other people’s
anxieties,” he said.  “Great thing in this world
is to keep trouble off your own shoulders.  Do that, and you
may reckon you’ve done pretty well.  How have you been
getting along since—since—”

“Since you dropped me?”

“Mutual consent,” he argued, rather uneasily,
“mutual consent.”  Both looked out of the window
for a time.  “By the by, do you ever see anything of
that chap Miller?  You don’t remember him perhaps; he
was in Grosvenor Gardens when last I heard of him.”

“I believe he’s there still,” she answered,
examining the tips of her boots.

“When did you—”

“Oh, don’t bother me!” cried Miss Everitt
sharply.  “You’re always wanting to know
p. 171
everything
about everybody.  A nuisance, that’s what you
are.”

“I’ve got no grievance against Miller,”
contended Chiswell.  “You’re doing me an
injustice.  Me and Miller are good friends enough.
Last time I met him he gave me some information, and we parted on
what I may call the most amicable terms.  I shouldn’t
at all mind,” he went on generously, “I
shouldn’t object in the least to running across poor Miller
again.”

“You needn’t call him
‘poor.’”

“I’m not using the term,” said Mr. Chiswell,
“in a monetary sense.”

“The monetary sense, as you call it, is about the only
one you possess.”

Noting that she tapped the side of her easy-chair and that her
head trembled, he decided to say nothing more on the subject,
reverting instead to the matter already discussed.  In going
over some of the circumstances he found excuse for increased
content; the swiftness of his action, and the general dexterity
he had displayed made his eyes grow round and bulgy.  The
dining-car attendant came through to announce that the first
series for lunch was ready, and Chiswell said he would smoke one

p.
172
cigarette and then go along and see whether his
services were required by Freddy.  Miss Everitt rose,
remarking that it would be well, perhaps, for her to ascertain,
at once, whether she could be of any use to Emily.

They returned to their chairs in less than five minutes: one
perturbed, the other calm.

“Well, of all the—” he spluttered.
“What I mean to say is, what in the world is going to
happen next, I wonder?”

“That’s more than either of us can tell,”
remarked Miss Everitt composedly.  “What I know is
that I do want my lunch.  Sight of food in the dining-car
has made me feel hungry.”

“The two of them!  The two of them sitting there at
a small table opposite each other!”

“I caught sight through the glass door of the bill of
fare,” said Miss Everitt.  “The name of the fish
I couldn’t quite make out, but there were côtes de
boeuf rôtis, and poularde, and haricots
verts—”

“They were sharing a bottle of Chablis together.
And he—he’d placed his hand on the top of her
hand.  Did you notice?”

“Wonder whether they’ll give us an ice?”

p.
173
Chiswell found a handkerchief and rubbed his
forehead.

“All very well for you to sit there and talk about food;
how do you know that now they’ve met and made it up, that
she won’t get rid of you in the same way that he’s
jolly well certain to manage without me?”

“It doesn’t matter,” she replied, with
calm.  “I’ve saved!”

“The amount you’ve saved, my girl,” he
declared, “will last you for just about five
weeks.”

“What do you know about how much I’ve put
by?” she demanded.

“I can tell you the sum to within a pound.  I can
write it down now, if you’ll lend me a lead
pencil.”

He scribbled some figures on the margin of his newspaper, and
handed it across to her.

“Guess again!” she said.

“It isn’t a question of guessing,” he
said.  “I happen to know.  Unless you’ve
made a considerable sum within the last three months,
that’s the exact amount.”

“You really believed, then, what Mr. Miller told
you?”

The conductor came, and returned to each
p. 174
the green
cardboard covers enclosing their tickets.  Under the
impression that Chiswell was still a blade, a chum, a jovial
companion, the conductor aimed at him a cheerful blow on the
shoulder, and the train giving at this moment a lurch, the action
took something of a more aggressive nature.  Chiswell blazed
up, trying to disengage himself from his coat.  Other
passengers in the saloon looked around interestedly; Miss Everitt
interposed and ordered Chiswell to behave himself, to remember
that he was in the presence of ladies.  The conductor
apologised and went on; the French passengers remarked to each
other that the English formed an excitable nation.

“Pardon me,” said Chiswell to his companion,
“but I should like to know your facts.  I should be
very glad indeed if you’ll kindly place me in possession of
the true circumstances.  To put it
plainly—here’s your pencil—how much have you
actually got in the bank on deposit, or on current account at the
present moment?  That’s all I want to know.”

She struck out his figures and wrote underneath.  Leaning
over he gave a whistle of astonishment.

p.
175
“My dear,” he said deferentially.
“There’s been a misunderstanding, due to the
interference of outsiders.  It’s not too late to put
it all smooth and right again, but at the same time I’m
bound to say such conduct is altogether inexcusable.  When I
come across Miller, I shall tell him so to his face.  Who
asked him to come to me, and give me wrong information, I should
like to know?”

“I did!” she remarked.  “But I’ve
just made up for it by giving correct information on another
subject to my young mistress.”

Chiswell threw himself back in his chair, and gazed severely
at the roof of the saloon carriage.

“All I can say is,” he declared, “it’s
absolutely ruined my lunch.”

p.
176
XI—COUNTER ATTRACTIONS

Half
the time I don’t trouble
to look up at them, especially when I happen to be busy.
They put their money underneath the brass wire; they ask for what
they want; it’s given to them, and off they go.  If
any other plan was adopted we should never get through the work
at our office, and there would be complaints to answer, and the
superintendent might send some one along to kick up a row.
As Miss Maitland says, when all the customers are made on one
pattern everything will be much easier to manage; meanwhile we
can’t do better than to do the best we can, and to
recognise that some are in a hurry, some are just the
reverse.

“Above all,” mentioned Miss Maitland, when I first
came here, “no carrying on across the counter with young
gentlemen.”

p.
177
“When you’ve known me longer, Miss
Maitland,” I said, “you’ll see how unnecessary
it is to make a remark like that.”

“I’m only warning you for your own
good.”

“I can behave myself,” I said, “as well as
most girls.  The fact that I’m a bit above the average
in regard to looks—”

“Is that really a fact?” inquired Miss
Maitland.

The very queer thing about it all was that he came in on the
afternoon of the very second day I was there.  I was having
an argument about a halfpenny with a lady sending a telegram, and
she said that she always understood we were well paid, and if
that was true we ought not to try to make anything extra.  I
kept my temper, but I daresay I managed to say what I wanted to
say—I generally do—and eventually she took the
telegram back and decided to take a cab to Charing Cross and send
it from there.

“Shilling’sworth of your best stamps,” he
requested; “I want them to match my necktie.”

“Pennies or halfpennies?” I asked.  You can
understand I wasn’t in the mood for nonsense just then.

p.
178
“Which are most fashionable just now, miss?
I don’t want to look odd or conspicuous.”

“You’ll do that in any case.  Kindly say what
you want.”

“Perhaps I’ll try sixpennyworth of each,” he
said.

I tore them off and pushed them underneath the trellis.

“Are these absolutely fresh?  I may not be cooking
them at once, you see.  They’ll be all right, I
suppose, if I keep them on ice?”

“You may as well put your head there at the same
time,” I said.

The other girls on my side of the counter looked around, and
Miss Maitland gave a cough.

“Heavens!” he said, putting on a deep voice,
“how I adore the fair creature!  Ere yonder sun sinks
to its rest she must, she shall, be mine.”

I glanced up at him, prepared to give him such a haughty look,
but I found he was a good-tempered-looking young fellow with his
straw hat tipped to the back of his head, and somehow I
couldn’t manage my cold stare quite so well as usual.
Two or three people
p. 179
entered through the swing doors at
that moment and came straight to my part of the counter.

“Very well then,” he said loudly,
“that’s arranged.  Outside the British Museum
Tube Station half-past eight to-night.  Mind, I shan’t
wait more than ten minutes.”

The fuss Miss Maitland made just because I’d answered
him back!  I had a good mind to say something about old
maids, but I stopped it just in time; instead I thought it the
best plan to say he was a great friend of my brother’s and
that he was one of those peculiar young gentlemen who had the
impression that he ought to keep up his reputation for being
comic.

“If he comes in again,” said Miss Maitland,
“call me, and I’ll show you how to deal with
him.”

The next day at about the same time I noticed out of the
corner of my eye his lordship at the doors.  He came in and
I knew he was looking for me; to please Miss Maitland I went
along to deal with some registered letters; she left her stool
and took my place.  “Now,” I said to myself,
“now he’ll get his head bitten off.”  I
was engaged with work for about five
p. 180
minutes, and to my surprise, when I
had finished, there was Miss Maitland chatting away with him as
amiably as possible.  “I like to go somewhere fresh
every year,” she was saying.  “That’s why
I went to Windermere last summer.”  He said,
“Not in July by any chance?” and she said,
“Yes, the middle of July.”  It appeared he had
been there at that date; not exactly Windermere but at Bowness,
and he remarked—talking to her in a very different way from
the one he had adopted with me—that it would have greatly
improved his holiday if he had been so fortunate as to meet
her.  Maity gave a sort of smile and was about to make some
further remark when he took out his watch, lifted his straw hat,
hurried away.

“Really,” she said to me, still flushed with the
conversation and looking quite young, “really a very
well-spoken gentleman.  Depends a good deal on how we
approach them.  If they think we want silly talk, why
naturally enough they give it.  In a general way,”
concluded Maity, as though she possessed a wide and considerable
experience, “in a general way men treat us as we deserve to
be treated.”

He came in again that afternoon to use the
p. 181
telephone;
the box was occupied and he had to wait.  We were all
watching to see how he would behave this time; lo and behold if
he didn’t take a big book from underneath his arm called
The Horse and his Health and read carefully, taking no notice of
any of us.  Maity looked disappointed, and one of the girls
said the great drawback about men was that they were never twice
alike.

That was the evening I found him waiting outside.  It
always rains when I leave my umbrella at home, and I
couldn’t very well refuse his offer to see me into the
motor omnibus, and it was certainly kind of him to suggest that I
should take his gamp.  I told him that the bus took me
within a minute and a half of mother’s house.

At the time I was in the habit of telling mother everything,
and she decided—not often she praised me—that I had
behaved in a ladylike manner, and mentioned it would be a good
thing if every mother brought up children as she had treated
me.  Mother told me about one or two half-engagements that
occurred before she married poor father, and gave me one piece of
advice which she said was worth its weight in gold, namely, that
the
p.
182
moment you saw a young man getting fond of you the best
plan was to pretend to be indifferent and in this way to make him
see that there was a lot of hard work in front of him.
Mother said this three times to impress it on my memory.

How in the world he found out the name it was not easy to see,
but, as every one is aware, people spare themselves no trouble
when they become fond of anybody.  However that may be, the
fact remains that a letter came, signed W. J. C., saying the
writer would be at the statue on a certain day and at a certain
hour, and, just for fun, I kept the appointment.  Maity was
very nice about giving me leave, and I waited there ten
minutes.  For a full ten minutes nothing happened, and I had
to look at the omnibuses as they stopped in order to pretend I
wanted to catch one of them.  Presently I caught sight of
him looking in a newspaper shop, and taking his time over it
too.  I became so mad that if there had been a pebble about
I think I should have picked it up and thrown it at him.  He
turned, and I had to wave my muff in order to gain his
attention.

“Hullo,” he said, coming across.
“Taking
p.
183
up express messenger-boy work?  Where’s your
parcel?”

“I came here,” I said coldly, “because I was
asked to do so, and for no other reason.  I’ve no
desire to be made to look like an idiot.”

“Plenty of easier tasks than that,” he
mentioned.  “I should reckon you were one of the most
sensible girls going.”

“People say that about a lady when they can’t
think of any other compliment to pay her.”

“Are you waiting for anybody, I wonder?”

“I wish you wouldn’t try to make jokes.”

“My dear girl,” he cried, and he seemed greatly
concerned, “please forgive me.  And now that
we’re here, what shall we do?”  He looked
around, glanced at his watch, and sighed.  “Come along
and see a bioscope show.”

We caught a bus and went to one of the swell places in Oxford
Street; I couldn’t help feeling pleased when I noticed that
he paid eighteenpence each for seats.  You can say what you
like, and you can talk about the joys of being independent, but
there’s something very gratifying in discovering for the
first time that a gentleman is willing to take
p. 184
your ticket
for you.  Of course the place was all darkened whilst the
pictures were going on, and I thought perhaps he would try to
take my hand, and I was prepared to give him a pretty sharp
remark if he did; but nothing happened, and I couldn’t make
it out at all.  It was nothing like what I’d read in
books; nothing like what other girls had told me.

“You seem a very comfortable set in your office,”
he said when the lights went up.  “All on good terms
with each other, aren’t you?”

“I suppose so,” I answered.
“It’s my first experience, you see.  What age do
you think I am?”

“I should say that you are young enough to be pleased if
I guessed you to be older than you really are.  Shall we say
nineteen?”

“Eighteen next birthday, and that’s on Tuesday of
next week.”  (There’s nothing like giving a
hint.)

“What have you been doing all these eighteen
years?”

“Improving myself,” I said.

“You can give that up now you are perfect.”

The lights went down again, and there was set of pictures
about a girl who was being loved by two gentlemen—one
rather plain
p.
185
with plenty of money and the other much better-looking
but apparently only a clerk.  I thought over his last remark
and tried to discover whether he was still joking or whether he
really meant it—if he did mean it it was a very gratifying
thing to be said, especially in view of the fact that mother is
generally finding fault with me.  She has often said that
I’m the worst girl in the world for leaving my shoes about
and not putting a book away when I have done with it, and all
this going on day after day, week after week, had given me a kind
of a lurking suspicion that I wasn’t quite up to the
mark.  When the pictures showed that the plain man’s
money really belonged to the good-looking chap he began to talk
again and went back once more to the subject of the post
office.  I would rather he had spoken of something else; I
wanted to forget Maity and the rest of them for awhile.

“Are many of them engaged?” he asked.

“Two of them say they are,” I replied.
“I should feel inclined to guess it was only a
half-and-half affair in either case.”

“Wonder what their names are?”  I told him
and he seemed relieved.  “It’s very
strange,” he went on, speaking in a more
p. 186
serious way
than usual, “how these affairs happen.  Looks as
though some one who exercises control jumbles all the names into
two hats and picks out one from each at random and decides that
they shall meet each other and fall in love.”

“A good deal of it is mere luck,” I agreed.
“Mother met father at a dance at the Athenæum up at
the end of Camden Road.  Of course a steward introduced
them, but to all intents and purposes they were
strangers.”

“A man goes on,” he said, still thoughtfully,
“fighting pretty hard and not giving much attention to the
other sex and all at once he catches sight of a face, through,
say, brass trelliswork, and instantly he decides
‘That’s the girl for me.’  And he thinks
of nothing else, can’t keep away from the neighbourhood of
her, and—”  He put his hands over his eyes and
bent down.

I felt sorry and I felt pleased if you understand that; sorry
for him, pleased for myself—seemed as though I had done him
an injustice.  It showed that you could not reckon any one
up correctly by their outside manner.  At the first I had no
idea he was anything but the ordinary chaffing sort of young
gentleman,
p.
187
and here he was obviously upset.  All very well
for mother to say that you ought to keep them at arm’s
length when they are fond of you, but I simply couldn’t
help patting his sleeve gently.

“Thanks very much,” he said gratefully.
“You’re a good little girl and I’m really
obliged to you.”

There was a funny set after this, with a short-sighted old
gentleman blundering over everything he did, getting mixed up
with motor cars, carried up by a balloon, tumbling down the
funnel of a ship, and finally being rolled out flat by a steam
roller, and pulling himself together and walking off.

“Always feel sorry for people who have to wear
glasses,” I remarked.

“It improves some people.”

“I don’t agree with you.  See how peculiar
our old joker looks at the office.”

He stared at me.

“Surely you don’t mean that Miss Maitland?”
he said.

“Of course I mean that Miss Maitland.  Who else
should I be referring to?”

He pressed the palm of a hand against his forehead.

p.
188
“Let us get this straight,” he urged.
“We seem to be in a muddle.  Your name is Maitland,
isn’t it?”

“My name is Barnes.  Up to the present.”

“Then that confounded new messenger boy took my shilling
and mixed up the information, and”—he stopped and
fanned himself—“and you received the letter I
intended for her.”

“I wish to goodness,” I said forcibly, “that
some of you men had got a little more common sense.”

*  *  *  *
*

Mother says everything in this world happens for the best, and
in all probability there’s some one else waiting for me
somewhere.  Mother says I have plenty of time in front of
me; mother herself was twenty-eight before she married.
Mother says there is no need for me to feel nervous until I get
past that age.

p.
189
XII—HERO OF HAMMERTON STREET

He
had been away so long that few
people remembered him, but his last exploit before leaving
ensured that in the minds of those few he remained clear and
definite.  His wife, when she set out to meet him, was
accompanied by a Reception Committee of three, and as they waited
outside the large building where he had been staying for the last
few months (his hosts kept several important establishments in
various parts of the country and he had spent part of the time at
one, part at others), as they waited, I say, under the avenue of
trees well away from the front door—having, as a point of
delicacy, no desire to be seen by the servants about the
place—they speculated on the probable improvement in his
personal appearance.  Members of the Committee recalled
precedents where So-and-so went away stout and unhealthy on a
p. 190
vacation of
similar length, and came back so trim and brown that his own
sweetheart would not have known him had she remained in the
neighbourhood.

“Here he is!” cried the wife suddenly.
“I could tell him, bless ’is heart, in a
thousan’.”

“That ain’t him!”

“He’s got a short beard, at any rate,” urged
the wife, admitting her error grudgingly as the visitor was
claimed and marched off by another lady.

“They all ’ave.  Try to use your
intelligence, why don’t you!”

“Well,” said the wife, pointing her umbrella at a
sharp-eyed man, who, coming out of the large doorway, glanced
around suspiciously, “well, at least that’s not my
Jim.”  The sharp-eyed man came across the open space
towards them, still keeping a look-out on either side.
“He’s mistaking us for his own people.  My
Jim’s a better-looking man than him.”

“If you say that again, Meria,” remarked the
arriving man in tones that could not be mistaken, “I shall
have to—  Now then, now then!  I don’t want
no kissing!”

He was dressed in a suit for which he had not been measured,
and his boots were scarcely
p. 191
a precise fit; he shambled along
with his friends, responding gruffly to their polite inquiries
and complaining bitterly—first, that they should have come
to meet him; second, that so many friends were absent.
Informed that some of these were no longer alive, he declined to
accept this as a sufficient excuse, describing them as a
cantankerous lot, ever thoughtless where the feelings of others
were concerned.  They stopped quite naturally at the first
place of refreshment, and he criticised the beverage set before
him, declaring that had he known beer could be so bad, he would
not have worried his thoughts so much about it during recent
years.  He was equally dissatisfied with his first pipe of
tobacco, which he had some trouble to light, and when he heard
that his sister had married a respectable fruiterer, off Bethnal
Green Road, he made no attempt to conceal his annoyance with the
way the world had been managed during his absence.

“Once I turn my back for a moment—” he said
disgustedly.  “Who’s got the pub at the corner
of our street?”

“I’ve moved, James,” explained his wife
apologetically.

p.
192
“Moved?  Who told you to move?”

“The landlord, dear.”

“Don’t you begin ‘dearing’ of
me,” he retorted threateningly.  “Why
wasn’t I asked?”

“There was no opportunity, James.”

“Bah!” he said, in the manner of one who can find
no other repartee.  He turned to the men.  “What
’ave you three come all the way down ere’ for?
On the make, I s’pose?”

“We are not on the make,” said the leader
precisely.  “Recollecting what you was put away for,
we have come down ’ere to offer you, as something in the
nature of a hero, a ’earty welcome on your return to what
we may venture to term your ’earth and
’ome.”  James relaxed the sternness of his
demeanour, and took another sip from his glass, this time without
making a wry face.  “We’re a-going to make a
fuss of you, old man.”

“Don’t go overdoing it,” he said
grudgingly.

They reached Hoxton at about noon, not because the way was
long, but because the Committee, possessing funds, desired to do
the thing well.  A neighbour had taken charge of the
arrangements for dinner, and the three men, arrived at the door
in Hammerton Street,
p. 193
mentioned gracefully that the
reunited pair would in all probability like to be left alone for
a few hours, and withdrew; first, however, warning James that he
would be expected at the Green Man that evening at eight
o’clock precisely, at which hour a few select friends would
be present to wish him success in his future career.

“Whad ye mean by my future career?” he
demanded.  “What are you three a-getting at
now?”

“It’s all right, old chap,” they answered
soothingly.  “Only a form of speech, you
know.”

“Be a bit more careful how you pick your words,”
he retorted threateningly.  “I ’aven’t
come back to be ragged by such as you.”

He was still rather surly that evening when he made his
appearance at the Green Man; he explained to one who was formerly
his closest friend that he had been enjoying a bit of a talk with
the wife.  Surroundings in the clubroom were, however, so
congenial that before long he showed guarded signs of amiability,
albeit he found grounds for annoyance in the fact that some of
his old companions had
p. 194
prospered, and had given up what was
referred to as the old game to engage on sport that, relatively
speaking, was of an honest, law-abiding character.  His best
friend indeed owned a large gold chain and a watch at the end of
it; he was now a bookmaker by profession, not, of course, a
literary person, but one who made money.  On James
suggesting they might perhaps go into partnership together in the
racecourse business, the closest friend said, with some reserve,
that it was an occupation requiring years of patient study, and
the fact of James having been out of the movement so long barred
him both from participating in the profits or sharing the
losses.

“See what I mean, don’t you?” asked the
bookmaker.  “Chuck that what you’re smoking
away, and have a real cigar!”

“I shan’t give you another opportunity,”
said James curtly.  “Should have thought you would
have been glad of a pretty sharp man for your right
’and.”

“But you’ve been rusting,” pointed out the
bookmaker.  (“Now you’ve been and bitten off the
wrong end.”)

Nothing, however, could exceed the geniality
p. 195
of the
hosts.  Thick crusty sandwiches rested on the deal tables;
there was no stint, so far as the guest of the evening was
concerned, in regard to liquids.  Everybody crowded around
him in a flattering way and everybody shook him by the hand
several times; a few promising younger men, who were brought up
and introduced, showed themselves highly sensible of the honour,
and asked eagerly what adventure he thought of going in for
next.

“’Aven’t quite made up me mind,” he
replied cautiously.

The younger men winked knowingly at each other, saying that
James was a deep one and no mistake, adding that an ability to
keep one’s head shut was a gift to be envied.  They
had singing later.  Songs were given which for James (who
had no musical tastes) should at least have possessed the charm
of novelty; the slang contained in them and in the public speech
of many of those present was to him quite incomprehensible.
They repeated unceasingly that they wished him well, and the
bookmaker made a speech just before closing time in which he
pointed out that every man-jack present was prepared to give
James a
p.
196
helping hand.  Never should it be said of them
that they had refused a helping hand to one of the best.  A
helping hand was due to such a hero and a helping hand he should
have.

“Friends, one and all,” said James.  (He
refused for some minutes to make a speech, but gave in to
encouragement.)  “Friends, one and all.”

A cry of “So you said!” and reproving shouts of
“Order!”

“I’ve been away from you fer a few year
owin’ to—owin’ to circs not altogether under my
control” (the room laughed uproariously), “but
I’m back in the midst of you once more, and I can tell you
one thing, and that ain’t two, I’m jolly glad of
it!  I’ve had quite enough penal to last me my
time.  I’m full up of it!  I’ve reached me
limit!  It’s no catch, I tell you!”
(Murmurs of sympathy.)  “If there’s any one
’ere that’s acquired a taste for it, they’re
welcome to my share.  I don’t know that I have much
more to say.  I ’aven’t had much practice at
public speaking of late.  Once you begin to ’old forth
in there” (here he gave a vague jerk of the head),
“why, they let you know it.  Anyway, it’s no use
’arping on the past, and in regard to the promise of a
p.
197
’elping ’and to which you, Mr. Chairman,
have so kindly referred, and to me being a hero, there’s
only one thing I want to say, and that is this: I shall keep you
to it!”

The club-room seemed to think the last sentence had an
ungracious sound, and there would have been an inclination to
hedge only that the white-sleeved potman arrived at that moment
with a dictatorial shout of “Now you cheps!
Time!” and the party had to break up.  Out in the
street, James’s arm was again in request, and his hand was
shaken so often with so many assurances of admiration and
enthusiastic comradeship, that he went off towards Hammerton
Street quite dazed and not sure whether he had won a battle, or
saved lives from drowning.  The men cheered him as he left
and began to chant an appropriate song, but a policeman came up,
and the crowd, not wishful for argument with the force, said
respectfully, “It’s all right, Mr. Langley, sir;
we’re just on the move,” and disappeared.

Womenfolk came round to Hammerton Street the next day asking
to be permitted to see him, and James’s wife would have
taken another day off, but James said there had
p. 198
been quite
enough gadding about for her already, and insisted she should go
to work.  He sunned himself at the front door with a fine
pretence of not knowing that he was being observed, the while
women on the opposite side of the pavement held up their babies
to see him and whispered admiring comments.

“You’d never think it to look at him, would you,
now?”

“I recollect his case as well as anything.  It was
before I was married to my present ’usband, but I can
recollect it all just as though it was only yesterday.  I
remember so well saying to my young sister—I was on
speaking terms with her just then—I remember saying,
‘Ah, well!’ I said.  Just like that!”

“She’s kept herself to herself, mind you, all the
time he’s been away.  I will say that for
her!”

“Wonder what he’ll be up to now.  He’s
turning something over in his mind, I lay!”

The hero could not help being pleased with all this attention,
and after he had taken his dinner at a coffee-shop, where the
waitress, informed of his distinguished reputation, stood back
and watched him over an illustrated
p. 199
paper, he put on a collar and again
lounged at the doorway.  The crowd was not so great now, and
consisted for the greater part of children who played tip-cat,
and gave no notice to him excepting when his presence interfered
with the game.  Disappointed with his audience, James went
indoors and, taking off his collar, indulged in the unaccustomed
luxury of an afternoon nap.  When his wife returned from
work it struck him that she was slightly more argumentative in
manner than she had been on the first day; in the course of
debate she threw out a most disconcerting hint in regard to a job
of work, news of which had come to her ears.

“Look ’ere, my gel!” said James
definitely.  “You may as well understand me fust as
last.  A man with so many friends as I’ve got
won’t want to work for many a long day yet.”

Nevertheless the idea gave him perturbation and he went round
to the Green Man to meet the friends referred to and receive from
them reinforcement of his hopes and views.  There were only
two or three in sight, and these were outside the house; they
hailed him with a casual cry of, “’Ullo, James!
Your turn to stand drinks, ain’t it?” and
p. 200
having
brought some money out, the savings of his compulsory retreat, he
found himself compelled to entertain them.

“And what you think of doing now, James?” they
asked.  (“Here’s luck!”)

“Well,” he said slowly, “I s’pose
eventually I shall ’ave to find, as the missis says,
something or other.  But not yet for a month or
two.”

“You’ll probably discover a chance
of—”

“No,” said James with emphasis.  “Not
me!  No more jobs on the cross for this child.  Risks
are too great.”

“But you don’t mean to say that you’re going
to chuck it?”  The men were so much amazed that their
glasses remained in mid-air.

“If you guess again,” said James stolidly,
“you’ll be wrong.”

He looked about in Hoxton the rest of the evening for friends,
and looked about in vain.  The next day he called on his
closest friend, the bookmaker; the bookmaker was just off to
Kempton Park and in peril of losing a train at Waterloo.  He
had heard, it seemed, of James’s decision, and James could
trace no sign of the generous friendship previously
p.
201
expressed.  To James’s suggestion that he
should accompany the bookmaker to Kempton Park, and enjoy a day
at the other’s expense, the reply came prompt and
definite.  “That be ’anged for a tale!”
said the bookmaker.

On the following Monday James went to ask about the job of
work to which his wife had referred; all his worst fears were
confirmed when he found himself successful in obtaining it.

“Drawback of being an ’ero is,” said James
gloomily, “that it don’t last much more than about
five minutes.”

p.
202
XIII—DAMAGES FOR LIBEL

“A
rare
rush whilst it
lasts,” mentioned Mrs. Crowther, assisting in the task of
clearing tables.  “My dear husband used to reckon up
how much we should be making profit in a year if, instead of
being from twelve to two, it went on from what he called early
morn to dewy eve.”  She sighed.  “Mr.
Crowther had a lot of poetry in his disposition—much more
so than most eating-house keepers in Millwall.”

“Did he make bits up out of his own ’ead?”
asked the girl deferentially.

“Ethel,” said the proprietress, nursing a column
of plates and speaking with resolution, “you’re new
to the place, and you’re not full acquainted with the
rules.  Understand, once for all, please, that I don’t
allow a word to be said against my late husband—nor
whispered.”

p.
203
“Here’s a stray customer coming in,
ma’am,” remarked the assistant.  “Give me
that armful, and you see to him.”

A stout man, after examining the day’s announcement
outside, entered and sat down with the relieved air common to
those who have walked a great distance and to those who find in
any form of exercise a source of trouble; he took off his hat,
hung up his overcoat, and said, with relish, “Here comes
the busy part of my day!”

Mrs. Crowther rested one palm on the table and gazed at the
reversed notice on the window: “The Best of Everything and
Everything of the Best,” giving him the space to make up
his mind.

“You’ve got a nice little show here.”

“Not bad, sir,” she replied briefly.
“What can I get for you?”

“Been all done up recently, too, if I mistake not.
If it hadn’t been that I remembered it was exactly opposite
the entrance to the works I shouldn’t have recognised
it.  Spent some of the ’appiest hours of my life, I
did, over the way.”

“The steak and kidney pudding is off,” she said,
glancing over his shoulder.  She
p. 204
took the bill of fare from his hand
and deleted the entry, returning the pencil to its position in
the fastening of her blouse.  Frowning at the impetuosity
exhibited, he gave an order.  She left, and returned with
the liver and bacon and a basket containing squares of household
bread.

“Any idea where my old friend Crowther is at the present
moment?” he asked jovially.  “Him and me were
great chums in the old days that are past and done
with.”

“He’s gone.”

“Where to?”

She pointed upward reverently.

“That isn’t exactly the place where I should have
thought of looking for him.”

“What do you mean by that?” she demanded
sharply.

“Oh, nothing,” he said, beginning to eat.
“Only very few of us in this world, ma’am, if you
don’t mind putting yourself out of the question, can be
looked upon as perfect.  My name’s Hards,” he
went on, his mouth full.  “Hards, with an aitch.
Daresay you’ve heard him mention me.  I’m
speaking now of—what shall I say?—four, or it might
be the early part of five.  We were what
p. 205
they call
inseparable, him and me, at that period.”

“Crowther gave up all his former companions when I
married him.”

“He used to complain that you ruled him with a rod of
iron.”

“I only wish,” she declared vehemently,
“that the dear man was here to contradict you.”

“Crowther was the sort of chap,” said the other,
with deliberation, “who’d contradict anything.
Never better pleased than when he was arguing that black was
white.  I’ve known Crowther say one thing to a girl
one minute, and another the—”

The customer found his plate snatched away, the remainder of
his chunk of bread swept to the floor.

“Go off out of my dining-rooms,” she
ordered.  “Don’t you stay here another minute,
or else I may use language that I shall be sorry for afterwards,
and that you’ll be sorry for afterwards.
There’s your hat, hanging up just behind you.  Now
move, sharp!”

The sleeves of his overcoat, owing to some defect in the
lining, were difficult to manage,
p. 206
and this gave him time to
protest.  He had come, he declared, with no other intention
than that of giving patronage to an establishment which he
remembered, with affection, in the time of Crowther’s
mother, and to enjoy a talk over the past; if, in the course of
conversation, he had over-stepped the mark, no one regretted it
more acutely than himself.  A plain man, accustomed to
speaking his mind, he often found that he gave offence where none
was intended.

“Jack Blunt they used to call me over at the
works,” he added penitently.  “Owing to me
having the awk’ard trick of always telling the
truth!”

Mrs. Crowther so far relented as to call the new girl; she
instructed her to attend to the customer the while she herself
retired to the back to wash up dishes.  Mr. Hards said in a
whisper to the attendant: “Don’t seem to have quite
pulled it off, first go!” and Ethel, also in an undertone,
replied: “Mustn’t get discouraged, uncle.
Mother always says it’s your one fault.  Unsettle her
mind about him, that’s what you’ve got to
do.”

He read a newspaper after the meal, and sent to the
proprietress a deferential inquiry,
p. 207
asking whether he might be allowed
to smoke, and presently hit upon a device for securing another
interview.

“Your memory seems not quite what it ought to be,”
said Mrs. Crowther, following him to the doorway.  “If
I were you I’d see a chemist about it.”

“I should have recollected that I hadn’t settled
up,” he declared, “just about as I was coming up from
the subway at Greenwich.”  He found coins.
“No,” gazing at a shilling reverently,
“mustn’t let you have that one with the hole through
it.  I was told it would bring me luck.  Crowther was
wrong for once, but he meant well.”

“Did that really once belong to my dear husband?”
she asked, with eagerness.  “Oh, do let me look.
I’d give almost anything to be allowed to keep
it.”

“Kindly accept it, ma’am, as a present from me,
and as a kind of apology for the blunder I made just
now.”

“I treasure everything he left behind,” said Mrs.
Crowther tearfully, “since he went, last December, and I
don’t know in the least how to thank you.  Drop in any
day you’re passing by, and let’s have another quiet
chat;
p.
208
I’m never ’appier than when I’m
talking about him.”

“My time’s practically my own,” answered Mr.
Hards.  “Since I retired from over opposite, owing to
a slight disagreement years ago, I’ve done a bit of work,
book-canvassing, but that don’t take up the entire
day.  So long!”

A few of the men came into the restaurant, after leaving the
works; these were folk who had no expectations of finding tea or
supper waiting at home, and they would have stayed on in comfort,
gazing admiringly at the young proprietress, only that Mrs.
Crowther offered a broad hint by instructing Ethel to find the
shutters.  They were drifting off, reluctantly, and one was
saying to the rest that he would certainly make a dash for it
(implying by this that he would make a proposal of marriage) if
the lady were not so obviously devoted to a memory, when Mr.
Hards appeared at the doorway, heated and exhausted by the effort
to arrive before closing-time.  With him a shy-looking
companion, who had to be taken by the arm because he exhibited
inclination to refrain, at the last moment, from entering.
“Be a sport,” urged
p. 209
Mr. Hards.  The other intimated
by his manner that the task was, for him, considerable.

“Looking younger than ever,” declared Mr. Hards
effusively.  “How are you, ma’am, by this
time?  Still keeping well?  Allow me to introduce you
to my friend Ashton.”

“Very pleased,” said Mrs. Crowther with a
nod.  “What will you gentlemen take—tea or
coffee?”

“Don’t suppose,” he remarked still in
complimentary tones, “that we shall be able to tell any
difference.  Ashton, you decide.”

Ashton, looking around, inquired whether the place did not
possess a licence; Mrs. Crowther gave the answer, and he said
that perhaps coffee would do him as little harm as anything.

“Happened to run across him,” explained Mr. Hards,
“and mentioned that I’d met you by chance,
ma’am, and he says ‘Not the widow of silly old
Millwall Crowther?’ he says.  Just like that.
Didn’t you, Ashton?”

Mrs. Crowther turned abruptly, and went to furnish the
order.  “Mind you say ‘yes’ to
everything,” ordered Hards privately and strenuously,
“or else I’ll make it hot for you.”

p. 210
The
two greeted Mrs. Crowther with frank and open countenances.

“The late lamented,” went on Mr. Hards, with a
confidential air, “as you may or may not be aware, used to
be in the ’abit of paying attentions to my friend
Ashton’s sister.”

“I know all about that,” she remarked
curtly.  “It was before he met me.”

“And, realising how anxious you was to get hold of
everything that once belonged to him, I persuaded him to hop off
home and have a search.  And lo and behold,” producing
a small paper parcel from the inside pocket of his overcoat,
“he found this.”  Mr. Hards untied the string
with deliberation.  “There you are!”
triumphantly.  “
Pearls from the Poets
.
And inside, his handwriting.”

“Not sure that I want anything that he gave away to
another lady at a time when him and me were not
acquainted.”

“The date’ll settle that,” said Hards.
“Ashton, your eyes are younger than mine; what do you make
of it?”

Ashton recited the entry with an emphasis on the date; Mrs.
Crowther grabbed at the book, glanced at the writing, and sat
down
p. 211
on
the nearest chair, gazing steadily at a ginger-ale
advertisement.

“Don’t tell me,” begged Hards distressedly,
“that I’ve put my foot into it again.
’Pon my word, if I ain’t the most unlucky chap
alive.  If I’d had the leastest idea that I was going
to be the means of disclosing to you the circumstance that
Crowther gave away presents of this kind, and with this sort of
remark, after he was married to you, why, I’d
sooner—”

She started up with the book, and, selecting the fly-page,
placed this between her eyes and the gas-light.

“Some one’s been altering the date,” she
said quietly.  She threw the volume across.  “You
gentlemen have got just two minutes and a half before we close
for the night.  And, as the business is doing pretty well,
perhaps you don’t mind if I suggest you never show your
faces inside here again.”  She went.

“Any objection to me offering you a word of advice, old
man?” asked Ashton, on the pavement.
“You’re on the wrong tack.  When a woman’s
made up her mind, the best plan is to agree with her.  What
you ought to do—”

p.
212
“Keep quiet,” ordered the other
exasperatedly.  “Can’t you see I’m
thinking?”

They crossed, and walked beside the blank wall of the
works.

Ashton was again invited, in plain language, to preserve
silence by putting his head in a bag.  The lights went out
in the restaurant opposite; on the first floor a match was struck
and applied to the gas globes; the music of a pianoforte was
heard.

“It’s a shame,” declared Hards, throwing out
his arms emphatically, “a right-down shame for a
nice-looking young woman of her sort to be left alone and
neglected.  Here she is, able to cook, able to play, very
good to look at, and she’s no business to be left by
herself.”

“Evidently she don’t want to be left with
you.”

“You hop off home,” ordered Hards, “soon as
ever you like, and take that book with you, and don’t you
ever attempt to interfere again with matters you’ve got no
concern in.  Otherwise—”

His friend hurried away without taking the opportunity to hear
the alternative.

Mr. Hards waited until his niece came out
p. 213
with a
letter for the post.  A whistle brought her to him from the
pillar-box.

“Who was it addressed to?” he demanded.  The
girl replied that she had omitted to look.

“’Pon my word,” he cried, “I seem to
be surrounded by lunatics.  Nobody’s got a particle of
sense, so far as I can ascertain, excepting myself.  No
wonder I can’t manage matters as I should like.  But,
putting all that on one side, what I want now is another
interview with her.”

“Judging by what she said after you left, you’re
not likely to get it.”

“Look here, my girl.  It was your own
mother’s suggestion at the start, and she won’t be
best pleased if you make yourself a stumbling-block.  She,
for some reason, seems to have got tired of me living in her
house at Greenwich, and it was her idea I should marry well, and
settle down somewhere else.  Apart from which, I’ve
arrived at a time of life when I need a woman’s care and
good feeding, and enough money in my pocket to stand treat to
friends after they’ve stood treat to me.”  He
spoke distinctly.  “I’m going to knock at that
door over there presently, and you’ve got to let me in, and
you can stand by and
p. 214
listen whilst I say a few words, and
put it all on a proper footing.”

“But she hates the very sight of you.”

“The sort of sensation,” he declared, “that
can soon be turned to love.”

Mr. Hards thought it wiser, on finding himself outside the
door of the restaurant, to give a sharp double knock.  He
smiled contentedly on hearing young Mrs. Crowther’s voice
call out: “It’s all right, Ethel.  Only the
postman.  I’ll answer him!”  She opened the
door, and faced him with a look of expectancy that at once
vanished.

“Excuse me, ma’am,” he said, taking off his
hat, “but I’ve been speaking my mind to that young
fellow, and he asked me to call back and apologise on his
behalf.  I never noticed what he’d been up to,
altering that date; it wanted a lady’s sharpness and a
lady’s intelligence to detect that.  What he wants me
to say is he acted on the impulse of the moment.”

“He’d better give up acting altogether,” she
remarked.  “Did you really know my husband well, or
was it all gas?”

“Didn’t I never tell you about that affair poor
Crowther and me had with a bobby down
p. 215
near the London Docks one night in
November?  A fine chap,” went on Hards reminiscently,
“if ever there was one.  The way he could put up his
dooks whenever there was trouble about!  I seldom met a
fellow who was his equal.  He was what I call a manly
man.  When they told me he’d gone and left you a widow
I cried like a child, I did.”

“I was upset at the time,” remarked Mrs. Crowther,
“but it soon wore off.”

“It’s often struck me,” he went on,
surprised, “that perhaps you didn’t appreciate him at
his true value whilst he was alive.  Very likely you
don’t know, as I know, the way he used to talk about you
behind your back.”

“If it was anything like the way he talked in front of
my face, I’d rather not hear.”

“Anyway, I daresay, ma’am, you often find yourself
looking about for his successor?”

“To tell you the truth, I do.”

He tried to take her hand, but failed.

“I can see him now,” he remarked
sentimentally.  “We was walking together in Stratford
Broadway, and suddenly he turned to me and he says,
‘Ernest,’ he says, ‘something seems to tell me
I’m not long for this
p. 216
world.  I want you to make me a
promise,’ he says.  ‘If anything amiss happens
to me, I look to you to be a friend to the wife.  And if so
be,’ he says, with a sort of a kind of a break in his
voice, ‘if so be as you should take a fancy to her, and she
should take a fancy to you, nothing would give me more pleasure
looking down on you both,’ he says, ‘than
to—’”

“Bequeathed me to you, did he?”

“It amounts to that, ma’am.”

“All this is news to me,” she remarked.
“About what date was it?”

“About what date?” echoed Hards, rubbing his
chin.  “I can give it you within a very little.
It was the night before I met William Humphries, and him and me
had a few friendly words about football, and I was in the
horspital for three weeks.  That was the early part of
December.  I think it was December you said that poor
Crowther drew his last breath.  Must have been only a few
days—three at the utmost—that he had his talk with
me.”

“That seems strange.”

“Strange things do occur in this world.”

“Because Crowther was laid up in his last illness for
four months inside this house, and
p. 217
never went outside until the
undertaker’s man carried him.  And a pretty tidy
nuisance he was, too, then, and, in fact, all the time I was
married to him.  Is that a constable-coming along, or a
postman?”

Hards, having ascertained that the approaching man did not
represent the law, remained, searching his mind busily.  The
postman stopped, gave Mrs. Crowther a letter with a foreign
postmark, and remarked that the evening was fine.

“His ship will be home here within a fortnight,”
she cried excitedly, glancing at the first words of the
communication.  “Two weeks from to-day.”

“Who?”

“Nobody you know,” said Mrs. Crowther.
“And then we shall be married, and I shan’t have to
keep the men at the works off by pretending to be so fond of my
first.  It’s taken a bit of doing.  Let me think,
now.  You want to see Ethel, I expect, don’t
you?”

“I don’t want to see no one,” he declared
with an emphatic gesture, “no one on this side of the river
ever again, so long as I jolly well live!”

p.
218
XIV—THE REST CURE

“
Knew
you’d like it,
dear,” said Mr. Gleeson confidently.  “I
declared the moment I saw the place, ‘Now this,’ I
said to myself, ‘this will suit the dear wife down to the
ground.’  Just look at that bit over there.
(Wait a moment, driver.)  Isn’t that
simply—”

He gave a gesture which meant that the English language
provided no adequate words.  His wife, with one hand upon
his shoulder, offered an “Ah!” of content.

“You must paint this,” he went on, recovering
powers of speech.  “You must bring your easel and your
white umbrella some morning when I’m busy, and try to get
this effect.  See the top of the church spire above the
trees?”

“That there’s a oast house,” interrupted the
driver.

“You will not forget that I shall have my
p. 219
duties in
the village,” she reminded him.  “We are going
to make life brighter, you know, for everybody.”

“True!” he admitted.  “It will require
discretion.”

“And diplomacy.”

“Still, we’re not exactly amateurs.  We bring
something like a ripe experience to the task.  This will be
child’s play after London.  Think of the difference in
numbers.  Driver, how many inhabitants are there in Murford
Green?”

“Can’t say as I ever counted ’em.”

“But speaking approximately.”

“Well,” said the driver, with deliberation,
“speaking approximately, I should say they was no better
than they ought to be.  And you’ll excuse me, but
I’ve got to get back to meet the five-eight, and if you and
your lady could give me what you may call permission to go on now
without any more pulling up, I shall jest do it.  Otherwise
I shan’t, and then Miss Bulwer won’t let me never
hear the last of it.  That’s what she
won’t!”

“Who is Miss Bulwer?”

“Look ’ere,” argued the driver, half
p. 220
turning in
his seat.  “I’ve answered a pretty tidy number
of questions sence we started from the railway station, and
I’m beginning to lose my voice, and I’m not far off
from losing my temper.  But in reference to your question
concerning, or regarding, or affecting Miss Bulwer, my answer is,
you’ll jolly soon find out!  Is that good enough for
you, or isn’t it?”

“Merely a surface manner,” explained Mr. Gleeson,
as the open fly trundled on again.  “You don’t
know these people, my dear.  A certain veneer of
brusqueness, but underneath that good pure gold.  Simple
natures, I admit, but as honest and
straightforward—Wonder,” dropping his voice,
“wonder how much he expects for this journey?”

“Pay him well,” suggested young Mrs. Gleeson, also
in a whisper.  “We must make a good impression at the
start.  Say eighteen-pence.”

“Fortunately,” resuming ordinary tones,
“both you and I will be protected and saved by our keen
sense of humour.”  He smiled.  “I expect
our arrival will flutter Murford Green pretty considerably.
On an even surface the slightest ripple shows.”

p. 221
Both
stood up in the open carriage on finding that the prophecy seemed
to receive full justification.  Twenty or thirty men and
lads were rushing across the triangle of green, shouting wildly;
in their hands they carried stout hammers and long-handled axes;
women cheered from doorways of cottages.  A few were
distracted temporarily by sight of the station fly, but, reproved
by the others, they went on, atoning for the slight delay by
shrieking more loudly than the rest.

“Anything on, driver?”

“Something coming off,” answered the man.
“I said what’d ’appen when people began to lock
up gates that’d been open for gen’rations and
gen’rations.  I warned ’em, but they
wouldn’t take no notice.  And I ain’t
of’en wrong, neither,” concluded the driver.

“Don’t be frightened, dear,” urged Mr.
Gleeson.  “I’ll go out presently and set it to
rights.  One wise word from an impartial person, and it will
all be over.”

The driver said at the destination that, times without number,
he had received three and six for the service, paid willingly; if
the gentleman had no more silver he supposed he would have to be
content with three shillings.
p. 222
In reply to contentions, the driver
asked whether Mr. Gleeson was aware of the price being asked, at
the present moment, for oats, and Mr. Gleeson having to admit
that his knowledge on this subject was incomplete, the driver
retorted, “Very well then, what’s the use of
arguing?  Why not pay up and look pleasant over
it?”  The fare obeyed the first part of this
recommendation.  The two maids (sent on in advance from
Kensington) stood inside the gate, and caught the driver’s
farewell remark.

“Really, ma’am,” said the elder primly,
“the manners of these people!  I thought I knew
something about language, but I’ve learnt something the
three days we’ve been down here.  Had a pleasant
journey?  Me and Sarah have both been feeling humpish.
I told her it would be all right soon as ever you and the master
came.”

Mr. Gleeson set out, immediately after a meal, to arrange the
question that was troubling Murford Green.  He had changed
into a Norfolk suit, and as a further concession smoked a briar
pipe; with a thick walking-stick he prodded at dock-leaves on the
green.  Near one corner of the triangle a meeting
p. 223
was being
held, with a large-faced man shouting excitedly from a Windsor
chair.  Mr. Gleeson, crossing over, added himself to the
audience.

“Well spoke,” sang the crowd, as the large man
appeared to finish.  “Very well putt!”

“There’s my shop ’cross there,”
shouted the orator, pointing to windows that had
“Crutchley, Butcher,” in marble letters
overhead.  “If any one thinks I’ve broke the
law, that’s where they can serve a summons.”

The crowd looked around at the village constable.  The
constable frowned with the air of a man who had not entirely
succeeded in making up his mind.

“We’ve got our rights,” the butcher went on,
“and I defy any one to say the contrairy.  If
there’s anybody here who don’t agree with me,
now’s the time for him to step up and express his
opinion.  Free speech is our motto and—
What name, please?”

“My name is Gleeson,” announced the newcomer,
“and I should like to say a few words.”

“For the agitation, may I ask, or against?”

“My attitude,” said Mr. Gleeson, “is that of
a peace-maker.”

The crowd grumbled; the butcher called for order.  Mr.
Gleeson ascended the chair.

p. 224
When,
at the end of ten minutes, he stepped down, only the constable
was there to give him a hand.  The constable accounted for
the dispersal of the crowd by pointing out that supper time was
near, and on Mr. Gleeson asking whether he thought the words
spoken had produced any effect, replied, cautiously, that it was
difficult to say.  The constable, as one who had looked on
at many struggles, gave the opinion that you could not do better
than let the parties fight it out and, this done, then possibly,
but not certainly, came the moment for you to interfere.
Mr. Gleeson felt bound, in reply, to mention that he had in his
time been called to the bar; intimated that, in circumstances
such as these, it seemed more fitting that he should give advice
than take it.

“Now,” admitted the constable, “now
you’re putting a different light, sir, on the matter.
To tell the truth, I wasn’t quite aweer who I was talking
to.  I look on your arrival here, sir, as particular
fortunate, because you can back me up in any action I see fit to
take.”

“Any correct action.”

“That’s the only way I’ve got of doing
p.
225
things.  I’ve never yet made a blunder, and
I don’t suppose now I ever shall.”

“We are all of us liable to err,” pointed out Mr.
Gleeson.

“Being liable to do a thing,” retorted the
constable judicially, “and actually doing it, is two
entirely different matters.  Shall I tell you, sir, what
idea has just come into my head?”

Permission given.

“This is the way I get ’old of notions,”
went on the other self-exultantly.  “I may be walking
along a quiet lane, or standing here, as I am now, and all at
once they come into my noddle like a—well, more like a
flash of lightning than anything else.  It’s
won’erful.  Gives me quite a turn for the
moment.  Guess what the notion is that I’ve just
thought of.”

The gentleman from London excused himself from making the
attempt, and found his arm hooked confidentially by the handle of
the policeman’s stick.

“I’ll bring over to your ’ouse this very
evening two of the leaders of this movement, or agitation, or
whatever you like to call it.  You take down their evidence
and to-morrow
p.
226
you go and call on Miss Bulwer.  She’s the
lady who’s been trying to stop up this path.  You talk
it over with her, you do, and settle it, and then announce your
decision.  As easy,” concluded the policeman,
detecting hesitation, “as easy as saying the
A.B.C.”

Two days later the constable, on receiving news from
Crutchley, Butcher, that the affair had been amicably settled,
was able to state that the village could reckon itself once more
in debt to him, and mentioned the case of a colleague at
Middlesham who had recently been presented by grateful
inhabitants with a bicycle.  Later came information that
Miss Bulwer had discharged her housemaid, with a month’s
wages in lieu of notice; the driver of the station fly, in the
course of a chat with his fare, ascertained the cause for her
dismissal was that Miss Bulwer had understood her (the housemaid)
to say, before the Londoner’s call, that she believed Mr.
Gleeson was a bachelor, whereas the departing housemaid declared
she had only mentioned that he was clean-shaven.  All the
same the decision of the arbitrator stood; Miss Bulwer was
declared to be the owner of the right of way, but graciously
permitted the inhabitants to use it.
p. 227
Few of the
villagers had walked along the path before the locked gate was
placed there, and no one showed any anxiety to do so now that it
was thrown open.

“A most satisfactory beginning,” said Mr. Gleeson
to his young wife.  “Nothing could be more
auspicious.  Now, we are about to take up the task of
breaking down some barriers on our own account.  Your help,
dear, will be specially needed.”

“I haven’t your tact.”

“You have something better, my love,” he replied
gallantly.  “You have charm.  Together we ought
to do a great work.”

“The place is beautifully quiet now,” she
remarked.

“‘If there’s peace to be found in the
world,’” quoted Mr. Gleeson, “‘a heart
that is humble may hope for it here.’”

“The girls are complaining.”

“They will soon become accustomed to the village and its
surroundings.  It takes time for a Londoner to settle
down.  The silence,” he went on, going to the window,
“is to me most impressive.”

“It appears to strike them as being dull.”

That evening, when the two were consulting
p. 228
the local
directory, taking down names and perfecting arrangements, a
sudden uproar started near the open windows, and the servants
came hurrying in to make protest against the noise; Mary and Emma
urged that the master ought to go out and see what was
happening.  Looking through the open window the group could
see that every man, every lad, every woman carried articles
capable of producing clamour: some bore dustpans, some toy drums,
some fire-irons.  Mr. Gleeson felt able to give an
explanation to the affrighted woman.  It had, he believed,
to do with bees; not quite certain about details, he felt sure it
concerned bees—swarming or something of the kind.

“I don’t want to be stung,” said cook
nervously.  “Wasps always make straight for
me!”

The crowd stopped at a house facing the green, and there the
hullabaloo increased to such an extent that Mr. Gleeson, finding
his cap, announced an intention of putting a stop to the row
without further delay.  The women expected the turmoil would
cease directly he reached the scene; they observed that he spoke
to one or two, remonstrating with them;
p. 229
the folk
seemed to be making an explanation, and he again used
argumentative gestures; they appeared to order him to go away
and, after one or two further efforts, he retired.  The
uproar continued.

“Not bees,” he announced, entering the room.
“No!  My dear, just send the maids to the
kitchen.”

The girls went.

“A primitive custom,” he explained, “with
which I was not previously acquainted.  It seems a retired
farmer living at the house in question lost his wife three months
ago.”

“Surely a strange way of expressing sympathy.”

“That is not exactly the idea.  The retired farmer
has married again—married the nurse, and the village thinks
it not quite right.”

“It isn’t right,” she declared warmly.
“I consider the villagers are quite justified in their
action.”

“I don’t agree with you, dear.”

“If I died,” she contended, “and you married
again in such a short time, I should be very much gratified in
looking down to find that people—”

p.
230
“Why do you say ‘down’?”
The contention in the Gleesons’ house rivalled the
demonstration in the roadway.

Mutual apologies having been made the next morning—

“I spoke without thinking of what I was saying, my
love.”

“I suppose, dear, I am too sensitive.”

—The great task came up before them to be tackled.
Mr. Gleeson made a short speech to his wife on the subject,
calling it a scheme for welding the village into one harmonious
whole, and they were both gratified by this neat way of putting
the case.  One harmonious whole, echoed Mrs. Gleeson.
One harmonious whole, he repeated firmly.

So the two set out, furnished with cards, to call upon
residents; an undertaking the more necessary and excusable
because residents had made no attempt to call upon them.
They divided the task, arranging to meet two hours later and
report progress of affairs, and meanwhile said farewell in an
affectionate style outside the house; two little girls, looking
on with a scandalised air, prepared to run off to tell their
respective mothers.

“Good luck, dear,” said Mrs. Gleeson.

p.
231
“Bon voyage, ma cherie,” he replied.
They kissed again.

At the time appointed she returned with satisfaction and
triumph announced on her attractive young features.  Her
husband had not arrived, and she strolled across to some children
who were fixing wickets for a game; they drew the stumps and
retired to another corner of the green.

“Shy little things,” remarked Mrs. Gleeson.

She flag-signalled with a lace handkerchief to her husband,
who could be seen walking slowly in the distance, but he was
gazing at the dusty road in a thoughtful manner and did not
respond; she ran to meet him and to take his arm.

“Well?” he asked shortly.

Everybody had said yes, she answered with enthusiasm.  No
sooner had she given the invitation than they accepted.  The
vicar, the Congregationalist minister, the auctioneer (who was
also insurance agent, and local representative for
Chipley’s Celebrated Guanos), the schoolmaster, Crutchley,
the postman, two labourers, and the man who usually stood outside
the Three Bells with a wisp of straw between his
teeth—every one of
p. 232
these and others she had secured,
every one had made careful note of the date.

“And you?” she asked.

Mr. Gleeson confessed his record was not so excellent.
Miss Bulwer delayed him for thirty-five minutes, and, a grievance
still rankling, managed in that time to intimate that she bossed
the village.

“Her own phrase,” he said excusingly.

Miss Bulwer flattered herself she performed the task well, and
certainly did not propose to allow new-comers to interfere.
Miss Bulwer agreed that the barriers of class should be broken
down; she came of a Liberal stock, and her father sat in
Parliament once for nearly a year, but rather than meet Crutchley
or any of his set on friendly terms, she would willingly be burnt
at the stake.

“But surely, dear, it was an error, if you don’t
mind my saying so, to tell her that we had invited anybody
else.”

“Thought it fairer,” he replied.

“I said nothing of the kind to some of mine.”

“You should have done.”

“Pardon me,” said Mrs. Gleeson, “but perhaps
you will admit that my plan proved more successful.”

p.
233
“Those two sisters, the dressmakers, are
coming,” he went on, declining to argue the point,
“and three other women accepted and promised to be with us
providing nothing better turned up in the meantime.
Singularly frank and open in their speech,” he remarked,
with a sigh.  “They went so far as to ask me what we
expected to make out of it.”

“I like people to be genuine.”

“There are limits,” he said, “which should
not be exceeded.  Let us go in and reckon up the number of
guests.”

The two small girls who had seen them kiss each other took up
a position near the fence, watching with undisguised curiosity as
Mr. and Mrs. Gleeson sat at the window completing
arrangements.  As these proceeded Mr. Gleeson regained
something of his early enthusiasm.  He intended to make a
speech to the company, once the visitors were assembled, and his
wife suggested that if his mind was made up in this regard, he
had better rehearse; he walked up and down the room, using
appropriate gestures, the while the two little spectators held on
to the fence in their anxiety to miss nothing.

p.
234
“Did you remember to telegraph to the
Stores?” he demanded, breaking off.

“I did.”

“And have the things arrived?”

“Not yet.  But they never fail.”

“Find a man,” he ordered, “the one outside
the Three Bells, and send him off at once.  Unless I see to
everything, there is always a muddle!”

Full justification for the issuing of this command was found
when the man returned with the case; it had duly arrived by the
mid-day train and would, he reported, have remained at the
station until goodness knew when if he had not been sent to fetch
it.  The man offered to prise open the lid, and on seeing
the contents made the announcement that the two shops of the
village would not be best pleased to hear that goods similar to
those which might have been purchased at their establishments had
been imported from town.  Asked by the anxious young hostess
to give his own opinion, the man said he was all for liberty and
freedom, and letting people do as they liked, but he felt bound
to say that home industries ought to be patronised.  He had
often argued this in the Three Bells, and felt he ought not
p. 235
to say
behind people’s backs anything he did not dare to speak in
front of their faces.

“All the same,” he added, accepting the shilling,
“I shall pop round in good time this evening.  You can
rely upon me.  My word’s as good as me
bond.”

Now the two maids began to fly to and fro.  Now Mr.
Gleeson set out chairs on the lawn at the back in preparation for
an overflow meeting.  Now furniture was moved and the
pianoforte opened.  Now one of the maids ran across to hire
twenty cups and saucers, and returned from the shop with the
message that only regular customers were obliged in this way; the
cups and saucers could be purchased, or they could be let alone,
but no third alternative existed.  Mr. Gleeson went over his
speech once more and, on the suggestion of his wife, introduced a
more pronounced tone of geniality, leaving out some of the
sterner views concerning the value of friendship.  Mrs.
Gleeson’s sketches were set in a good position.  Mr.
Gleeson tried “I am a Jolly Mariner,” and decided he
had found himself in worse voice.  At seven o’clock
they were ready for the thirty-five guests, and Mr. Gleeson
snatched a few moments to practise a smile
p. 236
of welcome,
one that would indicate gratification without degenerating into a
broad grin.

“We shall find them rather difficult at first,” he
mentioned.  “I must get you to help me, my dear, to
make them feel thoroughly at home from the very outset.
Wish you had thought to order some crackers.”

“Sorry!”

“In Stepney, if you remember, the pulling of these and
the wearing of paper caps at once put everybody at their
ease.  What’s the time now?”

She exhibited her watch.

“Mary asked the constable just now whether anything of
the kind had ever been arranged before and he said
‘No.’”

“Did he say anything else?” asked Mr. Gleeson.

“He added ‘And never won’t again,
neither.’”

“The ability of peering into the future,” he
remarked, nettled, “is a gift denied even to the village
policeman.  He seems to have the idea that no one can do
right excepting himself.”

“There’s a knock.”

Please, ma’am (announced Mary), Mr.
p. 237
Crutchley,
the butcher, has sent over to know whether we want a joint for
Sunday, because if so we had better say so in good time.
Ask the messenger (replied Mrs. Gleeson) to tell Crutchley that
we shall only trouble him in the case of chops and steaks; the
larger orders have been placed in town.  Very well,
ma’am.  Mary, returning three minutes later,
apologised for the message she had now to deliver; Crutchley sent
word that where the Gleesons procured their joints there they
could procure their chops and steaks; Crutchley told the
messenger to add that he was not in the habit of being under an
obligation to any one.

“I disliked the man,” declared Mr. Gleeson warmly,
“from the very first.  Understand, my dear, please,
that not another penny of mine is to be spent in his
shop—not another halfpenny.”

Another ring, and Mary, with a look of greater satisfaction,
announced the vicar.

“Ah,” said the visitor, entering breezily,
“Liberty Hall, Liberty Hall.  This is extremely
satisfactory.  How are we this evening?  Settling down
to country life?  That’s good.  Before I forget
it, there are two or
p. 238
three funds under my control, the
finances of which are in rather—what shall I
say?”

“Low water.”

“Capital!” declared the vicar, with
enthusiasm.  “The very phrase!  Now I’m not
going to bother you, and hate above all things any suspicion of
begging, but if you have your cheque-book handy—  How
very, very kind of you!  A great day, for Murford
Green—here’s a fountain pen—for Murford Green
when you two delightful people decided to take up your residence
here.  Thank you so much: I’ll blot it.  Equally
divided, shall we say?  A thousand obligations.  I have
a number of letters to write; will you forgive me if I run
off?  Pray give my sincere regards to all the dear
people.  All the dear people.  The dear people.
Dear people.  People.”  The voice disappeared in
the manner of a ventriloquist’s entertainment.

A note from the schoolmaster.  The schoolmaster was
sorry, but he had only just ascertained that the Rev. Mr. Barton,
Congregationalist minister, had been asked, and in these
circumstances the schoolmaster begged to be excused.  A note
from Mr. Barton.  Mr. Barton, having ascertained that the
p.
239
schoolmaster had been invited, felt it impossible to
meet that gentleman until he had withdrawn certain remarks
concerning Passive Resisters, and hoped Mrs. Gleeson would permit
him to defer his visit.  The postman called at the back door
to say that he could have spared an hour, and would have spared
an hour, but talk was going on in the village, and until this
received contradiction it was more than his position, as a
Government official, was worth to set foot inside the
house.  Mary, answering her master’s impatient
reprimand, declared she had asked for further particulars; the
postman, with a deep blush, assured her it was not a subject he
could discuss with a single young woman; on Mary insisting, he
referred her to a Mrs. Larch, living in one of a row of cottages
not far away.  The Gleesons, greatly disturbed, requested
the maid to fly in that direction and obtain details.  As
Mary went out of the front gate they noticed the two invited
labourers, dressed in black suits.

“Beg pardon, missy,” they heard one of them say,
“but if it ent a rude question, is there going to be any
beer purvided at this affair what’s to come off this
evening?”  The maid gave an answer and ran on.

p.
240
“Not?” they echoed amazedly.
“Very well then!  No bloomin’ beer; no
bloomin’ us!”

Other excuses came.  The odd man of the Three Bells alone
remained unaccounted for, and he arrived, pulling at the garden
gate, which he should have pushed, and solving the difficulty by
climbing over.  Approaching the open window, he lurched
across the flower-bed, took off his hat to Mr. Gleeson, blew a
clumsy kiss to Mrs. Gleeson.

“Not coming in,” he said, with a wink.
“No fear!  Not me!  Got my rep’tation to
consider.  I sh’d never ’old up my ’ead
again.  Warm lot, you Londoners.  Thank goodness I was
born ’n bred in the country.  Honest man, that’s
what I am, and I don’t care who says I’m not.
You never catch me ’ugging a girl in middle of the
roadway.  Not me!”

A council was held so soon as the maid came back.  Mary
had assured Mrs. Larch that her master and her mistress were
married, for she herself was present at the wedding, and the lady
offered two suggestions: one that Mary’s eyesight was
defective, the other that people only used a foreign language
when they desired to say something that could not
p. 241
be spoken
in decent English.  Mary, having delivered the news, stood
back and waited.

“Have you no suggestion to make, my dear?” asked
the worried Mr. Gleeson.  His wife shook her head
despondently.

“Excuse me, sir,” said the maid, with respect,
“but me and Emma have been talking it over, and as she says
the doctor ordered you quiet, and you haven’t yet succeeded
in letting the house at Kensington, what’s to prevent us
from—”

“Get the A.B.C.,” he ordered.
“We’ll find out what time there’s a train back
to town in the morning.”

p.
242
XV—REWARD FOR COURAGE

The
Committee gave Mr. Mayor the
time to put on, with the aid of his man, the official
garments.  One member asked who was looking after Enderby,
and the agitated young secretary ran into the largest room in the
Town Hall, returned with the satisfactory assurance that the man
was seated in the front row, well guarded by friends.

“These brave chaps,” remarked the member who had
put the alarming inquiry, “often have a peculiar strain
of—er—modesty in their disposition.  You can
never quite depend upon them as you would on ordinary
people.  Mr. Secretary, what’s the programme for the
afternoon?  Have you drawn up an agenda?  Don’t
call on me, if you can help it, but if it’s absolutely
necessary, of course—”

Mr. Secretary exhibited the sheet of foolscap
p. 243
paper;
members of the Committee whose names figured there expressed
approval; the rest mentioned a fear that they might not be able
to stay until the end.

“Mr. Mayor!”

His Worship came forward to be greeted by those acquainted
with him, to be introduced to others.  Everybody said it was
good of the Mayor to give up so much of his time, and he declared
it was good of them to do so.

“But some one,” he went on, with determination,
“some one must give me a sort of a notion of an idea of
what I’m supposed to talk about.  I want a few facts
pencilled down, just to go on with, as it were.”  The
secretary produced a type-written document, tendered a case
containing a medal.  “I see!” nodding as he
glanced at the sheet.  “Jumped in at risk of
life.  Brought child to bank.  Persuaded with
difficulty to give name and address.  Very fine,
indeed.  Capital.  First-rate.  Now, how long
shall I take?  Thirty minutes?”

“Less than that, Mr. Mayor, if you like.”

“As you please,” said his Worship, rather
nettled.  “I’m never a believer in long
speechifying.  Time we made a start, isn’t
p.
244
it?   Look in, and tell them I’m
coming, and they’ll be ready to applaud.  What’s
the chap’s name again?  Enderby.  George
Enderby.  Right you are!”

A good audience had assembled, and several ladies, subscribers
to the gift, were present.  Two were talking deferentially
to a puffed-faced man in the front row; they scuttled off to
their seats as the platform people arrived.  The man
inspected his boots, shifting them uneasily.  Mr. Mayor
rapped the table with an ebony hammer, and said, in his most
genial manner, that of all the duties imposed upon him during his
year of office not one had given so much pleasure as this.
They were probably acquainted with the facts and he would give
them briefly.  George Enderby, residing at 42, William
Street, by occupation a house decorator, but at present out of
work, was walking near the canal on the evening of Friday, the
seventeenth of June.  Some children were playing near the
bank, and, in the endeavour to reach a piece of wood that was
floating on the water, one little girl of six years of age
suddenly slipped and—.  Mr. Mayor read the
type-written sheet to the end, took off his pince-nez.

p.
245
“Let George Enderby,” he ordered, “be
kind enough to step up on the platform.”

The friends of the puffed-faced man took him by the elbows; he
resisted their efforts and was heard to say that he would see
everybody hanged before he made a public exhibition of
himself.  An awkward delay occurred; the Mayor repeated his
directions.  The secretary hurried down from the platform,
and induced George Enderby to consider afresh his decision.
He went up the steps with every sign of reluctance, and stood
there, turning cap in hands.

“Enderby,” said the Mayor, with an air of heavy
benevolence, “kindly answer one or two questions.  In
what condition of mind were you when you performed this gallant
act?”

“I wasn’t boozed,” replied the man
defensively, “if that’s what you’re driving
at.  I’d had a glass or two, but I wasn’t
abs’lutely oiled!”

“That is not quite what I mean.  What I want to
find out is, were you thinking at the time of the value of human
life, and how necessary it is that it should be preserved at all
costs?”

“If you must know, I waddent thinking nothing of the
kind.  Don’t worry myself about such
matters.”

p.
246
“I see!” said the Mayor, slightly taken
aback.  “And—forgive my curiosity—but what
were your sensations when you brought the child ashore?
What was uppermost, so to speak, in your thoughts?”

“I was wondering whether I sh’d catch a nasty
cold!”

“No, no!” said the Mayor, reproving the
audience.  “This worthy fellow is answering my
questions to the best of his ability.  Tell me, now,”
turning again to the man on the platform, “have you
performed many gallant actions of this kind in your life
before?”

“I ain’t.”

“Never, perhaps, had the opportunity?”

“Plenty of opportunities,” retorted Enderby,
“but not fool enough to take advantage of
’em!”

It was so clear he was becoming nettled that the secretary
whispered to Mr. Mayor; his Worship proceeded to speak, at some
length, on the subject of bravery, making allusions to the boy
who stood on the burning deck, to Grace Darling, and to
others.  Eventually, and to the obvious relief of Enderby,
he presented the purse, handed over the medal, and allowed the
man to return to the front row.  There Enderby and his
friends made
p.
247
no attempt to conceal restiveness during the remainder
of the speeches.  The occupants of seats at the
reporters’ table sent a note to the young secretary,
reminding him that the recipient had not acknowledged the
rewards.

“No,” replied Enderby, with resolution, “I
jolly well won’t.  Made myself quite conspicuous
enough as it is, and if I tried to talk from the platform I
sh’d only make myself more conspicuouser than before.
I may also add it’s dry work listening to all this
cackle.”

“Don’t lose the medal.”

“You take charge of it for me,” he
requested.  “May overlook it somewhere if I take it
with me now!”

It was the secretary’s first essay in management of
public affairs and he congratulated himself, in leaving the Town
Hall, on the fact that everything had gone well; the Mayor had
said at the end, “Very smooth and
satisfactory!”  The case with the medal bulged the
inside pocket of his coat, and this would not have mattered only
that he was going, later, to see a young woman whom he loved, and
give to her a full report.  Wherefore he stepped on a
tram-car and was conveyed to William Street.

p.
248
“May be back at any moment,” said the
neighbours.  “What’s to-day?
Tuesday?  Well, she has to be at Willesden by seven in the
morning, and she usually gets home, comparatively speaking,
early.  Other days its quite late before she—
Here she is!”

Mrs. Enderby was grateful to the secretary for bringing the
medal, and said so.  She wished he had also brought the
money that had been collected, but this, she knew, was an
extravagant aspiration.  Mrs. Enderby admitted it was
difficult, at times, to make ends meet; thanks be, she had fair
health and strength.  Six children, all living, and no one
could say they ever wanted for food.  Yes, it did seem a
pity Enderby was out of a job, but, after all (cheerfully), it
made very little difference at home, because if he earnt money he
spent it all himself.  How long?  Oh, a matter of
eleven years or so.  Good afternoon, sir, and thank you.

“Now, I wonder,” remarked the young secretary to
himself, “I wonder if they were right in putting
his

name on that medal!”

Printed by Hazel
,
Watson
& Viney, Ld.
,
London and Aylesbury
.

***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MIXED GRILL***

***** This file should be named 57704-h.htm or 57704-h.zip******

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/5/7/7/0/57704

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.