The Project Gutenberg EBook of Chambers's Journal of Popular Literature,
Science, and Art, No. 736, February 2, 18, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Chambers's Journal of Popular Literature, Science, and Art, No. 736, February 2, 1878

Author: Various

Editor: William Chambers
Robert Chambers

Release Date: August 24, 2018 [EBook #57759]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHAMBER'S JOURNAL OF LITERATURE, FEB 2, 1878 ***

Produced by Susan Skinner and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

{65}

CHAMBERS'S JOURNAL

OF

POPULAR

LITERATURE, SCIENCE, AND ART.

CONTENTS

MISS STIRLING GRAHAM.

HELENA, LADY HARROGATE.

LIFE AT NATAL.

A PERILOUS POSITION.

MISPRINTS.

NATURE’S TEACHINGS.

WASTE SUBSTANCES.

LONG AGO.

No. 736.

Price
1½
d.

SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 2, 1878.

MISS STIRLING GRAHAM.

Fifty
years ago, or thereabouts, when by good
fortune my brother and I were permitted to make
some advance towards an acquaintance with the
luminaries which at that time in a remarkable
manner distinguished society in the Scottish capital,
we one evening, at the house of John Archibald
Murray—afterwards Lord Murray—enjoyed
the satisfaction of seeing a lady who some years
previously had become locally famous. She was a
lively pleasant person, rather small in figure,
unmarried, and had seemingly reached middle age.
From her manners she evidently moved among
people in the higher circles. As to her language
there was the marked peculiarity that, besides a
Scottish intonation, there was a pretty frequent
use of the Scottish dialect—that which is best
exemplified in Burns; for as yet there were still
a few northern ladies of rank who in conversation
did not disdain to employ incidentally words in
the national vernacular. They spoke as they had
been taught in early life, and as they were accustomed
to speak among old and familiar friends.
There was nothing coarse or vulgar in their
language; the Scotch words gave an agreeable
flavouring to their discourse. Lady Anne Lindsay,
the writer of
Auld Robin Gray
, was a good specimen
of this lingering class of high-born ladies, who
understood and still occasionally used a Scotch
seasoning in their conversation. Lord Cockburn
has presented some charming reminiscences of
this class of ladies, and he wrote just at the
time when they had very nearly died out.

The lady who interested us on the present
occasion was Miss Stirling Graham of Duntrune.
As we understood, she lived mostly at the family
estate in Forfarshire, with a mansion overlooking
the estuary of the Tay, and commanding a distant
view of St Andrews. Usually she spent her
winters in Edinburgh, where she was immensely
esteemed for her geniality and accomplishments.
My brother, who had already written much about
the disastrous troubles in Scotland in the seventeenth
century, felt a peculiar interest in Miss
Stirling Graham, on account of her connection
by heritage with that historical personage, John
Graham of Claverhouse—the terrible Claverhouse
described by Scott in
Old Mortality
, for his persecution
of the Covenanters, and who as Viscount
Dundee perished by a musket-shot at the battle
of Killiecrankie, 1689. Claverhouse was a Forfarshire
man. Leaving no immediate heirs, his
estates devolved on a cousin, David Graham of
Duntrune; this person was succeeded by his last
surviving son, on whose demise the property was
inherited equally by his four sisters; one of these
sisters was the mother of Clementina Stirling
Graham, the lady to whose memory we have
devoted the present paper.

Moving about at evening parties among the
literati and the more eminent lawyers, Miss Stirling
Graham, by her original humour and tact,
may be said to have kept the town in a pleasant
kind of buzz. Nature seemed to have designed
her to be an actress. She possessed the power of
simulation to a degree almost unexampled; also
the powers of an improvisatrice which have been
very rarely excelled. Her wit and her personations,
however, were always exclusively employed
to promote harmless mirth among her
select acquaintances, and we know she would
have shrunk from anything like a public exhibition.
She was great in personifying and mimicking
old Scottish ladies, or indeed Scottish women
in the humbler ranks of life, for which her
acute observation of character and her knowledge
of the vernacular tongue particularly qualified her.
Her deceptions were numerous, but all of an innocent
kind. In her latter days, at the solicitation
of friends, she gave an account of her principal
personations, which was printed for private distribution,
under the title of
Mystifications
. The
book being much sought after in this country and
America, the authoress was prevailed on to let it
be published in the usual way (Edmonston and
Douglas), 1865; yet, we doubt, after all, if this
handsome volume, which was edited by Dr John
Brown, is so well known as it should be, and we
{66}

propose to give one or two alluring specimens of
the contents.

The first Mystification in the book is that which
signalised Miss Stirling Graham’s success in deceiving
Mr Jeffrey, the eminent practising lawyer, and
at the same time editor of the
Edinburgh Review
.
Jeffrey had been introduced to the lady, and had
heard of her cleverness in personation. Meeting
her afterwards at the theatre, he said he should
like to see her
take in
some one. A promise was
given that he should have that pleasure very soon.
Likely enough, the busy advocate thought nothing
more of the matter. On the second evening afterwards,
accompanied by Miss Helen Carnegy of
Craigo as her daughter, Miss Stirling Graham, who
at the time had been on a visit to Lord Gillies,
stopped at Mr Jeffrey’s door, 92 George Street,
between five and six o’clock, when she knew Mr
Jeffrey was at home and preparing for dinner.
The two ladies were ushered into the parlour
appropriated for visitors. What follows we copy
in a somewhat condensed form from the account
in
Mystifications
.

‘There was a blazing fire, and wax-lights on
the table; he [Jeffrey] had laid down his book,
and seemed to be in the act of joining the ladies
in the drawing-room before dinner. The Lady
Pitlyal was announced, and he stepped forward
a few paces to receive her. She was a sedate-looking
little woman of an inquisitive law-loving
countenance; a mouth in which [by an adroit
management of the lips] not a vestige of a tooth
was to be seen, and a pair of old-fashioned
spectacles on her nose.... She was dressed in
an Irish poplin of silver gray, a white Cashmere
shawl, a mob-cap with a band of thin muslin
that fastened it below the chin, and a small black
silk bonnet that shaded her eyes from any glare
of light. Her right hand was supported by an
antique gold-headed cane, and she leant with the
other on the arm of her daughter.

‘Mr Jeffrey bowed, and handed the old lady to a

chaise longue
on one side of the fire, and sat himself
down opposite to her on the other. But in his
desire to accommodate the old lady, and in his
anxiety to be informed of the purport of the visit,
he forgot what was due to the young one, and the
heiress of the ancient House of Pitlyal was left
standing in the middle of the floor. She helped
herself to a chair, however, and sat down beside
her mother. She had been educated in somewhat
of the severity of the old school, and during the
whole of the consultation she neither spoke nor
moved a single muscle of her countenance.

“
Well!
” said Mr Jeffrey as he looked at the
old lady, in expectation that she would open the
subject that had procured him the honour of the
visit.

“Weel,” replied her Ladyship, “I am come to
tak’ a word o’ the law frae you.

“My husband, the late Ogilvy of Pitlyal, among
other property which he left to me, was a house
and a yard at the town-end of Kirriemuir, also a
kiln and a malt-barn.

“The kiln and the barn were rented by a man
they ca’d John Playfair, and John Playfair subset
them to anither man they ca’d Willy Cruickshank,
and Willy Cruickshank purchased a cargo of
damaged lint, and ye widna hinder Willy to dry
the lint upon the kiln, and the lint took low and
kindled the cupples, and the slates flew aff, and a’
the flooring was brunt to the ground, and naething
left standin’ but the bare wa’s.

“Now it wasna insured, and I want to ken
wha’s to pay the damage, for John Playfair says
he has naething
ado wi’ it
, and Willy Cruickshank
says he has naething
to do it wi’
, and I am determined
no to take it off their hand the way it is.”

“Has it been in any of the Courts?”

“Ou ay; it has been in the Shirra Court of
Forfar; and Shirra Duff was a gude man, and he
kent me, and would ha’ gien’t in my favour, but
that clattering creature Jamie L’Amy cam’ in, and
he gave it against me.”

“I have no doubt Mr L’Amy would give a very
fair decision.”

“It wasna a fair decision when he gae it against
me.”

“That is what many people think in your circumstances.”

“The minister of Blairgowrie is but a fule body,
and advised me no to gae to the law.”

“I think he gave you a very sensible advice.”

“It was onything but that; and mind, if you
dinna gie’t in my favour, I’ll no be sair pleased.”

‘Mr Jeffrey smiled, and said he would not promise
to do that, and then inquired if she had any
papers.

“Ou ay, I have a great bundle of papers, and
I’ll come back at any hour you please to appoint,
and bring them wi’ me.”

“It will not be necessary for you to return yourself;
you can send them to me.”

“And wha would you recommend to me for an
agent in the business?”

“That I cannot tell; it is not my province to
recommend an agent.”

“Then how will Robert Smith of Balharry
do?”

“Very well; very good man indeed; and you
may bid him send me the papers.”

‘Meantime her Ladyship drew from her pocket
a large old-fashioned leather pocket-book with
silver clasps, out of which she presented him a
letter directed to himself. He did not look into it,
but threw it carelessly on the table. She now
offered him a pinch of snuff from a massive gold
box, and then selected another folded paper from
the pocket-book, which she presented to him,
saying: “Here is a prophecie that I would like
you to look at and explain to me.”

‘He begged to be excused, saying: “I believe
your Ladyship will find me more skilled in the

law
than the
prophets
.”

‘She entreated him to look at it; and on
glancing his eyes over it, he remarked, “that
from the words
Tory
and
Whig
, it did not seem
to be a very ancient prophecy.”

“Maybe,” replied her Ladyship; “but it has
been long in our family. I copied these lines
out of a muckle book entitled the
Prophecie of
Pitlyal
, just before I came to you, in order to
have your opinion on some of the obscure passages
of it. And you will do me a great favour if you
will read it out loud, and I will tell you what
I think of it as you go on.”

‘Here, then, with a smile at the oddity of the
request, and a mixture of impatience in his
manner, he read the following lines, while she
{67}

interrupted him occasionally to remark upon their
meaning:

When the crown and the head shall disgrace ane anither,

And the Bishops on the Bench shall gae a’ wrang thegither;

When Tory or Whig,

Fills the judge’s wig;

When the Lint o’ the Miln

Shall reek on the kiln;

O’er the Light of the North,

When the Glamour breaks forth,

And its wild-fire so red

With the daylight is spread;

When woman shrinks not from the ordeal of tryal,

There is triumph and fame to the House of Pitlyal.

“We ha’e seen the crown and the head,” she
said, “disgrace ane anither no very lang syne,
and ye may judge whether the bishops gaed right
or wrang on that occasion; and the
Tory
and
Whig

may no be very ancient, and yet never be the
less true. Then there is the Lint o’ the Miln—we
have witnessed that come to pass; but what
the ‘Light of the North’ can mean, and the
‘Glamour,’ I canna mak’ out. The twa hindmost
lines seem to me to point at Queen Caroline;
and if it had pleased God to spare my son, I might
have guessed he would have made a figure on her
trial, and have brought ‘Triumph and fame to
the House of Pitlyal.’ I begin, however, to think
that the prophecie may be fulfilled in the person
of my daughter, for which reason I have brought
her to Edinburgh to see and get a gude match
for her.”

‘Here Mr Jeffrey put on a smile, half serious
half quizzical, and said: “I suppose it would not
be necessary for the gentleman to change his
name.”

“It would be weel worth his while, sir; she
has a very gude estate, and she’s a very bonny
lassie, and she’s equally related baith to Airlie
and Strathmore; and a’body in our part of the
warld ca’s her the Rosebud of Pitlyal.”

‘Mr Jeffrey smiled as his eyes met the glance of
the beautiful flower that was so happily placed
before him; but the Rosebud herself returned no
sign of intelligence.

‘A pause in the conversation now ensued, which
was interrupted by her Ladyship asking Mr Jeffrey
to tell her where she could procure a set of
fause
teeth
.

“
Of what?
” said he, with an expression of astonishment,
while the whole frame of the young lady
shook with some internal emotion.

“A set of fause teeth,” she repeated; and was
again echoed by the interrogation, “
What?
”

‘A third time she asked the question, and in a
more audible key; when he replied, with a kind
of suppressed laugh: “There is Mr Nasmyth, north
corner of St Andrew Square, a very good dentist;
and there is Mr Hutchins, corner of Hanover and
George Street.”

‘She requested he would give her their names on
a slip of paper. He rose and walked to the table,
wrote down both the directions, which he folded
and presented to her.

‘She now rose to take leave. The bell was rung,
and when the servant entered, his master desired
him to see if the Lady Pitlyal’s carriage was at the
door.

‘He returned to tell there was no carriage waiting,
on which her Ladyship remarked: “This
comes of
fore-hand payments
—they make
hint-hand
wark
. I gae a hackney-coachman twa
shillings to bring me here, and he’s awa’ without
me.”

‘There was not a coach within sight, and another
had to be sent for from a distant stand of coaches.
It was by this time past the hour of dinner, and
there seemed no hope of being rid of his visitors.

‘Her Ladyship said she was in no hurry, as they
had had tea, and were going to the play, and hoped
he would accompany them. He said he had not
yet had his dinner.

“What is the play to-night?” said she.

“It is the
Heart of Midlothian
again, I believe.”

‘They then talked of the merits of the actors,
and she took occasion to tell him that she patronised
the
Edinburgh Review
.

“We read your buke, sir!”

“I am certainly very much obliged to you.”

‘Still no carriage was heard. Another silence
ensued, until it bethought her Ladyship to amuse
him with the politics of the country.

‘Here the coach was announced, and by the help
of her daughter’s arm and her gold-headed cane,
she began to move, complaining loudly of a
corny
tae
. She was with difficulty got into the coach.
The Rosebud stepped lightly after her.

‘The door was closed, and the order given to
drive to Gibb’s Hotel, whence they hastened with
all speed to Lord Gillies’s, where the party waited
dinner for them, and hailed the fulfilment of the
“Prophecie of Pitlyal.”

‘Mr Jeffrey, in the meantime, impatient for his
dinner, joined the ladies in the drawing-room.

“What in the world has detained you?” said
Mrs Jeffrey.

“One of the most tiresome and oddest old
women I ever met with. I thought never to have
got rid of her;” and beginning to relate some of
the conversation that had taken place, it flashed
upon him at once that he had been
taken in
.

‘He ran down-stairs for the letter, hoping it
would throw some light upon the subject, but it
was only a blank sheet of paper, containing a fee
of three guineas.

‘They amused themselves with the relation;
but it was not until the day after that he found out
who the ladies really were. He laughed heartily,
and promised to aid them in any other scene they
liked to devise.’ He returned the fee with an
amusing characteristic letter, in which he concluded
with best wishes for the cure of her Ladyship’s
corns.

With similar dexterity, this marvellously clever
lady figures on nearly a dozen different occasions
in town and country, sometimes in one guise and
sometimes in another, mystifying even the most
incredulous by her manœuvres.

About the best Mystification recorded is that in
which as a daughter of a poor man, Sandy Reid in
the Canongate, the lady imposed on Sir William
Fettes, who had been Lord Provost in Edinburgh,
and left a fortune to endow a college which is now
in successful operation. We let Miss Stirling
Graham relate the adventure.

‘I once got half-a-crown from Sir William
Fettes when he was dining with a few friends at
his sister, Mrs Bruce’s. She and Lady Fettes put
it into my head to ask charity from him, in the
character of a daughter of an old companion of his,
{68}

whose name was Sandy Reid. And whether
Sandy Reid ever had a daughter was nothing to
the purpose. Sir William had lost sight of the
man, and I had no previous knowledge that ever
such a person was in existence. Dressed in a
smart bonnet and shawl belonging to Lord Gillies’s
housekeeper, I boldly rang the door-bell, and
demanded of the servant if I could get a word of
Sir William.

‘On the message being carried up-stairs, the
ladies desired that the person who wished to speak
with Sir William might be shewn into Mrs Bruce’s
dressing-room, where behind the window-curtains
were stationed a merry party of some half-a-dozen
listeners.

‘Enter Sir William. “Well, my good woman,
what is your business with me?” “To ask your
help, sir, in behalf of the widow and the fatherless.”
“And pray who are you?”

“I am the daughter of ane Sandy Reid, who
was weel kenned to your honour; his father lived
next door to your father in the Canongate.” “Ay,
are you the daughter of Sandy Reid?”

“I am proud to say sae.” “And what has
reduced you to this plight, my good woman?”
“Just an ill marriage, Sir William.” “I am
sorry for that; but you say you are a widow.” “I
am no’ just a widow; but my husband has run
aff wi’ another woman.” “That is very unfortunate;
but what is your husband?” “A soldier, sir.”
“An officer of the soldiers you mean, I suppose?”

“Na, na, Sir William; he is but a single
soldier.” “And did Sandy Reid’s daughter marry
a single soldier?” (Weeping)—“It is o’er true,
Sir William; but he was a bonny man, and I
ne’er thought he would forsake me.” “And did
your father consent to your marrying a single
soldier?” “Oh, no, Sir William; but it was
ordained.”

“Have you any family, or any means of living?”
“I have five boys; and I wash and iron, and do
all I can to get bread to them.” “Where do you
live?”

“In Elder Street.” “In Elder Street! that
seems to me rather an expensive part of the
town for a person in your circumstances.”

“It is but a garret, sir, up four pair of stairs.”

“Are any of your children at school?” “No, sir;
but the eldest is in Provost Manderson’s [drug] shop,
who has been very kind to him, and ta’en him aff
my hand. And the second is a prentice to a tobacconist;
and (here weeping bitterly) the rest are in
the house, for I have neither decent claes to put
upon them, nor siller to send them to the schule;
and this is Saturday night, and no sae muckle
meat within the door as put by the Sabbath day.”

“I am sorry for you, and grieved to see Sandy
Reid’s daughter come to this; but you must be
sensible, that for a person in your situation, your
present dress is rather too showy and extravagant.”
“That’s true, Sir William; but gentle servants
are no’ civil to poor folk when they come ill-dressed.”

“I believe, indeed, that is too true, but your
dress is quite unsuitable.” “Indeed, Sir William,
I borrowed this bonnet and shawl from a gentleman’s
housekeeper, just for the purpose of waiting
upon you, for I am in great want.”

“Well, there is half-a-crown to help you in the
meantime; and I will inquire at Provost Manderson
about you on Monday, and if you be speaking
the truth, I will see and get your children into
some of the Hospitals.”

‘Here the party broke out from behind the
curtains’—and we may suppose that Sir William
was a good deal amazed as well as amused at the
adroit way he had been taken in.

Miss Stirling Graham long outlived the early
friends whom she delighted with her personations;
but drawing out existence to an advanced age, she
still surrounded herself with an agreeable society,
and was loved by all whom she honoured with her
acquaintance. She was a great reader, and possessed
good literary abilities, as is observable by
her
Mystifications
, and by the anecdotes which
conclude the volume, also by the following lines,
addressed to those ‘Shadows of the Past’ whom
she held in remembrance:

Blessed shades of the past,

In the future I see ye, so fair!

Ties that were nearest,

Forms that were dearest,

The truest and fondest are there.

They are flowerets of earth,

That are blooming in heaven, so fair:

And the stately tree,

Spreading wide and free,

The sheaves that were ripened are there.

The tear-drop that trembled

In Pity’s meek eye; and the prayer,

Faith of the purest,

Hope that was surest,

The love all-enduring are there.

And the loved, the beloved,

Whose life made existence so fair!

The soft seraph voice

Bade the lowly rejoice,

Is heard in sweet harmony there.

This gifted and venerable lady died at her
mansion at Duntrune on the 23d August 1877, at
the extreme age of ninety-five. Perhaps, the present
paper may help to make her
Mystifications

more extensively known than hitherto; this
object, however, might be better served by a
cheap and popular edition of the work, amplified
by explanatory notes. The book, enriched by the
tasteful preface of Dr John Brown, is a gem which
ought not to drop out of notice.

W. C.

HELENA, LADY HARROGATE.

CHAPTER VII.—A NEW FACE AT CARBERY.

‘
She
be coming for sure. Carriage, with second
coachman, just getting ready for a start to Dundleton,
to meet the down train at 9.17,’ said a pink-faced
youth, whose stature and chest measurement
would have procured for him the interested admiration
of a sergeant-major in Her Majesty’s Brigade
of Guards, but who was as yet but imperfect in his
domestic drill as third footman at Carbery Chase.

‘What’s 9.17?’ demanded the mature female
addressed, with some asperity, as she dredged flour
over some cunningly compounded mess simmering
beside the fire in the back-kitchen. ‘Can’t
you give a body the time o’ the day? They didn’t
cut it so fine when I was your age, young chap!’

And indeed it is marvellous to note how the
junior population throughout Western Christendom
{69}

appears to have learned to think and speak by
railway time, and to have been, as it were, inoculated
by Bradshaw.

‘Thought you knowed all that ’n, cook!’ half-sulkily,
half-apologetically rejoined the gigantic
hobbledehoy, mindful of that functionary’s empire
over the roasts, subject of course to the high fiat
of Monsieur Cornichon, the white-capped and
black-bearded
chef
.

‘Anyhow, this Miss Whatshername ’ll be here
soon after eleven.’

‘Willis is her name, and she comes from the
Ingees,’ put in a tart young town-made house-maid.
‘I wonder if she’s black?’ This quasi-witticism
provoked a titter among the rest of the
under-servants there collected; for anything was
welcome that could excuse a laugh; and besides, a
new recruit to the aristocracy of the waited-upon
is sure to be smartly criticised by the plebs of
those who wait.

‘
I
wonder,’ said the old sub-cook, stirring her
saucepan, ‘if she’ll be setting her cap at young
Mr Jasper?’

‘The captain knows too well on which side his
bread is buttered,’ pronounced the gaunt house-maid-in-chief,
an invaluable female, lynx-eyed for
spiders’ webs, and vigilant as to the minutest
details of bedroom duty.

Opinions at Carbery Chase were very much
divided as to the new-comer’s exact status and
claims to consideration. There were those who
invidiously described her as ‘Sir Sykes’s charity
child,’ and appeared to regard her as a species of
genteel mendicant most foolishly invited down
to Devonshire. There were others who were
not sorry for the arrival of any one considered
capable of lending animation to a house where
the regular routine of every-day life ran on
with somewhat sluggish flow. And there were a
few philosophers in plush or white aprons, much
flouted by the rest, who held that Sir Sykes was
himself the best judge as to what guests, permanent
or temporary, should be allowed to share the
shelter of his roof at Carbery.

That there was enough and to spare in that
opulent mansion which acknowledged Sir Sykes
Denzil for its master, was patent to all. Large
as was Sir Sykes’s household and handsome his
expenditure (for how many baronets chronicled in
the gilt-edged volumes of Messrs Dod and Debrett,
can afford themselves the luxury of a third and
fourth footman, a French
chef
like high-salaried
M. Cornichon, and a groom of the chambers?), he
was known to live within his income; and was
rumoured by his inferiors to be guilty of the
offence, never mentioned otherwise than with a
resentful reverence, of ‘putting by.’ Sir Sykes’s
men and maids were probably not students of
Dean Swift’s ironical advice to their order; but
we may rely on it that the servants of Dives himself
had strongly defined ideas as to the proportion
of high feasting that should accompany the purple
and fine linen of their patron.

Meanwhile, in spite of the early training which
is supposed to make an Englishman of Sir Sykes
Denzil’s degree as outwardly impassive as a
Red Indian, no one at Carbery appeared to think
so much about the arrival of Miss Willis as did
the baronet himself. Her coming did not now
at anyrate partake of the character of a surprise,
for weeks had naturally elapsed between the
incoming of the late and that of the new mail,
and there had been time enough for preparations,
if such were necessary. Sir Sykes, however, on
the morning of his ward’s arrival could not avoid,
not merely the being nervous and anxious, but the
exhibiting to all who cared to look of his inexplicable
nervousness and unreasonable anxiety. He
went and came at frequent and irregular intervals
between his own traditional apartment the
library, and that morning-room where his daughters
usually sat over their sketches and lacework and
china-painting, and all those laborious trifles on
which young ladies employ their taper fingers.

That their father was undignified in his apparently
uncalled-for agitation as to the Indian
orphan’s arrival, was too evident not to be recognised
by even the most dutiful of daughters.
But both Blanche and Lucy willingly accounted
for the baronet’s restlessness on the ground of
the revival of early associations, acting on the
nerves of one whose health was no longer robust.

‘Let her only come here and quietly drop into
her place among us,’ said the elder sister to the
younger; ‘and depend upon it, papa will find
her presence at Carbery as unexciting as though
she were a supplementary daughter returning “for
good,” as the girls call it, from a boarding-school.’

Jasper could, had it so pleased him, have considerably
enlightened the ignorance of his unsuspecting
sisters. But the captain prudently said
nothing, and did not ostensibly keep watch upon
his father’s actions, or deviate much from his own
habit of indolently hanging about the stables,
the kennels wherein sleek pointers and shaggy
retrievers howled and rattled their chains, the
billiard-room, and other resorts of ingenuous youth.
The baronet’s nervousness was not in itself surprising
to him, in whose memory was fresh the
conversation which he had overheard while lurking
in the mean garden of
The Traveller’s Rest
; but
he could only conjecture what might be the hidden
springs that prompted a course of conduct difficult
to reconcile with a clean conscience and a secure
worldly position.

‘I never,’ said Jasper to himself musingly, as
he knocked about the balls on the billiard-table,
‘heard a word against the governor. He was
awfully needy and that sort of thing once, of
course; but I never knew there to be a whisper
of any sharp practice either at écarté or with the
bones. Had there been such, some good-natured
fellow or other about the clubs would have let
fall a hint of it before now in my hearing, or
some servant would have tattled, when I wore a
jacket and was Master Jasper. He’s not much
{70}

liked, my father, but respected he is. I doubt if
many, who fluked by a lucky chance upon a great
fortune, get so civilly spoken of behind their
backs.’

Jasper was not one to have cherished those
tender recollections of infantine joys and sorrows,
which with some men remain green and fresh to
the last. He had, to use his own expression, to
‘hark back’ with painful effort and purpose, ere
he could reproduce before his mental vision the
long past of his early boyhood. ‘I have a vague
notion,’ said he, after an interval of this appeal to
memory, ‘that my mother gave me more sweetmeats
than were good for me, and that she, and I
too, seemed to stand in awe of my father. I’m
sure I don’t know why, unless it were because he
was serious and silent—a grave Spanish Don, as
I used to think. But she said too that he had
been of a livelier mood once, and something about
his high spirits having deserted him just when
the world began to smile. My old nurse—what
was her name, I wonder?—Wiggins, Priggins—all
nurses are named something of the sort, and all
combine to dote over the little wretches that
torment them—used to talk about the governor’s
sad looks dating from the loss of that young sister
of mine. She would have been younger than
Lucy, older than Blanche, I take it. But why, in
the name of common-sense, a man of the world
should never forget the loss of a chit in the
nursery—that is, if it was all on the square—but
then, again, the motive!’ And the captain’s arching
eyebrows and the compression of his thin lips
were very expressive of his readiness to believe
the very worst that could be believed as to his
nearest and dearest, if only a plausible reason for
such villainy could be alleged. ‘If it had been
myself now,’ he muttered, as he sent the red ball,
with a mechanical precision that proved him a
dexterous pool-player, into pocket after pocket of
the green table; ‘but even then the governor,
who had Apollyon’s own luck, did not need to
cut off the entail by illegal methods. He’s no
life-tenant of Carbery, as he makes me feel whenever
our views don’t exactly coincide; could leave
it to my sisters; or back again, if he chose, to the
De Vere lot; and so, what interest he could have
had in spiriting away little Mabel Denzil, is a
question that I defy Œdipus, or a modern racing
prophet, to answer.’ Having said which, the captain
rang the bell for something to drink, drank that
something, and immersed his fine faculties in the
delightful study of a sporting newspaper.

Jasper had not had leisure to thread his way
very far through the labyrinth of darkling vaticinations,
so dear to men who like himself are
of the horse, horsey, as to probable or certain
winners of important events to come off, or to
discriminate with sufficient nicety between the
inherent truth or falsehood of the reports that
made the barometer of the betting world oscillate
so wildly between panic and exultation, before
the grinding of wheels on the smooth gravel
announced the arrival of the carriage, and that Sir
Sykes’s ward was at the threshold of Carbery
Court, her future home.

‘I’d give a trifle,’ thought Jasper, ‘to know how
many throbs to the minute the governor’s pulse is
giving just now. I suppose, like a pattern guardian,
he will receive her in the hall. I’ll wait till the
first disjointed welcomes are over, and then drop
in and inspect the new importation. I wonder if
she drinks rum, like her brother?’

The captain had drawn, mentally, a fancy portrait
of Hold’s sister, and had marvelled how
Blanche and Lucy would be likely to get on with
such a one as she could scarcely fail to be. But at
the very first glance Jasper abandoned as untenable
the conjecture that Miss Willis could drink
rum, and he owned to himself, with the candour
which men of his stamp exhibit in self-communing
alone, how very wide of the mark was the likeness
which his imagination had traced.

Miss Willis was very short and slight, and the
deep mourning which she wore made her look
even slighter and shorter than she really was.
She had jet black hair that curled naturally,
which, as if in ignorance or defiance of fashion,
she wore in a crop, and which made the whiteness
of her skin seem more conspicuous than it would
otherwise have done. A pale little face, lit up by
a pair of fine dark eyes, that drooped modestly to
the carpet, as suitable to her shy, timid air.
Whether she were pretty or the reverse, was not
to be so summarily settled as is the case with most
of her sex.

It was the eyes, and the eyes alone, that lent
a marked peculiarity to the countenance of Sir
Sykes’s ward. Look at them, and the verdict that
Miss Willis was charming would have been pronounced
by many women and most men. Confine
the scrutiny to the other features, and the judgment
that the Indian orphan was a plain, pale
little creature, would as inevitably have resulted.
She looked young, quite a girl. The delicate
smoothness of her cheek suggested that her age
might be under twenty; but there was a subdued
thoughtfulness in her aspect that might have
harmonised well with her years, had she been
older by a lustrum.

‘I was talking of Œdipus,’ such was Jasper’s
soliloquy after a half-hour spent in the new
arrival’s company; ‘but here is the Sphynx herself,
by Jove!’

It was with an inexpressible sentiment of relief
that the baronet saw what style of person his ward
appeared to be. Here were no solecisms in breeding,
no coarseness of tone, or affectations more
painful than honest roughness ever is, to wince at,
to gloss over, to excuse on the ground of a youth
spent in a far country, and often in stations where
European society was scarce, and perhaps not
always choice as regarded its quality. Sir Sykes
had reckoned, at best, on a probationary period
during which he should have had to play the
irksome part of an apologist for the shortcomings
of her whom he had invited to be the companion
of his own daughters.

But Sir Sykes and Jasper, too, were forced to
admit that Miss Willis was either an actress of
consummate address, or, what really seemed the
more probable, was merely appearing in her
genuine character. Timid and somewhat constrained,
but not awkward, was her manner of
responding to the warm greeting of Sir Sykes’s
two daughters and to the grave urbanity of the
baronet himself. She did not say much; but her
voice trembled when she thanked Sir Sykes for
his ‘extreme kindness’ to a stranger like herself.
Then Blanche kissed her. She should not be a
stranger long, she said. And then the girl broke
down, sobbing. ‘How good you all are to me,’
{71}

she said. ‘I hope—I do hope not to be very
troublesome, not to’——

And then there were more tears and more
kissing; and the Misses Denzil took complete
possession of their new friend, and bore her off to
be installed in her room, and to learn to be at
home at Carbery. Nothing could have gone off
better than the orphan’s reception; and even
Jasper felt this, and forbore to sneer. His own
heart was as hard as the nether millstone; but he
accepted the fact that his sisters possessed organs
of a different degree of sensibility, precisely as
he owned that roses had perfume, and that the
thrushes and nightingales sang sweetly in the
garden.

‘She’s no more the sister of yonder pirate
fellow,’ such was the captain’s conclusion, ‘than
the last Derby winner was a drayhorse. I thought
the rascal spoke mockingly of the relationship
between her and him. No; she’s not Hold’s sister.
I wonder whether she is mine?’

In the course of the afternoon of that day, Lord
Harrogate, who had ridden over from High Tor,
made his appearance. There was, as has been
mentioned, a frequent exchange of neighbourly
communications between the two great houses of
the vicinity. The Earl, it is true, seldom called
upon Sir Sykes, and Sir Sykes as seldom on the
Earl; but the Countess was often at Carbery, and
the young people of both families were much in
each other’s company. By the time of Lord
Harrogate’s visit, the girl from India had made
considerable progress in winning the good-will of
the Misses Denzil, prepossessed in her favour from
the beginning. They had devoted the time since
luncheon to shewing her the lions of Carbery—the
tapestry of the ‘Queen’s Chamber,’ faded but
sumptuous; the stained glass; the chapel; the
pictures; the grand conservatory, built by a former
lord of Carbery, on a scale too ambitious for the
use of a private family, and which was kept up at
a cost which even Sir Sykes murmured at; and the
other local curiosities.

The orphan had proved herself a patient and
intelligent sight-seer, willing to be pleased, thankful
for the kind desire of her entertainers that
she should be pleased, and discriminating in her
admiration. There was still some constraint in
her manner, and of herself and her former life she
scarcely spoke. Perhaps her loss was too recent
for her to be able to talk freely of India, while of
the journey to England she said little. ‘There
were fellow-passengers who took much care of me,’
she replied once, in answer to a question on Lucy’s
part. ‘Indeed, I met kindness on every hand.
Perhaps my being alone, and my black frock’—— And
then her eyes filled with tears and she
turned her head away.

Lord Harrogate, when introduced to the baronet’s
ward, experienced one of the oddest sensations
that he had ever felt, and akin to that
tantalising, nameless thrill with which we all
sometimes fancy that we have seen some place
which we know ourselves to visit for the first time,
or witnessed some scene which never before met
our eyes. He had started, when first he saw Miss
Willis, and had eyed her in the inquiring fashion
in which we scan a face familiar to us. But it
was evident that Miss Willis did not know him,
as indeed it was impossible that she, Indian born
and bred, and now in England for the first time,
should know him. And yet, long after he had
left Carbery, the perplexing thought occurred to
him again and again that he remembered the face,
which, as all could aver, he had beheld for the first
time on that day.

LIFE AT NATAL.

Lady Barker
, to whom the public is indebted
for the most practically useful works on New
Zealand which have been placed within the reach
of the intending emigrant, having now completed
a year’s residence in our South African colony,
gives us, in
A Year’s Housekeeping in South Africa

(London: Macmillan & Co.), the benefit of her
recent experience in a volume equally useful and
entertaining. As compared with Christchurch,
the capital of the province of Canterbury, in New
Zealand, Maritzburg, in ‘fair Natal,’ is a backward
and sleepy place. Recent events may have
the effect of developing its ambition and accelerating
its speed. But here is Lady Barker’s description
of its actual condition: ‘Maritzburg consists
of a few straight, wide, grass-grown streets, which
are only picturesque at a little distance on account
of their having trees on each side. On particularly
dark nights, a dozen oil-lamps, standing at
long intervals apart, are lighted; but when it is
even moderate starlight, these aids to finding one’s
way about are prudently dispensed with. Only
two buildings make the least effect. One is the
Government House, standing in a nice garden,
and boasting of a rather pretty porch, but otherwise
reminding one, except for the sentinel on
duty, of a quiet country rectory. The other is
a small block comprising the public offices. A
certain air of quaint interest and life is given
to the otherwise desolate streets by the groups
of Kaffirs, and the teams of wagons waiting for
their up-country loads. Twenty bullocks drag
these ponderous contrivances—bullocks so lean
that one wonders how they have strength to carry
their wide-spreading horns aloft; bullocks of a
stupidity and obstinacy unparalleled in the natural
history of horned beasts.’ These teams are called
‘spans;’ and when, on Sundays, the teams and
the wagons are ‘outspanned’ on the green slopes
around Maritzburg, the aspect of the place, generally
dull and lifeless, becomes strikingly picturesque.

The road to Maritzburg from Port Durban, at
which travellers to Maritzburg land from the
steamer which conveys them to Cape Town, is
very tedious to travel by the government mule
wagon, which bumps about in ruts, and sticks
in mud after a fashion that renders the prospect
of the railway now in course of construction
very attractive to the expectant colonists; but it
is also very beautiful. ‘Curved green hills, dotted
with clusters of timber exactly like an English
park, and a background of distant ranges rising in
softly rounded outlines, with deep violet shadows
in the clefts, and pale green lights on the slopes,’
form its principal features. Nestling amid this
rich pasture-land are the kraals of a large Kaffir
‘location;’ and it is satisfactory to learn that in
our South African colony at least, the native
population has not been entirely sacrificed to
the white man.

At Durban there is a funny little railway between
the town and the ‘Point;’ ‘a railway,’ says Lady
{72}

Barker, ‘so calm and stately in its method of progression,
that it is not at all unusual to see a passenger
step deliberately out when it is at its fullest
speed of crawl, and wave his hand to his companions
as he disappears down the by-path leading
to his little home. The passengers are conveyed
at a uniform rate of sixpence a head, which
sixpence is collected promiscuously by a small boy
at odd moments during the journey.’

A great, indeed an inexhaustible, charm of the
country is the wonderful profusion and variety of
flowers which grow everywhere; precious things
only to be seen here in stately glass houses and
per favour of scientific head-gardeners, growing in
wild abundance, hiding the ugliness of buildings,
delighting the eyes and cheering the heart of the
colonist. As the drawbacks to a residence in ‘fair
Natal’ are numerous and undeniable, it is right
to dwell a little upon the exceeding beauty of
floral nature there. If flowers could only be eaten,
what a prosperous place Natal would be, or if the
soil would only grow cereals as it grows flowers!
To walk on the grassy downs is to walk among
beautiful lilies in scarlet and white clusters, endless
varieties of periwinkles, purple and white
cinerarias, and golden bushes of the Cape broom,
which we all know here as so great a beautifier of
landscape. Tall arum lilies fill every water-washed
hollow in the
spriuts
(or brooks), and ferns of all
kinds abound.

If the Kaffirs would work with even moderate
application, the formation of a luxuriant garden of
fruit, flowers, and vegetables would be easily within
the reach of any dweller on the soil. The grass is
always cleared away for a considerable distance
round the house, because snakes are unpleasantly
numerous, and grass affords cover for them; in
the instances of fine gardens, a broad walk of a
deep rich red colour intervening between the
house and the gardens, contrasts beautifully with
the flower-beds, which are as big as small fields.

The red soil is very destructive to clothing, but
it adds to the beauty of the landscape. ‘Green
things,’ says the author, describing a Natal garden,
‘which we are accustomed to see in England in
small pots, shoot up here to the height of laurel
bushes. In shady places grow many varieties of
fern and blue hydrangea, and verbena of every
shade flourish. But the great feature of this
garden is roses, of at least a hundred different
sorts, which grow untrained, unpruned, in enormous
bushes covered by magnificent blossoms;
each bloom of which would win the prize at
a rose-show. Red roses, white roses, tea roses,
blush roses, moss roses, and the clear old-fashioned
cabbage rose, sweetest and most sturdy of all;
there they are at every turn—hedges of them,
screens of them, and giant bushes of them on
either hand.’ Add to this a bright swift brook
trickling through the garden, the constant sweet
song of the Cape canary, and crowds of large
butterflies of ‘all glorious hues,’ which are quite
fearless and familiar, perching on the flowers and
on the walks, and one gets a delightful notion of
a Natal garden.

This is, however, the bright side of the picture
of life in our South African colony; its practical
aspects are less enticing, though the drawbacks
are chiefly such as will be removed in most cases,
and modified in all, when railway traffic shall
be established in the country; a devoutly-to-be-wished
consummation, not very distant. At present,
we are told, the necessaries of life are very
expensive and difficult to procure; the importation
of English servants is almost always a failure;
and the Kaffirs, though they have many good
qualities, are difficult to teach, very lazy, and
given to starting off to their native kraals for an
improvised holiday of uncertain duration, without
the smallest regard to domestic exigences or the
convenience of their employers.

The soil is wonderfully prolific but under-cultivated,
and the cost of transport is enormous. Here
is a statement which will no doubt in a few years
be looked back upon with wonder by the author
herself, and read with self-gratulatory retrospective
compassion by settlers in Natal under the
railway regime: ‘The country’ (between Maritzburg
and Durban) ‘is beautiful; but except for a
scattered homestead here and there, not a sign of
a human dwelling is there on its green and fertile
slopes. All along the road, shrill bugle-blasts
warned the trailing ox-wagons, with their naked
“forelooper,” at their head, to creep aside out of
the way of the open brake in which we travelled.
I counted one hundred and twenty wagons that
day on fifty miles of road. Now, if one considers
that each of these wagons is drawn by
a span of thirty or forty oxen, one has some
faint idea of how such a method of transport
must use up the material of the country.
Something like ten thousand oxen toil over this
one road summer and winter; and what wonder
is it not only that merchandise costs more to fetch
up from Durban to Maritzburg than it does to
bring out from England, but that beef is dear and
bad?

As transport pays better than farming, we hear
on all sides of farms thrown out of cultivation;
and in the neighbourhood of Maritzburg it is
esteemed a favour to let you have either milk or
butter at exorbitant prices and of most inferior
quality. When one looks round at these countless
acres of splendid grazing-land, making a sort of
natural park on either hand, it seems like a bad
dream to know that we have constantly to use
preserved milk and potted meat, as being cheaper
and easier to procure than fresh.’

Durban is a picturesque town, but the sand and
the dust are overpowering. Fine timber abounds;
the different kinds of wood having the queerest
of names. Three of the hardest and handsomest
native woods are called respectively stink-wood,
breeze-wood, and sneeze-wood. In Durban
too, magnificent flowers are everywhere in the
utmost profusion; at the fête of ‘The First Sod’
the spot was beautifully decorated with plants and
blossoms which would have cost a large sum in
England; but these were cheaper than the nails
and string used in their arrangement. This fête
of ‘The First Sod’ afforded a favourable opportunity
for seeing all classes of the population,
colonists, Kaffirs, and coolies, for they all flocked
into Durban; and Lady Barker says a shrewd
thing in reference to the populace in general: ‘It
was the most orderly and respectable crowd which
could possibly be seen. In fact, such a crowd
would be an impossibility in England or any
higher civilised country. There were no dodging
vagrants, no slatternly women, no squalid, starving
babies.
In fact, our civilisation has not yet mounted
to effervescence, so we have no dregs.
’

{73}

We have been told wonders of the salubrity and
delightfulness of the climate of Natal; but Lady
Barker does not indorse the statements in which
we have hitherto placed confidence. The alternations
of heat and cold are very trying; the rains
are sudden and violent; and thunder-storms are of
almost daily occurrence and great severity. After
one very grand storm she found a multitude of
beautiful butterflies dead on the garden paths;
their plumage was not dimmed nor their wings
broken; they might have been ready prepared for
a collection, quite dead and stiff.

Amongst the fauna of Natal, birds, reptiles,
and insects abound. The natives suffer much
from snake-bites, and white new-comers from
mosquitos; all classes from ‘ticks,’ which also
persecute the dogs and horses. The native language
is very melodious and easily learned; and
the Kaffirs pick up a little English readily enough.
They are indeed a clever race and very home-loving.
One genius of the author’s acquaintance,
called ‘Sixpence,’ had actually accompanied his
master to England, whence he returned with a
terrible recollection of an English winter, and a
deep-rooted amazement at the boys of the Shoe Brigade
who wanted to clean his boots. That astonished
him, Sixpence declares, more than anything
else. Lady Barker is emphatic in her advice to all
colonists that they should make up their minds
from the first to have Kaffir servants. One ‘Tom,’
a nurse-boy, figures in her book most amusingly;
he is a capital fellow; and it is to be hoped he has
abandoned the intention, which he confided to
his mistress, of resigning his position after ‘forty
moons,’ because by that time he should be in a
position to buy plenty of wives, who would work
for him and support him for the rest of his life.
A Kaffir servant usually gets a pound a month, his
clothes, and food. The clothes consist of a shirt
and trousers of coarse check cotton, and a soldier’s
cast-off greatcoat for winter—all the old uniforms
of Europe find their way to South Africa; and
the food is plenty of ‘mealies’—or maize meal for
‘scoff,’ the native name for a mixture which
probably resembles porridge. If a servant be
worth making comfortable, one gives him a trifle
every week to buy meat. The only effectual
punishment and the sole restraint which can be
placed on the Kaffir propensity to break things,
is a system of fines.

A native kraal consists of a cluster of huts
which exactly resemble huge beehives. There is
a rude attempt at sod-fencing round them, and a
few head of cattle graze in the neighbourhood.
Women roughly scratch the earth with crooked
hoes to form a mealy-ground. Cows and mealies
are all the Kaffirs require, except blankets and
tobacco. The latter is smoked out of a cow’s horn.
‘They seem a very gay and cheerful people,’ says
the author, ‘to judge by the laughter and jests
I hear from the groups returning to their kraals
every day by the road just outside our fence.
Sometimes one of the party carries an umbrella;
and the effect of a tall Kaffir clad in nothing at
all, and carefully guarding his bare head with a
tattered “Gamp,” is very ridiculous. Often one of
the party walks first, playing upon a rude pipe;
whilst the others jig after him, laughing and
capering like boys let loose from school, and all
chattering loudly.’

No man, except he be a white settler’s servant,
ever carries a burden. When an ‘induna’ or chief
is ‘on the track,’ he rides a sorry nag, resting only
the point of his great toe in the stirrup, like the
Abyssinians. He is followed by his ‘tail’ or great
men, who carry bundles of sticks and keep up
with the ambling steed. Then come the wives,
bearing heavy loads on their heads; but walking
with firm erect carriage, their shapely arms and
legs bare, their bodies, from shoulder to knee,
clothed in some coarse stuff, which they drape in
exquisite folds. Lady Barker describes the Kaffir
women as looking neither oppressed nor discontented,
but healthy, happy, jolly, lazy, and slow
to appreciate any benefit from civilisation, except
the money, concerning which they, in common
with most savages, display a keenness of comprehension
hardly to be improved upon.

A dozen miles from Maritzburg, on the road
which forms the first stage of the great overland
journey to the Diamond Fields, is the little town of
Hawick, on the river Umgeni, which widens down
just beneath it to an exquisitely beautiful fall.
Over the brink goes the wide, smooth, waveless
sheet of water, in an absolutely straight descent of
three hundred and twenty feet. From the highest
point of the road above the river, the Drakensberg
Mountains, snow-covered, except in the hottest
summer, are visible, and though majestic, they
are disappointing. They are a splendid range of
level lines, far up beyond the floating clouds. ‘I
miss,’ says the author, ‘the serrated peaks of the
Southern Alps and the grand confusion of the
Himalayan range. This is evidently the peculiarity
of the mountain formation of South Africa;
I noticed it first in Table Mountain at Cape Town;
it is repeated in every little hill between Durban
and Maritzburg, and carried out on a gigantic
scale in this splendid range.’

Lady Barker made an interesting excursion
of over one hundred miles into the Bush, where
she saw real savage Kaffir life, splendid forest
scenes, and came on traces of the wild animals,
which are being rapidly exterminated. With one
forest picture we regretfully take leave of this
interesting volume: ‘The tall stately trees around,
with their smooth magnificent boles, shoot up
straight as a willow wand for sixty feet and
more before putting forth their crown of leafy
branches; the more diminutive undergrowth of
gracefulest shrubs and plumy tufts of fern and
lovely wild-flowers, violets, clematis, wood anemones,
and hepaticas, shewing here and there a
modest gleam of colour. But indeed the very
mosses and lichens at our feet are a week’s study,
and so are the details of the delicate green tracery
creeping close to the ground. Up above our heads
the foliage is interlaced and woven together by a
perfect network of “monkey-ropes,” a stout and
sturdy species of liane, which are used by the
troops of baboons which live in those great woods,
coming down in armies when the mealies are ripe,
and carrying off the cobs by armfuls.’ It is spring-tide
(September) when Lady Barker lays down her
pen; soon, we hope, to resume it, and tell us of
the growth of the colony. ‘Everything is bursting
hurriedly and luxuriantly into bloom. The
young oaks are a mass of tender green, and even
the unpoetical blue gums try hard to assume a
fresh spring tint. The fruit-trees look like large
bouquets of pink blossom, and the loquot trees
afford good sport in climbing and stone-throwing
{74}

amid their cluster of yellow plums. On the
veldt

the lilies are pushing up their green sheaths and
white or scarlet cups through the yet hard ground,
and the black hill-slopes are turning a vivid green,
and the flowers are springing up in millions all
over my field like flower-beds. Spring is always
lovely everywhere, but nowhere is it lovelier than
in fair Natal.’

A PERILOUS POSITION.

IN TWO CHAPTERS.—CHAPTER I.

‘
Now
, look here, Fred; you’ve exactly an hour
and a half to get back in,’ said Mr Middleton
after luncheon. ‘I shall be at the mill by three
precisely. Are you sure you can manage it?’

‘Oh, quite certain of it, sir,’ was my confident
reply. ‘Why, I could go to M—— and back
within the hour, easy riding. I’ll not keep you
waiting, depend upon it.’ So saying, I vaulted
the low sill of a window which stood wide open,
and approached a couple who were strolling upon
the lawn in front of Holm Court, the aristocratic-looking
dwelling I had quitted.

Of this couple, one was a young lady, very fair
and, in my eyes at least, very beautiful. She
was the elder child and only daughter of the Mr
Middleton already mentioned; a mill-owner who
had realised a gigantic fortune by manufacturing;
and in three days she was to be my wife. I for
my part was a young man of good family, possessed
of an independent fortune, in my twenty-second
year, and ardently attached to my intended
bride. That this attachment was mutual, I was,
moreover, well assured; and on that delicious
summer afternoon life opened before me full of
brilliant promise. So happy indeed did I feel,
that it was with difficulty I could restrain my
jubilation within bounds, and compel myself
to walk along the ground at a reasonable and
gentlemanly pace, instead of running or leaping
as, in my ecstasy, inclination prompted.

As I neared her my darling stepped forward
to meet me; and after a few words upon another
subject, she administered an anxious caution
apropos of an adventure in which I was about
to join, and to which I shall advert immediately.
I assured her in return that there was no danger
connected with it; and with an affectionate
temporary adieu, we parted. Looking back as I
prepared to mount my horse, which, held by a
groom, stood ready saddled before the hall door,
I saw my sweet girl rejoined by the companion,
who, upon my approach, had sauntered away from
her to some short distance. This companion was
a Mr Marmaduke Hesketh, a fine-looking handsome
man, about thirty-five, second-cousin to
Mr Middleton, and lately returned from America.
That this gentleman entertained towards my
humble self feelings of a no very friendly character,
I was well aware, although he had never
addressed to me a single discourteous word; and
the cause of his antipathy I had divined. He
too was in love with Clara Middleton; I was
sure of it, although he had never told her so;
and although Clara herself, when I mentioned my
impression to her, laughed at me for it, and
called me a ‘fanciful goose.’ Her rallying, however,
did not shake my conviction of the truth,
and I felt very sorry for the poor man. As his
successful rival, I could afford to pity him; and
I had too much confidence in Clara’s affection
to feel an atom of jealousy, even when, as now,
I left him alone in her company.

My foot in the stirrup, I was preparing for a
spring to the saddle, when my name, called eagerly
from behind, arrested the action; and turning, I
saw Clara’s brother—a nice-looking lad of twelve
or so—running breathlessly down the broad steps
of the entrance-hall.

‘I say, Mr Carleton,’ he panted on reaching my
side, ‘mamma wants you, please, to get her a bottle
of chloroform from Pennick’s the druggist when
you’re passing. And I say; mind you don’t forget
my string, will you? It’s to be as strong as ever
you can get it, you know, for it’s such a big kite;
and two balls, mind—big ones. You’ll be sure
and remember?’

‘Oh, I’ll remember, Charlie, safe enough,’ I
returned, smiling. ‘String and chloroform—two
important commissions. I’ll not forget. Bye-bye,
my boy.’ And giving my horse his head, I
trotted down the avenue, passed the lodge gates,
and turned in the direction of the busy manufacturing
town of M——.

My errand there was to see the clergyman who
was to officiate at the marriage, and to arrange with
him some slight alteration in the hour previously
appointed for the ceremony. On my return from
this visit I was, according to agreement, to meet
Mr Middleton and Mr Hesketh on the site of a
large cotton-mill in process of erection by the
former. Of this mill one portion was already
completed, namely, an enormous chimney—the
broadest and tallest by far of any in the county.
Mr Middleton, exceedingly proud of his chimney,
and considering it a masterpiece of enterprise, had
determined beforehand to ascend to its summit as
soon as it should be finished; and in this expedition
he had invited Mr Hesketh and myself to
accompany him. The scaffolding used in building
it having been removed, the ascent was to be
made by means of a bucket or car (similar to
those employed in the descent of coal-pits), affixed
to two strong chains, passing over pulleys which
ran on pins built into the chimney at the top; and
the car was to be worked by a windlass.

It wanted exactly five minutes to three when I
arrived at the rendezvous—my business at M——
transacted, and the chloroform and string I had
been commissioned to purchase in my pocket.
Giving my horse into the charge of one of Mr
Middleton’s employés, of whom there were several
about, I walked towards the subterranean entrance
to the chimney, near which I perceived Mr
Marmaduke Hesketh standing. He looked rather
pale, I thought, as courteously advancing on my
approach, he imparted to me the information
that Mr Middleton had just received a telegram
summoning him to the bedside of his brother,
Captain Middleton. That gentleman, it appeared,
had been taken suddenly and dangerously ill; and
full of anxiety, Mr and Mrs Middleton had already
started off for F—— Junction, in order to catch the
first train thence to the town, some twenty miles
distant, where the captain was stationed with his
regiment. Mr Middleton had, however, my informant
proceeded, expressed, before leaving, a desire
that we would not allow his absence to interfere
{75}

with our project of ascending the chimney; and
he, Mr Hesketh, concluded by hoping that I would
not object to accompany him alone, as he very
much wished to see the view from the top, and
would not, as I knew—for he was leaving Holm
Court the next day—have another opportunity
of doing so.

Young and fond of adventure, I had rather
enjoyed the prospect of this enterprise, and though
disappointed not to carry it out in my intended
father-in-law’s company, I saw no reason for declining
Mr Hesketh’s proposal to go with him alone.
Accordingly, signifying my assent to it, we proceeded
to enter the chimney together. Some half-dozen
men were waiting within, in readiness to
turn the crank of the windlass; and a moment
later, swaying and vibrating in mid-air, we were
slowly ascending through the gradually narrowing
aperture of the great chimney. On gaining the
top I was the first to step from the bucket; but
Mr Hesketh was speedily by my side. The stone
coping being fully two feet in width and having
a narrow parapet a foot in height, presented a
perfectly safe footing. I had a strong head, and
had not expected to feel dizzy; yet, as I now
gazed from that tremendous height, a singular
feeling of insecurity seized upon me.

‘Will you not walk round?’ said my companion
when we had stood together for a few seconds on
the spot where we had alighted.

‘Oh, certainly,’ I replied with an assumption of
boldness, but an inward shrinking from the ordeal;
and with Mr Hesketh at my heels, I commenced
the circuit.

About half the short distance was accomplished,
when a hand laid on my arm arrested my steps.
‘We’ve a fine view from here—haven’t we?’
observed Mr Hesketh as I stopped, a sensation of
dread thrilling through my nerves at his touch.
‘You see Holm Court there, down to the right,
don’t you?’

‘Of course, quite plainly,’ I returned, clearing
my throat to cover the strange nervous uneasiness
I was experiencing.

‘So glad I persuaded you to come and see the
view,’ he remarked next in a very peculiar tone,
and at the same time tightening his grasp upon
my arm. ‘But it’s an awful height, isn’t it; I
hope you don’t feel giddy?’

‘Not at all,’ I replied, endeavouring to keep my
composure as I gazed downwards at the long perpendicular
wall of smooth brick, but feeling that
I was trembling perceptibly.

‘And yet there is but a step between us and
death,’ he pursued with a sneer. ‘Hollo! I’m
quoting Scripture, I declare. You wouldn’t have
expected that of me; would you?’

‘Oh, anybody can quote Scripture, you know,’
I responded with a ghastly attempt at airiness.
‘But I say, Hesketh, let go my arm, will you?
You’re hurting me.’

‘Hurting you, am I? Ha, ha! I beg your
pardon, I’m sure,’ he laughed, increasing instead
of diminishing the vice-like pressure of his fingers.
‘I wouldn’t hurt you for the world; O no! But
now, if you’ve quite finished with the scenery,
Mr Frederick Carleton, I’ll trouble you to give me
your attention for a moment. I’m going to ask
you a question, which you may perhaps consider
somewhat curiously timed. I am not a vain man,
that I know of; but I should like to have your
opinion respecting my personal appearance. Should
you feel justified now, for instance, in describing
me as a well-built, powerful kind of man?’

Considering that he was upwards of six feet in
height, broad and stout in proportion, with well-developed
sinewy limbs, the description would
have been accurate; and I said so.

‘If you feel any doubt of it,’ he resumed, still
in the same peculiar tone, ‘oblige me by examining
that muscle.’ And he stretched out for my
inspection an arm that could have felled an ox—firm
and strong as a bar of iron.

‘I am quite satisfied of your muscular strength
and powerful physical development, Mr Hesketh,’
I said, with an effort to appear unconcerned and
amused, which I was conscious was a dead failure.
‘And now, with your permission, I think we had
better descend.’

‘Not just this moment, my precious little
bantam cock,’ was the startling rejoinder. ‘Sorry
to detain you, believe me, but I must trouble you
with another question. Supposing, now, that you
and I, dear friend, were to have a tussle at the top
of this chimney, and that each of us was trying
to throw the other over, which, should you think,
would have the better chance of accomplishing
his purpose?’

Summoning to my aid all the manliness of which
I was possessed, I courageously declined to answer
this question—asserting that the case was not a
supposable one, seeing that I entertained towards
him no feelings of enmity, and that I felt sure he
had no desire to injure me.

‘Look in my face and see if I haven’t!’ he rejoined
in loud fierce accents, very different from
those he had hitherto employed. ‘Look in my
face, Mr Frederick Carleton, and see if I haven’t!’

I did look, and my heart died within me—for
on the face of the man who still retained my
arm in his iron grip on the top of that terrible
chimney, I saw an expression of fiendish hate and
malignance, of the like of which I could not have
believed a human countenance capable.

As my eyes fell before the awful glare of his,
he laughed. ‘You have read your answer, I see,’
he said. ‘And now, listen. Seat yourself upon
the parapet exactly where you now stand; observe
as closely as you please what I am about to do;
but stir one step to hinder it, and as I live, I will
hurl you below!’

The threat, I knew, was no vain one; the man
who uttered it overtopped me by the head and
shoulders, and possessed double my strength. Resistance,
therefore, would have been entirely useless;
and trembling in every limb, I obeyed the
command, and seated myself. And this was what
I then beheld. Approaching the mass of machinery
against which rested the wooden box or car wherein
we had ascended, Mr Hesketh leaned over the
edge of the chimney, and deliberately lifted this
up from one of the two strong iron hooks upon
which it hung suspended. Then slipping the
loosened chain over the pulley, he sent it clattering
towards the ground below. A horrified shout
from the men who stood by the windlass greeted
this act, coming up hoarse and discordant from
the distance; and bending forwards I answered
that shout with an imploring cry for aid—a wild
vain cry! The men, of course, could not help
me; and with sickening despair I watched them
retreating to the subterranean passage, to save
{76}

themselves from danger—as mounted now upon
the projecting machinery, Mr Hesketh loosened
the remaining hook of the car and precipitated it
into the abyss beneath.

MISPRINTS.

Misprints
, errors of the press, printers’ blunders,
typographical mistakes—call them what we may—are
so numerous that every reader meets with
them occasionally. Budgets of ludicrous examples
are now and then given in the popular journals;
and these budgets might be greatly extended.
Our
Journal
gave its quota more than thirty
years ago; and the matter was again touched upon
in the volume for 1872.

Many errors consist in the omission of a single
letter in a single word, altering the sense most
materially. Thus, an omission of the letter
t
, in a
work by Dr Watts, made immortal into
immoral
;
and other grotesque instances of this kind of error
could be given. The heedless substitution of one
letter for another, without exceeding or falling
short of the proper number of letters in the
word, is a very frequent form of blunder. ‘Bring
him to look’ is a poor version of ‘bring him
to
book
.’ A candidate at an election certainly
did not mean, as a newspaper implied, that he
fully expected to come in ‘at the top of the

pole
.’ A compositor, perhaps a learner, being
unable to make out a Greek word of three
letters, set them down as the three numerals to
which they bore some resemblance in shape,
namely 185. At a public demonstration the mob
rent the air with their
snouts
. Dr Livingstone’s
cap, as worn when Mr Stanley met him in the
heart of Africa, was said in one of the papers to
have been ‘
famished
with a gold-lace band.’ In
old English printing, the syllable
con
was often
contracted to something like the shape of the
figure 9; and this numeral is to be found in
many books, even standard works, where it
has no right whatever; in one edition of the

Monasticon Anglicanum
for instance, the word
conquest is represented as
9quest
. There are
both a wrong letter used and a letter omitted in
the startling statement, that a right reverend
prelate was highly pleased with some ecclesiastical

iniquities
shewn to him.

A useful question has been asked, and to some
extent discussed, whether several of the above-cited
misprints of single letters, or others similar to
them, may not be due to the arrangement of the
compositor’s working apparatus? Mr Keightley
suggested, a few years ago, that possibly some of
the varied readings of passages in Shakspeare
might be due to the compositor dipping his fingers
into the wrong cell, and others to the fact that
wrong types have got into the right cell. Most
persons who have visited any of the printing establishments
are aware that the compositor’s types
are placed in flat cases provided with a number
of small cells or receptacles, each for one particular
letter of one particular class of type. There
are two cases, one called the
upper
and the other
the
lower
; the former being for the capitals, the
latter for the small letters. Both cases are placed
before the compositor, inclining upwards from
front to back, the upper more inclined than
the lower. The cells are not ranged in regular
alphabetical order, but in such manner that those
containing the letters most wanted shall be grouped
together near the compositor’s hand, leaving such
letters as
j
,
k
,
q
,
x
,
z
, &c. to occupy cells near the
margin of the case. May not some types fall out
of an overfilled cell into the one just below it; or
may not the filling of a pair of cases with new
type be so carelessly managed that a few fall over
into the wrong cells; or may the compositor, in
distributing the type after printing, now and then
drop a type into a wrong cell?

A practical printer will answer such a question
in the affirmative. The letters
b
and
l
, for instance,
being in contiguous cells, one may fall or slip
down into the cell belonging to the other, which
might be the cause of ‘bring him to
book
’ being
changed into ‘bring him to
look
.’ The old form
of type for the double letter
st
is believed to have
led to many misprints—such as nostrils being
expressed
stostrils
, in a Bible printed in the early
part of the present century. Whether the types
were arranged in the cases a hundred or two
hundred years ago in the same order and manner
as at present, might be worth a little investigation—in
so far as any change of arrangement may have
rendered either more or less frequent such misprints
as would arise from the falling over of some
of the types into wrong cells. There are now
something like a hundred and fifty cells in a pair
of cases for ordinary book and newspaper printing;
even if there were the same number in former
times, it does not necessarily follow that the
arrangement of the rank and file would be the
same.

Benjamin Franklin, when a young man, refused
to give ‘garnish’ or ‘pay his footing,’ on being
placed in a room of compositors; because he had
already responded to a demand for similar blackmail
in another department of the printing-office.
They took a peculiar method of punishing him, by
disarranging some of the types in his cells when
he was out of the room. Very likely this technical
tribulation may have led him inadvertently to the
committal of numerous misprints. Several years
ago Mr H. Martin, of Halifax, adverted to a typographical
error in a former communication of his
to one of the journals, and added: ‘Upwards
of thirty years’ experience in connection with the
press has taught me to be very lenient towards
misprints. The difficulty of detecting typographical
errors is much greater than the uninitiated
are inclined to believe. I have often
observed that, even if the spelling be correct, a
wrong word is very apt to remain undetected.’ He
notices an instance in an edition of Shakspeare’s

Merchant of Venice
, where Portia’s lines—

Young Alcides when he did redeem

The virgin tribute paid by howling Troy—

were converted into nonsense by the simple change
of Troy into
Tory
. ‘In a short biographical
notice of Pope which I compiled for an edition of
his poems, I briefly enumerated his prose works,
among which I named his
Memoirs of a Parish
Priest
; when the proof came before me, I found
that the compositor had set it Memoirs of a
Paint
Brush
.’ It is possible that this blunder may have
arisen from a cause to which we shall presently
advert, obscure writing in the author’s manuscript;
but Mr Martin also took notice of the matter mentioned
above, namely the partial disarrangement
{77}

of some of the types in the cells, as a cause of
typographical bewilderment.

This misplacing of types in cells would fail,
however, to account for a multitude of blunders.
The author, the compositor, and the ‘corrector of
the press’ must be responsible on other grounds
for ‘A silver medal given to a florist for
stealing

geraniums;’ and for putting a wrong date on
the tops of some of the pages of a newspaper—such
as the
Daily News
in one of its issues,
which put ‘Monday July 18th’ on the top of
one page, and ‘Tuesday July 18th’ on the top of
all the others; and in a quite recent instance in
the
Illustrated London News
, where on the top of
one page Saturday was assigned to a date that
certainly did not belong to it. At the Duke of
Wellington’s funeral in 1852, Sir Peregrine Maitland
was one of the pall-bearers. A statement
appeared in some of the journals to the effect that
when Sir Archibald Alison published the last
volume of his
History of Europe
, the name of Sir
Peregrine Maitland appeared as Sir Peregrine

Pickle
; and it was remarked that such a misprint
could not have been otherwise than intentional, a
poor attempt at a joke on the part of the compositor,
or the ‘corrector.’ In the only copy which
we have consulted, this absurdity does
not
appear—a
negative testimony so far as it goes in favour
of the compositor.

The wrong placing of words in lines, and lines
in columns or pages, is an instance of careless
‘making-up,’ for which the compositor in the first
place is clearly responsible, but which as certainly
ought to be detected in the proof by the corrector.
Nevertheless, the examples of this are manifold.
Sometimes a whole line is transferred higher up
or lower down the page than the proper place;
and at others one single word makes an excursion
to a line where no reader would look for it. We
notice, for instance, in one of the magazines for
September 1877 the word
see
is used where it has
no meaning; twelve lines lower down occurs the
word
They
where it has no meaning; but on
transposing the two words, nonsense becomes
converted into sense. A practical printer could
tell us how such an error might arise in the
technical management of his ‘composing-stick’
and ‘form;’ but to outsiders it is well-nigh
incomprehensible.

It was a little too bad in the printers of a
Cambridge Bible, published some years back, that
such a line should appear as ‘I will never
forgive

thy precepts.’ Here there was no writer nor
transcriber concerned; the compositor made the
blunder, and the press-reader passed it without
detection; because as new editions of the Bible,
unless newly annotated, are copied from the print
of a previous edition, no manuscript is needed.
A somewhat trifling error, though puzzling in its
result, occurs in spacing the words: the last letter
or syllable of one word is inadvertently placed at
the beginning of the next, or else the first is
placed at the end of the preceding word. When
a lady is said, in a recent novel, to ‘rush down-stairs

without stretched
arms,’ we know what is
meant; but the corrector ought not to have
passed such a slip unnoticed. On one occasion—perhaps
one among many—a foot-note is incorporated
in the body of the page, throwing the whole
sense of a paragraph into utter confusion. A
printer will know how this may occur, in arranging
his lines into pages; but what is the corrector
about?

The most trying part perhaps of a compositor’s
duty is to decipher the writing of some authors
whose manuscripts have to be set up in type. No
one can conceive, merely judging from the interchange
of ordinary letters between relations and
acquaintances, the large amount of badly written
manuscript which reaches the printing-offices.
And it is known that some of our most eminent
authors, whose veritable words are regarded as
more important than those of other men, are great
sinners in this respect; they torment the compositor
with specimens of the art of penmanship
almost hopelessly unintelligible. Our readers will
find this part of the subject—that is the misprints
that are due wholly to the bad writing of the
author or amanuensis, and not to carelessness
shewn by the compositor or the corrector—fully
illustrated by examples in the article ‘Wretched
Writers’ in this
Journal
for March 14, 1874. The
late Horace Greeley, the distinguished American,
is pictured in that article as about the worst penman
that ever disturbed the peace of a compositor.

A word or two about correctors and correcting.
When the compositor has set up and arranged
matter enough for say a sheet, a ‘proof’ is pulled
at the hand-press, and the ‘first reader’ is employed
to examine it closely for the detection of
any technical errors; then, with the aid of a
‘reading-boy,’ he compares the paragraphs, one
after another, with the author’s manuscript, corrects
as he goes on by means of marginal marks on the
proof, and queries any doubtful word or passage
to which he wishes to draw the author’s attention.
The compositor makes all the corrections suggested
by this ‘first reader,’ and for common cheap
kinds of printing this is enough; but for better
work, a ‘second reader’ is employed to correct
not merely the compositor but to advise even the
author in regard to badly chosen words or badly
arranged sentences—an intellectual revision, in
fact, often performed by men who sometimes themselves
afterwards rise to distinction as authors.
The perplexities that beset the printer’s reader
were pretty fully set forth thirteen years ago in
the
Journal
; and we need say nothing more on
that subject. What with the reading-boy, the first
reader, and the second reader, we see that there
are many possible responsibilities for misprints
besides those due to the author, the copyist or
amanuensis, and the compositor. An impartial
distribution of blame is hence desirable so far as
it can be done.

NATURE’S TEACHINGS.

In
a curious and instructive book which we have
just read, entitled
Nature’s Teachings
, by Mr
Wood, we are shewn that scientific inventions,
no matter how original and ingenious they may

appear
to be, have each and all been anticipated
in the world of nature.

Countless inventions have been made by man
without his having any knowledge of the fact
that the machine which in its first idea sprang
from a single brain, and was afterwards, during
the progress of time, slowly improved and perfected
perhaps by many successive generations of
{78}

inventors, had been in use in nature in a more
perfect form than art could accomplish, for ages
before man existed on the earth. There is scarcely
a principle or part in architecture that has not its
natural parallel—walls, floors, towers, doors and
hinges, porches, eaves, and windows; thatch, slates,
and tiles, girders, ties, and buttresses, bridges,
dams, the pyramid, and even mortar, paint, and
varnish, are all there. The Eskimo snow-house
is an exact copy of the dwelling the seal builds
for her tender young; the wasp’s nest is composed
of several stories supported on numerous pillars.
The well-known instance of the building of the
Crystal Palace on a ‘new principle,’ by Sir Joseph
Paxton, is mentioned by the author, and is one
of the many cases where man has confessedly
copied nature in art; for that beautiful structure
of iron and glass is simply an adaptation of the
framework of the enormous leaves of the Victoria
regia plant, which, owing to its formation, combines
great strength with great apparent fragility.
The present Eddystone lighthouse, which has so
long withstood the force of the waves, was constructed
in 1760 by Smeaton on an entirely new
idea, the model being taken from a tree trunk, and
the stones of which it was built being strengthened
by being dovetailed into one another, as is the
case with the sutures of the skull.

The study of the eye of man, as well as of birds,
quadrupeds, and insects, has shewn how the most
beautiful and gradually improved inventions, such
as the telescope, microscope, pseudoscope, stereoscope,
multiplying glass, &c., had already been
perfected in nature for ages. By the combination
of a few prisms and a magnifying glass, is produced
that most wonderful of all optical instruments,
the spectroscope, which equally reveals to
us the constituents of the most distant stars or
the colouring matter of the tiniest leaf; and yet
the prismatic colours developed by this marvellous
instrument have existed equally within the glorious
arch of the rainbow and in the tiniest dew-drop as
it glitters in the rising sun, ever since the sun first
shone and the first rain fell.

In the arts of peace, we must look to the
animal world for the most perfect specimens of
tools for digging, cutting, or boring. No spade
is equal to the foot of the mole; and our hammers
and pincers look clumsy indeed beside the woodpecker’s
beak or the lobster’s claw. Moreover, the
dwellings in the construction of which such tools
are employed, are models of beauty and ingenuity.
Symmetrically shaped pottery made of moulded
mud or clay is found in Nature in the form of
birds’ and insects’ nests; in the jaws of the skate is
found the crushing-mill, and in the tooth of the
elephant the grindstone. In the ichneumon fly and
the grasshopper was perfected from the first the
modern agricultural improvement on the hand-dibble,
the seed-drill. It is only of late years that
the use of the teasel has been superseded by
machinery; and brushes and combs, buttons, hooks,
eyes, stoppers, filters, &c. are all found in Nature.
The principle of the diving-bell and air-tube exists
in varieties of insects; birds make beds and
hammocks and even sew, and the bower-bird
emulates us in the construction of ornamental
bowers and gardens. Graceful fans exist in plants
and insects, cisterns in the traveller’s tree and
the camel’s stomach, and natural examples of the
balloon and parachute.

In other varieties of art, Nature has stolen a
march on man; certain insects make paper of
different textures; the art known as ‘nature-printing’
was anticipated in the coal measures.
Star-stippling, as now used in engraving to produce
extra softness of effect, exists in utmost perfection
in every flower petal. The caddis-worm,
common in all our fresh waters, constructs for itself
a circular window-grating which admits the water
and yet protects the pupa from injury, an apparatus
exactly like the wheel-windows of a Gothic
building. There is a bird in South Africa, the
Sociable Weaver-bird, which may be looked upon
as a dweller in cities, each pair, up to the number
of perhaps three hundred, building its own nest;
while the whole community unite to form a common
roof or covering of thatch made from a coarse
kind of grass, to protect their habitations from the
heavy tropical rains. The Driver-ants, also found
in Africa, are so sensitive to the fierce heat of the
sun, that when on their marches they are obliged
to cross open ground, ‘they construct as they go
on, a slight gallery which looks very much like
the lining of a tunnel stripped of the surrounding
earth;’ and if they come to thick grass which
makes a shelter for them, they take advantage of
it, and only resume the tunnel when they emerge
on the other side. Not less wonderful than any of
these are the Trap-door spiders, of which mention
has been before made in this
Journal
. In making
their nests, they begin by sinking a shaft in the
ground; it is then lined with a silken web, and
closed by a circular door, which can scarcely be
distinguished from the moss and lichens which
grow around. The hinges are most exactly fitted,
and the spider has an extraordinary power of
closing his door from the inside, and resisting all
intrusion.

It is curious that as we
advance
in the scale of
creation these wonderful dwellings cease. Strange
to say, the creature which roams at will through
the forest, and has no settled resting-place, is
higher in the scale of life—according to the recognised
scheme of naturalists—than the animal that
is mechanically capable of constructing the most
perfect abode!

Mr Wood reminds us that though the march of
Science has destroyed much of our belief in
the sweet old tales of fairyland, yet she has given
us ample compensation, inasmuch as the ‘fairy
tales of science’ are in reality more full of grace
and poetry than any of the myths that delighted
our childhood. And many of the forms which
meet us, if we apply ourselves to the study of
natural history, are more full of quaint or graceful
fancy than the wildest tales that have ever stirred
the imagination of an Eastern story-teller. What
can be more beautiful than the little Velella, a
{79}

sea-creature like a circular raft, with an upright
membrane answering to a sail; ‘semi-transparent,
and radiant in many rainbow-tinted colours.’ What
more grotesque than the Archer-fish, ‘which possesses
the curious power of feeding itself by
shooting drops of water at flies, and very seldom
fails to secure its prey;’ or the Angler-fish,
which is endowed by Nature with a rod and bait
ready adjusted. This remarkable creature has
an enormous mouth; on the top of its head are
certain prolonged cane-like filaments, beautifully
set in a ring and staple joint, so as to turn every
way; and at the end of these singular appendages
is a little piece of flesh, which when waved about,
looks like a living worm, and attracts the fish,
which is then ingulfed in the huge jaws of this
natural angler.

Many interesting forms come to us from the
water-world, suggestive of rafts, boats, oars, and
anchors. An insect called the Water-boatman
is itself both boat and oars, besides being its own
passenger; the legs with which it rows are
fashioned in most exact resemblance to the blade
of an oar; or we should rather say that the blade
of an oar resembles the leg of this Water-boatman.
That fragile creature the Portuguese Man-of-war,
which traverses the surface of the ocean like a
bubble, and can at pleasure distend itself with
air and float, or discharge the air and sink, shews
us the principle of the life-dress in which Captain
Boyton made his daring passage across the
Channel. Cables too we have in plenty: the
Pinna, a kind of mussel, anchors itself to some
rock or stone with a number of silk-like threads
spun by itself; and the Water-snail moors itself,
perhaps to a water-lily leaf, by means of a gelatinous
thread, slight, almost invisible, yet very strong,
which it can elongate at pleasure.

In connection with this there is a very curious
account of a spider, which shews a marvellous
power of adaptation. Its wheel-like net was in
danger from a high wind. ‘The spider descended to
the ground, a depth of about seven feet, and instead
of attaching its thread to a stone or plant, fastened
it to a piece of loose stick, hauled it up a few feet
clear of the ground, and then went back to its web.
The piece of stick thus left suspended, acted in a
most admirable manner, giving strength and support,
and at the same time yielding partly to the
wind. By accident the thread became broken, and
the stick, which was about as thick as an ordinary
pencil, and not quite three inches in length, fell to
the ground. The spider immediately descended,
attached another thread, and hauled it up as
before. In a day or two, when the tempestuous
weather had ceased, the spider voluntarily cut
the thread and allowed the then useless stick to
drop.’ The plan here adopted by the spider is
frequently followed by fishermen who during
stormy weather at sea, ride out the gale by attaching
the boat to their yielding nets.

It is natural to expect that in the arts of war
and self-defence Nature should shew us an infinite
variety; and man has not been slow in using his
powers to adapt the same principles to his own
use. If man has armed himself with spears or
daggers, if he has dug pitfalls or set traps in
hunting, his most deadly contrivances are but
feeble adaptations of the weapons, offensive and
defensive, with which Nature has endowed her offspring.
We are prepared to find the serpent’s fang
a terrible instrument; and we are not surprised that
the piercing apparatus and sheaths of gnats and
fleas, or the lancets of mosquitoes when magnified,
are dangerous and blood-thirsty; but it is curious to
find how many of these deadly weapons belong to
the vegetable world. The sword-grass has a notched
blade which, when magnified, is almost exactly the
same as the shark-tooth sword of Mangaia. There
are nettles whose sting is sufficiently venomous to
cause violent pain, inflammation, cramp, and even
death; and it is well known that some of the
most graceful of plants, such as Venus’s Fly-trap,
which is common in the Carolinas, and the Drosera
or Sundew, one of our British plants, are in fact
nothing but skilful traps to catch and digest
unwary insects.

Some of the most curious of natural defences
are those which simulate some form quite different
from the true character of the creature. We are
tempted to think of the Mighty Book of Michael
Scott, in which was

Much of glamour might,

Could make a ladye seem a knight,

The cobwebs on a dungeon wall

Seem tapestry in lordly hall.

And Nature, in her turn exercising her powerful
glamour, can make a caterpillar seem a twig, or a
moth look exactly like a withered leaf. The
Spider-crab might be taken for a moving mass of
zoophytes and corallines, so thickly is its shell
covered with extraneous growths. The Leaf-insects
are so exactly like leaves that the most
experienced eye can scarcely distinguish them
from the leaves among which they are placed.
We must all have noticed other instances in which
the colours of insects, and also the plumage of
birds, harmonise in a wonderful way with the
scenes in the midst of which they are placed.
Indeed there seems no end to the resemblance
which may be traced between the works of Nature
and those of man. Many of the most obvious
of these strike us with fresh surprise when we
find the comparison carefully drawn out. What a
freak of Nature, for instance, are the aphides, the
milk-cows of a species of ant; or the tailor-bird,
‘which sews leaves together by their edges, and
makes its nest inside them!’ It is sufficiently
strange too, to remember that the elaborate process
of paper-making was carried on by the wasps, ages
before it was known to the Chinese.

One of the most powerful of all natural forces
is that of electricity; and it is at present so little
understood, and so full of mystery, that we may
perhaps suppose that many of the most important
discoveries of the future must lie in that direction.
But Nature has known how to turn this as well as
her other powers to her own use. She has her
living galvanic batteries, such as the torpedo and
the electric eel, both of which secure their prey
by paralysing it with their electric discharges.
And the light of the glow-worm and that of the
fire-fly, though hitherto it has been a puzzle to
naturalists, may, there is little doubt, be referred
to animal electricity.

After a careful perusal of the book, we are
convinced that the more closely the connection
between Nature and human inventions is observed,
the more perfect and the more numerous will
further discoveries be. Endowed with high moral
capabilities of truth and justice, and benevolence;
{80}

gifted with reasoning faculties, which enable him
to observe, to argue, to draw conclusions, it is for
man himself to work according to the same laws
which, unconsciously to themselves, govern the
organisations of the lower animal, and the vegetable
world.

WASTE SUBSTANCES.

CIGAR-ENDS.

Probably
few people in this country are aware
that that usually wasted substance a cigar-end is
utilised in Germany to a large extent, and with
even beneficent results.

We can imagine many of our readers wondering
what can be the object of collecting these small
ends; and we will therefore briefly explain that
they are sold for the purpose of being made into
snuff, and that the proceeds of such sales are
devoted to charitable purposes. There is in
Berlin a society called the ‘Verein der Sammler
von Cigarren Abschnitten,’ or the Society of Collectors
of Cigar-cuttings, which has been in existence
some ten years, and has done much good.
Every Christmas the proceeds of the cigar-ends
collected by this Society and its friends are applied
to the purchase of clothes for some poor orphan
children. In 1876 about thirty children were
clothed by this Society, each child being provided
with a shirt, a pair of good leather boots, a pair of
woollen stockings, a warm dress, and a pocket-handkerchief.
In addition to this, a large well-decorated
Christmas-tree is given for their entertainment,
and each child is sent home with a good
supply of fruit and sweetmeats. Altogether more
than two hundred poor orphan children have been
clothed by this Society simply by the proceeds of
such small things as cigar-ends.

The success of the Society at Berlin has induced
further enterprise in the same direction, and it is
now proposed to erect a building to be called the
‘Deutsches Reichs-Waisenhaus’ (Imperial German
Orphan Home), where orphans who are left unprovided
for may be properly cared for, clothed, and
instructed. The site proposed for this institution
is at Lahr in Baden, where there are a number of
snuff manufactories, and it is therefore well adapted
to the scheme, which we can only hope may be
successfully carried out. Although the directors
of this Home propose to have a plan prepared for
a large building, only a small part of it will at
first be erected, to which each year or two more
rooms may be added, in accordance with the
original plan, in proportion to the success which
is found to attend the undertaking. It will be
readily understood that a good many difficulties
beset this scheme, for it requires the most perfect
co-operation of the smoking community and some
assistance also from the non-smokers; but much
can be done by friends who will undertake the
duty of collecting, and some of the most energetic
of these are not unfrequently of the fair sex.

The system of collection, which is extended over
a large part of Germany, is generally undertaken
by one or two ladies or gentlemen in each town,
who collect now and then from their smoking
friends the ends which they have been saving up.
These collectors either send on the cigar-ends to
the central Society, or sell them on the spot and
transmit the proceeds. This latter plan, when it
can be worked, is preferable, as saving expenses
in carriage and packing. It is proposed that the
number of children which each town shall have
the privilege of sending to the Home shall be
regulated according to the amount which they
have contributed to the Society.

To insure the success of this institution, it will
be absolutely necessary for all to unite and work
together; each one must not leave it for his neighbour,
thinking that one more or less can make no
difference. To shew, however, what might be
accomplished by a thorough unity in this matter,
let us say that there are at least some ten millions
of smokers in Germany; or to be very much
within the mark, we will take only five million
smokers who will give themselves the trouble, if
such it is, of saving up their cigar-ends; and
assuming that the cigar-ends of each person during
one week are worth only a quarter
Pfennig
(ten
Pfennig = one penny English), we have a total
revenue for the year of six hundred and fifty
thousand marks, or thirty-two thousand five hundred
pounds. Now, these thirty-two thousand five
hundred pounds, which, as a rule, are thrown
away and wasted, can be used to provide a Home
for at least thirteen thousand poor orphan children.
Further, if the five million smokers would contribute
but once a year the value only of a single
cigar, say in Germany one penny, this would make
an additional five hundred thousand marks, or
twenty-five thousand pounds, which would clothe
another ten thousand children.

Now we ask, is it not worth while to be careful
in small things, and to save up these usually
wasted cigar-ends, when we see what great things
might result? We can only conclude by wishing
success to this remarkable institution, which has
taken for its motto the most appropriate words,
‘Viele Wenig machen ein Viel;’ or in the words
of the old Scottish proverb, ‘Many a little makes a
mickle.’

LONG AGO.

He
gave me his promise of changeless truth,

(Down in the wood where the ivy clings);

And the air breathed rapture, and love, and youth,

(And yon tree was in bud where the throstle sings).

He said he was going across the sea,

(Far from the wood where the ivy clings),

And would bring back riches and jewels for me;

(But brown leaves shake where the throstle sings).

Hope made Life like a summer morn;

(Sweet was the wood where the ivy clings);

Now my heart is cold, and withered, and worn,

(And the bough is bare where the throstle sings).

Days are dreary, and life is long;

(Yet down in the wood the ivy clings),

And the winds they moan a desolate song,

(And there’s snow on the bough where no throstle sings).

Spring will come with its buds and leaves

(Back to the wood where the ivy clings);

But ’tis winter cold for the heart that grieves,

(And I hear not the song that the throstle sings).

J. C. H.

Printed and Published by
W. & R. Chambers
, 47 Paternoster
Row,
London
, and 339 High Street,
Edinburgh
.

All Rights Reserved.

End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Chambers's Journal of Popular
Literature, Science, and Art,, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHAMBER'S JOURNAL OF LITERATURE, FEB 2, 1878 ***

***** This file should be named 57759-h.htm or 57759-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/7/7/5/57759/

Produced by Susan Skinner and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.