The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Doom of London, by Frederick Merrick White

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Doom of London
The Four Days' Night - The Dust of Death - The Four White
Days - The Invisible Force - The River of Death - A Bubble
Burst

Author: Frederick Merrick White

Release Date: September 14, 2018 [EBook #57904]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DOOM OF LONDON ***

Produced by Clare Graham & Marc D'Hooghe at Free Literature
(Images generously made available by the Hathi Trust)

THE DOOM OF LONDON

Six Stories by

Fred M. White

Illustrated by

Warwick Goble

First published in Pearson's Magazine, London, 1903-4

The Hotel Cecil in flames—a realistic picture of an unlikely contingency, pictured in the "Four White Days."

TABLE OF CONTENTS.

THE FOUR WHITE DAYS.

THE FOUR DAYS' NIGHT.

THE DUST OF DEATH.

A BUBBLE BURST.

THE INVISIBLE FORCE.

THE RIVER OF DEATH.

THE FOUR WHITE DAYS.

A Tale of London in the Grip of an Arctic Winter—Showing the Danger Any
Winter might Bring from Famine, Cold, and Fire.

I.

The editor of
The Daily Chat
wondered a
little vaguely why he had come down to the
office at all. Here was the thermometer
down to 11° with every prospect of touching
zero before daybreak, and you can't fill a
morning paper with weather reports. Besides,
nothing was coming in from the North of the
Trent beyond the curt information that all
telegraphic and telephonic communication
beyond was impossible. There was a huge
blizzard, a heavy fall of snow nipped hard
by the terrific frost and—silence.

To-morrow—January 25th—would see a
pretty poor paper unless America roused
up to a sense of her responsibility and
sent something hot to go on with. The
Land's End cables often obliged in that
way. There was the next chapter of the
Beef and Bread Trust, for instance. Was
Silas X. Brett going to prove successful in
his attempt to corner the world's supply?
That Brett had been a pawnbroker's
assistant a year ago mattered little. That
he might at any time emerge a penniless
adventurer mattered less. From a press
point of view he was good for three
columns.

The chief "sub" came in, blowing his
fingers. The remark that he was frozen to
the marrow caused no particular sympathy.

"Going to be a funeral rag to-morrow,"
the editor said curtly.

"That's so," Gough admitted cheerfully.
"We've drawn a thrilling picture of the
Thames impassable to craft—and well it
might be after a week of this Arctic weather.
For days not a carcase or a sack of flour
has been brought in. Under the circumstances
we were justified in prophesying a bread and
meat famine. And we've had our customary
gibe at Silas X. Brett. But still, it's poor stuff."

The editor thought he would go home.
Still he dallied, on the off chance of something
turning up. It was a little after
midnight when he began to catch the suggestion
of excitement that seemed to be simmering
in the sub-editor's room. There was a
clatter of footsteps outside. By magic the place
began to hum like a hive.

"What have you struck, Gough?" the
editor cried.

Gough came tumbling in, a sheaf of
flimsies in his hand.

"Brett's burst," he gasped. "It's a real
godsend, Mr. Fisher. I've got enough here
to make three columns. Brett's committed
suicide."

Fisher slipped out of his overcoat. Everything
comes to the man who waits. He ran
his trained eyes over the flimsies; he could
see his way to a pretty elaboration.

"The danger of the corner is over," he
said, later, "but the fact remains that we are
still short of supplies; there are few provision
ships on the seas, and if they were
close at hand they couldn't get into port with
all this ice about. Don't
say
that London
is on the verge of a famine, but you can
hint it."

Gough winked slightly and withdrew. An
hour later and the presses were kicking and
coughing away in earnest. There was a
flaming contents bill, so that Fisher went off
drowsily through the driving snow Bedford
Square way with a feeling that there was not
much the matter with the world after all.

It was piercingly cold, the wind had come
up from the east, the steely blue sky of the
last few days had gone.

Fisher doubled before the wind that seemed
to grip his very soul. On reaching home he
shuddered as he hung over the stove in the hall.

"My word," he muttered as he glanced at
the barometer. "Down half-an-inch since
dinner time. And a depression on top
that you could lie in. Don't ever recollect
London under the lash of a real blizzard, but
it's come now."

A blast of wind, as he spoke, shook the
house like some unreasoning fury.

II.

It was in the evening of the 24th of January
that the first force of the snowstorm swept
London. There had been no sign of any abatement
in the gripping frost, but the wind
had suddenly shifted to the east, and almost
immediately snow had commenced to fall. But
as yet there was no hint of the coming
calamity.

A little after midnight the full force of the
gale was blowing. The snow fell in powder
so fine that it was almost imperceptible, but
gradually the mass deepened until at daybreak
it lay some eighteen inches in the
streets. Some of the thoroughfares facing
the wind were swept bare as a newly reaped
field, in others the drifts were four or five feet
in height.

A tearing, roaring, blighting wind was still
blowing as the grey day struggled in. The
fine snow still tinkled against glass and brick.
By nine o'clock hundreds of telephone wires
were broken. The snow and the force of
the wind had torn them away bodily. As far
as could be ascertained at present the same
thing had happened to the telegraphic lines.
At eleven o'clock nothing beyond local letters
had been delivered, and the postal authorities
notified that no telegrams could be guaranteed
in any direction outside the radius.
There was nothing from the Continent at
all.

Still, there appeared to be no great cause
for alarm. The snow must cease presently.
There was absolutely no business doing in
the City, seeing that three-fourths of the
suburban residents had not managed to
reach London by two o'clock. An hour later it
became generally known that no main line
train had been scheduled at a single London
terminus since midday.

Deep cuttings and tunnels were alike rendered
impassable by drifted snow.

But the snow would cease presently; it
could not go on like this. Yet when dusk fell
it was still coming down in the same grey
whirling powder.

That night London was as a city of the
dead. Except where the force of the gale had
swept bare patches, the drifts were high—so
high in some cases that they reached to the
first floor windows. A half-hearted attempt
had been made to clear the roadways earlier
in the day, but only two or three main
roads running north and south, and east and
west were at all passable.

Meanwhile the gripping frost never abated
a jot. The thermometer stood steadily at
15° below freezing even in the forenoon;
the ordinary tweed clothing of the average
Briton was sorry stuff to keep out a wind
like that. But for the piercing draught the
condition of things might have been tolerable.
London had experienced colder weather so
far as degrees went, but never anything that
battered and gripped like this. And still the
fine white powder fell.

After dark, the passage from one main
road to another was a real peril. Belated
stragglers fought their way along their own
streets without the slightest idea of locality,
the dazzle of the snow was absolutely blinding.
In sheltered corners the authorities had
set up blazing fires for the safety of the police
and public. Hardly a vehicle had been seen
in the streets for hours.

At the end of the first four and twenty hours
the mean fall of snow had been four feet.
Narrow streets were piled up with the white
powder. Most of the thoroughfares on the
south side of the Strand were mere grey
ramparts. Here and there people could be
seen looking anxiously out of upper windows
and beckoning for assistance. Such was the
spectacle that London presented at daybreak
on the second day.

It was not till nearly midday of the 26th of
January that the downfall ceased. For thirty-six
hours the gale had hurled its force mercilessly
over London. There had been nothing
like it in the memory of man, nothing like it on
record. The thin wrack of cloud cleared and
the sun shone down on the brilliant scene.

A strange, still, weird London. A white
deserted city with a hardy pedestrian here and
there, who looked curiously out of place in a
town where one expects to see the usual
toiling millions. And yet the few people who
were about did not seem to fit into the picture.
The crunch of their feet on the crisp
snow was an offence, the muffled hoarseness
of their voices jarred.

London woke uneasily with a sense of
coming disaster. By midday the continuous
frost rendered the snow quite firm enough for
traffic. The curious sight of people climbing
out of their bedroom windows and sliding
down snow mountains into the streets excited
no wonder. As to the work-a-day side of
things that was absolutely forgotten. For the
nonce Londoners were transformed into Laplanders,
whose first and foremost idea was
food and warmth.

So far as could be ascertained the belt of
the blizzard had come from the East in a
straight line some thirty miles wide. Beyond
St. Albans there was very little snow, the
same remark applying to the South from
Redhill. But London itself lay in the centre
of a grip of Arctic, ice-bound country, and
was almost as inaccessible to the outside
world as the North Pole itself.

There was practically no motive power
beyond that of the underground railways,
and most of the lighting standards had been
damaged by the gale; last calamity of all,
the frost affected the gas so that evening saw
London practically in darkness.

But the great want of many thousands was
fuel. Coal was there at the wharfs, but
getting it to its destination was quite another
thing. It was very well for a light sleigh and
horse to slip over the frozen snow, but a
heavily laden cart would have found progression
an absolute impossibility. Something
might have been done with the electric trams,
but all overhead wires were down.

In addition to this, the great grain wharfs
along the Thames were very low. Local
contractors and merchants had not been in
the least frightened by the vagaries of Mr.
Silas X. Brett; they had bought "short,"
feeling pretty sure that sooner or later their
foresight would be rewarded.

Therefore they had been trading from hand
to mouth. The same policy had been
pursued by the small "rings" of wholesale
meat merchants who supply pretty well the
whole of London with flesh food. The
great majority of the struggling classes pay
the American prices and get American
produce, an enormous supply of which is in
daily demand.

Here Silas X. Brett had come in again.
Again the wholesale men had declined
to make contracts except from day to
day.

Last and worst of all, the Thames—the
chief highway for supplies—was, for the only
time in the memory of living man, choked
with ice below Greenwich.

London was in a state of siege as
close and gripping as if a foreign army
had been at her gates. Supplies were cut
off, and were likely to be for some days to
come.

The price of bread quickly advanced to
ninepence the loaf, and it was impossible to
purchase the cheapest meat under two shillings
per pound. Bacon and flour, and such like
provisions, rose in a corresponding ratio;
coal was offered at £2 per ton, with the
proviso that the purchaser must fetch it himself.

Meanwhile,
there was no
cheering news
from the outside—London
seemed to be cut
off from the universe.
It was as
bad as bad could
be, but the more
thoughtful could
see that there was
worse to follow.

III.

The sight of a
figure staggering
up a snow drift
to a bedroom
window in
Keppel Street
aroused no astonishment
in the breast of
a stolid policeman. It
was the only way of entry
into some of the houses in
that locality. Yet a little further
on the pavements were clear and
hard.

The sight of a figure staggering
up a snowdrift to a bedroom
window in Keppel Street aroused
no astonishment in the breast
of a stolid policeman.

Besides, the figure was pounding
on the window, and burglars don't
generally do that. Presently the sleeper
within awoke. From the glow of his oil-stove
he could see that it was past twelve.

"Something gone wrong at the office?"
Fisher muttered. "Hang the paper! Why
bother about publishing
Chat
this weather?"

He rolled out of bed, and opened the window,
draught of icy air caught his heart in a grip
like death for the moment. Gough scrambled into the
room, and made haste to shut out the
murderous air.

"Nearly five below zero," he said. "You
must come down to the office, Mr. Fisher."

Fisher lit the gas. Just for the moment
he was lost in admiration of Gough's figure.
His head was muffled in a rag torn from an old sealskin jacket. He was wrapped
from head to foot in a sheepskin recently stripped from the carcase of an animal.

"Got the dodge from an old Arctic traveller," Gough explained. "It's pretty greasy
inside, but it keeps that perishing cold out."

"I said I shouldn't come down to the office to-night," Fisher muttered. "This is
the only place where I can keep decently warm. A good paper is no good to us—we
shan't sell five thousand copies to-morrow."

"Oh, yes, we shall," Gough put in eagerly;
"Hampden, the member for East Battersea,
is waiting for you. One of the smart city
gangs has cornered the coal supply. There
is about half a million tons in London, but
there is no prospect of more for days to come.
The whole lot was bought up yesterday by a
small syndicate, and the price to-morrow is
fixed at three pounds per ton—to begin with.
Hampden is furious."

Fisher shovelled his clothes on hastily.
The journalistic instinct was aroused.

At his door Fisher staggered back as the
cold struck him. With two overcoats, and a
scarf round his head, the cold seemed to drag
the life out of him. A brilliant moon was
shining in a sky like steel, the air was filled
with the fine frosty needles, a heavy hoar
coated Gough's fleecy breast. The gardens in
Russell Square were one huge mound,
Southampton Row was one white pipe. It
seemed to Gough and Fisher that they had
London to themselves.

They did not speak, speech was next to
impossible. Fisher staggered into his office and
at length gasped for brandy. He declared that
he had no feeling whatever. His moustache
hung painfully, as if two heavy diamonds
were dragging at the ends of it. The fine
athletic figure of John Hampden, M.P., raged
up and down the office. Physical weakness
or suffering seemed to be strangers to him.

"I want you to rub it in thick," he shouted.
"Make a picture of it in to-morrow's
Chat
.
It's exclusive information I am giving you.
Properly handled, there's enough coal in
London to get over this crisis. If it isn't
properly handled, then some hundreds of
families are going to perish of cold and starvation.
The State ought to have power to
commandeer these things in a crisis like this,
and sell them at a fair price—give them away
if necessary. And now we have a handful of
rich men who mean to profit by a great public
calamity. I mean Hayes and Rhys-Smith and
that lot. You've fallen foul of them before. I
want you to call upon the poorer classes not to
stand this abominable outrage. I want to go
down to the House of Commons to-morrow
afternoon with some thousands of honest
working-men behind me to demand that this
crime shall be stopped. No rioting, no
violence, mind. The workman who buys his
coals by the hundredweight will be the worst
off. If I have my way, he won't suffer at all—he
will just take what he wants."

Fisher's eyes gleamed with the light of
battle. He was warm now and the liberal
dose of brandy had done its work. Here
was a good special and a popular one to his
hand. The calamity of the blizzard and the
snow and the frost was bad enough, but the
calamity of a failing coal supply would be
hideous. Legally, there was no way of
preventing those City bandits from making
the most of their booty. But if a few
thousand working-men in London made up
their minds to have coal, nothing could prevent
them.

"I'll do my best," Fisher exclaimed. "I'll
take my coat off to the job—figuratively, of
course. There ought to be an exciting
afternoon sitting of the House to-morrow.
On the whole I'm glad that Gough dragged
me out."

The
Chat
was a little late to press, but
seeing that anything like a country edition
was impossible, that made little difference.
Fisher and Gough had made the most of
their opportunity. The ears of Messrs.
Hayes & Co. were likely to tingle over the

Chat
in the morning.

Fisher finished at length with a sigh of
satisfaction. Huddled up in his overcoat and
scarf he descended to the street. The cold
struck more piercingly than ever. A belated
policeman so starved as to be almost bereft
of his senses asked for brandy—anything to
keep frozen body and soul together. Gough,
secure in his grotesque sheepskin, had
already disappeared down the street.

"Come in," Fisher gasped. "It's dreadful.
I was going home, but upon my word I dare
not face it. I shall sleep by the side of my
office fire to-night."

The man in blue slowly thawed out. His
teeth chattered, his face was ghastly blue.

"An' I'll beg a shelter too, sir," he said.
"I shall get kicked out of the force. I shall
lose my pension. But what's the good of a
pension to an officer what's picked up frozen
in the Strand?"

"That's logic," Fisher said sleepily. "And
as to burglars——"

"Burglars! A night like this!
I wish that the streets of London
were always as safe. If I might
be allowed to make up the fire,
sir——"

But Fisher was already asleep
ranged up close alongside the
fender.

IV.

The uneasy impression made by
the
Chat
special was soon confirmed
next morning. No coal
was available at the wharves under
three shillings per hundredweight.
Some of the poorer classes bought
at the price, but the majority turned
away, muttering of vengeance, and
deeply disappointed.

Whatever way they went the
same story assailed them. The
stereotyped reply was given at
King's Cross, Euston, St. Pancras
and in the Caledonian
Road. The situation had
suddenly grown dangerous
and critical. The sullen,
grotesque stream flowed
back westward with a headway
towards Trafalgar
Square. A good many sheepskins
were worn, for
Gough's idea had
become popular.

In some mysterious
way it got
abroad that John
Hampden was going
to address a mass
meeting. By half-past
two Trafalgar
Square and the
approaches thereto
were packed.
It was a little later
that Hampden
appeared. There
was very little cheering
or enthusiasm, for
it was too cold. The
crowd had no
disposition to riot, all they wanted was for the popular tribune to show them some way of
getting coal—their one great necessity—at a reasonable price.

Hampden, too, was singularly quiet and
restrained. There was none of the wildness
that usually accompanied his oratory. He
counselled quietness and prudence. He
pledged the vast gathering that before night he
would show a way of getting the coal. All he
required was a vast orderly crowd outside St.
Stephen's where he was going almost at once
to interrogate Ministers upon the present
crisis. There was a question on the paper
of which he had given the President of
the Board of Trade private notice. If
nothing came of that he would know how to
act.

There was little more, but that little to the
point. An hour later a dense mass of men
had gathered about St. Stephen's. But they
were grim and silent and orderly.

For an ordinary afternoon sitting the
House was exceeding full. As the light fell
on the square hard face of John Hampden a
prosy bore prating on some ubiquitous subject
was howled down. A minute later and
Hampden rose.

He put his question clearly and to the
point. Then he turned and faced the
modestly retiring forms of Mr. John Hayes
and his colleague Rhys-Smith, and for ten
minutes they writhed under the lash of his
bitter invective. As far as he could gather
from the very vague reply of the Board of
Trade representative, the Government were
powerless to act in the matter. A gang of
financiers had deliberately chosen to put
money in their pockets out of the great
misfortune that had befallen London. Unless
the new syndicate saw their way to bow
to public opinion——

"It is a business transaction," Hayes
stammered. "We shall not give way. If
the Government likes to make a grant to the
poorer classes——"

A yell of anger drowned the sentence.
All parts of the House took part in the heated
demonstration. The only two cool heads
there were the Speaker and John Hampden.
The First Lord rose to throw oil on the
troubled waters.

"There is a way out of it," he said
presently. "We can pass a short bill giving
Parliament powers to acquire all fuel and
provisions for the public welfare in the face of
crises like these. It was done on similar
lines in the Dynamite Bill. In two days the
bill would be in the Statute Book——"

"And in the meantime the poorer classes
will be frozen," Hampden cried. "The Leader
of the House has done his best, he will see
that the bill becomes law. After to-night the
working-people in London will be prepared
to wait till the law gives them the power to
draw their supplies without fear of punishment.
But you can't punish a crowd like
the one outside. I am going to show the world
what a few thousands of resolute men can
accomplish. If the two honourable members
opposite are curious to see how it is done let
them accompany me, and I will offer them a
personal guarantee of safety."

He flung his hand wide to the House; he
quitted his place and strode out. Hayes
rose to speak, but nobody listened. The
dramatic episode was at an end, and Hampden
had promised another. Within a few
minutes the House was empty. Outside was
the dense mass of silent, patient, shivering
humanity.

"Wonderful man, Hampden," the First
Lord whispered to the President of the Board
of Trade; "wonder what he's up to now.
If those people yonder only knew their power!
I should have more leisure then."

V.

Outside the House a great crowd of
men, silent, grim, and determined, waited for
Hampden. A deep murmur floated over the
mass as those in front read from Hampden's
face that he had failed so far as his diplomacy
was concerned.

His obstinate jaw was firmer, if possible;
there was a gleam in his deep-set eyes. So
the greedy capitalists were going to have
their pound of flesh, they were not ashamed
to grow fat on public misfortune.

Hampden stood there by the railings of
Palace Yard and explained everything in a
short, curt speech.

Hampden stood there by the railings of Palace Yard and explained everything in a short, curt speech.

Only those who were in need of coal were
present. But there would be others to-morrow
and the next day and so on. Then let them
go and take it. The thing must be done in
a perfectly orderly fashion. There were huge
supplies at King's Cross, Euston, St. Pancras,
in Caledonian Road, amply sufficient to
give a couple or so of hundredweight per
head and leave plenty over for the needs of
others. Let them go and take it. Let each
man insist upon leaving behind him a voucher
admitting that he had taken away so much, or,
if he had the money, put it down there and
then at the usual winter's rate per hundredweight.
The method would be of the rough
rule of thumb kind, but it would be a
guarantee of honesty and respectability.
There were but few military in London, and
against a force like that the police would
be perfectly powerless. It was to be a
bloodless revolution and a vindication of the
rights of men.

A constable stepped forward and touched
Hampden on the shoulder. Most of those
near at hand knew what had happened.
Hampden had been arrested for inciting the
mob to an illegal act.
He
smiled grimly.
After all, the law had to be respected. With
not the slightest sign of hostility the great
mass of people began to pass away. With
one accord they turned their faces to the
North. The North-Western district was
to be invaded.

"Case for bail, I suppose?" Hampden
asked curtly.

"Under certain conditions, sir," the inspector
said. "I shall have formally to
charge you, and you will have to promise to
take no further part in this matter."

Hampden promised that readily enough.
He had done his part of the work so that the
rest did not signify. He was looking tired
and haggard now, as well he might, seeing
that he had been sitting up all night with
some scores of labour representatives planning
this thing out. He made a remark
about it to Fisher who was standing by, mentally
photographing the great event.

Then he fastened upon Hampden eagerly.

"I want all the details," he said. "I wasn't
so foolish as to regard this thing as quite
spontaneous. You must have worked like a
horse."

"So we have," Hampden admitted. "Fact
is, perils that might beset Londoners have
long been a favourite speculative study of
mine. And when a thing like this—be it
famine, flood, or an Arctic winter—comes
we are certain to be the mark of the
greedy capitalist. And I knew that the
Government would be powerless. Fuel, or
the want of it, was one of the very early
ideas that occurred to me. I found out where
the big supplies were kept, and pretty well
what the normal stock is. I pigeon-holed
those figures. You can imagine how useful
they were last night. There are some two
hundred officials of Trades Unions with
yonder orderly mob, and every one of them
knows exactly where to go. There will be
very little crowding or rioting or confusion.
And before dark everybody will have his
coal."

Fisher followed with the deepest interest.

"Then you are going to leave the rest to
your lieutenants?" he asked.

"I'm bound to. In a few minutes I shall
be on my way to Bow Street. Inciting to
robbery, you know. No, there is no occasion to
trouble—a hundred men here will be willing to
go bail for me. If I were
you
I should have
been somewhere in the neighbourhood of
King's Cross by this time."

Fisher nodded and winked as he drew his
sheepskin about him. He wore a pair of
grotesque old cavalry boots, the tops of which
were stuffed with cotton wool. A large
woollen hood, such as old Highland women
wear, covered his head and ears. There were
many legislators similarly attired, but nobody
laughed and nobody seemed to be in the least
alive to the humours of the situation.

"Come along," Fisher said to Gough, who
was trying to warm the end of his nose with
a large cigar. "Seems a pity to waste all
this album of copy upon a paper without
any circulation."

"What would have a circulation in this
frost?" Gough growled. "How deserted the
place is! Seems shuddering to think that a
man might fall down in Trafalgar Square in
the broad daylight and die of exposure, but
there it is. Hang me if the solitude isn't
getting on my nerves."

Gough shivered as he pulled his sheepskin
closer around him.

"This is getting a nightmare," he said.
"We shall find ourselves dodging Polar
bears presently. It isn't gregarious enough
for me. Let's get along in the direction
where Hampden's friends are."

VI.

Meanwhile the vast mob of London's
workers was steadily pressing north. There
were hundreds of carts without wheels, which
necessarily hampered the rate of progression,
but would save time in the long run, for there
were any number up to a dozen with each
conveyance, seeing that various neighbours
were working upon the co-operation system.

Gradually the force began to break and
turn in certain directions. It became like an
army marching upon given points by a score
or more of avenues. It was pretty well
known that there were a couple of hundred
men amongst the multitude who knew exactly
where to go and who had instructions as to
certain grimy goals.

They were breaking away in all directions
now, quiet, steady, and determined, covering
a wide area from Caledonian Road to
Euston, and from Finsbury Park to King's
Cross. They were so quiet and orderly
that only the crunch of the snow and the
sound of heavy breathing could be heard.

Near Euston Station the first sign of resistance
was encountered. A force of eighty
police barred the way. The mob closed in.
There was no hot blood, no more than grim
determination with a dash of sardonic
humour in it. A head or two was broken by
the thrashing staves, but the odds were too
great. In five minutes the whole posse of
constables was disarmed, made secure by
their own handcuffs and taken along as
honoured prisoners of war. Perhaps their
sympathies were with the mob, for they made
nothing like so fine a fight of it as is usually
the case.

Up by King's Cross Station a still larger
force of police had massed, and here there
was some considerable amount of bloodshed.
But there were thousands of men within easy
distance of the fray, and the white silence of
the place became black with swaying figures
and the noise of turmoil carried far. Finally
the police were beaten back, squeezed in
between two vastly superior forces and surrendered
at discretion.

The victory was easier than it seemed, for
obviously the constables had no heart for the
work before them. Not a few of them were
thinking of their own firesides, and that they
would be better off in the ranks of their
antagonists.

Meanwhile, many of the local municipalities
were being urged to call out the military.
With one accord they declined to do anything
of the kind. It was the psychological moment
when one touch of nature makes the whole
world akin. In the House of Commons, to
the agonised appeal of Hayes and his partner,
the Secretary for War coldly preferred to be
unable to interfere unless the Mayor of this or
that borough applied for assistance after
reading the Riot Act. The matter was in the
hands of the police, who would know how to
act upon an emergency.

Hustled and bustled and pushed good-naturedly,
Fisher and his colleague found
themselves at length beyond a pair of huge
gates that opened into a yard just beyond
Euston Station. There was a large square area
and beyond three small mountains of coal,
all carefully stacked in the usual way. Before
the welcome sight the stolid demeanour of
the two thousand men who had raided the
yard fairly broke down. They threw up their
hands and laughed and cheered. They
stormed the office of the big coal company,
who were ostensible owners of all that black
wealth, and dragged the clerks into the yard.
From behind came the crash and rattle of
the wheel-less carts as they were dragged
forward.

"No cause to be frightened," the man
in command explained. "We're here to
buy that coal, one or two or three hundredweight
each, as the case may be, and you can
have your money in cash or vouchers, as you
please. But we're going to have the stuff and
don't you forget it. You just stand by the
gates and check us out. You'll have to
guess a bit, but that won't be any loss to you.
And the price is eighteen pence a hundredweight."

The three clerks grinned uneasily. At the
same moment the same strange scene was
being enacted in over a hundred other coal-yards.
Three or four hundred men were
already swarming over the big mound, there
was a crash and a rattle as the huge blocks
fell, the air was filled with a grimy, gritty
black powder, every face was soon black
with it.

Very soon there was a steady stream
away from the radius of the coal stacks. A
big stream of coal carts went crunching over
the hard, frozen snow pulled by one or two
or three men according to the load, or how
many had co-operated, and as they went
along they sang and shouted in their victory.
It was disorderly, it was wrong, it was a
direct violation of the law, but man makes
laws for man.

Gough and Fisher, passing down parallel
with Euston Road, presently found themselves
suddenly in the thick of an excited
mob. The doors of a wharf had been
smashed in, but in the centre of the yard
stood a resolute knot of men who had affixed
a hose pipe to one of the water mains and
defied the marauders with vigorous invective.
Just for a moment there was a pause. The
idea of being drenched from head to foot
with a thermometer verging upon zero was
appalling. These men would have faced fire,
but the other death, for death it would mean,
was terrible.

In the centre of the yard stood a resolute knot of men who had affixed
a hose pipe to one of the water mains and defied the marauders
with vigorous invective.

"Does that chap want to get murdered?"
Fisher exclaimed. "If he does that, they
will tear him to pieces. I say, sir, are you
mad?"

He pressed forward impulsively. Mistaking
his intention, the man with the hosepipe
turned on the cock vigorously. A howl of
rage followed. But the dramatic touch was
absent, not one spot of water came. A sudden
yell of laughter arose in time to save the life
of the amateur fireman.

"The water is frozen in the mains," a voice
cried.

It was even as the voice said. In a flash
everything became commonplace again.
Fisher was very grave as he walked away.

"This is a calamity in itself," he said.
"The water frozen in the mains! By this
time to-morrow there won't be a single drop
available."

VII.

Inside the House a hot debate was in
progress on the following day. Martial law
for London had been suggested. It was a
chance for the handful of cranks and faddists
not to be neglected. It was an interference
with the liberty of the subject and all the
rest of it. The debate was still on at ten
o'clock when Fisher came back languidly
to the Press gallery. At eleven one
of the champion bores was still speaking.
Suddenly an electric thrill ran through the
House.

The dreary orator paused—perhaps he was
getting a little tired of himself. Something
dramatic had happened. There was the
curious tense atmosphere that causes a
tightening of the chest and a gripping of the
throat before actual knowledge comes.
Heedless of all decorum, a member stood
behind the Speaker's chair, and called aloud:

The Hotel Cecil in flames.

"The Hotel Cecil is on fire!" he
yelled. "The place is well ablaze!"

Fisher darted from the gallery into the
yard. Even the prosy Demosthenes collapsed
in the midst of his oration, and hurried out
of the House. There was no occasion to
tell anybody what the magnitude of the
disaster meant. Everybody knew that in the
face of such a disaster the fire brigade would
be useless.

In the Strand and along the approaches
thereto, along the Embankment and upon the
bridges, a dense mass of humanity had
gathered. They were muffled in all sorts of
strange and grotesque garments, but they did
not seem to heed the piercing cold.

In the Strand it was as light as day. A huge
column of red and white flame shot far into
the sky, the steady roar of the blaze was like
surf on a stony beach. There was a constant
crackle like musketry fire.

The magnificent hotel, one of the boldest
and most prominent features of the Strand
and the Thames Embankment, was absolutely
doomed. Now and then the great showers
of falling sparks would flutter and catch some
adjacent woodwork but all the roofs around
were covered with firemen who beat out the
flames at once. Tons of snow were conveyed
up the fire escapes and by means of hastily
rigged up pullies, so that gradually the
adjacent buildings became moist and cool.
But for this merciful presence of the snow,
the south side of the Strand from Wellington
Street to Charing Cross might have passed
into history.

As it was now, unless something utterly
unforeseen occurred, the great calamity had
been averted. There was still much for the
firemen to do.

"Let's get back to the office," Fisher said,
with chattering teeth. "I would sell my
kingdom for a little hot brandy. I hope the
next blizzard we get we shall be more prepared
for. I suppose that out in the States
they would make nothing of this. And we
haven't got a single snow plough worthy of
the name this side of Edinburgh."

"We are ready for nothing," Gough
grumbled. "If there had been a wind
to-night, nothing could have saved the Strand.
The disaster may occur again; indeed, there
is certain to be a fire, half-a-dozen fires,
before daybreak. Given a good stiff breeze
and where would London be? It makes one
giddy to think of it."

Gough said nothing. It was too cold even
to think. Gradually the two of them thawed
out before the office fire. A languid sub
came in with a pile of flimsies. Quite as
languidly Gough turned them over. His eyes
gleamed.

"My word," he gasped. "I hope this is
true. They've had two days' deluge in New
York. We are to keep our eyes open for
strong Westerly gales with a deep depression——"

For the next two hours Fisher bent over
his desk. The room seemed warmer. Perhaps
it was the brandy. He took off his
sheepskin and then his overcoat below.
Presently a little bead of moisture grew on
his forehead. He drew a little further from
the fire. He felt stifling and faint, a desire
for air came over him.

A little doubtful of his own condition he
almost shamefacedly opened the window.
The air was cold and fresh and revived him,
but it was not the steely, polished, murderous
air of the last few days. Somebody passing
over the snow below slipped along with a
peculiar soaking soddened sound.

Fisher craned his head out of the window.
Something moist fell on the nape of his neck.
He yelled for Gough almost hysterically.
Gough also was devoid of his overcoat.

"I thought it was fancy," he said
unsteadily.

Fisher answered nothing. The strain was
released, he breathed freely. And outside the
whole, white, silent world was dripping,
dripping, dripping——

(
Next month Mr. White will tell the story
of the "Four Days' Night." He will depict
London under the pall of a frightful fog.
It is another of the dangers that at any time
might come upon London.
)

THE FOUR
DAYS' NIGHT.

The Story of a London Fog that
turned Daylight into Darkness
for Four Days.

I.

The weather forecast for London and the
Channel was "light airs, fine generally,
milder." Further down the fascinating
column Hackness read that "the conditions
over Europe generally favoured a continuance
of the large anti-cyclonic area, the barometer
steadily rising over Western Europe, sea
smooth, readings being unusually high for
this time of the year."

Martin Hackness, B.Sc., London, thoughtfully
read all this and more. The study of
the meteorological reports was part of his
religion almost. In the laboratory at the
back of his sitting-room were all kinds of
weird-looking instruments for measuring sunshine
and wind pressure, the weight of
atmosphere and the like. Hackness trusted
before long to be able to foretell a London
fog with absolute accuracy, which, when you
come to think of it, would be an exceedingly
useful matter. In his queer way Hackness
described himself as a fog specialist. He
hoped some day to prove himself a fog-disperser,
which is another word for a great
public benefactor.

The chance he was waiting for seemed to
have come at last. November had set in, mild
and dull and heavy. Already there had been
one or two of the dense fogs under which
London periodically groans and does nothing
to avert. Hackness was clear-sighted enough
to see a danger here that might some day
prove a hideous national disaster. So far as
he could ascertain from his observations
and readings, London was in for another dense
fog within the next four-and-twenty hours.
Unless he was greatly mistaken, the next
fog was going to be a particularly thick one.
He could see the yellow mists gathering in
Gower Street, as he sat at his breakfast.

The door flew open and a man rushed in
without even an apology. He was a little
man, with sharp, clean-shaven features, an
interrogative nose and assertive
pince-nez
. He
was not unlike Hackness, minus his calm
ruminative manner. He fluttered a paper in
his hand like a banner.

"It's come, Hackness," he cried. "It
was bound to come sometime. It's all here
in a late edition of the Telegraph. We must
go and see it."

He flung himself into an armchair.

"Do you remember," he said, "the day
in the winter of 1898, the day that petroleum
ship exploded? You and I were playing golf
together on the Westgate links."

Hackness nodded eagerly.

"I shall never forget it, Eldred," he said,
"though I have forgotten the name of the ship.
She was a big iron boat, and she caught fire
about daybreak. Of her captain and her
crew not one fragment was ever found."

"It was perfectly still and the effect of that
immense volume of dense black smoke was
marvellous. Do you recollect the scene at
sunset? It was like looking at half-a-dozen
Alpine ranges piled one on the top of the
other. The spectacle was not only grand, it
was appalling, awful. Do you happen to
recollect what you said at the time?"

There was something in Eldred's manner
that roused Hackness.

"Perfectly well," he cried. "I pictured
that awful canopy of sooty, fatty matter
suddenly shut down over a great city by a
fog. A fog would have beaten it down and
spread it. We tried to imagine what might
happen if that ship had been in the Thames,
say at Greenwich."

"Didn't you prophesy a big fog for
to-day?"

"Certainly I did. And a recent examination
of my instruments merely confirms my
opinion. Why do you ask?"

"Because early this morning a fire broke
out in the great petroleum storage tanks,
down the river. Millions of gallons of oil
are bound to burn themselves out—nothing
short of a miracle can quench the fire, which
will probably rage all through to-day and
to-morrow. The fire-brigades are absolutely
powerless—in the first place the heat is too
awful to allow them to approach; in the
second, water would only make things worse.
It's one of the biggest blazes ever known.
Pray Heaven, your fog doesn't settle down on
the top of the smoke."

Hackness turned away from his unfinished
breakfast and struggled into an
overcoat. There was a peril here that
London little dreamt of. Out in the yellow
streets newsboys were yelling of the conflagration
down the Thames. People were talking
of the disaster in a calm frame of mind
between the discussion of closer personal
matters.

"There's always the chance of a breeze
springing up," Hackness muttered. "If it
does, well and good, if not—but come along.
We'll train it from Charing Cross."

A little way down the river the mist curtain
lifted. A round magnified sun looked down
upon a dun earth. Towards the South-east
a great black column rose high in the sky.
The column appeared to be absolutely
motionless; it broadened from an inky base
like a grotesque mushroom.

"Fancy trying to breathe
that
," Eldred
muttered. "Just think of the poison there.
I wonder what that dense mass would weigh
in tons. And it's been going on for five
hours now. There's enough there to
suffocate all London."

Hackness made no reply. On the whole
he was wishing himself well out of it. That
pillar of smoke would rise for many more
hours yet. At the same time here was his
great opportunity. There were certain
experiments that he desired to make and for
which all things were ready.

They reached the scene of the catastrophe.
Within a radius of five hundred yards the
heat was intense. Nobody seemed to know
the cause of the disaster beyond the general
opinion that the oil gases had ignited.
And nothing could be done. No engine
could approach near enough to do any good.
Those mighty tanks and barrels filled with
petroleum would have to burn themselves
out.

The sheets of flame roared and sobbed.
Above the flames rose the column of thick
black smoke, with just the suspicion of a
slight stagger to the westward. The inky
vapour spread overhead like a pall. If
Hackness's fog came now it meant a terrible
disaster for London.

Further out in the country, where the sun
was actually shining, people watched that
great cloud with fearsome admiration. From
a few miles beyond the radius it looked as if
all the ranges of the world had been piled
atop of London. The fog was gradually
spreading along the South of the Thames,
and away as far as Barnet to the North.

There was something in the stillness and
the gloom that London did not associate with
ordinary fogs.

Hackness turned away at length, conscious
of his sketchy breakfast and the fact that he
had been watching this thrilling spectacle for
two hours.

"Have you thought of a way out?" Eldred
asked. "What are you going to do?"

"Lunch," Hackness said curtly. "After
that I propose to see to my arrangements in
Regent's Park. I've got Grimfern's aeroplane
there, and a pretty theory about high
explosives. The difficulty is to get the
authorities to consent to the experiments.
The police have absolutely forbidden experiments
with high explosives, fired in the air
above London. But perhaps I shall frighten
them into it this time. Nothing would please
me better than to see a breeze spring up, and
yet on the other hand——"

"Then you are free to-night?" Eldred
asked.

"No, I'm not. Oh, there will be plenty
of time. I'm going with Sir Edgar Grimfern,
and his daughter to see Irving, that is if it is
possible for anyone to
see
Irving to-night.
I've got the chance of a lifetime at hand,
but I wish that it was well over, Eldred
my boy. If you come round about midnight——"

"I'll be sure to," Eldred said eagerly.
"I'm going to be in this thing. And I want
to know all about that explosive idea."

II.

Martin Hackness dressed with less than his
usual care that evening. He even forgot
that Miss Cynthia Grimfern had a strong
prejudice in favour of black evening ties, and,
usually, he paid a great deal of deference to
her opinions. But he was thinking of other
matters now.

There was no sign of anything abnormal as
Hackness drove along in the direction of
Clarence Terrace. The night was more than
typically yellow for the time of year, but
there was no kind of trouble with the traffic
though down the river the fairway lay under
a dense bank of cloud.

Hackness sniffed the air eagerly. He
detected or thought he detected a certain
acrid suggestion in the atmosphere. As the
cab approached Trafalgar Square Hackness
could hear shouts and voices raised high in
protestation. Suddenly his cab seemed to
be plunged into a wall of darkness.

It was so swift and unexpected that it came
with the force of a blow. The horse appeared
to have trotted into a bank of dense blackness.
The wall had shut down so swiftly, blotting
out a section of London, that Hackness could
only gaze at it with mouth wide open.

Hackness hopped out of his cab hurriedly.
So sheer and stark was the black wall that the
horse was out of sight. Mechanically the
driver reined back. The horse came back
to the cab with the dazzling swiftness of a
conjuring trick. A thin stream of breeze
wandered from the direction of Whitehall.
It was this air finding its way up the funnel
formed by the sheet that cut off the fog to a
razor edge.

"Been teetotal for eighteen years," the
cabman muttered, "so
that's
all right. And
what do you please to make of it, sir?"

Hackness muttered something incoherent.
As he stood there, the black wall lifted like a
stage curtain, and he found himself under the
lee of an omnibus. In a dazed kind of way
he patted the cabhorse on the flank. He
looked at his hand. It was greasy and oily
and grimy as if he had been in the engine-room
of a big liner.

"Get on as fast as you can," he cried. "It
was fog, just a little present from the burning
petroleum. Anyway, it's gone now."

True, the black curtain had lifted, but the
atmosphere reeked with the odour of burning
oil. The lamps and shop windows were
splashed and mottled with something that
might have passed for black snow. Traffic
had been brought to a standstill for the
moment, eager knots of pedestrians were
discussing the situation with alarm and
agitation, a man in evening dress was busily
engaged in a vain attempt to remove sundry
black patches from his shirt front.

Sir Edgar Grimfern was glad to see his
young friend. Had Grimfern been comparatively
poor, and less addicted to big game
shooting, he would doubtless have proved a
great scientific light. Anything with a dash
of adventure fascinated him. He was
enthusiastic on flying machines and
aeroplanes generally. There were big work-shops
at the back of 119, Clarence Terrace,
where Hackness put in a good deal of his
spare time. Those two were going to startle
the world presently.

Hackness shook hands thoughtfully with
Cynthia Grimfern. There was a slight frown
on her pretty intellectual face as she noted
his tie.

"There's a large smut on it," she
remarked, "and it serves you right."

Hackness explained. He had a flattering
audience. He told of the strange happening
in Trafalgar Square and the majestic scene
on the river. He gave a graphic account of
the theory that he had built upon it. There
was an animated discussion all through dinner.

"The moral of which is that we are going
to be plunged into Cimmerian darkness,"
Cynthia said, "that is,
if
the fog comes down.
If you think you are going to frighten me out
of my evening's entertainment you are
mistaken."

All the same it had grown much darker
and thicker as the trio drove off in the
direction of the Lyceum Theatre. There
were patches of dark acrid fog here and there
like ropes of smoke into which figures passed
and disappeared only to come out on the
other side choking and coughing. So local
were these swathes of fog that in a wide
thoroughfare it was possible to partially
avoid them. Festoons of vapour hung from
one lamp-post to another, the air was filled
with a fatty sickening odour.

"How nasty," Cynthia exclaimed. "Mr.
Hackness, please close that window. I am
almost sorry that we started. What's that?"

There was a shuffling movement under the
seat of the carriage, the quick bark of a dog;
Cynthia's little fox terrier had stolen into the
brougham. It was a favourite trick of his,
the girl explained.

"He'll go back again," she said. "Kim
knows that he has done wrong."

That Kim was forgotten and discovered
later on coiled up under the stall of his
mistress was a mere detail. Hackness was
too preoccupied to feel any uneasiness. He
was only conscious that the electric lights
were growing dim and yellow, and that a
brown haze was coming between the auditorium
and the stage. When the curtain fell
on the third act it was hardly possible to see
across the theatre. Two or three large
heavy blots of some greasy matter fell on
to the white shoulders of a lady in the
stalls to be hastily wiped away by her
companion. They left a long greasy smear
behind.

"I can hardly breathe," Cynthia gasped.
"I wish I had stopped at home. Surely those
electric lights are going out."

But the lights were merely being wrapped
in a filament that every moment grew more
and more dense. As the curtain went up
again there was just the suspicion of a
draught from the back of the stage, and the
whole of it was smothered in a small brown
cloud that left absolutely nothing to the view.
It was impossible now to make out a single
word of the programme, even when it was
held close to the eyes.

"Hackness was right," Grimfern growled.
"We had far better have stayed at home."

Hackness said nothing. He had no pride
in the accuracy of his forecast. Perhaps he
was the only man in London who knew what
the full force of this catastrophe meant. It
grew so dark now that he could see no more
than the mere faint suggestion of his fair
companion, something was falling out of the
gloom like black ragged snow. As the pall
lifted just for an instant he could see the
dainty dresses of the women absolutely
smothered with the thick oily smuts. The
reek of petroleum was stifling.

There was a frightened scream from behind,
and a yell out of the ebony wall to the effect
that somebody had fainted. Someone was
speaking from the stage with a view to stay
what might prove to be a dangerous panic.
Another sombre wave filled the theatre and then
it grew absolutely black, so black that a match
held a foot or so from the nose could not be
seen. One of the plagues of Egypt with all
its horrors had fallen upon London.

"Let us try and make our way out,"
Hackness suggested. "Go quietly."

Others seemed to be moved by the same
idea. It was too black and dark for anything
like a rush, so that a dangerous panic
was out of the question. Slowly but surely
the fashionable audience reached the vestibule,
the hall, and the steps.

Nothing to be seen, no glimmer of anything,
no sound of traffic. The destroying
angel might have passed over London and
blotted out all human life. The magnitude
of the disaster had frightened London's
millions as it fell.

III.

A city of the blind! Six millions of
people suddenly deprived of sight!

The disaster sounds impossible—a nightmare,
the wild vapourings of a diseased
imagination—and yet why not? Given a
favourable atmospheric condition, something
colossal in the way of a fire, and there it is.
And there, somewhere folded away in the
book of Nature, is the simple remedy.

Such thoughts as these flashed through
Hackness's mind as he stood under the
portico of the Lyceum Theatre, quite helpless
and inert for the moment.

But the darkness was thicker and blacker
than anything he had ever imagined. It was
absolutely the darkness that could be felt.
Hackness could hear the faint scratching of
matches all around him, but there was no
glimmer of light anywhere. And the atmosphere
was thick, stifling, greasy. Yet it was
not quite as stifling as perfervid imagination
suggested. The very darkness suggested
suffocation. Still, there was air, a sultry light
breeze that set the murk in motion, and
mercifully brought from some purer area the
oxygen that made life possible. There was
always air, thank God, to the end of the Four
Days' Night.

Nobody spoke for a time. Not a sound
of any kind could be heard. It was odd to
think that a few miles away the country might
be sleeping under the clear stars. It was
terrible to think that hundreds of thousands
of people must be standing lost in the streets
and yet near to home.

A little way off a dog whined, a child in a
sweet refined voice cried that she was lost.
An anxious mother called in reply. The
little one had been forgotten in the first flood
of that awful darkness. By sheer good luck
Hackness was enabled to locate the child.
He could feel that her wraps were rich and
costly, though the same fatty slime was upon
them. He caught the child up in his arms
and yelled that he had got her. The mother
was close by, yet full five minutes elapsed
before Hackness blundered upon her.
Something was whining and fawning about
his feet.

He called upon Grimfern, and the latter
answered in his ear. Cynthia was crying
pitifully and helplessly. Some women there
were past that.

"For Heaven's sake tell us what we are to
do," Grimfern gasped. "I flatter myself that
I know London well, but I couldn't find my
way home in this."

Something was licking Hackness's hand.
It was the dog Kim. There was just a
chance here. He tore his handkerchief in
strips and knotted it together. One end he
fastened to the little dog's collar.

"It's Kim," he explained. "Tell the dog
'home.' There's just a chance that he may
lead you home. We're very wonderful
creatures, but one sensible dog is worth a
million of us to-night. Try it."

"And where are you going?" Cynthia
asked. She spoke high, for a babel of voices
had broken out. "What will become of
you?"

"Oh, I am all right," Hackness said with
an affected cheerfulness. "You see, I was
fairly sure that this would happen sooner or
later. So I pigeon-holed a way of dealing
with the difficulty. Scotland Yard listened,
but thought me a bore all the same. This is
the situation where I come in."

Grimfern touched the dog and urged him
forward.

Kim gave a little bark and a whine. His
muscular little body strained at the leash.

"It's all right," Grimfern cried. "Kim
understands. That queer little pill-box of a
brain of his is worth the finest intellect in
England to-night."

Cynthia whispered a faint good-night, and
Hackness was alone. As he stood there in
the blackness the sense of suffocation was
overwhelming. He essayed to smoke a
cigarette, but he hadn't the remotest idea
whether the thing was alight or not. It had
no taste or flavour.

But it was idle to stand there. He must
fight his way along to Scotland Yard to
persuade the authorities to listen to his ideas.
There was not the slightest danger of belated
traffic, no sane man would have driven a
horse in such dense night. Hackness
blundered along without the faintest idea
to which point of the compass he was facing.

If he could only get his bearings he felt
that he should be all right. He found his
way into the Strand at length; he fumbled up
against someone and asked where he was.
A hoarse voice responded that the owner
fancied it was somewhere in Piccadilly.
There were scores of people in the streets
standing about talking desperately, absolute
strangers clinging to one another for sheer
craving for company to keep the frayed
senses together. The most fastidious clubman
there would have chummed with the
toughest Hooligan rather than have his own
thoughts for company.

Hackness pushed his way along. If he
got out of his bearings he adopted the simple
experiment of knocking at the first door he
came to and asking where he was. His
reception was not invariably enthusiastic, but
it was no time for nice distinctions. And a
deadly fear bore everybody down.

At last he came to Scotland Yard, as
the clocks proclaimed that it was half-past
one. Ghostly official voices told Hackness
the way to Inspector Williamson's office,
stern officials grasped him by the arm and
piloted him up flights of stairs. He blundered
over a chair and sat down. Out of the
black cavern of space Inspector Williamson
spoke.

"I am thankful you have come. You are
just the man I most wanted to see. I want
my memory refreshed over that scheme of
yours," he said. "I didn't pay very much
attention to it at the time."

"Of course you didn't. Did you ever
know an original prophet who wasn't laughed
at? Still, I don't mind confessing that I
hardly anticipated anything quite so awful as
this. The very density of it makes some
parts of my scheme impossible. We shall
have to shut our teeth and endure it. Nothing
really practical can be done so long as this
fog lasts."

"But, man alive, how long
will
it last?"

"Perhaps an hour or perhaps a week. Do
you grasp what an awful calamity faces us?"

Williamson had no reply. So long as the
fog lasted, London was in a state of siege,
and, not only this, but every house in it was a
fort, each depending upon itself for supplies.
No bread could be baked, no meal could be
carried round, no milk or vegetables delivered
so long as the fog remained. Given a day
or two of this and thousands of families
would be on the verge of starvation. It was
not a pretty picture that Hackness drew, but
Williamson was bound to agree with every
word of it.

These two men sat in the darkness till
what should have been the dawn, whilst
scores of subordinates were setting some sort
of machinery in motion to preserve order.

Hackness stumbled home to his rooms
about nine o'clock in the morning, without
having succeeded in persuading the officials
to grant him permission to experiment.
Mechanically he felt for his watch to see the
time. The watch was gone. Hackness
smiled grimly. The predatory classes had
not been quite blind to the advantages of the
situation.

There was no breakfast for Hackness for
the simple reason that it had been found
impossible to light the kitchen fire. But there
was a loaf of bread, some cheese, and a knife.
Hackness fumbled for his bottled beer and
a glass. There were many worse breakfasts
in London that morning.

He woke presently, conscious that a clock
was striking nine. After some elaborate
thought and the asking of a question or
two from another inmate of the house,
Hackness found to his horror that he
had slept the clock round nearly twice. It
was nine o'clock in the morning, twenty-three
hours since he had fallen asleep! And, so
far as Hackness could judge, there were no
signs of the fog's abatement.

He changed his clothes and washed the
greasy slime off him so far as cold water and
soap would allow. There were plenty of
people in the streets, hunting for food for the
most part; there were tales of people found
dead in the gutters. Progression was slow,
but the utter absence of traffic rendered it
safe and possible. Men spoke with bated
breath, the weight of the great calamity upon
them.

News that came from a few miles
outside the radius spoke of clear skies and
bright sunshine. There was a great deal of
sickness, and the doctors had more than they
could manage, especially with the young and
the delicate.

And the calamity looked like getting worse.
Six million people were breathing what
oxygen there was. Hackness returned to his
chambers to find Eldred awaiting him.

"This can't go on, you know," the latter
said tersely.

"Of course it can't," Hackness replied.
"All the air is getting exhausted. Come
with me down to Scotland Yard and help to
try and persuade Williamson to test my
experiment."

"What! Do you mean to say he is still
obstinate?"

"Well, perhaps he feels different to-day.
Come along."

Williamson was in a chastened frame of
mind. He had no optimistic words when
Hackness suggested that nothing less than
a violent meteorological disturbance would
clear the deadly peril of the fog away.
It was time for drastic remedies, and if
they failed things would be no worse than
before.

"But can you manage it?" Williamson
asked.

"I fancy so," Hackness replied. "It's a
risk, of course, but everything has been ready
for a long time. We could start after to-morrow
midnight, or any time for that
matter."

"Very well," Williamson sighed with the
air of a man who realises that after all the
tooth must come out. "If this produces a
calamity I shall be asked to send in my
resignation. If I refuse——"

"If you refuse there is more than a chance
that you won't want another situation,"
Hackness said grimly. "Let's get the thing
going, Eldred."

They crawled along through the black
suffocating darkness, feeble, languid, and
sweating at every pore. There was a murky
closeness in the vitiated atmosphere that
seemed to take all the strength and energy
away. At any other time the walk to
Clarence Terrace would have been a pleasure,
now it was a penance. They found their
objective after a deal of patience and trouble.
Hackness yelled in the doorway. There was
a sound of footsteps and Cynthia Grimfern
spoke.

"Ah, what a relief it is to know that you
are all right," she said. "I pictured all sorts
of horrors happening to you. Will this never
end, Martin?"

She cried softly in her distress. Hackness
felt for her hand and pressed it tenderly.

"We are going to try my great theory,"
he said. "Eldred is with me, and we have
got Williamson's permission to operate with
the aerophane. Where is Sir Edgar?"

Grimfern was in the big workshop in the
garden. As best he could, he was fumbling
over some machinery for the increase of
power in electric lighting. Hackness took a
queer-looking lamp with double reflectors
from his pocket.

"Shut off that dynamo," he said, "and
give me the flex. I've got a little idea here
Bramley, the electrician, lent me. With that
1000-volt generator of yours I can get a light
equal to 40,000 candles. There."

Flick went the switch, and the others
staggered back with their hands to their eyes.
The great volume of light, impossible to face
under ordinary circumstances, illuminated
the workshop with a faint glow like a winter's
dawn. It was sufficient for all practical
purpose, but to eyes that had seen absolutely
nothing for two days and nights very
painful.

The great volume of light, impossible to face under ordinary circumstances, illuminated the workshop with a faint glow.

Cynthia laughed hysterically. She saw the
men grimed and dirty, blackened and greasy,
as if they were fresh from a stoker's hole in a
tropical sea. They saw a tall, graceful girl
in the droll parody of a kitchen-maid who
had wiped a tearful face with a blacklead
brush.

But they could
see
. Along the whole
floor of the workshop lay a queer, cigar-shaped
instrument with grotesque wings and
a tail like that of a fish, but capable of being
turned in any direction. It seemed a problem
to get this strange-looking monster out of the
place, but as the whole of the end of the
workshop was constructed to pull out, the
difficulty was not great.

This was Sir Edgar Grimfern's aerophane,
built under his own eyes and with the assistance
of Hackness and Eldred.

"It will be a bit of risk in the dark," Sir
Edgar said thoughtfully.

"It will, sir, but I hope it will mean the
saving of a great city," Hackness remarked.
"We shall have no difficulty in getting
up, and as to the getting down, don't
forget that the atmosphere a few miles
beyond the outskirts of London is quite
clear. If only the explosives are strong
enough!"

"Don't theorise," Eldred snapped. "We've
got a good day's work before we start. And
there is no time to be lost."

"Luncheon first," Sir Edgar suggested,
"served in here. It will be plain and
cold; but, thank goodness, there is plenty
of it. My word, after that awful darkness
what a blessed thing light is once
more!"

Two hours after midnight the doors of the
workshop were pulled away and the
aerophane was dragged on its carriage into
the garden. The faint glimmer of light only
served to make the blackness all the thicker.
The three men waved their hands silently to
Cynthia and jumped in. A few seconds
later and they were whirred and screwed
away into the suffocating fog.

IV.

London was holding out doggedly and
stolidly. Scores of houses watched and
waited for missing ones who would never
return, the streets and the river had taken
their toll, in open spaces, in the parks, and
on the heaths many were shrouded. But the
long black night held its secret well.
There had been some ruffianism and
plundering at first. But what was the use of
plunder to the thief who could not dispose
of his booty, who could not exchange a rare
diamond for so much as a mouthful of
bread? Some of them could not even find
their way home, they had to remain in the
streets where there was the dread of the
lifting blanket and the certainty of punishment
with the coming of the day.

But if certain houses mourned the loss of
inmates, some had more than their share.
Belated women, frightened business girls,
caught in the fog had sought the first haven
at hand, and there they were free to remain.
There were sempstresses in Mayfair, and
delicately-nurtured ladies in obscure
Bloomsbury boarding-houses. Class distinction
seemed to be remote as the middle ages.

Scotland Yard, the local authorities, and
the County Council had worked splendidly
together. Provisions were short, though a
good deal of bread and milk had with greatest
difficulty been imported from outside the
radius of the scourge. Still the poor were
suffering acutely, and the cries of frightened
children were heard in every street. A few
days more and the stoutest nerves must give
way. Nobody could face such a blackness
and retain their senses for long. London
was a city of the blind. Sleep was the only
panacea for the creeping madness.

There were few deeds of violence done.
The most courageous, the most bloodthirsty
man grew mild and gentle before the scourge.
Desperate men prowled about in search of
food, but they wanted nothing else. Certainly
they would not have attempted violence to
get it.

Alarmists predicted that in a few hours
life in London would be impossible. For
once they had reason on their side. Every
hour the air, or what passed for air, grew
more poisonous. Men fancied a city with six
million corpses!

The calamity would kill big cities
altogether. No great mass of people would
ever dare to congregate together again where
manufacturers made a hideous atmosphere
overhead. It would be a great check upon
the race for gold. There was much justification
for this morbid condition of public
feeling.

So the third long weary day dragged to an
end, and people went to bed in the old
mechanical fashion hoping for better signs
in the morning. How many weary years
since they had last seen the sunshine, colour,
anything?

There was a change from the black
monotony some time after dawn. Most
people had nearly lost all sense of time when
dawn ought to have been. People were
struggling back to their senses again, trying
to pierce the thick curtain that held everything
in bondage. Doors were opened and restless
ones passed into the street.

Suddenly there was a smiting shock from
somewhere, a deafening splitting roar in the
ears, and central London shivered. It was
as if some mighty explosion had taken place
in space, and as if the same concussion had
been followed by a severe shock of earthquake.

Huge buildings shook and trembled,
furniture was overturned, and from every
house came the smash of glass. Was this
merely a fog or some thick curtain that veiled
the approaching dissolution of the world?
People stood still, trembling and wondering.
And before the question was answered, a
strange thing, a modern miracle happened. A
great arc of the blackness peeled off and
stripped the daylight bare before their startled
eyes.

V.

The work was full of a real live peril, but
the aerophane was cast loose at length. Its
upward motion was slow, perhaps owing to
the denseness of the atmosphere.

For some time nobody spoke. Something
seemed to oppress their breathing. They
were barely conscious of the faint upward
motion. If they only rose perfectly straight
all would be well.

"That's a fine light you had in the workshop,"
said Eldred. "But why not have
established a few hundreds of them——"

"All over London," Hackness cut in.
"For the simple reason that the lamp my
friend lent me is the only one in existence.
It is worked at a dangerous voltage too."

The upward motion continued. The sails
of the aerophane rustled slightly. Grimfern
drew a deep breath.

"Air," he gasped, "real pure fresh air!
Do you notice it?"

The cool sweetness of it filled their lungs.
The sudden effect was almost intoxicating.
A wild desire to laugh and shout
and sing came over them. Then gradually
three human faces and a ghostly shaped
aerophane emerged out of nothingness.
They could see one another plainly now;
they felt the upward rush; they were
passing through a misty envelope
that twisted and curled like live
ropes. Another minute and they
were beyond the fog belt.

They looked at one another
and laughed. All three of
them were blackened and
grimed and greasy, smothered
from head to foot in fatty soot
flakes. Three more disreputable
looking ruffians it would
have been hard to imagine.
There was something grotesque
in the reflection that every
Londoner was the same.

It was light now, broad daylight,
with a round globe of sun
climbing up out of the pearly
mists in the East. They revelled
in the brightness and the
light. Below them lay the thick
layers of fog that would be a
shroud in earnest if nothing
came to dispel it.

"We're a thousand feet above
the city," Eldred said presently.
"We had better pay out five
hundred feet of cable."

To a hook at the end of a
flexible wire Hackness attached
a large bomb filled with a
certain high explosive.
Through the eye of the
hook another wire—an
electric one—was
attached. The
whole thing was
carefully lowered
to the full extent
of the cable. Two
anxious faces
peered from the
car. Grimfern
appeared to be
playing carelessly with
a polished switch spliced into
the wire. But his hands were
shaking.

Eldred nodded. He had no words to spare
just then.

Grimfern's forefinger pressed the polished
button, there was a snap and almost immediately
a roar and a rush of air that set the aerophane
rocking violently. All about them the
clouds were spinning, below the foggy envelope
was twisted and torn as smoke is blown away
from a huge stack by a high wind.

"Look," Hackness yelled. "Look at
that!"

The brilliant light of day shone through down into London
as from a gigantic skylight.

He pointed downwards. The force of the
explosion had literally torn a hole in the
dense foggy curtain. The brilliant light of
day shone through down into London as
from a gigantic skylight.

This is what the amazed inhabitants of
central London saw as they rushed out of
their houses after what they imagined to be
a shock of earthquake. The effect was
weird, wonderful, one never to be forgotten.
From a radius of half a mile from St. Paul's,
London was flooded with brilliant light.
People rubbed their eyes, unable to face the
sudden and blinding glare. They gasped
and thrilled with exultation as a column of
fresh sweet air rushed to fill the vacuum. As
yet they knew nothing of the cause.
That brilliant shaft of light showed strange
things. Every pavement was black as ink,
the fronts of the houses looked as if they had
been daubed over with pitch. The roads
were dark with fatty soot. On Ludgate Hill
were dozens of vehicles from which the horses
had been detached. There were numerous
motor cars apparently lacking owners. A
pickpocket sat in the gutter with a pile of
costly trinkets about him, gems that glittered
in the mud. These things had been collected
before the fog grew beyond endurance. Now
they were about as useful to the thief as an
elephant might have been.

At the end of five minutes the curtain fell
again. The flying, panic-stricken pickpocket
huddled down once more with a frightened
curse.

But London was no longer alarmed. A
passing glimpse of the aerophane had been
seen, and better informed folks knew what
was taking place. Presently another explosion
followed, tearing the curtain away over
Hampstead; for the next two hours the
explosions continued at short intervals. There
were tremendous outbursts of cheering
whenever the relief came.

Presently a little light seemed to be
coming. Ever and again it was possible for
a man to see his hands before his face.
Above the fog banks a wrack of cloud had
gathered, the aerophane was coated with a
glittering mist. An hour before it had been
perfectly fair overhead. Then it began to
rain in earnest. The constant explosions
had summoned up and brought down the
rain as the heavy discharge of artillery used
to do in the days of the Boer War.

It came down in a drenching stream that
wetted the occupants of the aerophane to the
skin. They did not seem to mind. The
exhilaration of the fresh sweet air was still in
their veins, they worked on at their bombs
till the last ounce of the high explosives was
exhausted.

And the rain was falling over London.
Wherever a hole was torn in the curtain, the
rain was seen to fall—black rain as thick as
ink and quite as disfiguring. The whole city
wore a suit of mourning.

Wherever a hole was torn in the curtain, the rain
was seen to fall.

"The cloud is passing away." Eldred
cried. "I can see the top of St. Paul's."

Surely enough, the cross seemed to lift
skyward. Bit by bit and inch by inch the
panorama of London slowly unfolded itself.
Despite the sooty flood—a flood gradually
growing cleaner and sweeter every moment—the
streets were filled with people gazing up
in fascination at the aerophane.

The tumult of their cheers came upwards.
It was their thanks for the forethought and
scientific knowledge that had proved to be
the salvation of London. As a matter of
fact, the high explosives had only been the
indirect means of preserving countless
lives. The conjuring up of that heavy rain
had been the real salvation. It had condensed
the fog and beaten it down to earth in a
sooty flow of water. It was a heavy, sloppy,
gloomy day, such as London ever enjoys the
privilege of grumbling over, but nobody
grumbled now. The blessed daylight had
come back, it was possible to fill the lungs
with something like pure air once more, and
to realise the simple delight of living.

Nobody minded the rain, nobody cared an
atom for the knowledge that he
was a little worse and a little
more grimy than the dirtiest
sweep alive. What did it matter
so long as everybody was alike?
Looking down, the trio in the
aerophane could see London
grow mad, grave men skipping
about in the rain like school-boys
at the first fall of snow.

"We had better get down,"
said Grimfern. "Otherwise we
shall have an ovation ready for
us, and, personally, I should prefer
a breakfast. In a calm like
this we need not have any difficulty
in making Regent's Park
safely."

The valve was opened and the
great car dropped like a flashing
bird. They saw the rush in the
streets, they could hear the tramp
of feet now. They dropped at
length in what looked like a yelling
crowd of demented
Hottentots.

VI.

The aerophane was
safely housed once more,
the yelling mob had
departed. London was
bent upon one of its
occasional insane
holidays. The
pouring rain did
not matter one
jot—had not the
rain proved to be
the salvation of
the great city?
What did it
matter that the
streets were black
and the people
blacker still? The
danger was
averted. "We
will go out and explore presently,"
said Grimfern.
"Meanwhile, breakfast. A thing
like this must never occur again, Hackness."

Hackness sincerely hoped not. Cynthia
Grimfern came out to meet them. A liberal
application of soap and water had rendered
her sweet and fair, but it was impossible to
keep clean for long. Everywhere lay
evidences of the fog.

"It's lovely to be able to see and breathe
once more," she said. "Last night every
moment I felt as if I must be suffocated.
To-day it is like suddenly finding Paradise."

"A sooty paradise," Grimfern growled.

Cynthia laughed a little hopelessly.

"It's dreadful," she said. "I have had no
table-cloth laid, it is useless. But the table
itself is clean, and that is something. I
don't think London will ever be perfectly
clean again."

The reek was still upon the great city, the
taint of it hung upon the air. By one o'clock
it had ceased raining and the sky cleared.
A startled sun looked down on strange things.
There was a curious thickness about the
trees in Regent's Park, they were as black as
if they had been painted. The pavements were
greasy and dangerous to pedestrians in a
hurry.

There was a certain jubilation still to be
observed, but the black melancholy desolation
was bound to depress the most exuberant
spirits. For the last three days everything
had been at a standstill.

In the thickly populated districts the
mortality amongst little children had been
alarmingly high. Those who had any
tendency to lung or throat or chest troubles
died like flies before the first breath of frost.
The evening papers, coming out as usual, a
little late in the day, had many a gruesome
story to tell. It was the harvest of the scare-line
journalist, and he lost no chance. He
scented his gloomy copy and tracked it down
unerringly.

Over two thousand children—to say nothing
of elderly people—had died in the East End.
The very small infants had had no chance
at all.

The Lord Mayor promptly started a
Mansion House fund. There would be
work and to spare presently. Meanwhile
tons upon tons of machinery stood idle until
it could be cleaned; all the trade of London
was disorganised.

The river and the docks had taken a
dreadful toll. Scores of labourers and sailors,
overtaken by the sudden scourge, had
blundered into the water to be seen no more.
The cutting off of the railways and other
communications that brought London its
daily bread had produced a temporary, but
no less painful lack of provisions.

"It's a lamentable state of things," Grimfern
said moodily as the two trudged back to
Regent's Park later in the evening. It was
impossible to get a cab for the simple reason
that there was not one in London fit to be
used. "But I don't see how we are going to
better it. We can dispel the fogs, but not
before they have done terrible damage."

"There is an easy way out of the
difficulty," Eldred said quietly.
The others turned eagerly to listen. As a
rule Eldred did not speak until he had
thought the matter deliberately out.

"Abolish all fires throughout the Metropolitan
area," he said. "In time it will
have

to be done. All London must warm itself
and cook its food and drive all its machinery
by electric power. Then it will be one of the
healthiest towns in the universe. Everything
done by electric power. No thousands of
chimneys belching forth black poisonous
smoke, but a clear, pure atmosphere. In
towns like Brighton, where the local authorities
have grappled the question in earnest, electric
power is half the cost of gas.

"If only London combined it would be less
than that. No dirt, no dust, no smell, no
smoke! The magnificent system at Brighton
never cost the ratepayers anything, indeed a
deal of the profit has gone to the relief of
the local burdens. Perhaps this dire calamity
will rouse London to a sense of its dangers—but
I doubt it."

Eldred shook his head despondingly at the
dark chaos of the park. Perhaps he was
thinking of the victims that the disaster had
claimed. The others had followed sadly, and
Grimfern, leading the way into his house,
banged the door on the darkening night.

(
Next month Mr. F. M. White will tell the story
of a terrible London water famine, entitled "The
River of Death."
)

[Transcriber's Note: In the event "The Dust of Death" was the next story to
appear in
Pearson's Magazine
. "The River of Death" would be the last.]

THE DUST OF DEATH.

The Story of the Great Plague of
the Twentieth Century.

The front door bell tinkled impatiently; evidently
somebody was in a hurry. Alan Hubert
answered the call, a thing that even a distinguished
physician might do, seeing that it
was on the stroke of midnight. The tall,
graceful figure of a woman in evening dress
stumbled into the hall. The diamonds in her
hair shimmered and trembled, her face was
full of terror.

"You are Dr. Hubert," she gasped. "I am
Mrs. Fillingham, the artist's wife, you know.
Will you come with me at once....
My husband.... I had been dining out.
In the studio.... Oh, please come!"

Hubert asked no unnecessary questions.
He knew Fillingham, the great portrait
painter, well enough by repute and by sight
also, for Fillingham's house and studio
were close by. There were many
artists in the Devonshire Park district—that
pretty suburb which was
one of the triumphs of the builder's
and landscape gardener's art. Ten
years ago it had been no more than a
swamp; to-day people spoke complacently
of the fact that they lived in
Devonshire Park.

Hubert walked up the drive and
past the trim lawns with Mrs. Fillingham
hanging on his arm, and in at
the front door. Mrs. Fillingham
pointed to a door on the right. She
was too exhausted to speak. There
were shaded lights gleaming everywhere,
on old oak and armour and on a large
portrait of a military-looking man propped
up on an easel. On a lay figure was a
magnificent foreign military uniform.

Hubert caught all this in a quick mental
flash. But the vital interest to him was a
human figure lying on his back before the
fireplace. The clean-shaven, sensitive face
of the artist had a ghastly, purple-black tinge,
there was a large swelling in the throat.

"He—he is not dead?" Mrs. Fillingham
asked in a frozen whisper.

Hubert was able to satisfy the distracted
wife on that head. Fillingham was still
breathing. Hubert stripped the shade from
a reading lamp and held the electric bulb at
the end of its long flex above the sufferer's
mouth, contriving to throw the flood of light
upon the back of the throat.

"Diphtheria!" he exclaimed.

"Diphtheria!" he exclaimed. "Label's
type unless I am greatly mistaken. Some
authorities are disposed to scoff at Dr.
Label's discovery. I was an assistant of his
for four years and I know better. Fortunately
I happen to know what the treatment—successful
in two cases—was."

He hurried from the house and returned a
few minutes later breathlessly. He had
some strange-looking, needle-like instruments
in his hands. He took an electric lamp
from its socket and substituted a plug on a
flex instead. Then he cleared a table
without ceremony and managed to hoist his
patient upon it.

"Now please hold that lamp steadily thus,"
he said. "Bravo, you are a born nurse! I
am going to apply these electric needles to
the throat."

Hubert talked on more for the sake of his
companion's nerves than anything else. The
still figure on the table quivered under his
touch, his lungs expanded in a long,
shuddering sigh. The heart was beating
more or less regularly now. Fillingham
opened his eyes and muttered something.

"Ice," Hubert snapped, "have you got
any ice in the house?"

It was a well-regulated establishment and
there was plenty of ice in the refrigerator.
Not until the patient was safe in bed did
Hubert's features relax.

"We'll pull him through yet," he said.
"I'll send you a competent nurse round in
half-an-hour. I'll call first thing in the
morning and bring Dr. Label with me. He
must not miss this on any account."

Half-an-hour later Hubert was spinning
along in a hansom towards Harley Street.
It was past one when he reached the house
of the great German savant. A dim light was
burning in the hall. A big man with an
enormous shaggy head and a huge frame
attired in the seediest of dress coats
welcomed Hubert with a smile.

"So, my young friend," Label said, "your
face promises excitement."

"Case of Label's diphtheria," Hubert said
crisply. "Fillingham, the artist, who lives
close by me. Fortunately they called me in.
I have arranged for you to see my patient the
first thing in the morning."

The big German's jocular manner vanished.
He led Hubert gravely to a chair in his
consulting-room and curtly demanded details.
He smiled approvingly as Hubert enlarged
upon his treatment of the case.

"Undoubtedly your diagnosis was correct,"
he said, puffing furiously at a long china pipe.
"You have not forgotten what I told you of
it. The swelling—which is caused by violent
blood poisoning—yielded to the electric
treatment. I took the virus from the cases
in the north and I tried them on scores of
animals. And they all died.

"I find it is the virus of what is practically
a new disease, one of the worst in the wide
world. I say it recurs again, and it does. So
I practise, and practise to find a cure. And
electricity is the cure. I inoculate five dogs
with the virus and I save two by the electric
current. You follow my plans and you go
the first stage of the way to cure Fillingham.
Did you bring any of that mucous here?"

Hubert produced it in a tiny glass tube.
For a little time Label examined it under his
microscope. He wanted to make assurance
doubly sure.

"It is the same thing," he said presently.
"I knew that it was bound to recur again.
Why, it is planted all over our big cities.
And electricity is the only way to get rid of it.
It was the best method of dealing with sewage,
only corporations found it too expensive.
Wires in the earth charged to say 10,000 volts.
Apply this and you destroy the virus that lies
buried under hundreds of houses in London.
They laughed at me when I suggested it
years ago."

"Underground," Hubert asked vaguely.

"Ach, underground, yes. Don't you
recollect that in certain parts of England
cancer is more common than in other places?
The germs have been turned up in fields. I,
myself, have proved their existence. In a
little time, perhaps, I shall open the eyes of
your complacent Londoners. You live in
a paradise, ach Gott! And what was that
paradise like ten years ago? Dreary pools
and deserted brickfields. And how do you
fill it up and level it to build houses upon?"

"By the carting of hundreds of thousands
of loads of refuse, of course."

"Ach, I will presently show you what that
refuse was and is. Now go home to bed."

Mrs. Fillingham remained in the studio
with Hubert whilst Label was making his examination
overhead. The patient had had a
bad night; his symptoms were very grave
indeed. Hubert listened more or less
vaguely; his mind had gone beyond the
solitary case. He was dreading what might
happen in the future.

"Your husband has a fine constitution," he
said soothingly.

"He has overtried it lately," Mrs. Fillingham
replied. "At present he is painting a portrait
of the Emperor of Asturia. His Majesty was
to have sat to-day; he spent the morning here
yesterday."

But Hubert was paying no attention.

The heavy tread of Label was heard as he
floundered down the stairs. His big voice
was booming. What mattered all the portraits
in the world so long as the verdict hung on the
German doctor's lips!

"Oh, there is a chance," Label exclaimed.
"Just a chance. Everything possible is
being done. This is not so much diphtheria as
a new disease. Diphtheria family, no doubt,
but the blood poisoning makes a difficult
thing of it."

Label presently dragged Hubert away after
parting with Mrs. Fillingham. He wanted
to find a spot where building or draining was
going on.

They found some men presently engaged
in connecting a new house with the main
drainage—a deep cutting some forty yards
long by seven or eight feet deep. There was
the usual crust of asphalt on the road, followed
by broken bricks and the like, and a
more or less regular stratum of blue-black rubbish,
soft, wet, and clinging, and emitting an
odour that caused Hubert to throw up his
head.

"You must have broken into a drain somewhere
here," he said.

"We ain't, sir," the foreman of the gang
replied. "It's nout but rubbidge as they
made up the road with here ten years ago.
Lord knows where it came from, but it do
smell fearful in weather like this."

The odour indeed was stifling. All
imaginable kinds of rubbish and refuse lay
under the external beauties of Devonshire Park
in strata ranging from five to forty feet deep.
It was little wonder that trees and flowers
flourished here. And here—wet, and dark,
and festering—was a veritable hotbed of
disease. Contaminated rags, torn paper,
road siftings, decayed vegetable matter, diseased
food, fish and bones all were represented
here.

"Every ounce of this ought to have gone
through the destructor," Label snorted. "But
no, it is used for the foundations of a suburban
paradise. My word, we shall see what your
paradise will be like presently. Come
along."

Label picked up a square slab of the blue
stratum, put it in a tin, and the tin in his pocket.
He was snorting and puffing with contempt.

Label picked up a square slab of the blue strata, put it in a tin, and
the tin in his pocket.

"Now come to Harley Street with me and
I will show you things," he said.

He was as good as his word. Placed
under a microscope, a minute portion of the
subsoil from Devonshire Park proved to be a
mass of living matter. There were at least
four kinds of bacillus here that Hubert had
never seen before. With his superior knowledge
Label pointed out the fact that they all
existed in the mucous taken from Fillingham
on the previous evening.

"There you are!" he cried excitedly.
"You get all that wet sodden refuse of
London and you dump it down here in a heap.
You mix with it a heap of vegetable matter so
that fermentation shall have every chance.
Then you cover it over with some soil, and
you let it boil, boil, boil. Then, when
millions upon millions of death-dealing
microbes are bred and bred till their virility
is beyond the scope of science, you build
good houses on the top of it. For years I
have been prophesying an outbreak of some
new disease—or some awful
form of an old one—and
here it comes. They called
me a crank because I asked
for high electric voltage to
kill the plague—to destroy
it by lightning. A couple of
high tension wires run into
the earth and there you are.
See here."

He took his cube of the
reeking earth and applied
the battery to it. The mass
showed no outward
change. But once
under the microscope
a fragment
of it demonstrated
that there was not
the slightest
trace of organic
life.

"There!"
Label cried.
"Behold the
remedy. I don't
claim that it will
cure in every case,
because we hardly
touch the diphtheretic
side of
the trouble.
When there has
been a large
loss of life
we shall
learn the
perfect
remedy by
experience.
But this thing
is coming,
and your
London is going to get a pretty bad
scare. You have laid it down like port
wine, and now that the
thing is ripe you
are going to suffer from the consequence.
I have written articles in the
Lancet
, I
have warned people, but they take not the
slightest heed."

Hubert went back home thoughtfully. He
found the nurse who had Fillingham's case
in hand waiting for him in
his consulting-room.

"I am just back from
my walk," she said. "I
wish you would call at Dr.
Walker's at Elm Crescent.
He has two cases exactly
like Mr. Fillingham's, and
he is utterly puzzled."

Hubert snatched his hat
and his electric needles,
and hurried away at once.
He found his colleague impatiently
waiting for him.
There were two children
this time in one of the
best appointed houses in
Devonshire Park, suffering
precisely as Fillingham had
done. In each instance the
electric treatment gave the
desired result. Hubert
hastily explained the whole
matter to Walker.

"It's an awful business,"
the latter said.
"Personally, I have
a great respect for
Label, and I
feel convinced
that he is
right. If
this thing
spreads,
property in
Devonshire
Park won't be
worth the price
of slum lodgings."

By midday nineteen
cases of the so-called
diphtheria had been
notified within the three
miles area known as Devonshire Park.
Evidently some recent excavations had liberated
the deadly microbe. But there was no
scare as yet. Label came down again hot-foot
with as many assistants as he could get,
and took up his quarters with Hubert. They
were going to have a busy time.

It was after two before Hubert managed
to run across to Fillingham's again. He
stood in the studio waiting for Mrs. Fillingham.
His mind was preoccupied and uneasy,
yet he seemed to miss something from
the studio. It was strange, considering that
he had only been in the room twice before.

"Are you looking for anything?" Mrs.
Fillingham asked.

"I don't know," Hubert exclaimed. "I
seem to miss something. I've got it—the
absence of the uniform."

"They sent for it," Mrs. Fillingham said
vaguely. She was dazed for want of sleep.
"The Emperor had to go to some function,
and that was the only uniform of the kind he
happened to have. He was to have gone
away in it after his sitting to-day. My husband
persuaded him to leave it when it was
here yesterday, and——"

Hubert had cried out suddenly as if in
pain.

"He was here yesterday—here, with your
husband, and your husband with the diphtheria
on him?"

Then the weary wife understood.

"Good heavens——"

But Hubert was already out of the room.
He blundered on until he came to a hansom
cab creeping along in the sunshine.

"Buckingham Palace," he gasped. "Drive
like mad. A five-pound note for you if you
get me there by three o'clock!"

Already Devonshire Park was beginning to
be talked about. It was wonderful how the
daily press got to the root of things. Hubert
caught sight of more than one contents
bill as he drove home that alluded to the
strange epidemic.

Dr. Label joined Hubert presently in Mrs.
Fillingham's home, rubbing his huge hands
together. He knew nothing of the new
dramatic developments. He asked where
Hubert had been spending his time.

"Trying to save the life of your friend, the
Emperor of Asturia," Hubert said. "He was
here yesterday with Fillingham, and, though
he seems well enough at present, he may have
the disease on him now. What do you think
of that?"

Hubert waited to see the great man stagger
before the blow. Label smiled and nodded
as he proceeded to light a cigarette.

"Good job too," he said. "I am honorary
physician to the Court of Asturia. I go back,
there, as you know, when I finish my great
work here. The Emperor I have brought
through four or five illnesses, and if anything
is wrong he always sends for me."

"But he might get the awful form of
diphtheria!"

"Very likely," Label said coolly. "All
these things are in the hands of Providence.
I know that man's constitution to a hair, and
if he gets the disease I shall pull him through
for certain. I should like him to have it."

"In the name of all that is practical,
why?"

"To startle the public," Label cried. He
was mounted on his hobby now. He paced
up and down the room in a whirl of tobacco
smoke. "It would bring the matter home to
everybody. Then perhaps something will
be done. I preach and preach in vain. Only
the
Lancet
backs me up at all. Many times
I have asked for a quarter of a million of
money, so that I can found a school for the
electrical treatment of germ diseases. I want
to destroy all malaria. All dirt in bulk, every
bit of refuse that is likely to breed fever and
the like, should be treated by electricity. I
would take huge masses of deadly scourge and
mountains of garbage, and render them
innocent by the electric current. But no;
that costs money, and your poverty-stricken
Government cannot afford it. Given a
current of 10,000 volts a year or two ago,
and I could have rendered this one of the
healthiest places in England. You only
wanted to run those high voltage wires into
the earth here and there, and behold the
millions are slain, wiped out, gone for ever.
Perhaps I will get it
now
."

London was beginning to get uneasy.
There had been outbreaks before, but they
were of the normal type. People, for
instance, are not so frightened of smallpox
as they used to be. Modern science has
learnt to grapple with the fell disease and rob
it of half its terrors. But this new and
virulent form of diphtheria was another matter.

Hubert sat over his dinner that night,
making mental calculations. There were
nearly a thousand houses of varying sizes in
Devonshire Park. Would it be necessary to
abandon these? He took down a large scale
map of London, and hastily marked in blue
pencil those areas which had developed
rapidly of recent years. In nearly all of
these a vast amount of artificial ground had
been necessary. Hubert was appalled as he
calculated the number of jerry-built erections
in these districts.

A servant came in and laid
The Evening
Wire
upon the table. Hubert glanced at it.
Nothing had been lost in the way of sensation.
The story of the Emperor's visit to the
district had been given great prominence.
An inquiry at Buckingham Palace had
elicited the fact that the story was true.

Well, perhaps no harm would come of it.
Hubert finished a cigar and prepared to go
out. As he flung the paper aside a paragraph
in the stop press column—a solitary paragraph
like an inky island in a sea of white—caught
his eye.

"No alarm need be experienced as to the
danger encountered by the Emperor of
Asturia, but we are informed that His
Majesty is prevented from dining at Marlborough
House to-night owing to a slight
cold and sore throat caught, it is stated, in
the draughts at Charing Cross Station. The
Emperor will go down to Cowes as arranged
to-morrow."

Hubert shook his head doubtfully. The
slight cold and sore throat were ominous.
His mind dwelt upon the shadow of trouble
as he made his way to the hospital. There
had been two fresh cases during the evening
and the medical staff were looking anxious
and worried. They wanted assistance badly,
and Hubert gave his to the full.

It was nearly eleven before Hubert
staggered home. In the main business street
of the suburb a news-shop was still open.

A flaming placard attracted the doctor's
attention. It struck him like a blow.

"Alarming illness of the Asturian
Emperor. His Majesty stricken down by
the new disease. Latest bulletin from
Buckingham Palace."

Almost mechanically Hubert bought a
paper. There was not much beyond the
curt information that the Emperor was
dangerously ill.

Arrived home Hubert found a telegram
awaiting him. He tore it open. The
message was brief but to the point.

"Have been called in to Buckingham
Palace, Label's diphtheria certain. Shall try
and see you to-morrow morning. Label."

London was touched deeply and sincerely.
A great sovereign had come over here in the
most friendly fashion to show his good
feeling for a kindred race. On the very start
of a round of pleasure he had been stricken
down like this.

The public knew all the details from the
progress of that fateful uniform to the
thrilling eight o'clock bulletin when the life
of Rudolph III. was declared to be in great
danger. They knew that Dr. Label had been
sent for post haste. The big German was no
longer looked upon as a clever crank, but
the one man who might be able to save
London from a terrible scourge. And from
lip to lip went the news that over two hundred
cases of the new disease had now broken out
in Devonshire Park.

People knew pretty well what it was and
what was the cause now. Label's warning
had come home with a force that nobody had
expected. He had stolen away quite late for
half-an-hour to his own house and there had
been quite free with the pressmen. He
extenuated nothing. The thing was bad, and
it was going to be worse. So far as he could
see, something of this kind was inevitable.
If Londoners were so blind as to build
houses on teeming heaps of filth, why, London
must be prepared to take the consequences.

Hubert knew nothing of this. He had
fallen back utterly exhausted in his chair with
the idea of taking a short rest—for nearly
three hours he had been fast asleep. Somebody
was shaking him roughly. He struggled
back to the consciousness that Label was
bending over him.

"Well, you are a nice fellow," the German
grumbled.

"I was dead beat and worn out," Hubert
said apologetically. "How is the Emperor?"

"His Majesty is doing as well as I can
expect. It is a very bad case, however. I
have left him in competent hands, so that I
could run down here. They were asking
for you at the hospital, presuming that you
were busy somewhere. The place is full,
and so are four houses in the nearest
terrace."

"Spreading like that?" Hubert exclaimed.

"Spreading like that! By this time to-morrow
we shall have a thousand cases on
our hands. The authorities are doing everything
they can to help us, fresh doctors and
nurses and stores are coming in all the
time."

"You turn people out of their houses to
make way then?"

Label smiled grimly. He laid his hand on
Hubert's shoulder, and piloted him into the
roadway. The place seemed to be alive with
cabs and vehicles of all kinds. It was as if
all the inhabitants of Devonshire Park were
going away for their summer holidays simultaneously.
The electric arcs shone down on
white and frightened faces where joyous
gaiety should have been. Here and there a
child slept peacefully, but on the whole it
was a sorry exodus.

It was if all the inhabitants of Devonshire Park were going
away for their summer holidays simultaneously.

"There you are," Label said grimly. "It
is a night flight from the plague. It has been
going on for hours. It would have been
finished now but for the difficulty in getting
conveyances. Most of the cabmen are avoiding
the place as if it were accursed. But
money can command everything, hence the
scene that you see before you."

Hubert stood silently watching the procession.
There was very little luggage on
any of the cabs or conveyances. Families
were going wholesale. Devonshire Park for
the most part was an exceedingly prosperous
district, so that the difficulties of emigration
were not great. In their panic the people
were abandoning everything in the wild
flight for life and safety.

Then he went in again to rest before the
unknown labours of to-morrow. Next morning
he anxiously opened his morning paper.

It was not particularly pleasant reading
beyond the information that the health of the
Emperor of Asturia was mentioned, and that
he had passed a satisfactory night. As to the
rest, the plague was spreading. There were
two hundred and fifty cases in Devonshire
Park. Label's sayings had come true at
last; it was a fearful vindication of his
prophecy. And the worst of it was that no
man could possibly say where it was going to
end.

Strange as it may seem, London's anxiety
as to the welfare of one man blinded all to
the great common danger. For the moment
Devonshire Park was forgotten. The one
centre of vivid interest was Buckingham
Palace.

For three days crowds collected there until
at length Label and his colleagues were in a
position to issue a bulletin that gave something
more than hope. The Emperor of
Asturia was going to recover. Label was not
the kind of man to say so unless he was pretty
sure of his ground.

It was not till this fact had soaked itself
into the public mind that attention was fully
turned to the danger that threatened London.
Devonshire Park was practically in quarantine.
All those who could get away had done so,
and those who had remained were confined
to their own particular district, and provisioned
on a system. The new plague was
spreading fast.

In more than one quarter the suggestion
was made that all houses in certain localities
should be destroyed, and the ground
thoroughly cleansed and disinfected. It
would mean a loss of millions of money,
but in the scare of the moment London cared
nothing for that.

At the end of a week there were seven
thousand cases of the new form of diphtheria
under treatment. Over one thousand cases
a day came in. Devonshire Park was practically
deserted save for the poorer quarters,
whence the victims came. It seemed strange
to see fine houses abandoned to the first
comer who had the hardihood to enter.
Devonshire Park was a stricken kingdom within
itself, and the Commune of terror reigned.

Enterprising journalists penetrated the
barred area and wrote articles about it. One
of the fraternity bolder than the rest passed
a day and night in one of these deserted
palatial residences, and gave his sensations
to the Press. Within a few hours most of
the villas were inhabited again! There
were scores of men and women in the slums
who have not the slightest fear of disease—they
are too familiar with it for that—and they
came creeping westward in search of shelter.
The smiling paradise had become a kind
of Tom Tiddler's ground, a huge estate in
Chancery.

Nobody had troubled, the tenants were busy
finding pure quarters elsewhere, the owners
of the property were fighting public opinion
to save what in many cases was their sole
source of income. If Devonshire Park had
to be razed to the ground many a wealthy
man would be ruined.

It was nearly the end of the first week
before this abnormal state of affairs was fully
brought home to Hubert. He had been
harassed and worried and worn by want of
sleep, but tired as he was he did not fail to
notice the number of poorer patients who
dribbled regularly into the terrace of houses
that now formed the hospital. There was
something about them that suggested any
district rather than Devonshire Park.

"What does it mean, Walker?" he asked
one of his doctors.

Walker had just come in from his hour's
exercise, heated and excited.

"It's a perfect scandal," he cried. "The
police are fighting shy of us altogether. I've
just been up to the station and they tell me
it is a difficult matter to keep competent
officers in the district. All along Frinton
Hill and Eversley Gardens the houses are
crowded with outcasts. They have drifted
here from the East End and are making some
of those splendid residences impossible."

Hubert struggled into his hat and coat, and
went out. It was exactly as Walker had said.
Here was a fine residence with stables and
greenhouses and the like, actually occupied
by Whitechapel at its worst. A group of
dingy children played on the lawn, and a
woman with the accumulated grime of weeks
on her face was hanging something that passed
for washing out of an upper window.
The flower beds were trampled down, a
couple of attenuated donkeys browsed on
the lawn.

Here was a fine residence actually occupied by Whitechapel
at its worst.

Hubert strolled up to the house fuming.
Two men were sprawling on a couple of
morocco chairs smoking filthy pipes. They
looked up at the newcomer with languid
curiosity. They appeared quite to appreciate
the fact that they were absolutely masters of
the situation.

"What are you doing here?" Hubert demanded.

"If you're the owner well and good," was
the reply. "If not, you take an' 'ook it. We
know which side our bread's buttered."

There was nothing for it but to accept this
philosophical suggestion. Hubert swallowed
his rising indignation and departed. There
were other evidences of the ragged invasion
as he went down the road. Here and there
a house was closed and the blinds down; but
it was an exception rather than the rule.

Hubert walked away till he could find a
cab, and was driven off to Scotland Yard in a
state of indignation. The view of the matter
rather startled the officials there.

"We have been so busy," the Chief
Inspector said; "but the matter shall be
attended to. Dr. Label was here yesterday,
and at his suggestion we are having the whole
force electrically treated—a kind of electrical
hardening of the throat. The doctor claims
that his recent treatment is as efficacious
against the diphtheria as vaccination is against
smallpox. It is in all the papers to-day. All
London will be going mad over the new
remedy to-morrow."

Hubert nodded thoughtfully. The electric
treatment seemed the right thing. Label had
shown him what an effect the application of
the current had had on the teeming mass of
matter taken from the road cutting. He
thought it over until he fell asleep in his cab
on the way back to his weary labours.

London raged for the new remedy. The
electric treatment for throat troubles is no new
thing. In this case it was simple and painless,
and it had been guaranteed by one of
the popular heroes of the hour. A week
before Label had been regarded as a crank
and a faddist; now people were ready to
swear by him. Had he not prophesied this
vile disease for years, and was he not the
only man who had a remedy? And the
Emperor of Asturia was mending rapidly.

Had Label bidden the people to stand on
their heads for an hour a day as a sovereign
specific they would have done so
gladly. Every private doctor and every
public institution was worked to death. At
the end of ten days practically all London
had been treated. There was nothing for it
now but to wait patiently for the result.

Another week passed and then suddenly the
inrush of cases began to drop. The average
at the end of the second week was down to
eighty per day. On the seventeenth and
eighteenth days there were only four cases
altogether and in each instance they proved
to be patients who had not submitted themselves
to the treatment.

The scourge was over. Two days elapsed
and there were no fresh cases whatever.
Some time before a strong posse of police
had swamped down upon Devonshire Park
and cleared all the slum people out of
their luxurious quarters. One or two of
the bolder dwellers in that once favoured
locality began to creep back. Now that
they were inoculated there seemed little to
fear.

But Label had something to say about
that. He felt that he was free to act now, he
had his royal patient practically off his hands.
A strong Royal Commission had been
appointed by Parliament to go at once
thoroughly into the matter.

"And I am the first witness called," he
chuckled to Hubert as the latter sat with the
great German smoking a well-earned cigar.
"I shall be able to tell a few things."

He shook his big head and smiled. The
exertion of the last few weeks did not seem to
have told upon him in the slightest.

"I also have been summoned," Hubert
said. "But you don't suggest that those fine
houses should be destroyed?"

"I don't suggest anything. I am going to
confine myself to facts. One of your patent
medicine advertisements says that electricity
is life. Never was a truer word spoken.
What has saved London from a great
scourge? Electricity. What kills this new
disease and renders it powerless? Electricity.
And what is the great agent to fight dirt and
filth with whenever it exists in great quantities?
Always electricity. It has not been
done before on the ground of expense, and
look at the consequences! In one way and
another it will cost London £2,000,000
to settle this matter. It was only a little
over a third of that I asked for. Wait till
you hear me talk!"

Naturally the greatest interest was taken in
the early sittings of the Commission. A
somewhat pompous chairman was prepared
to exploit Label for his own gratification and
self-glory. But the big German would have
none of it. From the very first he dominated
the Committee, he would give his evidence
in his own way, he would speak of facts as
he found them. And, after all, he was the
only man there who had any practical knowledge
of the subject of the inquiry.

"You would destroy the houses?" an
interested member asked.

"Nothing of the kind," Label growled.
"Not so much as a single pig-sty. If you
ask me what electricity is I cannot tell you.
It is a force in nature that as yet
we don't understand. Originally it was
employed as a destroyer of sewage,
but it was abandoned as too expensive.
You are the richest country in the world,
and one of the most densely populated. Yet
you are covering the land with jerry-built
houses, the drainages of which will frequently
want looking to. And your only way of
discovering this is when a bad epidemic
breaks out. Everything is too expensive.
You will be a jerry-built people in a jerry-built
empire. And your local authorities
adopt some cheap system and then smile
at the ratepayers and call for applause.
Electricity will save all danger. It is dear
at first, but it is far cheaper in the long
run."

"If you will be so good as to get to the
point," the chairman suggested.

Label smiled pityingly. He was like a
schoolmaster addressing a form of little boys.

"The remedy is simple," he said. "I
propose to have a couple of 10,000 volts
wires discharging their current into the ground
here and there over the affected area. Inoculation
against the trouble is all very well, but
it is not permanent and there is always danger
whilst the source of it remains. I propose to
remove the evil. Don't ask me what the
process is, don't ask me what wonderful
action takes place. All I know is that some
marvellous agency gets to work and that a
huge mound of live disease is rendered safe
and innocent as pure water. And I want
these things now, I don't want long sittings and
reports and discussions. Let me work the
cure and you can have all the talking and
sittings you like afterwards."

Label got his own way, he would have got
anything he liked at that moment. London
was quiet and humble and in a mood to be
generous.

Label stood over the cutting whence he
had procured the original specimen of all
the mischief. He was a little quiet and subdued,
but his eyes shone and his hand was a
trifle unsteady. His fingers trembled as he
took up a fragment of the blue grey stratum
and broke it up.

"Marvellous mystery," he cried. "We
placed the wires in the earth and that great,
silent, powerful servant has done the rest.
Underground the current radiates, and, as it
radiates, the source of the disease grows less
and less until it ceases to be altogether. Only
try this in the tainted areas of all towns and
in a short time disease of all kinds would
cease for ever."

"You are sure that stuff is wholesome,
now?" Hubert asked.

"My future on it," Label cried. "Wait
till we get it under the microscope. I am
absolutely confident that I am correct."

And he was.

A BUBBLE BURST.

How a Stock Exchange Scare Dislocated the Life of the Empire for Two Days.

The era of peace which seemed to be well
begun in 1906 was naturally marked by an
extraordinary commercial and financial
activity; an amount of world-wide speculations
never equalled in intensity, even in the mad
times of the South Sea Bubble, or when Hudson,
the Railway King, flourished. The
countless millions piled up in English banks
earning a 2½ per cent. interest were lavishly
withdrawn, new mines had been started, everybody
was going to be rich. On the face of
it people had good ground for their sanguine
expectations. The Rand with its forty square
miles of rich gold-bearing reefs containing
an untold number of immense fortunes—the
richest region on earth—was properly
administered for the first time. From the
highest to the lowest everybody was investing
their savings in South Africa.

In other words, there was a tremendous
"boom." Nothing like it had ever been
seen in the history of commerce. It was the
golden hour of the promoter. Yet, for the
most part, the schemes promised well. There
was, however, an enormous amount of rubbish
in the market. Some of the more thoughtful
financiers scented danger ahead, but they
were not listened to. The roar of the Kaffir
circus resounded in men's ears and made
them mad. Park Lane would never be able
to hold the new millionaires.

All England was in the grip of the mania.

Bona fide
speculation and business had
become gambling pure and simple. London
thought of nothing else. The City was
crammed with excited buyers and operators,
the little outside broker of yesterday came
down to his offices behind a pair of blood
horses, and his diamonds were a solid sign
of his new prosperity.

A busy day was drawing to a close. Carl
Ericsson sat in his office smoking a cigarette.
Ericsson yesterday had been waiter in an
unimportant restaurant. To-day he had
a fine set of offices and a small mansion at
Hampstead. He had "arrived" on the
crest of the wave as many far less astute
adventurers had done. There was a peculiarly
uneasy grin on his dark features, a
curious twitching of the lips, and he had the
tired eyes of the sleepless.

His partner sat opposite him behind a big
cigar. He was a fat man with a big jaw and
a merciless mouth. Six months before Eli
Smith had been a fairly well-to-do suburban
butcher. Now he was E. Asherton-Smith,
the big financial agent. He boasted, with
truth, that he could sign a cheque for
£40,000 and be none the worse for it. In
the area of the City it would have been difficult
to find two choicer specimens of rascality
than the partners in Ericsson & Co.

"Got a big card to play, eh?" Asherton-Smith
asked.

Ericsson grinned nervously. His lithe
little body was quivering with excitement.
There was a furtive look in his drooping
eyes.

"The ace of trumps," he gurgled; "the
coup of the century. Eli, my boy, how much
money could we make if we could scare
South Africans down five or six points for a
week?"

Mr. Asherton-Smith's diamonds heaved
with emotion.

"Millions," he said. "Just as many millions
as we could stagger under. Makes my
mouth like sawdust to think of it. But pass
out a bottle of champagne."

Ericsson did so, rose from his seat and
peeped into the outer office; the clerks had
all gone for the day. He closed the door
gently.

"I'm going to tell you," he said. "If I
don't tell somebody I shall go mad. I can't
sleep at nights for thinking of it. When I
do doze off I'm swimming in a river of sovereigns.
With a bit of luck, it's a certainty."

"Get on, Carlo. You're just playing with
my feelings."

"Well, it's just this way"—Ericsson's voice
dropped to a whisper. "There are two lines
of cable by which South Africa can communicate
with the outside world—the East and
West Africa cables. The West Coast line
isn't to be relied upon; it breaks down at
least once a week. At a time like this a
breakdown is a serious matter. The directors
have taken the
bull by the
horns, so at
the present
moment the
West Coast
line is out of
our calculations.
It's
under repair,
and it's likely
to remain so
for some time
to come. I've
ascertained
that communication
with South
Africa by the
Western line is impossible.
For the next
fortnight no message can
come or go by that route. This leaves us
only the Eastern line to grapple with. If
that kindly breaks down for four-and-twenty
hours, our fortunes are safe."

"Is it likely?" Asherton-Smith asked.

"Why, yes. It has happened three times
during this year. I tell you I have followed
this thing pretty keenly. It's more than on
the cards. Suppose the breakdown did
come, Eli, and we had the last message
through? Look at this."

Ericsson took from a safe a sheet of paper—a
cablegram message, in fact, sent cut
from the office of the East Africa company.
It was a genuine document enough, with the
date and the hour showing that it had been
dispatched from Cape Town on the afternoon
of the same day. There were words
upon it to the effect that "Bertha has lost
her aunt, and the water has been packed in
the matchbox."

"That isn't our cypher," Asherton-Smith said.

"That isn't our cypher," Asherton-Smith
said.

"Quite right; it's the cypher used by

The Messenger. The Messenger
, my boy,
enjoys as high a reputation as
The Times
.
If a cablegram appeared in
The Messenger

to-morrow saying that there had been an
earthquake on the Rand, and that the
Johannesburg water-works had overflowed
into the deep levels everybody could take it
for gospel. That's why I managed to
get hold of and learn
The Messenger

cypher.

"On the off-chance of the Eastern
cable breaking down, I've had a cable
sent to me every day from a friend in South
Africa saying that there has been an earthquake
in Johannesburg, and that the mines
are flooded out. The cable comes to me in
the cypher used by
The Messenger
people.
That's what all that gibberish about Bertha
and the water and the matchbox means.

"Suppose you were to walk into the office
and say the Eastern line of cable had broken
down. As the Western line is under repair
that tells me that communication with South
Africa is impossible for a day or more.
Probably the lines would be unavailable for
nearly a week. I've got a spare envelope or
two used by the Eastern Company for their
messages; I put this flimsy inside and alter
my own address 'Bonan' to 'Bonanza'—which
is the registered cable address of
The
Messenger
—by the addition of two letters,
and there you are. That's why I thought of
'Bonan' and that little office of mine in
Long Lane, where I am known as James
Jones.

"I've had this scheme in my mind for
years. A boy drops into
The Messenger

office and hands over the cablegram, and
there you are. The thing looks perfectly in
order; it is the private cypher of the big
newspaper, and, moreover, it is quite up-to-date.
If the cable breaks down no questions
can be asked, and the thing goes into the
paper. We've only got to get the same message
sent to me every day, and sooner or
later our chance comes."

Asherton-Smith was breathing heavily.
The prospect was dazzling. Somebody was
tapping at the outer door. A large man in a
big fur coat entered.

"What are you beggars conspiring about?"
he asked. "Got something extra special
from down below? Egad, I'd give something
for a private wire of my own! We'll
get a rest for a day or two. The East Africa
cable is bust up south of Mauritius."

The intruder helped himself to a glass of
champagne that he obviously didn't want, and
drifted out again. The partners glanced at
one another without speaking. Perhaps they
were just a little frightened.

The thing appeared to be absolutely
certain. So far as they could see, the story
would be believed implicitly, for
The
Messenger
was absolutely reliable.

The great beauty of the whole scheme was
its conclusiveness. There never had been an
earthquake on the Rand, but there was no
reason why there shouldn't be. And an
earthquake would assuredly destroy the
Johannesburg water-works, which would
mean the washing away of half the place and
the flooding of some of the richest mines
below the town.

The West Coast cable was under repair and
incapable of use. But that frequently
happened, as most people interested in South
Africa know. There was no chance of the
truth trickling back to London
viâ
Australia
or New York. And now the Eastern line
had broken down also, as all deep sea cables
do on occasion.

"Upon my word, I can't see a flaw anywhere,"
Ericsson remarked, in a voice that
trembled. "If the Eastern line is repaired by
morning we shall be none the worse off. Our

coup
will have miscarried, a few inquiries will
be made, and James Jones will never be seen
in Long Lane Office again."

Asherton-Smith went home and dined and
drank; but sleep was not for his pillow that
night. The papers were late in the morning,
and that did not lessen his irritability. The
breakfast stood untouched, beyond a little dry
toast, and some brandy and soda water. Just
for the moment the prosperous Asherton-Smith
regretted the day when he had been the
oily and irresponsible Eli Smith, butcher.

The papers came at last—a whole pile of
them: but Asherton-Smith only desired to see

The Messenger
. He fluttered it open with
fingers that trembled. There it was—the
news that he sought. He drew a deep breath.

Usually
The Messenger
avoided sensation;
but here was a "scoop" that no human
editor could possibly resist. The headlines
danced before the reader's eyes.

"Earthquake at Johannesburg! Destruction
of the Water Works and the Flooding of
the Mines. Great loss of life and property."

The Messenger
, alone of all the papers, contained
this news.

The Messenger
, alone of all the papers, contained this news.

A map of Johannesburg, right away from
the water-works to the five-mile belt, where
the world-renowned mines lay, only served to
make the story more convincing. The water
would have swept over the city, from the
aristocratic suburb of Dornfontein to the
auriferous belt that held the wealthy mines.

There were hundreds of millions of
money invested here. The news of the
disaster would have a depressing effect upon
the Stock Exchange. Weak holders would
be pretty certain to lose their heads, and
the markets would be flooded with shares.
Asherton-Smith trembled as he thought of
his forthcoming fortune.

A little after ten o'clock
he was in the City. In
the train and in the
streets people were talking
about nothing but the
great disaster in South
Africa. Nobody doubted
the story, though only
The
Messenger
contained it.
Unfortunately the Eastern
line had broken down at
a critical moment, and no
details were forthcoming
for the time being.
The
Messenger's
cable had
been the last to come
through.

"Going all right, eh?"
Asherton-Smith asked.
His teeth were chattering,
but not with cold. "Pretty
satisfied, eh?"

Ericsson nodded and
grinned. He looked
white and uneasy.

"I've started the
machinery," he said.
"When prices have
dropped five or six points
we are going to buy
quietly. Mind you, I'm
going to make no secret
of it. I'm going to pose
as the saviour of the
market, the one man
who refuses to bow to
the panic—shall swagger
about the stuff being
there in spite of a dozen
earthquakes. I shall
boast that at bed rock
prices we can afford to
buy to hold. That line
will avert suspicion from
us when the cat is out of
the bag and our fortunes
made. And you'll have
to back me up in this.
What a row there will be when the truth
comes to be told!"

Ericsson and his partner pushed their way
past inquisitive spectators
who had nothing to lose,
and therefore enjoyed
the strange scene; they
elbowed wealthy-looking
men in all the garb of
prosperity whose haggard
faces gave the lie to their
outer air.

Everybody was constrained
and alert. The
big financiers who usually
controlled the markets
were getting frightened.
They assumed that there
must be no panic, they
desired that nothing
should be done till the
full magnitude of the
disaster could be verified.

But people believed in
the integrity of
The Messenger

which had never
played them false yet.
The great men of the
exchanges and the marts
had forgotten their
human nature for the
moment. They were
asking poor humanity to
put aside greed and self
interest and love of
money, the father to
forget his savings, and
the widow to ignore her
dividends. They might
just as well have appealed
to the common sense of
a flood tide swept by the
gale.

Two of the big men
were penned on the pavement
on Cornhill. Their
names were good on
"'Change" for any amount
in reason; they reckoned
themselves rich and comfortable.
But the strain
of the situation was getting on their nerves.

"I'd give £50,000 to have my way here
for a few hours, Henderson," said one.

"I'd give twice that to feel that I had
what I deemed myself to possess yesterday,"
said Sir James Henderson. "What would
you like to do, Kingsley?"

"Clear the streets," the great bullion broker
replied. "Get some troops and Maxims, and
declare the City in a state of siege for eight-and-forty
hours. Pass a short Act of Parliament
prohibiting people from dealing in
stocks and shares for a week. By that time
the panic would have allayed itself and folks
regained their sanity. As it is, thousands
are going to be ruined. Every share in the
South African market is absurdly inflated,
and, even if the disaster is small, prices
must keep low. But there is worse coming
than that, my friend."

Already rumours were spreading far and
wide as to the fall of certain shares. Mines
that yesterday stood high in the estimation
of the public were publicly offered at a reduction
of from eight to ten points; even the
gilt-edged securities were suffering.

The feeling grew that nothing was safe. It
is the easiest thing in the world to shake
public assurance where money is concerned.
With one accord the thousands of large and
small speculators had set out for the City to
get rid of their liability on the earliest possible
occasion. They asked for no profits,
they demanded no margin—they would have
been content to get out at a loss.

It never occurred to the individual that
the same brilliant idea might strike a million
brains simultaneously. With one accord they
rushed to the line of action that might be the
ruin of one-third of them. Just for the time
purchases by a few bold speculators stopped
the rush; but presently they got filled up or
frightened, so that by two o'clock some of the
best paper in the market was begging at a few
shillings the £1 share. When the fact struck
New York and reacted on the London
market, nobody knew what might happen.

It was fortunate that sellers could not
unload at once. Sheaves of telegrams
tumbled into brokers' offices, the floors were
littered with orange envelopes, the City was
musical with the tinkle of telephones. The
heads of firms, half mad with worry and
anxiety, were offering the girls in the telephone
exchange large sums to connect them
with this office and the other. The usually
sane City of London was as mad now as it
had been in the days of the South Sea
Bubble.

By three o'clock, however, business on the
Stock Exchange had practically come to a
standstill. It was useless to deal with waste
paper. To-morrow the crowd would doubtless
be augmented by thousands of provincial
speculators. Already the foreign Bourses
were suffering under the strain. Early in the
afternoon there were rumours and signs of an
excited struggle in Lothbury.

What had happened now? People were
straining their ears to listen. The news came
in presently. There was a run on the South
African Industrial Bank!

When the crowd began to clamour at the
doors of the South African Industrial, the
manager slipped out by a side entrance and
made the best pace he could in the direction
of the Bank of England. Once there, all his
self-possession deserted him. He asked
wildly to see the chief cashier, the general
manager, the governors, anybody who might
help him for the moment.

But the officials had other things to occupy
their attention. From all parts of the country
intelligence had arrived to the effect that the
panic was at its height. It was only now that the
big financiers realised what a large amount of
fanatical gambling there had been in South
Africans. Everybody had been going to make
their fortunes, from humble clerks up to
the needy aristocrats. Every penny that
could be raked together had gone that way.

And now the country had taken it into
its head that the Rand was lost. Wild
appeals had been made to the Eastern Cable
Company to do something, but they could
only reply that their line had broken down
somewhere beyond Mauritius, and that, until
it could be fished up and spliced. South
Africa might as well be in the moon. People
were acting as if the Rand had been swallowed
up altogether.

The Bank of England was full of great
financiers at their wits' ends for some means
of allaying the panic and restoring public
confidence. The great houses, Rothschild,
and Coutts, and the rest, were represented
in the governor's parlour.

The presiding genius of the South African
Industrial found his way into the meeting.
He was sorry to trouble them: he would not
have come unless he had been absolutely
bound to. But there was a run on his bank,
and he wanted £2,000,000 immediately. As
to security——

One of the grave financiers laughed aloud.
It seemed an awful thing
to do in that solemn and
decorous parlour, but nobody
seemed to notice.
But there was a general
consensus of opinion that
the money must be forthcoming.
If one sound
bank was allowed to
topple over, goodness
only knew where the
catastrophe might end.

"You will have to do
with £500,000 for the
present," the chairman said.
"There are sure to be
applications. You must be diplomatic;

festina lente
, you know."

"If I could keep open straight
away until——"

"Madness. Keep to your regulations.
Close at four o'clock.
Delay is everything."

The big clock in the room
boomed the hour of four. It
was as if some long-drawn mental
agony had suddenly ceased.

The manager of the South African Industrial
fought his way back to the offices with a
little comfort at the back of his mind.

There was a lull in the roar as he
appeared. He took advantage of it. His
courage had come back to him now.

"Close the doors," he said sharply. "It
is past four o'clock."

A cashier whipped
a revolver out from
a drawer.

The mob yelled its protest. A big man
climbed over the trellis along the counter.
Just for a moment it looked like a lawless
riot, but a cashier whipped a revolver out from
a drawer, and as the big man looked down the
blue bore his courage failed him. There was
no further rush, but at, the same time there
was no disposition on the part of the crowd
to retire.

"We are closed
for the day," the
manager said with
considerable coolness.
"You can't expect me to
stay here all night merely
because you have taken it
into your heads to want your
money all at once. Come to-morrow
and you shall all be
paid."

A derisive howl followed. The manager
whispered something to one of the clerks
and the latter slipped out. Presently there
was a commotion at the doors, and half-a-dozen
helmets topped the crowd. There
was a swaying movement till the long counter
creaked again, an oath or two, uplifted sticks
and the smashing of a policeman's helmet.

For the next few minutes there was something
in the nature of a free fight; blows
were freely exchanged, and more than one
face bore traces of blood. But there is
always something besides physical force behind
law and order, and gradually the mob
turned back. Gradually the counting-house
was cleared and the iron shutters let down.

But the City did not clear. The wildest
rumours were in the air. Other banks, doing
a more or less large business in the way of
withdrawals, had followed the example of the
South African Industrial, and this had not
tended to restore public confidence. It was
pretty clear that every house would have to
face a similar run on the morrow.

At eight o'clock the streets were still
crowded. It was fairly warm: there was
little or no traffic after dusk, and it became
evident that thousands of people had all
tacitly resolved to do the same thing—remain
in the streets all night outside their
particular offices or business houses, and wait
so that they might have the first chance in the
morning. People sat on the paths and in
the roadway. Every City house of refreshment
had been depleted of food long
since.

Under the big electric lamps people reclined,
reading the evening papers. It was
a gigantic picnic, with tragedy to crown the
feast. There was no laughter, nothing but
grim determination of purpose.

The papers were full of bad news from
the provinces. Everywhere public credit
was shaken to breaking point. There had
been runs on scores of local banks.

In the West End there was only one topic
of conversation. But the theatres and restaurants
were open, and life was going on much
the same. In a private room at the Savoy
Ericsson and his partner in guilt were dining.
The waiters had gone, the wine and cigars
stood on the table.

There was a subdued look about both of
them, a furtive cast of the eyes and just a
suggestion of slackness in their hands not
due entirely to the champagne. It was a
long time before either of them spoke.

"Pretty warm day, Eli," Ericsson suggested.

Asherton-Smith wiped his red damp forehead.

"Rather," he said. "I'm not so sharp as
you, I know, but I'd forfeit a few thousands
to be well out of this."

Ericsson was not so contemptuous of his
thick-witted partner as usual.

"I should like to know what you are
driving at," he muttered.

"Well, we've been too sharp. We've
played the game too far. Shares were only
to drop a few points, and we were to buy
for the rise. We've laid out every penny
that we could rake together for the rise.
And what have we got? Some hundreds of
thousands of shares a few points below par?
Not a bit of it. If this panic waits two days
longer we shall have exchanged all our own
cash and our own credit for a ton or two of
waste paper."

"It will all come back again," Ericsson
said uneasily.

"Ah, but when? The bogey has been
too big for the public. We've given them a
scare that they will not get over in a hurry
for many a day. We've shown them what

might
happen. And they tumble to the fact
that things are far too inflated. The fall of
a few points would have put millions into our
pockets. As it is, we shall have to hold on
perhaps for months. And we're not strong
enough to do that."

"If the cable works again to-morrow."
Ericsson said hoarsely after a pause,
"it——"

"Yes, and if it doesn't? And if the thing
goes on, what then? And if there should
be a run to-morrow on the Bank of
England!"

"I never thought of that," Ericsson
groaned. "Pass the brandy. If only to-morrow
were Saturday instead of Thursday!
A pretty black Thursday it's going to be."

Ericsson and Asherton-Smith were still
sipping their brandy, but they were no longer
gloating over their prey with shining eyes—they
no longer counted their prospective millions.
Like the greedy fox they had dropped
the substance for the shadow. They were
going to be ruined with their victims.

With moody, furtive, bloodshot eyes they
looked at each other.

"I suppose we can't drop a hint," Ericsson
suggested.

"Drop a hint," Asherton-Smith sneered.
"You're a clever chap, you are—too clever
by half. But if that's all the idea you've got
you'd better shut up. Perhaps you'd like to
go and tell the story to the Lord Mayor?"

Ericsson's fine turn for repartee seemed to
have deserted him.

"Who could have anticipated anything like
this?" he groaned. "And the worst of it is
that we dare not say a word. The merest
hint would invite suspicion, and you may be
pretty sure that they would make the punishment
fit the crime. We'll just have to grin
and bear it."

Asherton-Smith shook his fist in the
speaker's face.

"You miserable swindler!" he yelled.
"But for you I should have been a rich man
to-day. And now I am ruined—ruined!"

Ericsson bent his head meekly with never a
word to say.

The City was awake earlier than usual next
morning; indeed, for once, it had not slept.
By nine o'clock in the morning the streets
were packed. The haggard-eyed, sleepless
ones gained nothing by their tenacity, for
they were pushed from pillar to post by
others, fresh for the fray.

The provincial trains from an early hour
had commenced to pour fresh forces into
London. A great many business men had
slept as best they could in their offices, feeling
pretty sure that it was the only way to be on
the spot in the morning. They looked tired
and worn out.

It was a quiet, persistent, grim crowd. There
was no hustling or horse-play, or anything of
that kind; even the ubiquitous humourist was
absent. They pushed on persistently, a
denser crowd round the large banks. As
soon as the shutters were down and the doors
opened the human tide streamed in.

The run on the banks had set in grimly.
Clerks and cashiers from distant branches
had been brought up to meet the pressure.
There was a confidence in the way they
bustled about and handled and paid out the
money that was not without its effect. More
than one man eyed the pile of notes in his
hand and passed them back over the counter
again. Here and there people were bewailing
the loss of their money.

It was the golden hour of the light-fingered
fraternity. They were absolutely covered by
the dense crowd so that they could pursue
their vocation with impunity. They had only
to mark down some rich prize and plunder.
Individuals shrieked that they had been
robbed, but nobody took any notice.

A burly, red-faced farmer yelled that he
had been robbed of £800 in Bank of England
notes. Someone by him retorted that it was
no loss, seeing that there was a run on the
great National Bank.

It was the thrilling
moment of the day! A
run on the Bank of
England!

It was the thrilling moment of the day!
A run on the Bank of England! And yet it
seemed in the light of new circumstances to
be the most natural thing in the world.
Would the bank be able to cash its own
notes? If not—well, if not—nobody could
foresee the end.

There were thousands of curious people in
the crowd who had no business there whatever.
Not that there was any business
properly so called done in London that
day. There was a surging rush in the
direction of Threadneedle Street. It would
be something in after life to say that one had
seen a run on the Bank of England.

Inside the paying departments huge piles
of gold and silver glittered in the sunshine.
It was a curious and thrilling contrast between
the grave decorum of the clerks and the wild,
fierce rush of the public.

The piles of gold and the easy unconcern
of the officials satisfied a good many people
who pushed to the counters and then fell back
again muttering uncomfortably; but, in real
truth, the bank managers were becoming a
little anxious.

Lord Fairchild, the great capitalist, with his
houses in every big city of the world, contrived
at length to reach the bank parlour.
There was a full meeting of the chairman
and governors. A cheerful tone prevailed.

"I sincerely hope we may weather the
storm," the chairman said anxiously. "We
have had no signal of distress from anyone;
but I shall be glad when it is over."

Everybody looked tired and worn out. One
or two of the governors had fallen asleep in
their chairs. There was a litter of lunch on
the table. But very few of those assembled
there seemed to care anything for food.

"I calculate that we can last another day,"
Lord Fairchild said. "By to-morrow I hope
we shall have contact with Cape Town
again."

Every effort was being made to bring about
this desirable consummation. The broken
line might be repaired at any moment. News
had come from
the Mauritius
that the broken
cable had been
fished up, but
there was no
further information
since midnight.
Possibly,
when contact
could be made
again, the disaster
would prove to be much less than
the last message had forecasted.

"It must come," one of the governors
sighed. "It must come soon, or Parliament
will have to deal with this question. Another
two days——"

"I prefer not to think of another two
days," Lord Fairchild
replied. "If
the worst comes to
the worst, Government
must guarantee
our paper. We
shall have to issue
Treasury bills to
make up our deficit.
We——"

An excited individual
burst without
ceremony into
the room. His hat
was off; his smart
frock coat was torn
to ribands.

"I am from the
office of the East
Cable Company,"
he gasped. "I
was told to come
here at once. My
Lord, I have the
most extraordinary
news. The great
disaster at Johannesburg
is—is—is——"

"Get on, man; we are
all impatience."

"Is—is no disaster at
all. We have verified it.
Our agent at Cape Town
says he has heard nothing
of it. Johannesburg
stands where it did. There are
four messages through and—well,
there has been a cruel fraud, and
we are doing our best to get to the
bottom of it."

A rousing cheer echoed through
the bank parlour. The governors
yelled and shook each other by the hand like
school-boys. Probably the decorum of that
room had never been so grossly violated
before.

Lord Fairchild passed into the great office
where the public were still pushing and
struggling. He stood on a table, his spare
and striking figure standing out conspicuously.
There were hundreds present who recognised
that noble figure.

"Gentlemen," Lord Fairchild cried, "I
have just received the most authentic information
that Johannesburg stands intact to-day.
There has been trickery somewhere, but, thank
Heaven, the panic is over."

A perfect yell followed. Men went frantic
with delight. When Lord Fairchild said a
thing it was accepted as gospel. Hats went
high in the air, people shook hands with
perfect strangers, there was a rush to pay gold
back and take notes instead.

The news spread in the marvellous magnetic
way common to the ear of a huge multitude.
It ran with lightning speed through the
streets. Everybody seemed to know like
magic that Lord Fairchild had made a short
speech in the Bank of England to the
effect that the scare was over. In less
than ten minutes the various bank officials
were deeply engaged in taking back again the
piles of gold they had so recently paid out.
The mob roared out patriotic songs, there
was a rush in all directions. For the next
hour or so the telegraph lines fairly hummed
with messages. Within an hour the City had
regained much of its usual busy decorum,
save for the long stream of people who were
getting rid of their gold once more.

With a view to prevent any further
exploiting and financial uneasiness on the
part of the speculating fraternity, the committee
of the Stock Exchange met and formally
closed the House till Monday. Under the
circumstances the step was an exceedingly
wise one.

In the seclusion of the bank parlour Lord
Fairchild was closeted with the editor of
The
Messenger
. He had come down post haste
to the City to vindicate his character. The
famous cablegram lay on the table.

"I need not say, my lord," he began,
"that I——"

"You need not say anything about yourself,"
Lord Fairchild said kindly. "We are
quite convinced that you have been made a
victim. But how?"

"I can only theorise at present," the

Messenger
editor replied. "And you, gentlemen,
will understand, a great newspaper like
ours has correspondents everywhere. We
also have a special cypher known only to
ourselves. Our man at the Cape is absolutely
reliable. Now somebody must have
stolen our cypher or possessed himself of
the key. Cables come to us addressed to
'Bonanza.' Such was the cable that
reached us on the day that the Eastern line
broke down. Seeing that it was absolutely
in order and apparently delivered in the
usual way, we used it, under the impression
that we had a great piece of news
and one that possibly our rivals did not
possess.

"There was nothing in the appearance of
the cablegram to excite our suspicions, but
since the news of its falseness has come
through I have had it examined by an expert
who reports that the original telegram had
been directed to 'Bonan,' and not to
'Bonanza.' The last two letters had been
cleverly forged, but under a very strong glass
the forgery is clear. Now you can see the
trap. I have been to the office of the Cable
Company, and, as I expected, I find that a
message was sent on the day in question from
Cape Town to a registered 'Bonan.' This
'Bonan' turns out to be one James Jones who
has an office in Long Lane. Of course that
office was taken for the express purpose of
getting that message, so that in case the
Eastern line broke down the paper could be
forced upon us. Unfortunately it was forced
upon us with dire results. We find that the
message was repeated day by day in the
hopes of a breakdown.

"Now, lots of big houses down South
cable quotations, lists of prices, finds of
gold-dust and the like every day. All these
are in cypher, and perhaps a fortnight might
pass without any fluctuations, which would
mean practically the receipt of an identical
message for days. Nothing but a close
search of the records could have aroused
suspicion. Besides, the line had broken
down, and all the energies of the company
were devoted to that.

"If any of you gentlemen like to call at
the Cable Company's offices and see the
scores of duplicate cypher messages, all
more or less alike, you will be convinced
that the employés there are not in the least
at fault. We have been the victims of a
clever conspiracy. We can safely leave the
rest to the police."

The City was becoming normal again. By
four o'clock it was practically deserted. The
offices of the various banks were bursting
with the repaid gold. Many clerks were
closing up the books and looking forward to
a good night's rest.

It was almost impossible to believe that
these were the same streets of a few hours
before.

Meantime, Ericsson and his partner in the
inner room of their offices were gloating over
a bewildering array of figures; their gains from
the gigantic hoax they had played on the
public promised to run into millions.

Rejoicing in the sudden turn in affairs,
the two guilty men were building castles in
the air with their ill-gotten wealth, when
heavy footsteps came up from the office
stairs; there was a knocking at the door.
The two men started up. Their nerves were
humming still from the strain of the past day
and night.

"Come in," Asherton-Smith cried unsteadily.

A couple of men entered. One of them
had a paper in his hand.

"Mr. Asherton-Smith and Mr. Carl
Ericsson,
alias
James Jones," he said, "I
have a warrant for your arrest which I will
read to you presently. I warn you not to say
too much. Your accomplice, Jacob Peters,
has been arrested at Cape Town, and I am
instructed by cable that he has made a full
confession."

The snarling oath died away on Ericsson's
lips.

"It's all up," he said hoarsely, "but it was
a chance. Curse Peters for a white-livered
fool. But for him I should be worth fifty
millions."

THE INVISIBLE FORCE.

A Story of What Might Happen in the Days to Come, when Underground London is
Tunnelled in all Directions for Electric Railways, if an Explosion Should Take Place
in One of the Tubes.

I.

It seemed as if London had solved one of
her great problems at last. The communication
difficulty was at an end. The first-class
ticket-holders no longer struggled to and
from business with fourteen fellow-sufferers
in a third-class carriage. There were no
longer any particularly favoured suburbs, nor
were there isolated localities where it took as
long getting to the City as an express train
takes between London and Swindon. The
pleasing paradox of a man living at Brighton
because it was nearer to his business than
Surbiton had ceased to exist. The tubes
had done away with all that.

There were at least a dozen hollow cases
running under London in all directions.
They were cool and well ventilated, the carriages
were brilliantly lighted, the various
loops were properly equipped and managed.

All day long the shining funnels and bright
platforms were filled with passengers.
Towards midnight the traffic grew less, and
by half-past one o'clock the last train had
departed. The all-night service was not
yet.

It was perfectly quiet now along the gleaming
core that lay buried under Bond Street
and St. James's Street, forming the loop
running below the Thames close by Westminster
Bridge Road and thence to the
crowded Newington and Walworth districts.
Here a portion of the roof was under repair.

The core was brilliantly lighted; there was
no suggestion of fog or gloom. The general
use of electricity had disposed of a good deal
of London's murkiness; electric motors were
applied now to most manufactories and work-shops.
There was just as much gas consumed
as ever, but it was principally used for
heating and culinary purposes. Electric
radiators and cookers had not yet reached the
multitude; that was a matter of time.

In the flare of the blue arc lights a dozen
men were working on the dome of the core.
Something had gone wrong with a water-main
overhead, the concrete beyond the
steel belt had cracked, and the moisture had
corroded the steel plates, so that a long
strip of the metal skin had been peeled
away, and the friable concrete had fallen on
the rails. It had brought part of the crown
with it, so that a maze of large and small
pipes was exposed to view.

"They look like the reeds of an organ,"
a raw engineer's apprentice remarked to the
foreman. "What are they?"

"Gas mains, water, electric light, telephone,
goodness knows what," the foreman
replied. "They branch off here, you see."

"Fun to cut them," the apprentice grinned.

The foreman nodded absently. He had
once been a mischievous boy, too. The job
before him looked a bigger thing than he had
expected. It would have to be patched up
till a strong gang could be turned on to the
work. The raw apprentice was still gazing
at the knot of pipes. What fun it would be
to cut that water-main and flood the tunnels!

In an hour the scaffolding was done and
the
débris
cleared away. To-morrow night
a gang of men would come and make the
concrete good and restore the steel rim to
the dome. The tube was deserted. It
looked like a polished, hollow needle, lighted
here and there by points of dazzling light.

It was so quiet and deserted that the
falling of a big stone reverberated along the
tube with a hollow sound. There was a
crack, and a section of piping gave way
slightly and pressed down upon one of the
electric mains. A tangled skein of telephone
wires followed. Under the strain the electric
cable parted and snapped. There was a
long, sliding, blue flame, and instantly the
tube was in darkness. A short circuit had
been established somewhere. Not that it
mattered, for traffic was absolutely suspended
now, and would not be resumed again before
daylight. Of course, there were the work-men's
very early trains, and the Covent
Garden market trains, but they did not
run over this section of the line. The
whole darkness reeked with the whiff of
burning indiarubber. The moments passed
on drowsily.

Along one side of Bond Street the big
lamps were out. All the lights on one main
switch had gone. But it was past one
o'clock now, and the thing mattered little.
These accidents occurred sometimes in the
best regulated districts, and the defect would
be made good in the morning.

It was a little awkward, though, for a great
State ball was in progress at Buckingham
Palace. Supper was over, the magnificent
apartments were brilliant with light dresses
and gay uniforms. The shimmer and fret
of diamonds flashed back to lights dimmer
than themselves. There was a slide of feet
over the polished floors. Then, as if some
unseen force had cut the bottom of creation,
light and gaiety ceased to be, and darkness
fell like a curtain.

There were a few cries of alarm from the
swift suddenness of it. To eyes accustomed
to that brilliant glow the gloom was Egyptian.
It seemed as if some great catastrophe had
happened. But common-sense reasserted
itself, and the brilliant gathering knew that
the electric light had failed.

There were quick commands, and spots of
yellow flame sprang out here and there in the
great desert of the night. How faint and
feeble, and yellow and flaring, the lights
looked! The electrician down below was
puzzled, for, so far as he could see, the fuses
in the meters were intact. There was no
short circuit so far as the Palace was concerned.
In all probability there had been an
accident at the generating stations; in a few
minutes the mischief would be repaired.

But time passed, and there was no welcome
return of the flood of crystal light.

"It is a case for all the candles," the Lord
Chamberlain remarked; "fortunately the old
chandeliers are all fitted. Light the candles."

It was a queer, grotesque scene, with all
that wealth of diamonds and glitter of uniforms
and gloss of satins, under the dim suggestion
of the candles. And yet it was
enjoyable from the very novelty of it. Nothing
could be more appropriate for the minuet
that was in progress.

"I feel like one of my own ancestors," a
noble lord remarked. "When they hit upon
that class of candle I expect they imagined
that the last possibility in the way of lighting
had been accomplished. Is it the same outside,
Sir George?"

Sir George Egerton laughed. He was
fresh from the gardens.

"It's patchwork," he said. "So far as I
can judge, London appears to be lighted in
sections. I expect there is a pretty bad breakdown.
My dear chap, do you mean to say
that clock is right?"

"Half-past four, sure enough, and mild for
the time of year. Did you notice a kind of
rumbling under—Merciful Heavens, what is
that?"

II.

There was a sudden splitting crack as if a
thousand rifles had been discharged in the
ballroom. The floor rose on one side to a
perilous angle, considering the slippery nature
of its surface. Such a shower of white flakes
fell from the ceiling that dark dresses and
naval uniforms looked as if their wearers had
been out in a snowstorm.

Cracks and fissures started in the walls
with pantomimic effect, on all sides could be
heard the rattle and splinter of falling glass.
A voice suddenly uprose in a piercing scream,
a yell proclaimed that one of the great crystal
chandeliers was falling. There was a rush
and a rustle of skirts, and a quick vision of
white, beautiful faces, and with a crash the
great pendant came to the floor.

A yell proclaimed that one of the great crystal chandeliers was falling.

The whole world seemed to be oscillating
under frightened feet, the palace was humming
and thrumming like a harpstring. The panic
was so great, the whole mysterious tragedy so
sudden, that the bravest there had to battle for
their wits. Save for a few solitary branches of
candles, the big room was in darkness.

There were fifteen hundred of England's
bravest, and fairest, and best, huddled together
in what might be a hideous deathchamber for
all they knew to the contrary. Women were
clinging in terror to the men, the fine lines of
class distinction were broken down. All were
poor humanity now in the presence of a
common danger.

In a little time the earth ceased to sway and
rock, the danger was passing. A little colour
was creeping back to the white faces again.
Men and women were conscious that they
could hear the beating of their own hearts.
Nobody broke the silence yet, for speech
seemed to be out of place.

"An earthquake," somebody said at
length. "An earthquake, beyond doubt, and
a pretty bad one at that. That accounts for
the failure of the electric light. There will
be some bad accidents if the gas mains are
disturbed."

The earth grew steady underfoot again, the
white flakes ceased to fall. Amongst the men
the spirit of adventure was rising; the idea of
standing quietly there and doing nothing was
out of the question.

Anyway, there could be no further thought
of pleasure that night. There were many
mothers there, and their uppermost thought
was for home. Never, perhaps, in the history
of royalty had there been so informal a
breaking up of a great function. The King
and Queen had retired some little time before—a
kindly and thoughtful act under the circumstances.
The women were cloaking and
shawling hurriedly; they crowded out in
search of their carriages with no more order
than would have been obtained outside a
theatre.

But there were remarkably few carriages in
waiting. An idiotic footman who had lost his
head in the sudden calamity sobbed out the
information that Oxford Street and Bond
Street were impassable, and that houses were
down in all directions. No vehicles could
come that way; the road was destroyed. As
to the rest, the man knew nothing; he was
frightened out of his life.

There was nothing for it but to walk. It
wanted two good hours yet before dawn, but
thousands of people seemed to be abroad.
For a space of a mile or more there was not
a light to be seen. Round Buckingham
Palace the atmosphere reeked with a fine
irritating dust, and was rendered foul and
poisonous by the fumes of coal gas. There
must have been a fearful leakage somewhere.

Nobody seemed to know what was the
matter, and everybody was asking everybody
else. And in the darkness it was very hard
to locate the disaster. Generally, it was
admitted that London had been visited by a
dreadful earthquake. Never were the daylight
hours awaited more eagerly.

"The crack of doom," Sir George Egerton
remarked to his companion, Lord Barcombe.

They were feeling their way across the
park in the direction of the Mall.

"It's like a shuddering romance that I
read a little time since. But I must know
something about it before I go to bed. Let's
try St. James's Street—if there's any St.
James's Street left."

"All right," Lord Barcombe agreed, "I
hope the clubs are safe. Is it wise to strike
a match with all this gas reeking in the
air?"

"Anything's better than the gas," Sir
George said tersely.

The vesta flared out in a narrow, purple
circle. Beyond it was a glimpse of a seat
with two or three people huddled on it.
They were outcasts and companions in the
grip of misfortune, but they were all awake
now.

"Can any of you say what's happened?"
Lord Barcombe asked.

"The world's come to an end, sir, I believe,"
was the broken reply. "You may
say what you like, but it was a tremendous
explosion. I saw a light like all the world
ablaze over to the north, and then all the
lights went out, and I've been waiting for the
last trump to sound ever since."

"Then you didn't investigate?" Lord Barcombe
asked.

"Not me, sir. I seem to have struck a bit
of solid earth where I am. And then it
rained stones and pieces of brick and
vestiges of creation. There's the half of a
boiler close to you that dropped out of the
sky. You stay where you are, sir."

But the two young men pushed on. They
reached what appeared to be St. James's
Street at length, but only by stumbling and
climbing over heaps of
débris
.

The roadway was one mass of broken
masonry. The fronts of some of the clubs
had been stripped off as if a titanic knife had
sliced them. It was like looking into one of
the upholsterers' smart shops, where they
display rooms completely furnished. There
were gaps here and there where houses had
collapsed altogether. Seeing that the road
had ceased to exist, it
seemed impossible that
an earthquake could
have done this thing.
A great light flickered
and roared a little way
down the road. At an
angle a gas main was
tilted up like the spout
of a teapot, upheaved
and snapped from its
twin pipes. This had
caught fire in some way,
so that for a hundred
yards or so each way
the thoroughfare was
illuminated by a huge
flare lamp.

It was a thrilling sight
focussed in that blue
glare. It looked as if
London had been utterly
destroyed by a siege—as
if thousands of well-aimed
shells had exploded.
Houses looked
like tattered banners of
brick and mortar.
Heavy articles of furniture
had been hurled
into the street; on the
other hand, little gimcrack ornaments still
stood on tiny brackets.

A scared-looking policeman came staggering
along.

"My man," Lord Barcombe cried, "what
has happened?"

The officer pulled himself together and
touched his helmet.

"It's dreadful, sir," he sobbed. "There
has been an accident in the tubes; and they
have been blown all to pieces."

III.

The constable, for the moment, had utterly
lost his nerve. He stood there in the great
flaring roar of the gas mains with a dazed
expression that was pitiful.

"Can you tell us anything about it?" Lord
Barcombe asked.

"I was in Piccadilly," was the reply.
"Everything was perfectly quiet, and so far
as I could see not a soul was in sight. Then
I heard a funny rushing
sound, just like the
tear of an express train
through a big, empty
station. Yes, it was for
all the world like a
ghostly express train that
you could hear and not
see. It came nearer and
nearer; the whole earth
trembled just as if the
train had gone mad in
Piccadilly. It rushed
past me down St.
James's Street,
and after that
there was an
awful smash and
a bang, and I was
lying on my back
in the middle of
the road. All the
lights that remained
went out,
and for a minute
or two I was
in

that railway collision.
Then, when
I got my senses
back, I blundered
down here because
of that big flaring light there; and I
can't tell you, gentlemen, any more, except
that the tube has blown up."

Of that fact there was no question. There
were piles of
débris
thrown high in one part,
and a long deep depression in another like a
ruined dyke. A little further on the steel core
of the tube lay bare with rugged holes ripped
in it.

"Some ghastly electric catastrophe," Sir
George Egerton murmured.

It was getting light by this time, and it was
possible to form some idea of the magnitude
of the disaster. Some of the clubs in St.
James's Street still appeared to be intact, but
others had suffered terribly. The heaps of
tumbled masonry were powdered and glittering
with broken glass and a few walls hung
perilously over the pavement. And still the
gas main roared on until the flame grew from
purple to violet, and to straw colour before
the coming dawn. If this same thing had
happened all along the network of tubes,
London would be more or less a hideous
ruin.

The explosion had had a
straight run here, for the
road had been raised like
some gigantic zigzag molehill.

For the better part of Piccadilly things were
brighter. Evidently the explosion had had a
straight run here, for the road had been raised
like some mighty zigzag molehill for many
yards. The wood pavement scattered all over
the place suggested a gigantic box of child's
bricks strewn over a nursery floor. The tube
had been forced up, its outer envelope of concrete
broken so that the now twisted steel core
might have been a black snake crawling
down Piccadilly. Doubtless the expanding
air had met with some obstacle in the tube
under St. James's Street, hence the terrible
force of the explosion there.

There was quite a large crowd in Oxford
Street. The whole roadway was wet; the
gutters ran with the water from the broken
pipes. The air was full of the odour of gas.
All the clocks in the streets seemed to have
gone mad. Lord Barcombe glanced at his
own watch, to find that it was racing
furiously.

"By Jove!" he whispered excitedly,
"we're in danger here. The air is full of
electricity. I went over some works once,
and neglected to leave my watch behind me,
and it played me the same prank. It affects
the mainspring, you know."

There were great ropes and coils of electric
wire of high voltage cropping out of the
ground here and there; coils attached to
huge accumulators, and discharging murderous
current freely. A dog, picking his
way across the sopping street, trod on one of
the wires, and instantly all that remained of
the dog was what looked like a twisted bit of
burnt skin and bone. It appealed to Sir
George Egerton's imagination strongly.

"Poor little brute!" he murmured. "It
might have happened to you or me. Don't
you know that a force that only gives a man
a bad shock when he is standing on dry
ground often kills him when the surface is
wet? I wonder if we can get some indiarubber
gloves and galoshes hereabouts.
After that gruesome sight, I shall be afraid to
put one foot before the other."

Indeed, the precaution was a necessary one.
A horse attached to a cab came creeping
over the blocked streets; the animal slipped
on a grating connected with the ventilation of
the drains, and a fraction of a second later
there was no horse in existence. The driver
sat on his perch, white and scared.

"The galoshes," Lord Barcombe said
hoarsely. "Don't you move till we come
back again, my man. And everybody keep
out of the roadway."

The cry ran along that the roadway meant
instant death. The cabman sat there gibbering
with terror. A little way further down
was a rubber warehouse, with a fine selection
of waders' and electricians' gloves in the
window. With a fragment of concrete Sir
George smashed in the window, and took
what he and Lord Barcombe required.
They knew that they would be quite safe
now.

More dead than alive the cabman climbed
down from his seat and was carried to the
pavement on Lord Barcombe's shoulder. The
left side of his face was all drawn up and
puckered, the left arm was useless.

"Apoplexy from the fright," Sir George
suggested.

"Not a bit of it," Lord Barcombe
exclaimed, "It's a severe electric shock.
Hold up."

Gradually the man's face and arm ceased to
twitch.

"If that's being struck by lightning," he
said, "I don't want another dose. It was
as if something had caught hold of me and
frozen my heart in my body. I couldn't do a
thing. And look at my coat."

All up the left side the coat was singed so
that at a touch the whole cloth fell to pieces.
It was a strange instance of the freakishness
of the invisible force. A great fear fell on
those who saw. This intangible, unseen
danger, with its awful swiftness, was worse
than the worst that could be seen.

"Let's get home," Lord Barcombe
suggested. "It's getting on my nerves. It's
dreadful when all the terror is left to the
imagination."

IV.

Meanwhile no time was lost in getting to
the root of the mischief.

The danger could not be averted by switching
off the power altogether at the various
electrical stations of the metropolis. At
intervals along the tubes were immense
accumulators which for the present could not
be touched. It was these accumulators that
rendered the streets such a ghastly peril.

It was the electrical expert to the County
Council—Alton Rossiter—who first got on
the track of the disaster. More than once
before, the contact between gas and electricity
had produced minor troubles of this kind.
Gas that had escaped into man-holes and
drains had been fired from the sparks caused
by a short-circuit current wire. For some
time, even as far back as 1895, instances of
this kind had been recorded.

But how could the gas have leaked into
the tube, seeing that it was a steel core with a
solid bedding of concrete beyond? Unless
an accident had happened when the tube was
under repair, this seemed impossible.

The manager of the associated tubes was
quite ready to afford every information to
Mr. Rossiter. The core had corroded in
Bond Street in consequence of a settling of
the earth caused by a leaky water-main. The
night before, this had been located and the
steel skin stripped off for the necessary
repairs.

Mr. Alton Rossiter cut the speaker short.

"Will you come to Bond Street with me,
Mr. Fergusson?" he said; "we may be able
to get into the tunnel there."

Fergusson was quite ready. The damage
in Bond Street was not so great, though the
lift shaft was filled with
débris
, and it became
necessary to cut a way into the station before
the funnel was reached.

For a couple of hundred yards the tube
was intact; beyond that point the fumes of
gas were overpowering. A long strip of steel
hung from the roof. Just where it was, a
round, clean hole in the roadway rendered it
possible to work and breathe there in spite of
the gas fumes.

"We shall have to manage as best we
can," Rossiter muttered. "For a little time,
at any rate, the gas of London must be cut off
entirely. With broken mains all over the
place the supply is positively dangerous.
Look here."

He pointed to the spot where the gas main
had trended down and where a short-circuit
wire had fused it. Here was the whole secret
in a nutshell. A roaring gas main had
poured a dense volume into the tube for
hours; mixed with the air it had become one
of the most powerful and deadly of explosives.

"What time does your first train start?"
Rossiter asked.

"For the early markets, four o'clock,"
Fergusson replied. "In other words, we
switch on the current from the accumulator
stations at twenty minutes to four."

"And this is one of your generating
stations?"

"Yes. Of course I see exactly what you
are driving at. Practically the whole circuit
of tubes was more or less charged with a
fearful admixture of gas and air. As soon
as the current was switched on a spark
exploded the charge. I fear, I very much
fear, that you are right. If we can only find
the man in charge here! But that would be
nothing else than a miracle."

All the same the operator in charge of the
switches was close by. Fortunately for him
the play of the current in the tube had
carried the gases towards St. James's Street.
The explosion had lifted him out of his box,
and for a time he lay stunned. Dazed and
confused, he had climbed to the street and
staggered into the shop of a chemist who was
just closing the door upon a customer who
had rung him up for a prescription.

But he could say very little. There had
been an explosion directly he pulled down
the first of the switches, and his memory
was a blank after that.

Anyway, the cause of the disaster was
found. To prevent further catastrophe
notice was immediately given to the various
gas companies to cut off the supplies at once.
In a little time the whole disastrous length
of the tube was free from that danger.

By the afternoon a committee had gone
over the whole route. At the first blush it
looked as if London had been half ruined.
It was impossible yet to estimate the full
extent of the damage. In St. James's Street
alone the loss was pretty certain to run
into millions.

Down in Whitehall and Parliament Street,
and by Westminster Bridge, the damage was
terrible. Here sharp curves and angles had
checked the rush of expanding air with the
most dire results. Huge holes and ruts had
been made in the earth, and houses had come
down bodily.

Most of the people out in the streets by
this time were properly equipped in indiarubber
shoes and gloves. It touched the
imagination strongly to know that between a
man and hideous death was a thin sheet of
rubber no thicker than a shilling. It was like
walking over the crust of a slumbering
volcano; like skating at top speed over very
thin ice.

Towards the evening a thrilling whisper
ran round. From Deptford two early specials
had started to convey an annual excursion of
five hundred men and their wives to Paddington,
whence they were going to Windsor.
It seemed impossible, incredible, that these
could have been overlooked; but by five
o'clock the dreadful truth was established.
Those two specials had started; but what
oblivion they had found—how lingering,
swift, or merciful, nobody could tell.

V.

There was a new horror. The story of
those early special trains gave the final terror
to the situation. Probably they had been
blown to eternity. There was just one chance
in a million that anybody had escaped. All
the same, something would have to be done
to put the matter at rest.

Nobody knew what to do; everybody had
lost their heads for the moment. It seemed
hopeless from the very start. Naturally, the
man that everybody looked to at the moment
was Fergusson of the associated tubes. With
him was Alton Rossiter, representing the
County Council.

"But how to make a start?" the latter
asked.

"We will start from Deptford," said Fergusson.
"We must first ascertain the exact
time that the train left Deptford, and the
precise moment when the first explosion took
place. Mind you, I believe there was a
series of explosions. You see, there is
always a fair amount of air in the tubes.
When the inflowing gas met the cross currents
of air, it would be diverted, or pocketed,
so to speak. We should have a big pocket
of the explosive, followed by a clear space.
When the switches were turned on there
would be sparks here and there all along the
tubes. This means that practically simultaneously
the mines would be fired; fired so
quickly that the series of reports would sound
like one big bang. That this must be so can
be seen by the state of some of the streets. In
some spots the tube has been wrenched
bodily from the earth as easily as if it had
been a gaspipe. And then, again, you have
streets that do not show the slightest
damage. You must agree with me that my
theory is a correct one."

"I do. But what are you driving at?"

"Well, I am afraid that my theory is a
very forlorn one, but I give it for what it is
worth. It's just possible, faintly possible,
that those trains ran into a portion of the
tube where there was no explosion at all.
There were explosions behind them and in
front of them, and of course the machinery
would have been rendered useless instantly,
so that the trains may be trapped with no
ingress or outlet. I'm not in the least
sanguine of finding anything, but the aftermath
of a fearful tragedy. Anyway, our duty
is pretty plainly before us—we must go to
Deptford. Come along."

The journey to Deptford was no easy one.
There were so many streets up that locomotion
was a difficult matter. And where the
streets were damaged there was danger. It
was possible to use cycles, seeing that the
rubber tires formed non-conductors, and
indiarubber gloves and shoes allowed extra
protection. But the mere suggestion of a
spill was thrilling. It might
mean the tearing of a glove
or the loss of a shoe, and
then—well, that did not
bear thinking about.

"I never before properly
appreciated the feelings of
the man that Blondin used
to carry on his back."
Rossiter said as the pair
pushed steadily through
Bermondsey, "but I can
understand his emotions
now."

The roads, even where
there was no danger, were
empty. A man or woman
would venture timidly out
and look longingly to the
other side of the road and
then give up the idea of
moving altogether. As a
matter of fact there was
more of it safe than otherwise,
but the risks were too
awful.

VI.

Meanwhile something
like an organised attempt
was being made to grapple
with the evil. Days must, of necessity, elapse
before a proper estimate of the damage could
be made, to say nothing of the loss of life.

Nothing very great could be accomplished,
however, until the huge accumulators had
been cleared and the deadly current switched
off. So far as the London area proper was
concerned, Holborn Viaduct was the point to
aim at. In big vaults there, underground,
were some of the largest accumulators in the
world. These would have to be rendered
harmless at any cost.

But the work was none so easy, seeing that
the tube here was crushed and twisted, and all
about it was a knot of high-pressure cables
deadly to the touch. There was enough
power here running to waste to destroy a city.
There were spaces that it was impossible to
cross; and unfortunately the danger could
not be seen. There was no warning, no
chance of escape for the too hardy adventurer;
he would just have stepped an inch
beyond the region of safety, and there would
have been an end of him. No wonder that
the willing workers hesitated.

There was nothing for it but the blasting of
the tube. True, this might be attended with
danger to such surrounding buildings as had
weathered the storm, but it was the desperate
hour for desperate remedies. A big charge
of dynamite rent a long slit in the exposed
length of tube, and a workman taking his life
in his hands entered the opening. There
were few spectators watching. It was too
gruesome and horrible to stand there with
the feeling that a slip either way might
mean sudden death.

The workman, swathed
from head to foot in
indiarubber, disappeared
from sight.

The workman, swathed from head to foot
in indiarubber, disappeared from sight. It
seemed a long time before he returned, so
long that his companions gave him up for
lost. Those strong able men who were ready
to face any ordinary danger looked at one
another askance. Fire, or flood, or gas, they
would have endured, for under those circumstances
the danger was tangible. But here
was something that appealed horribly to the
imagination. And such a death! The
instantaneous fusion of the body to a dry
charcoal crumb!

But presently a grimed head looked out of
the funnel. The face was white behind the
dust, but set and firm. The pioneer called
for lights.

So far he had been successful. He had
found the accumulators buried under a heap
of refuse. They were built into solid concrete
below the level of the tube, so that they had
not suffered to any appreciable extent.

There was no longer any holding back.
The party swung along the tube with lanterns,
and candles flaring, they reached the vault
where the great accumulators were situated.
Under the piled rails and fragments of
splintered wood, the shining marble switchboard
could be seen.

But to get to it was quite another matter.
Once this was accomplished, one of the
greatest dangers and horrors that paralysed
labour would be removed. It was too much
to expect that the average labourer would toil
willingly, or even toil at all when the moving
of an inch might mean instant destruction.
And it was such a little thing to do after all.
A child could have accomplished it; the
pressure of a finger or two, the tiny action
that disconnects a wire from the live power,
and the danger would be no more, and
the automatic accumulators rendered harmless.

But here were a few men, at any rate, who
did not mean to be defeated. They toiled on
willingly, and yet with the utmost caution:
for the knots of cable wire under their feet
and over their heads were like brambles in the
forest. If one of these had given way, all of
them might be destroyed. It was the kind of
work that causes the scalp to rise and the
heart to beat and the body to perspire even on
the coldest day. Now and then a cable
upheld by some
débris
would slip; there
would be a sudden cry, and the workmen
would skip back, breathing heavily.

It was like working a mine filled with
rattlesnakes asleep; but gradually the mass of
matter was cleared away and the switchboard
disclosed. A few light touches, and a large
area of London was free from a terrible
danger. It was possible now to handle the
big cables with impunity, for they were perfectly
harmless.

There was no word spoken for a long
time. The men were trembling with the
reaction. One of them produced a large
flask of brandy and handed it round. Not
till they had all drunk did the leader of the
expedition speak.

"How many years since yesterday morning?"
he asked.

"Makes one feel like an old man," another
muttered.

They climbed presently into the street
again, for there was nothing to be done here
for the present. A few adventurous spectators
heard the news that the streets
were free from danger once more. The
tidings spread in the marvellous way that
such rumour carries, and in a little time the
streets were packed with people.

VII.

When the two cyclists came to Deptford,
they found that comparatively little damage
had been done to the station there, beyond
that the offices and platforms had been
wrecked. A wounded man was found, who
described how a mighty hurricane had roared
down the tube ten minutes after the excursion
trains had departed. Fergusson made
a rapid calculation from the figures that the
man supplied.

"The trains must have been near to Park
Road Station," he said, "when the explosion
occurred. There is just a chance that they
may have run into a space free from gas, and
that the explosion passed them altogether.
Let us make for Park Road Station without
delay, and we must try to pick up some
volunteers as we go along."

When they arrived at the scene they found
that a big crowd had gathered. A rumour
had spread that feeble voices had been heard
down one of the ventilation gratings, calling
for help. Fergusson and Rossiter reached
the spot with difficulty.

"Get our fellows together," whispered
Fergusson. "We can work now with impunity;
and if any of those poor people down
below are alive, we shall have them out in
half-an-hour. If we only had some lights!
Beg, borrow, or steal all the lanterns you can
get."

The nearest police-station solved that
problem fast enough. A small
gang of special experts moved
upon Park Road Station whilst
the mob was still struggling
about the ventilation shaft, and
in a little time
the entrance
was forced.

The station
was a veritable
wreck; but for
two hundred
yards the tunnel
was clear
before them.
Then came a
jammed wall of
timber, the end
of a railway
carriage standing
on end. The timbers
were twisted, huge baulks
of wood were bent like a
bow. A way was soon
made through the
débris
,
and Fergusson yelled
aloud.

Out of the velvety darkness of the tube a man staggered into
the lane of light.

To his delight a hoarse
voice answered him. He
yelled again and waved
his lantern. Out of the
velvety darkness of the tube a man staggered
into the lane of light made by the lantern.
He was a typical, thick-set workman, in his
best clothes.

"So you've found us at last," he said dully.

He appeared to be past all emotions.
His eyes showed no gratitude, no delight.
The horrors of the dark hours had numbed
his senses.

"Is—is it very bad?" asked Rossiter.

"Many were killed," the new comer said
in the same wooden voice. "But the others
are sitting in the carriages waiting for the end
to come. The lights in the carriages helped
us a bit, but after the first hour they went out.
Then one or two of us went up the line till it
seemed to rise and twist as if it was going to
climb into the sky, and by that we guessed
that there had been a big explosion of some
kind. So we tried the other way, and that
was all blocked up with timber; and we
knew then. The electricity was about, and—well,
it wasn't a pretty
sight, so we went back to
the trains. When the lights
went out we
were all mad
for a time, and—and—"

The speaker's
lips quivered
and shook—he
burst into a
torrent of tears.
Rossiter patted
him on the
back approvingly.
Those
tears probably
staved off stark
insanity. The
light of the
lanterns went
swinging on
ahead now, and
the trains began
to pour out their
freight of half-dead
people.
There were
some with
children, who
huddled back fearfully in their corners and
refused to face the destruction which they
were sure lay before them. They were all
white and trembling, with quivering lips and
eyes that twitched strangely. Heaven only
knows how long an eternity those hours of
darkness had seemed.

They were all out at last, and were gently
led to blessed light again. There were
doctors on the spot by this time with
nourishing food and stimulants. For the
most part, the women sat down and cried,
quietly hugging their children to their breasts.
Some of the men were crying in the same dull
way, but a few were violent. The dark horror
of it had driven them mad for the time. But
there was a darker side to it; of the pleasure-seekers
the dead were numbered at more
than half.

But there was one man here and there who
had kept his head throughout the crisis. A
cheerful-looking sailor gave the best account
of the adventure.

"Not that there is much to say," he remarked.
"We got on just as usual for the
first ten minutes or so, the train running
smoothly and plenty of light. Then all at
once we came to a sudden stop that sent us
flying across the carriage. We seemed to
have gone headlong into the stiffest tempest
I ever met. You could hear the wind go
roaring past the carriages, and then it stopped
as soon as it had begun.

"The rattle of broken glass was like
musketry. The first thing I saw when I got
out was the dead body of the engine-driver
with the stoker close by. It was just the same
with the train in front. Afterwards, I tried to
find a way out, but couldn't. There was a
man with me who trod on some of them
cables as you call 'em, and the next instant
there was no man—but I don't want to talk of
that."

"It means months upon months," Fergusson
said sadly.

"Not months—years," Rossiter replied.
"Yet I dare say that in the long run we shall
benefit by the calamity, great communities do.
As to calculating the damage, my imagination
only goes as far as fifty millions, and then
stops. And yet if anybody had suggested this to
me yesterday morning, I should have laughed."

"It would have seemed impossible."

"Absolutely impossible. And yet now
that it has come about, how easy and natural
it all seems! Come, let us get to work and
try to forget."

THE RIVER OF DEATH.

A Tale of London in Peril.

I.

The sky was as brass from the glowing East upwards, a stifling heat
radiated from stone and wood and iron—a close, reeking heat that
drove one back from the very mention of food. The five million odd
people that go to make up London, even in the cream of the holiday
season, panted and gasped and prayed for the rain that never came. For
the first three weeks in August the furnace fires of the sun poured
down till every building became a vapour bath with no suspicion of a
breeze to temper the fierceness of it. Even the cheap press had given
up sunstroke statistics. The heat seemed to have wilted up the
journalists and their superlatives.

More or less the drought had lasted since April. Tales came up from
the provinces of stagnant rivers and quick, fell spurts of zymotic
diseases. For a long time past the London water companies had
restricted their supplies. Still, there was no suggestion of alarm,
nothing as yet looked like a water famine. The heat was almost
unbearable but, people said, the wave must break soon, and the
metropolis would breathe again.

Professor Owen Darbyshire shook his head as he looked at the brassy,
star-powdered sky. He crawled homewards towards Harley Street with his
hat in his hand, and his grey frock coat showing a wide expanse of
white shirt below. There was a buzz of electric fans in the hall of
No. 411, a murmur of them overhead. And yet the atmosphere was hot and
heavy. There was one solitary light in the dining-room—a room all
sombre oak and dull red walls as befitted a man of science—and a
visiting card glistened on the table. Darbyshire read the card with a
gesture of annoyance:

James P. Chase

Morning Telephone

"I'll have to see him," the Professor groaned, "I'll have to see the
man if only to put him off. Is it possible these confounded pressmen
have got hold of the story already?"

With just a suggestion of anxiety on his strong clean-shaven face, the
professor parted the velvet curtains leading to a kind of study-laboratory,
the sort of place you would expect to find in the house of
a man whose speciality is the fighting of disease in bulk. Darbyshire
was the one man who could grapple with an epidemic, the one man always
sent for.

The constant pestering of newspaper men was no new thing. Doubtless
Chase aforesaid was merely plunging around after sensations—journalistic
curry for the hot weather. Still, the pushing little
American might have stumbled on the truth. Darbyshire took down his
telephone and churned the handle.

"Are you there? Yes, give me 30795, Kensington.... That you,
Longdale? Yes, it's Darbyshire. Step round here at once, will you?
Yes, I know it's hot, and I wouldn't ask you to come if it wasn't a
matter of the last importance."

A small thin voice promised as desired and Darbyshire hung up his
receiver. He then lighted a cigarette, and proceeded to con over some
notes that he had taken from his pocket. These he elaborated in pencil
in a small but marvellously clear handwriting. As he lay back in his
chair he did not look much like the general whose army is absolutely
surrounded, but he was. And that square, lean head held a secret that
would have set London almost mad at a whisper.

Darbyshire laid the sheets down and fell into a reverie. He was roused
presently by the hall bell and Dr Longdale entered. The professor
brightened.

"That's right," he said. "Good to see somebody, Longdale. I've had an
awful day. Verity, if Mr. Chase comes again ask him in here."

"Mr. Chase said he would return in an hour, sir," the large butler
replied. "And I'm to show him in here? Yes, Sir."

But already Darbyshire had hustled his colleague beyond the velvet
curtains. Longdale's small clear figure was quivering with excitement.
His dark eyes fairly blazed behind a pair of gold-rimmed spectacles.

"Well," he gasped, "I suppose it's come at last?"

"Of course it has," Darbyshire replied, "Sooner or later it was an
absolute certainty. Day by day for a month I have watched the sky and
wondered where the black hand would show. And when these things do
come they strike where you most dread them. Still, in this case, the
Thames——"

"Absolutely pregnant," Longdale exclaimed. "Roughly speaking, four-fifths
of London's water supply comes from the Thames. How many towns,
villages drain into the river before it reaches Sunbury or thereabouts
where most of the water companies have their intake? Why, scores of
them. And for the best part of a month the Thames has been little
better than a ditch stagnating under a brazen sunshine. Will our
people ever learn anything, Darbyshire? Is London and its six million
people always to groan under the tyranny of a monopoly? Say there's an
outbreak of typhoid somewhere up the river between here and Oxford. It
gets a grip before the thing is properly handled, the village system
of drainage is a mere matter of percolation. In eight-and-forty hours
the Thames is one floating tank of deadly poison. And, mind you, this
thing is bound to happen sooner or later."

"It has happened," Darbyshire said quietly, "and in a worse form than
you think. Just listen to this extract from an eastern counties
provincial paper:

"'STRANGE AFFAIR AT ALDENBURGH

"'A day or two ago the barque Santa Anna came ashore at Spur, near
Aldenburgh, and quickly became a total wreck. The vessel was piled
high on the Spur, and, the strong tide acting upon the worn-out hull,
quickly beat it to pieces. The crew of eight men presumably took to
their boats, for nothing has been seen of them since. How the Santa
Anna came to be wrecked on a clear, calm night remains a mystery for
the present. The barque was presumedly inbound for some foreign port
and laden with oranges, thousands of which have been picked up at
Aldenburgh lately. The coastguards presume the barque to be a
Portuguese.'

"Naturally you want to know what this has to do with the Thames,"
Darbyshire observed. "I'm going to tell you. The Santa Anna was
deliberately wrecked for a purpose which you will see later. The crew
for the most part landed not far away and, for reasons of their own,
sank their boat. It isn't far from Aldenburgh to London: in a short
time the Portuguese were in the Metropolis. Two or three of them
remained there, and five of them proceeded to tramp to Ashchurch,
which is on the river, and not far from Oxford. Being short of money,
their idea was to tramp across to Cardiff and get a ship there. Being
equally short of our language, they get out of their way to Ashchurch.
Then three of them are taken ill, and two of them die. The local
practitioner sends for the medical officer of health. The latter gets
frightened and sends for me. I have just got back. Look here."

Darbyshire produced a phial of cloudy fluid, some of which he
proceeded to lay on the glass of a powerful microscope. Longdale
fairly staggered back from the eyepiece. "Bubonic! The water reeks
with the bacillus! I haven't seen it so strongly marked since we were
in New Orleans together. Darbyshire, you don't mean to say that this
sample came from——"

"The Thames? But I do. Ashchurch drains directly into the river. And
for some few days those sailors have been suffering from a gross form
of bubonic fever. Now you see why they ran the Santa Anna ashore and
deserted her. One of the crew died of plague, and the rest abandoned
her. We won't go into the hideous selfishness of it; it was a case of
the devil take the hindmost."

"It's an awful thing," Longdale groaned.

"Frightful," Darbyshire murmured. He was vaguely experimenting with
some white precipitate on a little water taken from the phial. He
placed a small electric battery on the table. "The great bulk of the
London water supply comes from the Thames. Speaking from memory, only
the New River and one other company draw their supply from the Lea. If
the supply were cut off, places like Hoxton and Haggerstone and
Battersea, in fact all the dense centres of population where disease
is held in on the slenderest of threads, would suffer fearfully. And
there is that deadly poison spreading and spreading, hourly drawing
nearer to the metropolis into which presently it will be ladled by the
million gallons. People will wash in it, drink it. Mayfair will take
its chance with Whitechapel."

"At any hazard the supply must be cut off!" Longdale cried.

"And deprive four-fifths of London of water altogether!" Darbyshire
said grimly. "And London grilling like a furnace! No flushing of
sewers, no watering of roads, not even a drop to drink. In two days
London would be a reeking, seething hell—try and picture it,
Longdale."

"I have, often," Longdale said gloomily. "Sooner or later it had to
come. Now is your chance, Darbyshire—that process of sterilisation of
yours."

Darbyshire smiled. He moved in the direction of the velvet curtains.
He wanted those notes of his; he wanted to prove a startling new
discovery to his colleague. The notes were there, but they seemed to
have been disturbed. On the floor lay a torn sheet from a notebook
with shorthand cypher; thereon Darbyshire flew to the bell and rang it
violently.

"Verity," he exclaimed, "has that infernal—I mean, has Mr Chase been
here again?"

"Well, he have, sir," Verity said slowly, "he come just after Mr
Longdale. So I asked him to wait, which he did, then he come out again
after a bit, saying as you seemed to be busily engaged he would call
again."

"Um! Did he seem to be excited, Verity?"

"Well, he did, sir; white and very shiny about the eyes, and——"

"That will do. Go and call me a hansom, at once," Darbyshire cried, as
he dashed back into the inner room. "Here's a pretty thing; that
confounded American journalist, Chase—you know him—has heard all we
said and has helped himself to my notes; the whole thing will be
blazing in the
Telephone
to-morrow, and perhaps half-a-dozen papers
besides. Those fellows would wreck the empire for what they call a
'scoop.'"

"Awful!" Longdale groaned. "What are you going to do?"

Derbyshire responded that he was going to convince the editor of the

Telephone
that no alarmist article was to appear on the morrow.

He would be back again in an hour and Longdale was to wait. The
situation was not quite so hopeless as it seemed on the face of it.
There was a rattle of wheels outside and Darbyshire plunged hatless
into the night.

"Offices of the
Telephone
," he cried. "A sovereign if I'm there in
twenty minutes."

The cab plunged on headlong. The driver was going to earn that
sovereign or know the reason why. He drove furiously into Trafalgar
Square, a motor car crossed him recklessly, and a moment later
Darbyshire was shot out on to his head from the cab. He lay there with
no interest in mundane things. A languid crowd gathered, a doctor in
evening dress appeared.

"Concussion of the brain," he said in a cool matter of fact tone. "By
Jove, it's Dr. Derbyshire. Here, police; hurry up with the ambulance;
he must be removed to Charing Cross at once."

II.

With no spiritual indigestion troubling him, Mr. James Chase, late of
the
New York Chanticleer
, now of the
Morning Telephone
, lighted a
cigarette at the corner of Harley Street. The night was young and
there was plenty of time for him to mature his plans. He had got what
he called an "almighty scoop" in his pocket, indeed in the whole
history of yellow journalism he could remember no greater. London
dried up like a withered sponge and absolutely devoid of water! London
with the liquid plague bursting from every subterranean pipe and
fountain! The whirling headlines were revolving in Chase's close-cropped
head.

He reached the offices of the
Telephone
at length and crawled up a
dingy flight of stairs. Without knocking he passed the barrier of a
door marked "strictly private." The controlling genius of the

Telephone
sat limp and bereft of coat and vest. His greeting of Chase
was not burdened with flattering politeness. He merely asked what the
blazes he wanted. Chase nodded sweetly and drew a large sheet of paper
before him. After a little thought he dashed in half-a-dozen vigorous
lines with a blue pencil.

"Things pretty slack lately," he remarked amicably. "So hot that even
the East End can't rise to its weekly brutal murder. Still you get on
to a pearl sometimes. Grady, my boy, what do you think of that for a
contents bill?"

He held the white sheet aloft so that the flare of the gas should fall
upon it. The tired look faded from Grady's eyes; he sat up alert and
vigorous. Here was the tonic that his fretted soul craved for.

"Chapter and Verse?" he said, speaking fast as if he had run far.

"I overheard a conversation between him and Doctor Langdale."

"Got it all from Derbyshire," Chase replied. "I overheard a
conversation between him and Doctor Longdale in his own house. Also I
managed to get hold of some notes to copy."

"It wants pluck," Grady remarked, "A scare like that might ruin the
Empire; if——"

"None of that," Chase cut in. "Take it or leave it. If you haven't got
the grit, Sutton of the
Flashlight
will jump at the chance."

He held the contents bill up to the light again and Grady nodded. He
was going to do this thing deliberately, once he was sure of his
ground. He remarked cynically that it sounded like a fairy story.

"Not a bit of it," Chase, said briskly. "The plague breaks out on this
barque and the crew know it. There's no ceremony with sailors of that
class. They just lose their vessel and strike for the nearest land.
Knowing something of our quarantine laws they make themselves scarce
as soon as they can. A local doctor calls the plague English cholera,
too much bad fruit in very hot weather, and there you are."

Grady nodded again. The sweltering heat of the place no longer
affected him. Down below the presses were already beginning to clang
and boom. There was a constant clatter of feet along the passages.

"Sit down right away," Grady snapped. "Make two columns of it. I'll
get some statistics out for you."

Chase peeled off his coat and got to work at once. Grady found the
book he required and proceeded to compile his facts therefrom.

The further he dived into the volume the more terribly grave the
situation appeared.

The upper waters of the Thames were poisoned beyond doubt. And the
Thames for some time past had been little better than a stagnant ditch
under a fiery sun. Let that water only find its way into the pipes
under London and who could forecast the magnitude of the disaster?
Nearly all London derived its supply from the Thames.

So far as Grady could see from a swift examination of Dr. Richard
Siskey's valuable book, there were only two London water companies did
not derive their stock from the Thames—the New River Company with its
40,000,000 gallons per diem, and the Kent Company with 20,000,000
gallons a day were the favoured ones.

But what of the other six sources of supply? Chelsea, East London,
West Middlesex, Grand Junction, Southwark, and Vauxhall and Lambeth
were all dependent upon the Thames. Some 250,000,000 gallons of water
daily were a matter of necessity for the areas supplied by the above-named
companies. Fancy that liquid poison flowing like a flood into
the Fast End from Limehouse to West Ham, and from Bow to Walthamstow,
and nobody dreaming of the hideous danger! Why, the Great Plague of
London would be nothing to it.

And the West End would be no better off. From Sunbury to Mayfair those
connected with the Grand Junction supply would suffer. So far as
London proper was concerned, only those fortunate ones who were joined
to the New River mains would be exempt from peril, and, even then,
what chance has a sanitary area surrounded by pestilent districts? If
it were not already too late, the only chance was to cut off the
contaminated water supply, and then leave four-fifths of the
population of London absolutely without water under a heat that seemed
to deprive one of vital power.

The further Grady read on the more he was impressed. If he could get
this dread information into the hands of the people before it was too
late, he felt that he would be playing the part of a benefactor.
Desperate as the situation looked, the
Telephone
might yet save it.
Professor Darbyshire had no right to hold up such a secret when he
should have been taking measures to avert the threatened danger. It
never occurred to Grady that Darbyshire had had this calamity before
his eyes for years, and that his genius had found a way to nullify the
evil.

"The figures are pretty bad," Grady muttered. "Upon my word, it makes
me creepy to think about it. Got your stuff ready? Want anything?"

"Anything in the way of food, you mean?" Chase asked.

"That's it. No? So much the better; because when that copy goes
upstairs not a soul leaves the premises till the paper has gone to
bed."

An hour later the presses were roaring: presently huge parcels of damp
sheets were vomited into the street. Under the glare of the arc lamps
perspiring porters ghostly blue and spectral vans waited. The whole
street was busy with the hum of high noon. And all the while, a little
way beyond the radius of purple arcs, London slept....

London awoke presently and prepared for the day's work. There was no
sign of fear or panic yet. A copy of the
Telephone
lay on a hundred
thousand odd breakfast tables, news in tabloid form for busy men to
read. As the sheets were more or less carelessly opened the eye was
arrested by the scare heads on page 5. Nothing else seemed to be
visible:—

THE POISONED THAMES

Millions of plague germs flowing down into London. Bacillus of bubonic
plague in the river. New River and Kent Companies alone can supply
pure water. Stupendous discovery by Professor Darbyshire. Death in
your breakfast cup to-day. Shun it as you would poison. If you are not
connected with either of the above companies, or if you have no
private supply.

CUT OFF YOUR WATER AT THE MAIN AT ONCE!

What did it all mean? Nobody seemed to know. At eight o'clock in the
morning London's pulse was calm and regular. An hour later it was
writhing like some great reptile in the throes of mortal pain.

III.

By ten o'clock the authorities had taken the matter in hand. By some
mishap the one man who could have done most to help was lying
unconscious at Charing Cross Hospital with no chance of his throwing
any light on the subject for some days to come. Darbyshire's hurt was
not dangerous, but his recovery was a matter of time.

Meanwhile Dr. Longdale was the man of the hour. But he could not allay
the panic that had gripped London. A deadly fear had taken possession
of everybody. Longdale could hold out no hope, he could only give his
conversation with Darbyshire and declare that the bubonic microbe had
impregnated the Thames. Did he think seriously of the danger? The
answer was not reassuring. For his part Longdale would far rather see
a million of troops and a siege train battering London than hear of
such a thing as this.

There was only one thing for it. It was no time for kid glove
remedies. Six of the great London Water Companies had their supply cut
off within an hour. It is almost impossible to sit down and realise
what this means, and that under a sky like brass and the thermometer
at 97° in the shade.

Try and imagine it for a moment, and try and wonder why the thing has
not happened before. Think of two-thirds of two millions deprived
suddenly of the element which is almost as vital to existence as food.
Try and realise that these two-thirds of six millions derive their
water supply from an open stream that at any moment by the accident of
chance might be turned into a hideous poison-cup.

Under a blazing sunshine after days of heat and dust the packed East
End was suddenly deprived of every drop of water. For an hour or two
no great hardship was felt, but after that every moment added to the
agony. Before long the railway termini were packed with people eager
to be away from the metropolis.

Well-dressed business men could be seen proceeding in
cabs to the favoured area with buckets and water cans.

By midday business was at a standstill. There was not a water cart to
be seen from Kensington to the Mansion House. Every cart and tank that
could be raked together had been despatched into the New River and
Kent Water area with instructions to convey a supply as speedily as
possible to the congested districts East and South-east of the Thames.
By lunch time the City presented a strange spectacle. Well-dressed
business men could be seen proceeding in cabs to the favoured area
with buckets and water cans with the avowed object of taking a supply
forthwith. Cabmen were commanding their own prices.

Fairly early in the morning came the announcement that mineral waters
had gone up two hundred per cent. in price. By midday the supply for
the time being had ceased. Men of means with an eye to the future had
bought up the whole stock. The streets were crowded with people
anxiously waiting developments.

For the time being the scare was kept well in hand. What men were most
anxious to know, though they dared hardly whisper the question, was
whether any disease had broken out as yet. It was a little after two
o'clock that the
Evening Flashlight
settled the question. A boy came
yelling down the Strand with a flapping of papers on his shoulders.

"The plague broke out," he cried; "two cases of bubonic fever at
Limehouse. Dr. Longdale's analysis. Speshull."

There was a rush for the lad and his papers were gone in a twinkling
of an eye. He looked down dazed at the pile of silver and coppers in
the palm of his grimy hand.

Yes, there it was right enough. Two cases of bubonic plague had been
located in a crowded corner of Limehouse, and Dr. Longdale had been
called in to verify them. He had not the slightest hesitation in so
doing. Perhaps if the readers of the
Flashlight
had known these two
cases were renegades from the Santa Anna, the panic might have been
allayed. But nobody knew.

There was terror in the mere suggestion of the plague. Doubtless,
people said, these two poor fellows had drunk of the polluted flood
and paid the penalty. But no fever breaks out quite so soon as that
and within a few hours nine-tenths of the white-face multitude had
drunk of the same stream. Man turned to friend and stranger to
stranger with the same dread question in his eye. It might be the turn
of any one of them next. There were those who shrugged their shoulders
stolidly, others that crept in bars and restaurants and asked
furtively for brandy.

The streets were still packed with people waiting for fresh
information. By this time there was something like method in the
conveyance of water to the affected parts. But after all the New River
and Kent companies could not do everything. At the utmost they could
supply no more than 60,000,000 gallons per day and now they were
suddenly called upon for water for the whole of London. Just enough to
drink and keep body and soul together was all that could be expected.

In some crowded districts where great breweries and the like had been
established much was accomplished by private enterprise. There were
scores of artesian wells in East and South London and these were
generously given over at once to the requirements of the people. Even
private houses known to possess pumps were besieged and strangers of
all classes were accommodated. The situation was dreadful enough but
it would be worse if a real panic broke out.

Presently people began to press in dense masses along the Strand and
the avenues leading to Trafalgar Square where fountains by Nelson's
column were spurting high and clear. There was a continuous rush in
the direction of the Square where placards announced the fact that
there was no suggestion of contamination here. People danced and raved
about the fountain, they fought for the water, they carried it away
only to lose it again in the crush, they bent down and lifted the
precious fluid to their lips in the hollow of their hands.

Still, there was no sign of panic as yet, no more cases of fever
reported. As night fell the streets cleared and something like a
normal condition of things was restored.

IV.

It seemed indeed as if serious disaster would now be averted. All
night long a willing band of firemen and volunteers were engaged in
bringing the precious fluid to the famine stricken district. But,
including private and other wells, the available supply was little
more than 70,000,000 gallons per day and this had to be divided
amongst 6,000,000 people over an area of some thirty square miles.

And this, after all, was only a proper precaution. The New River and
Kent Companies had a face supply of 50,000,000 gallons per diem, but
this was an absolute maximum and far over the average demand.

Moreover, the drought had been a long one, and the reserve reservoirs
had been freely called upon. In a day or two the allowance would have
to be halved.

Again in the hospitals and sick households water for domestic purposes
was absolutely necessary. Meanwhile scores of the main line trains had
been knocked off to make way for trains of tanks bringing water from
the country. The Spring Gardens officials were working with superhuman
efforts.

All night long a stream of people were coming and going between
Trafalgar Square and such other open supplies as were available.
Morning came at length, with the promise of another sweltering day. A
few people turned vaguely to Parliament to do something. Two days
before the House of Commons had looked forward to prorogation on
Saturday, but there was no talk of that any longer.

The streets began to be busy again. There were smartly-dressed men
here and there with grimy chins and features frankly dirty. It seemed
strange to see individuals with good coats and spotless linen grimed
and lined with the dust of yesterday. A steady breeze was blowing so
that in a little time the dust in the streets became intolerable. The
air was full of a fine dry powder that penetrated lungs and throat,
and produced a painful thirst. It was impossible to water the roads,
so that the evil had to be endured.

There was one question on every lip, and that was whether there had
been any further spread of the plague. The authorities were
exceedingly happy to announce that no further cases had been reported.
There was comfort in the knowledge, and London breathed a little
easier. Evidently the prompt measures taken had averted all danger of
a disastrous epidemic. Gradually it became known who the sufferers
were. It was an awful price that London had to pay for the casting
away of the Santa Anna.

But that was only the spark to the powder, after all. Extraordinary
apathy and criminal carelessness were the causes of the disaster. The
knowledge a century hence that London derived its water supply from an
open river into which many towns conveyed its sewage will be recorded
with pitiful amazement. For the present we have the plain unmitigated
fact.

The yellow press made the most of it. The
Red Banner
pointed to
corruption and apathy on the part of the ruling powers; the
Red Banner

also asked if it were not a fact that our bloated legislators had a
private water supply of their own, and that, whilst the common people
were allowanced, our law makers were sipping their coffee and tea and
whiskey and water as usual?

It was the usual coarse gibe to be expected from a paper of that type,
an arrow at venture. But for once the thing was true, seeing that the
House of Commons has a private supply of water drawn from a well of
its own. As a rule, the
Banner
carried very little weight, but the
question got into the people's mouths and became a catchword. A man
had only to pass a standpipe without a struggle in its direction, to
be dubbed a member of the House of Commons, i.e., the public want did
not touch him at all.

The blazing, panting day wore on. People were beginning faintly to
understand what a water famine might mean. Everybody was grimy and
tired; in the East and West alike dingy features could be seen. As
night fell small riots broke out here and there, people were robbed of
their precious fluid as they carried it along the streets. It had
leaked out that sundry shops in different parts of London had wells,
and these establishments were stormed and looted of their contents by
thieves who took advantage of the confusion. It was only by dint of
the most strenuous exertion that the police managed to keep the upper
hand.

Another day or two of this and what would become of London? At
nightfall it became absolutely necessary to release some millions of
gallons of the condemned water for the flushing of the sewers. There
was danger here, but, on the whole, the danger was less than a wide
epidemic of diphtheria and fever. And there were people thirsty and
reckless enough to drink this water heedless of the consequences. With
characteristic imprudence, the East End had exhausted its dole early
in the day, and wild-eyed men raved through the streets yelling for
more.

From time to time the police raided and broke up these dangerous
commandoes. A well-known democratic agitator came with a following
over Westminster Bridge and violently harangued a knot of his
followers in Palace Yard. The police were caught napping for the
moment. The burly red-faced demagogue looked round the swelling sea of
sullen features and pointed to the light in the clock tower. He
started spouting the froth of his tribe.

It was all the fault of the governing body, of course. They managed
things much better on the Continent.

"If you were men," he yelled, "you'd drag them out of yonder. You'd
make them come and work like the rest of us. What said the
Banner
to-day?
Your bloated rulers are all right; they don't want for anything.
At the present moment they have plenty of the water that you'd sell
your souls for."

"If you'll lead the way, we'll follow," said a voice hoarsely.

The orator glanced furtively around. There was not a single police
helmet to be seen, nothing but five or six hundred desperate men ready
for anything.

"Then come along," he yelled. "We'll make history to-night."

He strode towards the House followed by a yelling mob. The few police
inside were tossed here and there like dry leaves in a flood; the
quiet decorum of the lobby was broken up, a white-faced member fled
into the chamber and declared that London was in riot and that a mob
of desperadoes were here bent on wrecking the mother of parliaments.

An interminable debate on some utterly useless question was in
progress, the Speaker nodded wearily under the weight of his robes and
wig, the green benches were dotted with members all utterly overcome
with the stifling heat. There was to be a big division about midnight,
so that the smoking-room and bars and terraces were full of members.

The mob filled the chamber, yelling and shouting. It was in
vain that the Speaker tried to make his voice heard above the din.

The Speaker looked up sharply. A stinging reproof was on the tip of
his tongue. He had scarcely uttered a word, before, as if by magic,
the green benches were swarming with the mob. It filled the chamber,
yelling and shouting. It was in vain that the Speaker tried to make
his voice heard above the din.

A glass of water and a bottle stood on the table before him. One of
the intruders more audacious than the rest snatched up the glass and
emptied it. A mighty roar of applause followed the audacious act. As
yet the mob was fairly good-humoured, though there was no knowing what
their mood would be presently.

"It's that confounded
Banner
," one member of the government groaned to
another. "They have come after our private supply. Can't one of you
get to the telephone and call up Scotland Yard?"

Meanwhile the mob were inclined to be sportive. They surged forward to
the table driving the Speaker back behind the chair, they overturned
the table and scattered books and papers in all directions. The
foreign element in the company started singing the
Marseillaise
in
strident tones. The martial spirit of it fired the blood of the
others.

"We are wasting time here," someone cried. "There are bars and dining-rooms.
As we came in I heard the rattle of glasses. This way."

The crowd reeled back as if one motion controlled them all. There was
still the same note of laughter in the roar and all might have been
well yet, but for the advent of a small, but determined body of
police. They charged fiercely into the mob, and in the twinkling of an
eye farces gave way to tragedy.

In less time than it takes to tell the police were beaten back with
one or two of their number badly hurt, whilst the forefront of the
visitors had not come off any better. The popular chamber had become a
wreck; outside in the lobby broken furniture was scattered about
everywhere.

Then the tide of humanity surged into the bars and dining-rooms. A few
frightened attendants and waiters still stuck to their posts. The
sight of the glasses and bottles of water about seemed to madden the
mob. They demanded that all the taps should be turned on, the fittings
were wrenched away amidst a perfect tornado of applause, soon the
floors were swimming with the element that all London was clamouring
for outside.

The rooms were strewn with broken glass and china, the floors were
damp and soppy with the wasted water. Here and there men were feasting
on looted food. Never had anything like this been seen in any
parliament before. A few courageous members vainly trying to stop the
din wondered where were the police.

But they were coming. They did come presently, two hundred of them,
steady, stern, and disciplined, and before them the rioters fled like
chaff before the wind. Five more minutes and the House was cleared.
But the damage was great.

Outside a dense mass of people had gathered, attracted by the news of
the riot. They were in no mood to take the side of law and order and
it was with great difficulty that the ring-leaders of the late affray
were got away safely. A thin high voice a long way off in the back of
the crowd was shouting something which seemed to at once arrest
attention. A sullen murmur came up to Palace Yard. The loose jeers of
the mob ceased as if by magic.

"What are they saying?" an Irish member asked.

"I can't quite catch it," another member said, "but it's something
about water in Trafalgar Square. I shouldn't wonder if——"

Just for an instant the roar broke out again. There was a note of fear
in it this time. The babel of voices yelled one against the other.
Gradually it was possible to make something out of it.

"By Jove, it's as I feared," the Irish member said. "The spring under
the Trafalgar Square fountain has given out. It's a public calamity.
See, they are all off. No more row to-night."

The great crowd was melting away with marvellous rapidity. Each man
there wanted to verify this new disaster for himself. The mob streamed
along towards the Square as if life and death hung in the balance. If
fortune had lain there they could not have fought or struggled harder.
In the heat and the strife many fell by the way, but they lay there
unheeded.

The cool fountain no longer played. People who had come from afar with
vessels for the precious fluid cast them on the ground passionately
and cursed aloud. The disaster was so great, it appeared so
overwhelming that the cruel mood of the mob was held in check for the
time. Taking advantage, the police shepherded the mob here and there
until comparative quiet was restored. Dr. Longdale, on his way home,
paused to contemplate the scene.

"'Blucher or night,'" he murmured, "Darbyshire or morning, rather. I'd
give my practice to have a few words with Darbyshire now. I'll just
call at the Charing Cross Hospital and see how he is."

It was comparatively quiet in the Strand by this time. Four or five
stalwart constables stood on the steps of the hospital as a safeguard,
for there was no lack of water there. A house-surgeon came
hurrying out.

"I am very glad to see you," he said. "I was just going to send for
you. Dr. Darby——"

"Good heaven, you don't mean to say he is worse!"

"On the contrary, much better; quite sensible, in fact; and he
declines to think about sleep until he has seen you."

V.

If the sweltering heat that hung over London added in one way to the
terror of the hour, it was not without a beneficent effect in another
direction. Under such a sky, and with a barometer somewhere in the
nineties, it was impossible for rioting to last long at a stretch.

The early hours of dawn saw London comparatively quiet again. Perhaps
it was no more than the sleep of exhaustion and sullen despair,
perhaps the flame might break out again with the coming of the day.
Down in the East End a constant struggle was maintained, a struggle
between the industrious and prudent and those who depended upon luck
or the power of the strong arm.

The day came again with the promise of another round of blazing hours.
At first there were no signs of lawlessness, nothing more than an
eager jostling stream of people pushing impatiently towards the
districts where water could be obtained. These were the folks who
preferred to get their own instead of waiting for the carts or tanks
to visit them.

Naturally, the Press was full of good advice. Thousands of
correspondents had rushed into print with many a grotesque suggestion
for getting rid of the difficulty. Amongst these ingenious inventions
was one that immediately arrested popular attention. The writer
pointed out that there were other things to quench thirst besides
water. There were hundred of tons of fruit in London, it came up from
the provinces by the trainload every day, foreign vessels brought
consignments to the Thames and the Mersey. Let the Government pour all
this into London and distribute it free in a systematic way.

This letter appeared in three popular papers. The thing was talked
about from one end of London to the other. It was discussed in
Whitechapel and eagerly debated in the West End clubs.

Instantly the whole metropolis had a wild longing for fruit. Some of
the shops were cleared out directly at extraordinary prices. Grapes
usually sold at a shilling or two the pound now fetched twenty times
their value. A costermonger in the Strand with a barrow of oranges
suddenly found himself a comparatively rich man. Towards midday
crowds began to gather before the big fruit stores, and in the
neighbourhood of Covent Garden traffic was impossible.

Prices went leaping up as if fruit had become as extinct as the dodo.

Still the stuff came pouring in in response to urgent telegrams. It
looked as if the dealers were bent upon making a fortune out of the
public mood. Like lightning the news of what was happening flashed
over London, and gradually the approaches to Covent Garden were packed
with people.

Another man, amidst the yells
of the crowd, sprang to the
top of the load and whirled
a basket of apples far
and wide.

Presently curiosity was followed by a sullen resentment. Who were
these men that they should be allowed to fatten on public misfortune?
These things ought to have been given away if only on the ground of
mere public policy. Through the crush came a waggon-load of baskets
and boxes. A determined-looking mechanic stopped the horses whilst
another man, amidst the yells of the crowd, sprang to the top of the
load and whirled a basket of apples far and wide.

"You've got too heavy a load, matey," he said grimly to the driver.

The man grinned meaningly. He was benefiting nothing by the new order
of things. He took an apple and began to eat it himself. In a few
minutes every speck of fruit had disappeared.

The thing was done spontaneously and in perfect order. One moment the
market had been absolutely crammed with fruit of all kinds, an hour
afterwards it was empty.

It was a fairly good-humoured crowd, if a little grim, as yet. But the
authorities had serious faces, whilst quite half the police in streets
looked shy and out of place as well they might be seeing that several
thousand of them had been drafted into London from all parts of the
country. Towards midday a sport was added to the amusement of the
great mobs that packed the main streets. There was not the slightest
reason why all London should not be at work as usual, but, by mutual
consent, the daily toil had come to a standstill. It was grilling hot
with a sun that made the pavement gleam and tremble in the shimmering
haze and there was little to quench the thirst of the multitude. But
then did not London teem from end to end with places of public
entertainment where thirsts were specially catered for?

Already sections of the crowd had begun to enter them and call loudly
for sundry liquids. Why should the hotel proprietors get off scot
free? Mysteriously as the sign that called up the Indian Mutiny, the
signal went round to raid the public houses. There was no call to
repeat it twice.

Everybody suffered alike. The bars were choked and packed with
perspiring humanity yelling for liquid refreshment, the men who were
wise bowed to the inevitable and served out their stock till it was
exhausted and said so with cheerful faces. In the Strand the cellars
of certain famous restaurants were looted and one proprietor
proclaimed that Whitechapel and Shoreditch had taken from him wines to
the value of £30,000. Men were standing in the Strand with strange
dusty bottles in their hands, the necks of which they knocked off
without ceremony to reach the precious liquid within. For the most
part they were disappointed. There were murmurs of disgust and wry
faces at the stored juice of the grape that a connoisseur would have
raved over.

Fortunately there was little or no drunkenness. The crowd was too vast
and the supply too limited for that. And practically there was no
rioting where the unfortunate license holders were discreet enough to
bow to the inevitable. One or two places were gutted under the eyes of
the police who could do no more than keep a decent show of order and
bustle about certain suspicious characters who were present for
something more than curiosity.

About one o'clock in the afternoon the early edition of the evening
papers began to appear. They were eagerly bought up with a view to the
latest news. Presently the name of the
Mirror
seemed to rise
spontaneously to every lip. Nobody knew whence it came or why, but
there it was. With one accord everybody was calling for the
Mirror
.
There was pregnant news within. Yet none of the papers could be seen
in the streets. There was a rush to the office of the paper.

A large flag floated on the top of the building. Across the front was
a white sheet with words upon it that thrilled the heart of the
spectator.

"The panic is at an end. London to use its full water supply again.
Dr. Darbyshire saves the situation. The mains turned on everywhere.
See the
Mirror
."

What could it mean? In the sudden silence the roar of the
Mirror

printing presses could be heard. Presently the big doors in the
basement burst open and hundreds of copies of the paper were pitched
into the street. No payment was asked and none was expected. A white
sea of rustling sheets fluttered over men's heads as far as the
Strand. Up there the turncocks were busy flushing the gutters with
standpipes, a row of fire engines was proceeding to wash the streets
down from the mains. The whole thing was so sudden and unexpected that
it seemed like a dream.

Who was this same Dr. Darbyshire who had brought this miracle about?
But it was all in the
Mirror
for everyone to see who could read.

"Very late last night Dr. Longdale the well-known hygienic specialist
was called to Charing Cross Hospital to see Dr. Darbyshire who the
night before had been taken to that institution with concussion of the
brain. It may not be generally known that Dr. Darbyshire discovered
the bubonic plague bacillus in the Thames which led to the wholesale
cutting off of the London Water Supply.

"Unfortunately the only man who might have been able to grapple with
the difficulty was placed
hors de combat
. We know now that if nothing
had happened to him there would have been no scare at all.
Unfortunately the bacillus story found its way to the office of a
contemporary, who did not hesitate to make capital out of the dreadful
discovery. The dire result that followed on the publication of the

Telephone
we already know to our cost.

"To obviate that calamity Dr. Darbyshire was on his way to the

Telephone
office when he met with his accident. Late last night the
learned gentleman had so far recovered as to ask full particulars of
what had happened and also to see Dr. Longdale without delay.

"Judge of the surprise and delight of the latter to know that matters
had been already remedied. It appears that for years past Dr.
Darbyshire has been experimenting upon contaminated water with a view
to making the same innocuous to human life. Quite recently the
discovery has been perfectly and successfully tried with water
impregnated with the germs of every known disease. So long as so many
great towns draw their water supply from open streams liable to all
kinds of contamination, Dr. Darbyshire felt sure there would be no
public safety till the remedy was found.

"The remedy had been found and would have been made public directly,
when there came the now historic case of the Santa Anna and the
alarming outbreak of bubonic fever at Ashchurch.

"On reaching the village in question and on verifying his suspicions,
Dr. Darbyshire found that the waters of the Thames were strongly
impregnated with the germs of that fell disease. As a matter of fact,
the sterilising process was applied at once, and an examination of the
water of the Thames a few miles lower down gave the result of absolute
purity.

"This part of the story Dr. Darbyshire had no time to tell his
colleague Dr. Longdale. He was only too anxious to get away and
prevent the issue of a scare leader by the
Telephone
.

"Accident prevented this design, and when Dr. Longdale was questioned
he was bound to admit that he had seen the Thames water strongly
impregnated with the bubonic bacillus. After that there was no
alternative but to cut off the supply from the Thames. Let us hope the
severe lesson has not been in vain.

"Once these facts came to Dr. Longdale's notice, he lost no time. A
special train was dispatched to Ashchurch, and returned quickly,
bringing specimens of water from the Thames.

"These, after investigation, a small body of leading specialists drank
without the slightest hesitation. The new process of sterilisation
discovered by Dr. Darbyshire has saved the situation. Otherwise it
would have been impossible to magnify the disaster."

Did ever a quiet and dignified newspaper paragraph produce such a
sensational outbreak in the history of journalism? Nobody needed to be
convinced of the truth of the statement—truth was on the face of it.
Men shook one another by the hand, hats were cast into the air and
forgotten heedless of the blazing sun; up in the Strand where fire-engines
were sluicing the streets with water people stood under the
beating drip of the precious fluid until they were soaked to the skin;
well-dressed men laved themselves in the clear running gutters with an
eagerness that the pursuit of gold never surpassed. London was saved
from disaster, and Dr. Darbyshire was the hero of the hour.

The great man was sitting up in bed and modestly listening to the
story that Longdale had to tell. Darbyshire was blaming himself
severely.

"I ought to have told you," he said. "When I asked you to come round
to me the other night I had a dramatic surprise for you. I told you
all about the fever and the state of the Thames. From the condition of
the germs I knew that the trouble had not gone far. Here was a chance
to test my sterilisation on a big scale. I tried it with perfect
success. I'll show you the whole process the first time I get back
home."

"Yes, do," said Longdale grimly. "It's all right as it is, but if you
meet with another accident and another such scourge comes along and we
don't know——"

"I quite understand. When I had worked upon your feelings, I was going
to show you the whole thing. Then I found out what that fellow Chase
had got hold of, and I had to fly off post haste and see his editor. I
didn't mind the paper having its 'scare' so long as I came in at the
finish with the assurance that there was no need for alarm.

"Hence my hurry, and hence my accident. All the same, it was a mean
thing, Longdale. Some day perhaps the country will realise what a debt
it owes to its men of science."

Longdale looked at the yelling joyous mob outside heedless of the
sunshine and reckless in the hysteria of the moment.

"And perhaps the country will foster them a little more," he said.
"Nothing but science could have prevented a calamity that would have
multiplied ten-fold the horrors of the Great Plague, and destroyed,
not thousands, but tens of thousands."

Darbyshire nodded thoughtfully.

"One of the things that might have been," he said.

"Might have been! We have had a lesson, but I doubt if we shall profit
by it. England never seems to profit by anything. It is one of the
things that may be. And there is more difference than meets the eye."

THE END.

End of Project Gutenberg's The Doom of London, by Frederick Merrick White

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DOOM OF LONDON ***

***** This file should be named 57904-h.htm or 57904-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/7/9/0/57904/

Produced by Clare Graham & Marc D'Hooghe at Free Literature
(Images generously made available by the Hathi Trust)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.