The Project Gutenberg EBook of Petersburg National Military Park, Virginia, by
Richard Wayne Lykes

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Petersburg National Military Park, Virginia
National Park Service Historical Handbook Series No. 13

Author: Richard Wayne Lykes

Release Date: January 1, 2019 [EBook #58588]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PETERSBURG NATIONAL MILITARY PARK ***

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

Stewart L. Udall,
Secretary

NATIONAL PARK SERVICE

Conrad L. Wirth,
Director

HISTORICAL HANDBOOK NUMBER THIRTEEN

This publication is one of a series of handbooks describing the
historical and archeological areas in the National Park System
administered by the National Park Service of the United States
Department of the Interior. It is printed by the Government
Printing Office and may be purchased from the Superintendent of
Documents, Washington 25, D. C.

Price 25 cents.

PETERSBURG

National Military Park, Virginia

by Richard Wayne Lykes

NATIONAL PARK SERVICE HISTORICAL HANDBOOK SERIES NO. 13

Washington, D. C., 1951

(Reprint 1961)

The National Park System, of which this area is a unit,
is dedicated to conserving the scenic, scientific, and
historic heritage of the United States for the benefit and
inspiration of its people.

Contents

Page

The Union Strategy of 1864
2

The Strategic Importance of Petersburg
4

The Battle of Petersburg, June 15-18, 1864
8

First Union Attempt on the Weldon Railroad
11

The Battle of the Crater, July 30, 1864
12

The Fight for the Weldon Railroad
22

Union Encirclement Continues
25

The South Strikes Back—the Battle of Fort Stedman
34

Union Encirclement Becomes a Reality
39

The Fall of the City
43

Guide to the Area
46

How to Reach the Park
55

Administration
56

Related Areas
56

Visitor Facilities
56

TABLE OF EVENTS

I.
Events in 1864 Preceding the Campaign

Mar. 9. U. S. Grant made commander in chief of the Union armies.

May 4. Butler and the Army of the James capture City Point, Virginia.

May 5-7. Battle of the Wilderness.

May 8-19. Battle of Spotsylvania Court House.

May 23. Battle of North Anna River.

May 29. Battle of Totopotomoy Creek.

June 3. Battle of Cold Harbor.

June 9. Raid by Union cavalry on Petersburg lines.

II.
Events in 1864 During the Campaign

June 15-18. Opening Battle of Petersburg.

June 22-23. Union attack on Weldon Railroad repulsed.

July 30. Battle of the Crater.

Aug. 18-21. Union forces capture the Weldon Railroad.

Aug. 25. Battle of Reams Station.

Sept. 14-17. Hampton’s cavalry raid on Union beef supply.

Sept. 29-Oct. 1. Battle of Peebles’ Farm and Capture of Fort Harrison.

Oct. 19. Battle of Cedar Creek.

Oct. 27. Battle of Burgess’ Mill.

III.
Events in 1865 During the Campaign

Feb. 5-7. Battle of the Boydton Plank Road.

Mar. 25. Battle of Fort Stedman.

Apr. 1. Battle of Five Forks.

Apr. 2. General Union attacks on Confederate lines outside Petersburg.

Apr. 3. Union troops enter Richmond and Petersburg.

Apr. 9. Lee and the Army of Northern Virginia surrender at Appomattox Court House.

Frontispiece
:
View of Petersburg in 1865 looking south
across the Appomattox River.
Courtesy, National Archives.

1

In the final year of the Civil war in the East, the fighting centered upon Petersburg,
an important supply depot for the Richmond area. After 10 months of
combat, both from behind prepared positions and along the main routes of supply,
the Confederates were forced to give up Petersburg and Richmond on April
2, 1865. One week later Lee surrendered the Army of Northern Virginia at
Appomattox Court House.

By June of 1864, the Civil War lay heavily on both the North and the
South. For more than 3 years the two antagonists—the Blue and the
Gray—had struggled to determine the fate of the Union.

The capitals of the embattled forces stood only 110 miles apart. But
these miles of rolling Virginia countryside which separated Richmond
from Washington had proven exceedingly difficult for the Union forces
to cross. Various Northern generals had been placed in command of the
Army of the Potomac and had faced Lee’s Army of Northern Virginia.
So far not one had been successful in destroying Lee’s army or in
capturing Richmond.

Perhaps Gen. George B. McClellan had come the closest to success
when in the late spring and early summer of 1862 the Northern troops
had threatened the Confederate capital, only to be repulsed on the outskirts.
The other Northern commanders who followed McClellan, such
as Pope, Burnside, and Hooker, were less successful. Their drives had
been met and turned aside by Lee, the able Southern guardian of
Richmond.

After 36 months of bitter conflict the war in the East seemed, to many
observers, to be far from a final settlement. The failure of Union forces
to deliver a decisive blow against the Army of Northern Virginia was a
source of growing concern in Washington. The Confederacy, for its part,
was no more successful in settling the issue. Attempted invasions of the
Northern States by Lee were turned back at Antietam in September 1862
and at Gettysburg in July 1863.

2

Lt. Gen. Ulysses S. Grant, Union commander
at Petersburg.
Courtesy, National Archives.

Gen. Robert E. Lee, Confederate commander
at Petersburg.
Courtesy, National Archives.

Farther west the picture was brighter for Northern hopes. In the same
month as the Battle of Gettysburg, the town of Vicksburg, Miss., fell
into Union hands. A few days later, July 9, 1863, Port Hudson, the last
remaining stronghold of the Confederacy on the banks of the Mississippi
River, surrendered. Later in 1863, the Union capture of Chattanooga,
Tenn., threw open the gateway to Georgia and South Carolina.

Strategically, despite the stalemate in Virginia, the beginning of 1864
found the Northern armies in a stronger position than the Confederate
military forces. Not only was there a distinct possibility that the South
could be split into two parts, but the greater resources at the command
of the Lincoln administration were beginning to count more heavily
with each passing day. All that seemed to be needed to end the war was
an able Union commander who could marshal the mighty resources of
his country for a last tremendous blow at the South. Such a man was
found in Gen. Ulysses S. Grant, the victor at Vicksburg and Chattanooga,
who was made commander in chief of all the Union armies on March
9, 1864.

The Union Strategy of 1864

To accomplish the conquest of the Confederacy the Northern plan called
for a huge two-pronged attack. Gen. William T. Sherman was in command
of the southern prong which was assigned the task of capturing
Atlanta, marching to the sea, and then turning north to effect a junction
with Grant. Opposed to Sherman was the Army of Tennessee led by
Gen. Joseph E. Johnston.

3

It was the upper arm of the movement which was directly concerned
with Richmond and Petersburg. This was composed of two armies: the
Army of the Potomac and the Army of the James. It was the task of
these armies to capture Richmond, crush the Army of Northern Virginia,
and march south toward Sherman.

The story of the Army of the James in the early phase of the offensive
may be briefly told. Gen. Benjamin F. Butler was ordered to advance
upon Richmond from the south and threaten communications between
the Confederate capital and the Southern States. With some 40,000
Union troops the advance was begun. City Point, located at the junction
of the James and Appomattox Rivers and soon to be the supply center
for the attack on Petersburg, was captured on May 4, 1864. Within 2
weeks, however, a numerically inferior Confederate force shut up the
Army of the James, “as if it had been in a bottle strongly corked,” in
Bermuda Hundred, a loop formed by the winding James and Appomattox
Rivers. Here Butler waited, while north of him the Army of the Potomac
and the Army of Northern Virginia engaged in a series of bloody battles.

THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGN

1864-65

WILDERNESS

MAY 5-7, 1864

SPOTSYLVANIA

MAY 8-19, 1864

COLD HARBOR

JUNE 3, 1864

PETERSBURG CAMPAIGN

JUNE 1864-April 1865

Five Forks

April 1, 1865

AMELIA COURT HOUSE

SAYLOR’S CREEK

APRIL 6, 1865

APPOMATTOX COURT HOUSE

APRIL 9, 1865

4

The Battle of the Wilderness, May 5-7, 1864, began what proved to
be the start of the final campaign against the Army of Northern Virginia.
Here the Army of the Potomac, commanded by Gen. George G. Meade
and numbering approximately 118,000 troops, fought the Confederate
defenders of Richmond. Lee had about 62,000 men with him, while an
additional 30,000 under Gen. P. G. T. Beauregard held the Richmond-Petersburg
area. The battle resulted in a fearful loss of men on both
sides, although the armies remained intact. This was followed by an
equally heavy series of engagements around Spotsylvania Court House
from May 8 to 19.

Failing to destroy the Army of Northern Virginia in these battles,
Grant moved the Army of the Potomac to the east of Richmond. It was
his hope that he would outflank the Confederate defenders by persistent
night marches. Lee was not to be so easily outguessed, however, and after
minor battles at the North Anna River (May 23) and Totopotomoy Creek
(May 29), Grant arrived at Cold Harbor, about 8 miles east of Richmond.
Between him and that city stood Lee’s army. On June 3, 2 days
after he arrived at Cold Harbor, Grant ordered a direct frontal assault.
He was repulsed with heavy losses.

This was the situation at the end of the first month of Grant’s
campaign:

1. Both sides had suffered heavy casualties. The approximate percentage
of casualties to total strength, including reinforcements, was 31
percent for the North and 32 percent for the South.

2. The ability of the Union to refill the depleted ranks was greater
than that of the Confederacy.

3. The offensive strength of Lee had been sapped. From the time of
the Battle of Spotsylvania Court House until the end of the war, except
for local, small-scale actions, the Army of Northern Virginia was a
defensive weapon only. This Army, although hurt, had not been crushed,
and the Confederate flag still waved over Richmond.

In June, after Cold Harbor, Grant decided to turn quickly to the south
of Richmond and isolate the city and the defending troops by cutting
the railroads which supplied it. To do this he would need to attack
Petersburg.

The Strategic Importance of Petersburg

According to the United States census of 1860, Petersburg was a city
of 18,266 people. It was situated on the southern bank of the Appomattox
River less than 8 miles from City Point, the place where the Appomattox
joins the James; 23 miles north was Richmond. As the war progressed
and the territory to the north and east was shut off, Richmond became
increasingly dependent on Petersburg for supplies. Through it passed a
constant stream of war materials and necessities of life from the South
to sustain the straining war effort. In short, Petersburg was a road and
rail center of considerable importance to the Confederacy.

5

Map showing the network of railroads
and the strategic location of Petersburg to
Richmond. The shaded area is the approximate
line of Union control in early 1864. The three
arrows indicate the major drives planned by the
Union Army for 1864. (Railroads serving Richmond
and Petersburg are in heavy lines.)

Railroads and important roads serving Petersburg in
1864. The dashed line indicates the original
Confederate defense line built in 1862-63.
January 1951, NMP-PET-7006

Railroads

Richmond and Petersburg R. R.

City Point R. R.

Southside R. R.

Norfolk and Petersburg R. R.

Petersburg and Weldon R. R.

Roads

Richmond Turnpike

CITY POINT ROAD

JORDAN POINT ROAD

PRINCE GEORGE C. H. ROAD

BAXTER ROAD

JERUSALEM PLANK ROAD

BOYDTON PLANK ROAD

ORIGINAL CONFEDERATE LINE

COX ROAD

SQUIRREL LEVEL ROAD

HALIFAX ROAD

VAUGHAN ROAD

Confederate defenses

BATTERY 5

ORIGINAL CONFEDERATE LINE (THE “DIMMOCK LINE”)

6

The transportation vehicles of that day did not require the wide,
straight highways of the present. However, several good roads came into
the city from the east, south, and west where they effected a junction
with the Richmond Turnpike. Along these roads passed supply wagons,
couriers, and, on occasion, troops on their way to repel the foe. Several
were built of logs laid across the road to form a hard surface. Because of
this they were called “plank roads.” Thus two of the most important
arteries of traffic into Petersburg were the Jerusalem Plank Road, connecting
Petersburg with Jerusalem (now Courtland), Va., and the
Boydton Plank Road which led south through Dinwiddie Court House.
Among others of importance were the City Point, Prince George Court
House, Baxter, Halifax, Squirrel Level, and Cox Roads.

It was the railroads, more than the highways, however, which imparted
a significance to Petersburg out of all proportion to its size. Confederate
leaders were painfully aware that loss of control over their small and
harassed network of railroads would mean the loss of the war. Since
Petersburg was a point of convergence for five lines, it was of great
importance to the South. As other lines of supply were cut off or
threatened, the dependence of Richmond upon Petersburg increased. By
June 1864 all but one railroad from the south into the Confederate
capital—the Richmond and Danville Railroad—passed through
Petersburg.

Tracks radiated from Petersburg in all directions. The Richmond and
Petersburg Railroad left the city to the north. The Southside Railroad
ran west to Lynchburg, while the Petersburg and Weldon Railroad led
south to North Carolina. The Norfolk and Petersburg Railroad passed
through a ravine east of the city before turning southeast in the direction
of Norfolk. For good measure the Petersburg and City Point Railroad
struck out for the hamlet of City Point, situated at the junction of the
James and Appomattox Rivers 8 miles away. Because of its proximity,
Petersburg was a part of the transportation system of the Confederate
capital. It served as a major point of transfer to the larger metropolis for
products and materials from the vast region to the south.

In the spring of 1862, McClellan had threatened Richmond from the
east and southeast. This “Peninsular Campaign” made the defenders of
Richmond acutely aware of the need for a system of fortifications around
Petersburg. In August of that same year a defense line was begun, and
work continued until its completion about a year later. Capt. Charles H.
Dimmock was in charge of it under the direction of the Engineer
Bureau, Confederate States Army, and the line so constructed became
unofficially known as the “Dimmock Line.”

When finished, the chain of breastworks and artillery emplacements
around Petersburg was 10 miles long. It began and ended on the
Appomattox River and protected all but the northern approaches to the

7

city. The 55 artillery batteries were consecutively numbered from east to
west. Although natural terrain features were utilized whenever possible,
some glaring weaknesses existed. For example, between Batteries 7 and
8 lay a deep ravine which could provide a means of penetration by an
attacking force. The very length and size of the fortifications proved to
be a disadvantage. It meant that a larger number of troops would be
necessary to defend the line than General Beauregard, charged with this
heavy responsibility, had present for duty. Col. Alfred Roman, an aide-de-camp
of Beauregard, estimated that the long “Dimmock Line” would
take more than 10 times as many men to defend as were available.

Gen. P. G. T. Beauregard, who held the Confederate defense line before
Petersburg until Lee arrived.
Courtesy, National Archives.

The first serious threat to the untested line occurred when the Army
of the James was dispatched to approach Richmond from the southeast
by way of the James River. Although, the Army of the James was soon
neutralized by being bottled up in Bermuda Hundred by a smaller Confederate
force, it would be wrong to assume that the Union force was
completely out of the picture. It not only immobilized a considerable
number of Confederate soldiers assigned to guard it, but it provided a
reservoir of troops for operations in other parts of the field. On several
occasions raids were made on the railroads south and west of Petersburg.
The most serious of these occurred on June 9, 1864, when 3,000 infantry
and 1,300 cavalry appeared in force along the eastern sector of the Dimmock
Line. The infantry contented itself with a menacing demonstration,
but the cavalry attacked on the Jerusalem Plank Road. It was halted by
the joint efforts of regular Southern Army units assisted by a hastily
summoned home guard of old men and youths. The damage done by

8

raids such as this was quickly patched up, but they were a constant nuisance
to the city’s transportation lines. To shut off permanently the
supplies that streamed along the railroads, the Union commanders
realized that it would be necessary to take permanent physical possession
of them.

The Battle of Petersburg, June 15-18, 1864

After the Battle of Cold Harbor on June 3, Grant had abandoned, for a
time at least, his plan to capture Richmond by direct assault. With characteristic
zeal he had ordered Meade to move the Army of the Potomac
across the James River and to invest the more southerly city. On June
14 Grant and Butler conferred at Bermuda Hundred. At that time orders
were given for the attack on Petersburg.

The first of the Northern forces to arrive on the scene of battle was
the XVIII Corps of the Army of the James. Early in the morning of
June 15 these troops, commanded by Gen. William F. Smith, crossed
from Bermuda Hundred to the south side of the Appomattox by means
of a pontoon bridge at Broadway Landing. Eighteen thousand Union
soldiers were on their way to face less than 4,000 under Beauregard.
Throughout the day they approached the city and assembled for the
attack.

The Union offensive opened shortly after 7 p. m. on June 15. Among
the first places to fall was Battery 5, one of the strongest of the Confederate
positions. Entering the ravine between Batteries 7 and 8, Smith’s
men were able to approach Battery 5 and take it from the rear, the direction
from which an attack was least expected. Within a few hours
Beauregard had lost not only Battery 5 but all the line for more than a
mile south. The defenders withdrew and threw up a hasty entrenchment
along Harrison’s Creek, well to the rear of the captured section of the
line. While this Confederate retreat was taking place, the Union II
Corps, commanded by Gen. Winfield S. Hancock, arrived to reinforce
the attacking columns.

The appearance on the field of the II Corps was an ominous sign for
the Confederacy. While the initial attacks were taking place on June 15,
the Army of the Potomac had been busily engaged in crossing the James
River farther to the east, on pontoon bridges. The number of Union
troops south of the river was increasing hourly until by midnight of
June 16 the entire army, numbering at least 90,000, had crossed.

Darkness ended the fighting on June 15, but early the next day the
attacks were renewed. More of the defense line south of the portion captured
the previous day now gave way. In response to repeated entreaties
from Beauregard throughout June 15 and 16, Lee ordered more divisions
to the support of Petersburg. This necessitated the draining of precious
reserves from the Richmond lines. By dusk of that second day Beauregard

9

could muster about 14,000 to face the enemy. Thus, the center of attention
rapidly shifted from Richmond to Petersburg, which had so recently
seemed of but secondary importance.

Broadway Landing on the Appomattox River where the XVIII
Corps of the Army of the James crossed on June 15, 1864. It was
later used as an ordnance depot by the Union Army.
Courtesy,
National Archives.

Pontoon bridge at Broadway Landing constructed by the Union
Army in 1864.
Courtesy, National Archives.

The third day of battle was practically a repetition of that of the preceding
day. Again the Northern forces attacked the Confederate troops,
concentrating their efforts to the south of the positions captured earlier.
Again the Confederates were forced to draw back. A decisive breakthrough
of the opposing line was now anticipated by the assaulting

10

forces. At about 12:30 a. m., June 18, Beauregard ordered his troops to
begin a withdrawal to new positions about a mile closer to the city.
Throughout the early morning hours of that day Beauregard had his men
busily engaged in the construction of this defense line. Colonel Roman,
aide to Beauregard, later recalled that “without a moment’s rest the
digging of the trenches was begun, with such utensils as had been hastily
collected at Petersburg, many of the men using their bayonets, their
knives, and even their tin cans, to assist in the rapid execution of the
work.”

A general assault was ordered for the Union forces at 4 a. m. on June
18. When the attack began it was soon discovered that the ranks of the
enemy had not been broken nor had the city fallen into Northern hands.
The eastern section of the Dimmock Line was empty except for a thin
line of skirmishers who were gradually forced back. The Northern
troops came on, crossing the Norfolk and Petersburg Railroad south of
where the defenders had constructed their line. The advance continued
until they were brought face to face with the muzzles of the defender’s
guns. Meanwhile, elements of Lee’s command continued pouring in to
aid their comrades. Lee, himself, came down from his temporary headquarters
near Chester, Va., to direct the defense operations in person.

Throughout that June Saturday, brisk action occurred on the new
Petersburg front. The major Union drive, involving elements of four
corps, came about 3 p. m. Artillery hammered the Confederates. Charges
of infantry were made only to be hurled back. During the course of one
of these futile drives the 1st Maine Heavy Artillery, according to William
F. Fox (
Regimental Losses in the American Civil War
), suffered the most
severe losses of any regiment in a single engagement of the entire war.
About 4 p. m. this unit, 850 strong, charged from the concealment of
the Prince George Court House Road north of where Fort Stedman was
soon to stand. Met by a heavy crossfire, it withdrew in less than one-half
hour, with 632 casualties.

As on the previous days, fighting ended with the coming of darkness.
Grant’s attempt to capture Petersburg had failed, with a loss of 10,000
men; but his efforts could not be considered entirely unsuccessful. Two
of the railroads leading into the city had been cut, and several roads were
in Union hands. Behind the Northern troops was City Point which
Grant speedily converted into a huge supply base.

The major result of the opening 4 days of combat, however, was the
failure of the Federal forces to break the Confederate defense line. First
Beauregard, and then Lee, had held against heavy odds. They had been
pushed back closer to their base—but they had held. Possibly if Smith
had advanced his XVIII Corps farther into the defenses on the opening
night, Petersburg would have fallen on June 15 or 16. But that had not
been done, and the campaign was to run nearly 10 more months.

The lines of battle before Petersburg were clearly drawn. Between
47,000 and 51,000 men defended it against 111,000 to 113,000 besiegers.

11

The defenses of Richmond now stretched from White Oak Swamp, east
of that city, south to the Jerusalem Plank Road, 26 miles away. The fate
of the Army of Northern Virginia—of the Confederate capital itself—would
depend upon the outcome of the drive against Petersburg.

First Union Attempt on the Weldon Railroad

The Union Army, having failed in its initial attack on Petersburg, was
now committed to doing something further to effect its capture.

The period from June 19 to July 9 was spent in three types of activity.
First, elements of the army were set to work consolidating the positions
captured in the 4-day battle and constructing the devices needed for siege
operations. A second type of effort consisted of jabbing thrusts at the
important supply routes into Petersburg. The last was a reconnoitering
of the Confederate defenses to determine a plan which would result in
the fall of the city.

A threatening movement toward the Weldon Railroad was soon made
by the Northern troops. Three days after the failure to capture the city
a small force began to push to the southwest of Grant’s flank on the
Jerusalem Plank Road. The following day, June 22, Confederate divisions
led by Generals Cadmus M. Wilcox and William Mahone advanced
from the defense line south of Petersburg and forced the Union troops
to a temporary halt.

The next morning saw the resumption of the advance toward the
Weldon Railroad. A small cavalry force was successful in reaching the
tracks on the 23d, and it promptly started the work of destruction which
was its mission. Alarmed by the threat to this important supply line, the
Confederates launched a sharp attack which forced the withdrawal of the
Union forces from the vicinity of the railroad. However, the Union lines
confronting Petersburg had been extended across the Jerusalem Plank
Road, thus cutting off its use to the city.

In itself the battle of June 22-23 was not important. The North could
quickly replace the loss of 2,300 men. The railroad, although its days
were numbered, was still able to deliver a few supplies to Petersburg.
But as an indication of Grant’s tactics, it pointed the course of the campaign
ahead. It marked the first of several attempts to encircle Petersburg.
The others to follow would not all be as disappointing to Northern
hopes. In these repeated drives to the west lay the essence of the basic
tactics to capture Petersburg.

On July 9, 1864, the plan of operations decided upon by the Union
high command was revealed in an order issued from Meade’s headquarters.
This order gave detailed instructions on the building of fortifications
and the development of siege tactics. Thus it became apparent
that the Union plan was to reduce Petersburg by a lengthy process of
attrition.

12

Lt. Col. Henry Pleasants, Commanding
Officer of the 48th Pennsylvania
Infantry Regiment which dug the
Union tunnel under the Confederate
line.
From Battles and Leaders of the
Civil War.

There were still those in the attacking forces, however, who felt that,
with a little imagination, the city could be taken by direct assault. While
most of the troops were digging siege lines, another, and smaller, group
had already begun work on a unique plan which would, if successful,
make further encirclement unnecessary.

The Battle of the Crater, July 30, 1864

At several places east of the city the opposing lines were extremely close
together. One of these locations was in front of Elliott’s Salient, a Confederate
strong point near Cemetery Hill and old Blandford Church.
Here the Confederate position and the Union picket line were less than
400 feet apart. Because of the proximity of the Union line, Elliott’s Salient
was well fortified. Behind earthen embankments was a battery of
four guns, and two veteran South Carolina infantry regiments were stationed
on either side. Behind these were other defensive works; before
them the ground sloped gently downward toward the Union advance
line.

13

Cross-section view of a scale model of the Union tunnel.

THE FEDERAL TUNNEL

Built by the Forty-eighth Pennsylvania Regiment, commanded by Colonel Henry Pleasants.

THE EXPLOSION OF THIS MINE PRODUCED THE CRATER

FEDERAL LINE ESTABLISHED JUNE 18, 1864

TUNNEL STARTED JUNE 25, 1864

TUNNEL SLOPED UP TO AVOID HEAVY CLAY

8000 LBS POWDER PLACED HERE JULY 27, 1864

CONFEDERATE PEGRAMS BATTERY DESTROYED BY EXPLOSION JULY 30, 1864

14

The explosion of the Union mine as recorded by A. R. Waud, a
contemporary artist.
From Battles and Leaders of the Civil War.

16

This forward Union line was built on the crest of a ravine which had
been crossed on June 18. Through this ravine, and between the sentry
line and the main line, lay the roadbed of the Norfolk and Petersburg
Railroad. The front in this sector was manned by Gen. Ambrose E. Burnside’s
IX Corps. Among the many units which composed this corps was
the 48th Regiment, Pennsylvania Veteran Volunteer Infantry. A large
proportion of this regiment had been coal miners, and it seemed to have
occurred to one or more of them that Elliott’s Salient would provide an
excellent place to use their civilian occupation. Lt. Col. Henry Pleasants,
the commanding officer of the 48th and a mining engineer by profession,
overheard one of the enlisted men mutter, “We could blow that damned
fort out of existence if we could run a mine shaft under it.” From this
and similar remarks came the germ of the idea for the Union mine. This
is what the 48th Regiment proposed to do: dig a long gallery from the
bottom of the ravine behind their picket line to a point beneath the
Confederate battery at Elliott’s Salient, blow up the position by means
of powder placed in the end of the tunnel, and, finally, send a strong
body of troops through the gap created in the enemy’s line by the explosion.
They saw as the reward for their effort the capitulation of Petersburg
and, perhaps, the end of the war.

After obtaining the permission of Burnside and Grant, Pleasants and
his men commenced digging their mine shaft on June 25. The lack of
proper equipment made it necessary constantly to improvise tools and
apparatus with which to excavate. Mining picks were created from
straightened army picks. Cracker boxes were converted into hand-barrows
in which the dirt was removed from the end of the tunnel. A
sawmill changed a bridge into timber necessary for shoring up the mine.
Pleasants estimated both direction and depth of the tunnel by means of
a theodolite (old-fashioned even in 1864) sent him from Washington.
The outmoded instrument served its purpose well, however; the mine
shaft hit exactly beneath the salient at which it was aimed.

One of the most remarkable features of the gallery was the method
devised to supply the diggers at the end with fresh air. The longer the
tunnel grew, the more serious became the problem of ventilation. It had
been considered impossible to dig a tunnel for any considerable distance
without spacing shafts at regular intervals in order to replace the polluted
air with a fresh supply. This problem had been solved by the application
of the simple physical principle that warm air tends to rise.
Behind the Union picket line and to the right of the mine gallery,
although connected with it, the miners dug a ventilating chimney.
Between the chimney and the mine entrance they erected an airtight canvas
door. Through that door and along the floor of the gallery there was
laid a square wooden pipe. A fire was then built at the bottom of the
ventilating shaft. As the fire warmed the air it went up the chimney. The
draft thus created drew the bad air from the end of the tunnel where the
men were digging. As this went out, fresh air was drawn in through the
wooden pipe to replace it.

Work on the tunnel had been continuously pushed from the start on
June 25. By July 17 the diggers were nearly 511 feet from the entrance
and directly beneath the battery in Elliott’s Salient. The Confederates
had become suspicious by this time, for the faint sounds of digging
could be heard issuing from the earth. Their apprehension took the form

17

of countermines behind their own lines. Several of these were dug in an
effort to locate the Union gallery. Two were very close, being sunk on
either side of where the Pennsylvanians were at work. Although digging
in the countermines continued throughout the month of July, Confederate
fears seemed to quiet down during the same period. There were
many reasons for this. One was the failure of their tunnels to strike any
Union construction. Another major reason, undoubtedly, was a belief
held by many that it was impossible to ventilate a shaft of any length
over 400 feet without constructing air shafts along it.

The next step in the Union plan was to burrow out into lateral galleries
at the end of the long shaft. Accordingly, on July 18 work was
begun on these branches which extended to the right and left, paralleling
the Confederate fortifications above. When completed, these added
another 75 feet to the total length of the tunnel which now reached 586
feet into the earth. It was about 20 feet from the floor of the tunnel to
the enemy works above. The average internal dimensions of the shaft
were 5 feet high, with a base 4½ feet in width tapering to 2 feet at the top.

Digging was finally completed on July 23. Four days later the task
of charging the mine with black powder was accomplished. Three hundred
and twenty kegs of powder weighing, on the average, 25 pounds
each were arranged in the two lateral galleries in eight magazines. The
total charge was 4 tons, or 8,000 pounds. The powder was sandbagged
to direct the force of the explosion upward and two fuses were spliced
together to form a 98-foot line.

Meanwhile, preparations for the attack which was to follow the explosion
of the mine had been carried out. Burnside was convinced of the
necessity for a large-scale attack by the entire IX Corps. His request was
acceded to by Meade and Grant with but one important exception. It
had been Burnside’s hope that a fresh and numerically strong (about
4,300) Negro division should lead the charge after the explosion. Meade
opposed this on the grounds that if the attack failed the Union commanders
could be accused of wanting to get rid of the only Negro troops
then with the Army of the Potomac. Burnside was not informed of this
decision until the day before the battle, July 29, and he was forced to
change his plans at the last moment. Three white divisions were to make
the initial charge along with the colored troops. Burnside had the commanding
generals of these three divisions draw straws to see which
would lead. Gen. James F. Ledlie of the 1st Division won the draw.

Despite these eleventh-hour changes, a plan of battle had been
evolved. During the night of July 29-30 the bulk of the IX Corps had
assembled in the ravine behind the mine entrance. Troops from other
Union corps were sent to act as reinforcements. A total of 110 guns and
54 mortars was alerted to begin their shelling of the Confederate line. A
Union demonstration before Richmond had forced Lee to withdraw
troops from Petersburg. Only about 18,000 soldiers were left to guard
the city.

18

A contemporary sketch by Waud showing the Union charge to
the Crater.
From Battles and Leaders of the Civil War.

20

The Crater as it appeared in 1865. The Union soldier seated at
the end of the tunnel gives an idea of the size of the Crater.

Courtesy, National Archives.

At 3:15 a. m., July 30, Pleasants lit the fuse of the mine and mounted
the parapet to see the results of his regiment’s work. The explosion was
expected at 3:30 a. m. Minutes passed slowly by, and the men huddled
behind the lines grew more apprehensive. By 4:15 there could be no
doubt but that something had gone wrong. Two volunteers from the
48th Regiment (Lt. Jacob Douty and Sgt. Harry Reese) crawled into the
tunnel and found that the fuse had burned out at the splice. They
relighted it and scrambled to safety. Finally, at about 4:45 a. m., the
explosion took place. The earth trembled as men, equipment, and debris
were hurled high into the air. At least 278 Confederate troops were killed
or wounded in the tremendous blast, and 2 of the 4 guns in the battery
were destroyed beyond repair. The measurements of the size of the crater
torn by the powder vary considerably, but it seems to have been at least
170 feet long, 60 to 80 feet wide, and 30 feet deep.

The awesome spectacle of the mine explosion caused a delay in the
Union charge following the explosion. Removal of obstructions between
the lines caused further delay. Soon, however, an advance was made to
the crater where many of the attacking force paused to seek shelter on
its steep slopes or to look at the havoc caused by the mine. The hard-pressed
Confederates rallied quickly and soon were pouring shells and
bullets into their opponents. Union reinforcements poured into the
breach; but, instead of going forward, they either joined their comrades

21

in the crater or branched out to the immediate right and left along the
lines. By 8:30 that morning a large part of the IX Corps had been poured
into the captured enemy salient. Over 15,000 troops now filled and
surrounded the crater.

By prompt action and determined effort the Confederates had stopped
the attack. The attention of three batteries was soon directed on the
Blue-clad men in the crater. Repeated volleys of artillery shot and shell
raked the huddled groups of increasingly demoralized men. In addition,
mortars were brought to within 50 yards of the crater and started to drop
shells on the soldiers with deadly effect.

Successful as these devices were in halting the Union advance, Lee was
aware that an infantry charge would be necessary to dislodge the enemy.
By 6 a. m. an order had been sent to General Mahone to move two brigades
of his division from the lines south of Petersburg to the defense of
the threatened position. Then Lee joined Beauregard in observing the
battle from the Gee house, 500 yards to the rear of the scene of strife.

Maj. Gen. William Mahone, Confederate
leader at the Battle of the
Crater.
Courtesy, National Archives.

In spite of the Confederate resistance, most of the Northern Negro
division and other regiments had, by 8 a. m., advanced a short distance
beyond their companions at the crater. Shortly after 8 o’clock Mahone’s
Confederate division began to arrive on the scene. The men filed into a
ravine about 200 yards west of the crater and between it and Petersburg.
No sooner had they entered this protected position than, perceiving the
danger to their lines, they charged across the open field into the mass
of enemy soldiers. Although outnumbered, they forced the Northerners
to flee back to the comparative shelter of the crater. Then they swept

22

on to regain a portion of the line north of the Union-held position.

Again, at about 10:30 a. m., more of Mahone’s troops charged, but
were repulsed. Meanwhile, the lot of the Northern soldiers was rapidly
becoming unbearable. The spectacle within the crater was appalling.
Confederate artillery continued to beat upon them. The closely packed
troops (dead, dying, and living mixed indiscriminately together) lacked
shade from the blazing sun, food, water and, above all, competent
leadership. Meade had ordered their withdrawal more than an hour
before the second Confederate charge, but Burnside delayed the transmission
of the order till after midday. Many men had chosen to run the
gantlet of fire back to their own lines, but others remained clinging to
the protective sides of the crater.

The last scene in the battle occurred shortly after 1 p. m. A final charge
by Mahone’s men was successful in gaining the slopes of the crater.
Some of the Union men, overcome with exhaustion and realizing the
helplessness of their situation, surrendered; but others continued to fight.
At one point where resistance centered, the Confederates put their hats
on ramrods and lifted them over the rim of the crater. The caps were
promptly torn to shreds by a volley. Before their foe could reload,
Mahone’s forces jumped into the crater where a desperate struggle with
bayonets, rifle butts, and fists ensued.

Soon it was all over. The Union Army had suffered a loss of over
4,000 in killed, wounded, or captured as against about 1,500 for the Confederates.
Again, as on June 15-18, a frontal assault had failed to take
the Confederate citadel.

The Fight for the Weldon Railroad

Grant, if he reviewed the fruits of his campaign shortly after July 30,
could not have felt much comfort. Two hammering blows delivered
against Petersburg had failed. Moreover, two important railroads still
connected the city with the south. Lee, despite his numerically inferior
numbers, was still able to maintain a long line of defenses around Petersburg
and Richmond. Farther south, the Union outlook was brighter.
Two days before the Battle of the Crater, final operations against Atlanta
had been begun by Sherman. On September 2 it was to fall and the
march to the sea follow.

Yet it was equally certain that Grant had accomplished an important
objective. By committing Lee’s weakened but still potent Army of
Northern Virginia to a defensive position in the area adjacent to the
Capital he was immobilizing the South’s most powerful striking force.
Moreover, the Union failure at the crater decided the future direction of
the campaign to capture Petersburg. All Grant’s energy now turned to
extending siege fortifications around the city.

The first step taken in this direction after July 30 was a strong effort

23

to capture the Weldon Railroad, which the Confederates had so nearly
lost in June. On August 16, Gen. Gouverneur K. Warren, Union V
Corps commander, received orders to attack, occupy, and hold the
Weldon Railroad 3 miles below the city.

The seizure of the objective was quickly accomplished on August 18,
the opening day of battle. More than a mile of track in the vicinity of an
old colonial inn named Globe Tavern was soon in Union hands. Then
Warren marched most of his forces northward toward the city. Soon
they were in unfamiliar and heavily wooded terrain where they encountered
strong artillery and musket fire from the enemy. They then halted
and bivouacked in the woods below Petersburg.

On the afternoon of the next day, August 19, four brigades of Gen.
A. P. Hill’s Corps struck the Union infantry. Two of the brigades managed
to slip in behind their opponents by taking advantage of the
concealment offered by the heavy growth of trees. They inflicted serious
losses and captured 2,700 prisoners. By nightfall Warren had been forced
back a half mile nearer his new headquarters at Globe Tavern.

Globe Tavern near the Weldon Railroad. This building served as
headquarters for the Union V Corps (Maj. Gen. G. K. Warren)
during the Battle of Globe Tavern, August 18-21, 1864.
Courtesy,
National Archives.

August 20 was marked by comparative inactivity, although there was
some skirmishing in the morning. Throughout the following day Hill
threw his men at the Union positions around the tavern. The attacks
were in vain, for the new Union lines held. General Lee arrived with
infantry replacements during the afternoon, but even this did not turn
the tide of battle. By the end of the day Lee realized that the upper portion
of the Weldon Railroad had been lost and that any attempt to
regain it would be a needless sacrifice of manpower.

One sentence from a dispatch sent by Lee to the Confederate Secretary
of War on August 22 shows the seriousness of the loss of the railroad:

24

“Our supply of corn is exhausted today, and I am informed that the
small reserve in Richmond is consumed.” For a time the Confederate
government was able to utilize the Weldon Railroad as far as Stony
Creek, 20 miles below Petersburg, where supplies were transferred to
wagons and hauled around the left of the Northern Army to Petersburg
and Richmond. Soon the railroad line was destroyed below Stony Creek
and henceforth the beleaguered cities had only two direct rail communications
with the south. These were the Richmond and Danville Railroad
out of Richmond and the Southside from Petersburg.

Union soldier on picket duty in the lines before Petersburg.

Courtesy, National Archives.

On August 25, 4 days after the attack on Globe Tavern, the Confederates
scored a minor victory with a surprise attack. Their blow was aimed
at the Union II Corps which was engaged in destroying railroad tracks
at Reams Station, nearly 5 miles below Globe Tavern. The II Corps, containing
large numbers of inexperienced recruits, was badly beaten and
more than 2,000 were taken prisoner. The Southern victory was short-lived,
for the destruction of their rail communications was continued.
The best that Lee could hope for in the future would be to stem the
Blue advance.

In mid-September, Wade Hampton, cavalry commander of the Army
of Northern Virginia, led a remarkable raid of 4,000 mounted troops
around the rear of the Union Army, which now numbered 80,000. He
succeeded in returning to Petersburg on September 17 with over 2,400
head of cattle and more than 300 prisoners, while suffering losses of only
61 men in two engagements with the enemy. Although this raised the
morale of the Confederates, it did not change the course of the campaign.
The iron band being forged outside their city was a reality, and
Grant, a tenacious man, had not loosened his grip.

25

The wharves and supply vessels at City Point, Va., Union headquarters
and supply base on the James River.
Courtesy, National
Archives.

Union Encirclement Continues

The relentless westerly advance of the besieging force was soon resumed
after the capture of the Weldon Railroad in August. Constant skirmishing
occurred between the lines until, in late September, Grant struck
again.

The Battle of Peebles’ Farm, September 29 to October 1, was really
the second section of a two-part struggle. The first took place closer to
Richmond and was directed at Fort Harrison, a strongly fortified point
on the outer defense line of the capital. Fort Harrison was located a mile
north of the James River and approximately midway between Richmond
and Petersburg. On the morning of September 29, Union troops advanced
and captured the fort and held it the next day against a counterattack by
the late occupants. At the same time Meade was moving toward a further
encirclement of Petersburg with about 16,000 troops. The direction
of his attack was northwest toward Confederate earthworks along the
Squirrel Level Road. The ultimate goal was the capture of the Southside
Railroad.

Fighting began on the 29th as the Blue vanguard approached the Confederates
in the vicinity of Peebles’ Farm. The engagement increased in
fury on the 30th and continued into the 1st day of October. When the
smoke of battle had blown away on October 2, Meade had extended the
Union left flank 3 miles farther west and had secured the ground on
which Fort Fisher would soon be built. This fort was to be the Union’s
biggest and was one of the largest earthen forts in Civil War history. He
had, however, stopped short of the coveted Southside Railroad. Against
the gain in territory the Union Army had suffered a loss of over 1,500
prisoners to the Confederacy and more than 1,000 in killed and wounded.
The Southerners found that their lines, while unbroken, were again
extended. Each extension meant a thinner Confederate defense line.

26

PETERSBURG NATIONAL MILITARY PARK

TOUR MAP
High-resolution Map

Petersburg to Richmond 23 Miles (Via U S 1 & 301)

Petersburg to Blackstone 35 Miles (Via U S 460)

Petersburg to Raleigh 136 Miles (Via U S 1)

Petersburg to Hopewell 9 Miles (Via State 36)

Petersburg to Norfolk 73 Miles (Via U S 460)

Petersburg to Emporia 41 Miles (Via U S 301) and South

Indicates Park Tour Routes

Indicates Park Boundary

Circled Numbers refer to Historic Points Mentioned in “
Guide to the Area.
”

28

Photograph of one of the engines used on the United States
military railroad taken at City Point in 1865. This engine
hauled men and supplies to various parts of the long line around
Petersburg.
Courtesy, National Archives.

“The Dictator” or “The Petersburg Express,” a 13-inch,
17,000-pound mortar which the Union Army used to shell
Petersburg from a distance of two and one-half miles.
Courtesy,
National Archives.

29

For a period of a little over 3 weeks after the Battle of Peebles’ Farm
the shovel and pick again replaced the musket as the principal tools for
soldiers on both sides. Forts were built, breastworks dug, and gabions
constructed. Then, on October 27, the Union troops moved again. This
time they turned toward Boydton Plank Road and a stream known as
Hatcher’s Run, 12 miles southwest of Petersburg.

The general plan of operations was nearly the same as that used at
Peebles’ Farm. Butler’s Army of the James was ordered to threaten attack
in front of Richmond. Meanwhile, at the left of the Union line 17,000
infantry and cavalry of the Army of the Potomac started for the Boydton
Plank Road. They made rapid progress, driving the enemy outposts
ahead of them and advancing in two long columns until they reached
the vicinity of Burgess’ Mill where the Boydton Plank Road crossed
Hatcher’s Run.

It was in the neighborhood of Burgess’ Mill that heavy Confederate
opposition was met. Here a spirited engagement took place between the
two contending forces. A failure of Union Generals Hancock of the II
Corps and Warren of the V Corps to coordinate the efforts of their
respective columns, coupled with stout Confederate infantry resistance
and a dashing charge by Hampton’s cavalry in a manner reminiscent of
“Jeb” Stuart, resulted in a speedy Northern withdrawal. The Boydton
Plank Road, for a time at least, remained in Southern hands, and Grant’s
encircling movement had received a temporary check.

The approach of winter made any large-scale effort by either side less
probable, although daily skirmishes and tightening of the siege lines
continued. The slackening of hostile action was used to good advantage
by Union and Confederate alike, as it had been in the previous respites
between battles, in the strengthening of the battle lines and efforts to
develop some rudimentary comforts in the cheerless camps. Throughout
the last 2 months of 1864 and the first month of the new year there were
no strong efforts by either side before Petersburg; picket duty, sniping,
and patrolling prevailed. Lee now had a 35-mile front, with the left resting
on the Williamsburg Road east of Richmond and the right on
Hatcher’s Run southwest of Petersburg. To hold this long line he had
but 57,402 effective soldiers on December 31. Facing these undernourished
and ragged soldiers, there were, according to official returns of the
same date, 110,364 well-fed and equipped Union troops.

The picture throughout the rest of the South was no more reassuring
to the Confederate sympathizers. In the Shenandoah Valley of Virginia,
northwest of Richmond, Gen. Philip H. Sheridan had crushed the
Southern forces of Gen. Jubal A. Early at Cedar Creek on October 19 and
was destroying the scattered resistance that remained. Far to the south
Gen. William T. Sherman had captured Atlanta, Ga., in September 1864,
and Savannah had surrendered on December 21. As the new year dawned,
his army was prepared to march north toward Grant. To complete the
gloomy Southern prospects, Fort Fisher, bastion of Wilmington, N. C.,
which was the last of the great Atlantic Coast ports to remain in their
possession, was under fatal bombardment by mid-January.

30

A section of the Union siege line around Petersburg. Note the
use of wickerware (gabions), sharpened stakes (fraises), and
branches (abatis) to protect the lines.
Courtesy, National
Archives.

Making sap rollers, Union line.
Courtesy, National Archives.

31

Deserted huts on the Confederate line in 1865.
Courtesy,
National Archives.

Union battery of Parrott guns before Petersburg.
Courtesy,
National Archives.

The Battle of Hatcher’s Run, February 5 to 7, 1865, was the result of
a further drive by the Northern forces in their attempt to encircle Petersburg.
The two Union Corps (the II and the V), which had been stopped
at Burgess’ Mill, again marched toward Hatcher’s Run. As before, their
objective was the Boydton Plank Road. This time they reached their
goal with little trouble on February 5.

32

Camp scene on the Union line. Behind the seated soldiers are
good examples of the type of improvised quarters built by many
of the troops.
Courtesy, National Archives.

Confederate opposition to this advance lasted through 3 days, but it
was ineffective. This was due to several factors: the inferior numbers of
the Southern Army, the extremely bad weather which made a Union
attack appear unlikely, the ravages of cold on badly equipped and uniformed
men, and, most important, the breakdown of the food supply
system.

After having been successful in capturing the Boydton Plank Road
and beating off Confederate attacks, the Northern leaders decided that
the road was not worth holding. It was not as important an artery of
traffic as they had supposed. Consequently, they made no attempt to hold
it, but they did occupy and fortify the newly extended line to Hatcher’s
Run at a point 3 miles below Burgess’ Mill. Thus, again the Union lines
had been pushed to the west, and, as before, Lee was forced to lengthen
his defenses. The Petersburg-Richmond front with its recent extension
now stretched over 37 miles, and the army holding it had dwindled
through casualties and desertion to a little more than 46,000 in number
on March 1, 1865.

The Battle of Hatcher’s Run was another fight in the constant movement
of the Union Army to the west after June 18, 1864. In its relentless
extension around Petersburg, which continued day by day with the addition
of a few more feet or yards of picket line and rifle pits, there had
occurred five important thrusts aimed by the Northern leaders at encircling

33

Petersburg. They included two attacks on the Weldon Railroad, in
June and August 1864; Peebles’ Farm, in September and October; Burgess’
Mill, in October; and, finally, the move on the Boydton Plank
Road in February 1865. They met with varying degrees of success, but
still the Union noose was not drawn tightly enough.

Maj. Gen. John B. Gordon, Confederate
commander at the Battle of
Fort Stedman.
Courtesy, National
Archives.

The enlisted men of both armies, however, remained largely unaware
of the strategy of their commanders. Their daily existence during the
campaign took on a marked flavor, different in many respects from the
more dashing engagements which preceded it. Too often war is a combination
of bloodshed and boredom, and Petersburg, unlike most other
military operations of the Civil War, had more than its share of the
latter. The Petersburg episode—assault and resistance—dragged on to
become the longest unbroken campaign against a single city in the history
of the United States. The romantic and heroic exploits were
relatively few, and between them came long stretches of uninspiring and
backbreaking routine.

The men of both sides had much in common, despite the bitterness
with which they fought. In battle they were enemies, but in camp they
were on the same common level. Stripped of the emotional tension and
exhilaration of combat they all appear as bored, war-weary, homesick
men. The greater part of their time was primarily concerned with digging
and constructing fortifications, performing sentry and picket duty, and
striving to speed up the long succession of days. They lived in rude
improvised shelters, often made of mud and log walls with tent roofs.

34

Chimneys were made of mud and barrels. There was some friendly interchange
of words and gifts between the lines, but enmity was more rampant
than brotherly regard. Off duty, the amusements and pastimes of the
soldiers were simple and few—limited in most cases to their ability to
improvise them. The most striking difference between the armies as the
Petersburg campaign lengthened was that, while the Northerners suffered
most from boredom, the Confederates were plagued by the more
serious and unpleasant pangs of hunger.

The Petersburg campaign, however, was grim business. Amusements
could lighten the heart for only a brief time at best. Ever present were
the mud and disease which followed every Civil War camp. Both opposing
forces felt the chill of winter and the penetrating rain. The discouragement
of the homesick, who never knew when, or if, he would return
to his fireside, was not a hardship peculiar to any rank. However, when
spring came to warm the air there was a difference between the two
armies. It was more than a numerical superiority. Then the Union
trooper felt confidence, while the Southern veteran, ill-clothed, ill-fed,
and nearly surrounded, knew only despair.

The South Strikes Back—The Battle of Fort Stedman

By mid-March of 1865 the climax of the campaign, and of the war, was
close at hand. Lee’s forces in both Richmond and Petersburg had dwindled
to under 50,000, with only 35,000 fit for duty. Grant, on the other
hand, had available, or within easy march, at least 150,000. Moreover,
Sheridan, having destroyed the remnants of Early’s forces at Waynesboro,
Va., on March 2, had cleared the Shenandoah Valley of Confederates
and was now free to join Grant before Petersburg.

Everywhere Lee turned the picture was black. Union forces under
Sherman, driving Johnston before them, split the Confederacy and were
now in North Carolina. With President Jefferson Davis’ consent, Lee
sent a letter to General Grant on March 2 suggesting an interview. In the
early morning hours of the second day following the dispatch of the
letter, Lee and Maj. Gen. John B. Gordon discussed the three possible
solutions to the problem which perplexed them. In order, they were as
follows:

(1) Try to negotiate satisfactory peace terms. This had already been acted upon in Lee’s note to Grant.

(2) Retreat from Richmond and Petersburg and unite with Johnston for a final stand.

(3) Attack Grant in order to facilitate the retreat.

There followed a series of interviews with high Government officials
in Richmond. Each of the plans was analyzed. The first was quickly
dropped when Grant made it clear that he was not empowered to negotiate.

35

Nor was the second proposal, that of retreat, deemed advisable by
President Davis who wished to strike one more blow before surrendering
his capital. This left only the third alternative—to attack.

An exterior view of Fort Stedman as it appeared in 1865.

Courtesy, National Archives.

The plan evolved by the Southern commander was relatively simple.
He ordered General Gordon to make a reconnaissance of the lines around
Petersburg. Gordon soon reported that the best place for the proposed
attack was at Fort Stedman. This Union position was near the City Point
Railroad which Grant used as a major supply line between his base at
City Point and the entrenchments around Petersburg. Capture of this
railroad would cut the Northern supply line. An additional advantage,
from the Confederate viewpoint, was the fact that Fort Stedman was but
150 yards to the east of a strongly fortified Southern position named
Colquitt’s Salient.

About one-half of the besieged army would be used to charge the
Union line in the vicinity of Fort Stedman. It was hoped that this would
cause Grant to shorten his front in order to protect the endangered supply
route. Then Lee could detach a portion of his army to send to the aid
of Johnston as, with shorter lines, he would not need as many men in
Petersburg. Should the attack fail, he would attempt to retreat with his
forces intact for a final stand with Johnston. This was the last desperate
gamble of the Army of Northern Virginia.

The details for the attack were worked out by Gordon. During the
night preceding the attack, the obstructions before the Confederate lines
were to be removed and the Union pickets overcome as quietly as possible.
A group of 50 men were to remove the chevaux-de-frise and abatis
protecting Fort Stedman; then 3 companies of 100 men each were to
charge and capture the fort. When Stedman was safely in Confederate
hands, these men were to pretend they were Union troops and, forming
into 3 columns, were to rush to the rear to capture other positions.

36

THE PETERSBURG CAMPAIGN

January 1951 NMP-PET-7007

UNION TROOPS ADVANCE ON PETERSBURG

JUNE 15-18, 1864. PORTION OF ORIGINAL CONFEDERATE LINE CAPTURED AND NEW LINE BUILT NEARER CITY

JUNE 22-23, 1864. UNION ATTEMPT TO CAPTURE THE WELDON R. R. TURNED BACK

JULY 30, 1864. THE CRATER. UNION ATTEMPT TO CAPTURE PETERSBURG BY SURPRISE FAILED.

AUGUST 16-21, 1864. UNION TROOPS CAPTURE THE WELDON R. R.

SEPTEMBER 29-30, 1864. BATTLE OF PEEBLES’ FARM. UNION LINES PUSHED WEST OF THE WELDON R. R.

OCTOBER 27, 1864. BATTLE OF BURGESS MILL UNION DRIVE TOWARD THE SOUTHSIDE R. R. TURNED BACK

FEBRUARY 5-7, 1865. UNION TROOPS CUT BOYDTON PLANK ROAD AND EXTEND LINE TO HATCHER’S RUN

MARCH 25, 1865. FORT STEDMAN. CONFEDERATE OFFENSIVE FAILS.

APRIL 1, 1865. BATTLE OF FIVE FORKS. UNION VICTORY OPENS WAY TO SOUTHSIDE R. R.

APRIL 2, 1865. UNION FORCES BREAK THROUGH OUTER DEFENSES OF CITY AND REACH APPOMATTOX RIVER

NIGHT OF APRIL 2-3, 1865. CONFEDERATES EVACUATE PETERSBURG AND RETREAT WEST. UNION TROOPS ENTER CITY MORNING OF APRIL 3

UNION ARMY SETS OUT IN IMMEDIATE PURSUIT OF THE CONFEDERATES ON APRIL 3

38

The next step was to send a division of infantry to gain possession of
the siege lines north and south of the fallen bastion. When the breach
had been sufficiently widened, Southern cavalry were to rush through
and destroy telegraphic communication with Grant’s headquarters at
City Point. They were also ordered to cut the military railroad. Additional
reserves were to follow the cavalry.

The attack was scheduled for the morning of March 25. The 50 axemen
and the 300 soldiers who were to make up the advance columns
were given strips of white cloth to wear across their breasts in order to
tell friend from foe. The officers in charge were given the names of
Union officers known to be in the vicinity and were told to shout their
assumed names if challenged. Beginning about 3 a. m., Confederates
professing to be deserters crossed to the Union pickets with requests to
surrender. Their actual purpose was to be near at hand to overwhelm the
unsuspecting pickets when the attack began.

At 4 a. m. Gordon gave the signal, and the Confederates sprang forward.
At first the attack went as planned. Blue-clad pickets were silenced
so effectively that not a shot was fired. Union obstructions were quickly
hewn down by the axemen, and the small vanguard of 300 swept through
Battery 10 which stood immediately north of Fort Stedman. They then
rushed into the fort from the northwest. The sleeping, or partially
awakened, occupants were completely surprised and surrendered without
a fight. Battery 11 to the south of Fort Stedman was also soon in Confederate
hands. Union resistance in this early stage was ineffective,
although Battery 11 was recaptured for a brief time.

More Confederates pressed into the torn line. While the three columns
set out in the general direction of City Point and along the Prince
George Court House Road behind Stedman, other infantry units moved
north and south along the Federal emplacements. To the north they captured
the fortifications as far as Battery 9 where they were stopped by
the Union defenders. In the opposite direction they progressed as far as
the ramparts of Fort Haskell. A desperate struggle ensued, but here, too,
the Northerners refused to yield. Despite these checks, the Confederates
were now in possession of about three-fourths of a mile of the Union
line.

In the center of the Confederate attack the three small columns quickly
advanced as far as Harrison’s Creek—a small stream which winds its way
north to the Appomattox River 650 yards behind Fort Stedman. One of
the columns succeeded in crossing the stream and continuing toward a
small Union artillery post on the site of what had been Confederate Battery
8, but canister from the post forced the column back to the creek.
Confusion took hold of the Confederates who were unable to locate the
positions they had been ordered to capture in the rear of the Union line.
Artillery fire from Northern guns on a ridge to the east held them on
the banks of Harrison’s Creek. By 6 a. m. their forward momentum had
been checked.

39

Union infantry then charged from the ridge to attack the Southerners.
The forces joined battle along the banks of Harrison’s Creek and the
Confederates were soon forced back to Fort Stedman. For a brief time
they held their newly captured positions. At 7:30 a. m. Gen. John F.
Hartranft advanced on them with a division of Northern troops. Heavy
musket and artillery fire on Gordon’s men threatened them with annihilation
unless they retired to their own lines soon. Shortly after 7:30
a. m., Gordon received an order from Lee to withdraw his men. The
order was quickly dispatched across the open fields to the soldiers in the
captured Union works. By now, however, the line of retreat was raked
by a vicious crossfire and many Confederates preferred surrender to withdrawal.
About 7:45 a. m., the Union line was completely restored and
the forlorn Southern hope of a successful disruption of Northern communications,
followed by secret withdrawal from the city, was now lost.
Equally bad, if not worse, to the Confederates was the loss of more than
4,000 killed, wounded, and captured as compared to the Union casualties
of less than 1,500.

Of the three Confederate plans of action before the Battle of Fort
Stedman, now only the second—retreat—was possible. The situation
demanded immediate action, for, even as Gordon had been preparing
on March 24 to launch his attack, Grant had been engaged in planning
more difficulties for the harassed defenders of Petersburg.

Union Encirclement Becomes a Reality

The coming of better weather heralded the opportunity for the final
blows against the city. Grant, who was now passing some of the most
anxious moments of his life, planned that this effort should be concentrated
on the extreme right of the long Confederate line which protected
Richmond and Petersburg. This meant that hostilities would soon commence
somewhere west of Hatcher’s Run, perhaps in the neighborhood
of Dinwiddie Court House or a road junction called Five Forks which
lay 17 miles southwest of Petersburg. On March 24, Grant ordered the
II and IX Corps and three divisions of the Army of the James to the
extreme left of the Union lines facing Lee. This resulted in a strong concentration
southwest of Hatcher’s Run. Two days later Gen. Philip
Sheridan arrived in City Point, fresh from a victorious campaign in the
Shenandoah Valley, and was ordered to join his troops to the concentration
on the left. Finally, it began to appear as if the Army of Northern
Virginia was to be encircled.

Meanwhile, Lee was waiting only until he collected supplies and
rations to last his men for a week and until the roads were passable
before leaving to join Johnston. He hoped to leave on or about April 10.
The information he received about the rapid accumulation of Union
forces opposite his lightly held right was very disturbing, for it not only

40

threatened to cut off his retreat to the west and south, but it also posed
a serious danger to the Southside Railroad—the last remaining communication
of Petersburg with the south, which continued to deliver a
trickle of supplies to the city. So, while Sheridan was assembling his
troops around Dinwiddie, Lee issued orders on March 29 which sent
Generals George E. Pickett and Fitzhugh Lee to the Confederate right
near Five Forks, far beyond Petersburg.

Union soldiers on the ramparts of Confederate Fort Mahone,
April 2, 1865.
Courtesy, National Archives.

Sheridan was prepared to move against the Confederates with his cavalry
on March 30, but heavy rains lasting from the evening of March 29
until the morning of the 31st made a large-scale movement impracticable
over the unpaved roads. During the storm he kept his horses around
Dinwiddie. On the last day of the month a portion of Sheridan’s forces
which had pushed northwest toward Five Forks were engaged by
Southern forces who succeeded in driving them back toward the main
Union troop concentration at Dinwiddie Court House. Pickett, the Confederate
leader, then found his men badly outnumbered and withdrew
them to Five Forks without pressing the advantage he had gained. This
incident, often called the Battle of Dinwiddie Court House, was a minor
Confederate victory, although Sheridan’s men were neither demoralized
nor disorganized by the attack, and Lee could find small comfort in the
situation. Lee was able to concentrate on his right only about 10,600
cold and hungry Confederates to meet the expected Union drive to turn

41

his right flank. Massed against him at this part of the line were more
than 10,000 Northern cavalry and 43,000 infantry. The desperate urgency
of Lee’s fears was indicated in the dispatch he sent to Pickett early on
April 1, the day of the struggle for Five Forks. “
Hold Five Forks at all
hazards.
Protect road to Ford’s Depot and prevent Union forces from
striking the south-side railroad. Regret exceedingly your forced withdrawal,
and your inability to hold the advantage you had gained.”

A Union Army wagon train entering Petersburg.
Courtesy,
National Archives.

Throughout April 1, Pickett’s troops worked unceasingly, erecting
barricades of logs, branches, and earth around Five Forks. At about 4
p. m., with only 2 hours of daylight remaining, Sheridan’s cavalry and
Warren’s infantry attacked. While the dismounted cavalry charged the
Confederates from the front of their newly erected defense line, two divisions
of foot soldiers from the V Corps drove around to the left of
Pickett’s troops and, after crossing the White Oak Road which connected
Five Forks with Petersburg, hit them on the weakly held left flank.
Lacking sufficient artillery support, the Southerners were quickly overcome.
Realizing that their position was no longer tenable, portions of
the Confederate troops tried to retreat to Petersburg, but the avenue of
escape had been cut by the Union advance across the White Oak Road.

By dusk, the Battle of Five Forks had ended. Union troops were in
possession of the disputed area. They had cut off and captured over
3,200 prisoners, while suffering a loss which was probably less than 1,000.

42

Now the besieging forces had nearly succeeded in accomplishing Grant’s
objective of encircling the city. The western extremity of Lee’s defenses
had crumbled.

Those Confederates who survived the Battle of Five Forks had fallen
back to the Southside Railroad where they rallied for a defensive stand,
but darkness had prevented a Union pursuit. Grant’s troops were within
striking distance of the rail line, located less than 3 miles from Five
Forks. Lee now knew that Petersburg must be evacuated without delay
or the Army of Northern Virginia would be completely cut off from
outside help and all possible escape routes would be gone.

The problem of assigning a proper significance to Five Forks is a difficult
one. It is now known that Lee and the Confederate government
officials were on the eve of the abandonment of their capital. In June
of the previous year the Southside Railroad had been a most important
objective of the invading army, but the plight of Lee’s army had grown
so desperate during the intervening months that whether the railroad
remained open or not mattered little. Grant, of course, did not know
this as a positive fact, although the uncomfortable situation of his opponents
was something of which he was doubtless aware. The real importance
of Five Forks lay in the probability that, by making it more difficult
for Lee to escape, it brought the inevitable a little closer. Brig. Gen.
Horace Porter, of Grant’s staff, was positive more than 30 years later
that news of Sheridan’s success prompted the Union commander in chief
to issue the orders for the attack that carried the city.

Maj. Gen. Philip H. Sheridan, Union commander at the Battle
of Five Forks.
Courtesy, National Archives.

43

The Fall of the City

Continuously throughout the night following the Battle of Five Forks,
the Union artillery played upon the Confederate earthworks and dropped
shells within the city. Troops were prepared for a large general assault
which had been ordered for the following dawn. At 4:40 a. m., April 2,
1865, a wide frontal attack was begun with the sound of a signal gun
from Fort Fisher. A heavy fog, however, prevented the action from
gaining full momentum until after 7 a. m.

The story of the fighting along the Petersburg front on that spring
Sunday is one of Union success over stout Confederate resistance. The
Union VI Corps, under Gen. Horatio G. Wright, broke through the
Confederate right and rushed on to the Southside Railroad. Other elements
of Grant’s army swept away the remnants of the Confederate lines
along Hatcher’s Run. Early in the day, Lt. Gen. Ambrose P. Hill, a Confederate
corps commander, had been killed by the bullet of a Union
soldier near the Boydton Plank Road when on the way to rally his men
at Hatcher’s Run.

The desperateness of the Southern position was shown when, about
10 a. m., Lee telegraphed President Davis to inform him of the turn
events had taken at Petersburg. The message read: “I advise that all
preparations be made for leaving Richmond tonight.” Davis received the
message while attending Sunday services at St. Paul’s Church. He left
immediately, destroying the calm of worship, in order to prepare for
evacuating the capital. The flight of the Confederate government was
promptly begun.

By midday the entire outer line to the west of Petersburg had been
captured with the exception of Forts Gregg and Baldwin. The city was
now completely surrounded except to the north. The left of the Union
line finally rested on the bank of the Appomattox River after months of
strenuous effort.

It now became apparent to Lee that he must hold an inner line west
of Petersburg until nightfall, when it would be possible for him to
retreat from the city. While gray-clad troops were forming along this
line built on the banks of Old Indian Town Creek, the defenders of Forts
Gregg and Baldwin put up a stubborn delaying action against the
Northern advance. At Fort Gregg, particularly, there was a desperate
Confederate defense. Approximately 300 men and 2 pieces of artillery
met an onslaught of 5,000 Northerners. The outcome of the struggle
was determined by the numbers in the attacking force, but the capture
of Fort Gregg occurred only after bitter hand-to-hand combat. Fort Baldwin
was forced to yield shortly after the fall of Fort Gregg. The purpose
of the defense of these two positions had been accomplished, however,
for a thin but sturdy line running behind them from Battery 45 to the
Appomattox River had been manned. Temporarily, at least, street fighting
within Petersburg had been avoided. Blows directed at this line at

44

other points, such as Fort Mahone near the southeast corner of the
defense works, were turned back. Yet there was no doubt in the mind
of Lee and other Southern leaders that all hope of retaining Petersburg
and Richmond was gone. It was obvious that, if the lines held the Union
Army in check on April 2, they must be surrendered on the morrow.
The object was to delay until evening when retreat would be possible.

The Crater area. The bank in the background is the original
Confederate earthwork constructed in 1864.

The close of the day found the weary Confederates concentrating
within Petersburg and making all possible plans to withdraw. Lee had
issued the necessary instructions at 3 o’clock that afternoon. By 8 p. m.
the retreat was under way, the artillery preceding the infantry across the
Appomattox River. Amelia Court House, 40 miles to the west, was
designated as the assembly point for the troops from Petersburg and
Richmond.

Grant had ordered the assault on Petersburg to be renewed early the
next morning (April 3). It was discovered at 3 a. m. that the Southern
earthworks had been abandoned, and so an attack was not necessary.
Union troops took possession of the city shortly after 4 a. m. Richmond
officially surrendered 4 hours later.

President Lincoln, who had been in the vicinity of Petersburg for several
days, came from Army Headquarters at City Point that same day for
a brief visit with Grant. They talked quietly on the porch of a private
home for an hour and a half before the President returned to City Point.
Grant with all of his army, except the detachments necessary to police

45

Petersburg and Richmond and to protect City Point, set out in immediate
pursuit of Lee. He left Maj. Gen. George L. Hartsuff in command at
Petersburg.

Petersburg had fallen, but it was at a heavy price. In the absence of
complete records the exact casualties will never be known, but in the
10-month campaign at least 42,000 Union troops had been killed,
wounded, and captured, while the Confederates had suffered losses of
more than 28,000. Although the Northern forces had lost more men
than their opponents, they had been able to replenish them more readily.
Moreover, Grant had been prepared to utilize the greater resources at
his disposal, and the Petersburg campaign had been turned by him into
a form of relentless attrition which the Southern Army had not been
able to stand. The result had been the capture of Petersburg and, more
important, of the Southern capital. It had also resulted in the flight of
the remnants of the once mighty Army of Northern Virginia.

On the Sunday following the evacuation of Petersburg and Richmond,
Lee’s troops at Appomattox Court House were cut off from any possibility
of uniting with Johnston in North Carolina. In this small
Virginia town, nearly 100 miles west of Petersburg, the Army of Northern
Virginia, now numbering little more than 28,000, surrendered to the
Union forces. Within a week of the fall of Petersburg the major striking
force of the Confederacy had capitulated. The Civil War finally was
all but ended. Gen. Joseph E. Johnston surrendered his army to General
Sherman in North Carolina on April 26, 1865.

View from east to west across the Crater.

46

Guide to the Area

A self-guided tour of Petersburg National Military Park may be made
by automobile. This tour, extending 27 miles, begins at the Crater and
park museum and follows the lines of earthworks around the city. It
offers a nearly complete picture of the engagements which occurred during
the campaign and gives an idea of the scope and magnitude of the
area covered by the contending forces. Throughout the tour you will
have an opportunity to study exhibits and narrative markers which will
help you to orient yourself with the terrain.

In the description of the tour which follows an attempt has been
made to provide you with a guide to all the important points of interest.
The following remarks about this description may prove useful. The
total road distances from the starting point at the Crater and park museum
to the various points of interest are shown in parentheses. The distances
are stated to the nearest tenth of a mile. All route numbers are State or
county unless they are identified as United States highway routes. Points
of historic interest are identified in capital letters (
FORT FISHER
,
BATTERY
PEGRAM
, etc.) where they are mentioned for the first time. The numbers
at the beginning of various paragraphs correspond to the circled numbers
on the Park Tour Map found on pages
26
-27.

1. The
CRATER
(0.0) is the scene of the Battle of the Crater, July 30,
1864. You may see the results of the explosion of the Union mine and
the ground for which both armies contested. Information can be obtained
at the park museum, where there is usually a member of the staff on duty.
Talks on the Battle of the Crater and the Petersburg Campaign are given
at frequent intervals. The museum contains exhibits pertinent to the
fighting at Petersburg.

You should then follow the small “Park Tour” signs which will
conduct you to Battery 5. Return to the junction of the Crater
entrance with U. S. 460 and 501 (0.3). A
left turn
is made on this
highway (called in 1864 the
JERUSALEM PLANK ROAD
) which is followed
to the fork where U. S. 460 branches left (east) to Norfolk (0.5).
Follow U. S. 460 across the bridge which spans the tracks of the
Norfolk and Western Railroad. These tracks are on the same approximate
roadbed used by the
NORFOLK AND PETERSBURG RAILROAD
in
1864-65. Continue across bridge to the intersection of Siege Road
(1.3) which is identified by a large “Park Tour” sign.
Turn left
on Siege
Road.

2.
BATTERY 16
was located at the left of this intersection. This is one of
many Union artillery emplacements constructed during the campaign.
Similar batteries were constructed by the Confederates. Siege Road follows
the Union lines east of Petersburg which were held from June 18,
1864, to April 2, 1865.

47

An interior view of the remains of Fort Stedman.

3.
FORT MORTON
(1.4). The site of this fort is a short distance past Battery
16 and on the left of Siege Road. This fort, obliterated after the war,
was the place from which Gen. Ambrose E. Burnside directed the attack
of the Union IX Corps during the Battle of the Crater. It was a strongly
fortified position and considered by many contemporary observers as one
of the best of the nearly 50 forts surrounding the city.

4. Union
BATTERY 13
(1.7). The tour continues along Siege Road, passing
the remains of this battery, which are to the left. The Union batteries
were numbered consecutively, beginning with Battery 1 on the Appomattox
River east of Petersburg and running south and west around the
city. There were 42 of these Union batteries by the end of the campaign.
In a like manner, the Confederate batteries were numbered starting at
the river. In the original defense lines (the “Dimmock Line”) there were
55 Confederate batteries.

Notice on the left of Siege Road, and at numerous other places
throughout the tour, the low breastworks which connect the forts and
batteries to make a long, continuous line. It was behind these that the
enlisted men spent much of their time during the campaign.

5.
FORT HASKELL
(2.0), on the left of Siege Road, is one of the best preserved
of the earthworks. The most important event in its history occurred
on the morning of March 25, 1865, when the defense made here
by Union troops helped turn the tide against the Confederates during
the Battle of Fort Stedman. The moat, or ditch, around the embankments

48

was made more formidable at that time with the aid of sharpened
stakes (fraise) or brush (abatis). Chevaux-de-frise (timbers with sharpened
stakes driven through at right angles) may also have been placed
outside the moat. Gabions (cylindrical wicker baskets) and sandbags
were placed on the fortifications to protect them from shot and shell.
All of these devices were used regularly by both armies.

Siege Road crosses the Union siege line a short distance beyond Fort
Haskell so that the earthworks are now on the right (east) of you. The
road leads through a ravine.

6.
BATTERY 11
(2.3) is situated at the top of the rise from the ravine.
This, along with
BATTERY 12
(since destroyed), was captured by the
Confederates in the Battle of Fort Stedman, March 25, 1865. In the
course of the engagement that followed, the battery changed hands several
times. After the final Southern withdrawal that same day, the battery
remained in Northern possession until the end of the war.

7.
FORT STEDMAN
(2.4) is close to Battery 11. The site is marked by
well-preserved remains. This Union fort was the place selected by Confederate
General Gordon for his attack on Grant’s supply line. This
attack occurred only 15 days before Lee surrendered at Appomattox
Court House and was the last large-scale offensive movement of the
Army of Northern Virginia. Although captured by the Confederates
shortly after 4 a. m. on March 25, 1865, it was regained by the Northern
forces within 4 hours. Fort Stedman also stands on the site of heavy
fighting on June 18, 1864, when Grant failed to break the defense line
that had been built the night before. However, the fort was not constructed
until a month following this opening battle. Inside the fort is
a monument erected by the State of Pennsylvania to the memory of the
3d Division, IX Corps, Army of the Potomac, which participated in the
Battle of Fort Stedman.

Twenty-five yards past the Fort Stedman trailside exhibit,
turn left
on
Sortie Road. This road passes between the lines and indicates their
proximity at this point.

Battery 5 on the original Confederate defense line, captured by
Union forces on June 15, 1864.

49

Monument to Col. George W. Gowen,
48th Pennsylvania Regiment, killed
in the assault on Fort Mahone, April
2, 1865.

8. The
MAINE MONUMENT
may be seen near the bottom of the gentle
slope on the right (north) of Sortie Road. This marks the scene of the
heaviest fighting on June 18, 1864. At this point the 1st Maine Heavy
Artillery suffered the heavy casualties referred to in the
text
.

9.
COLQUITT’S SALIENT
(2.6) is reached after traversing the short distance
between the lines. This fortified position was named for Confederate
Gen. A. H. Colquitt. It was one of the closest to the Union lines and
was selected by Gordon as the place from which to launch the attack of
March 25, 1865.

10.
GRACIE’s DAM
ruins (2.8) are behind Colquitt’s Salient. This dam
was one of several constructed by the Confederates around the city in
order to flood the ground between the lines and prevent a surprise attack.

The tour continues around Colquitt’s Salient and back to Siege Road.
A
left turn
is made on Siege Road where it is followed by a
right turn
on

PRINCE GEORGE COURT HOUSE ROAD
(3.2) 50 yards north. This road is
a colonial stage route which connected Petersburg with Prince George
Court House. Part of the road has been restored. It leads east behind the
Union siege line and in the general direction of Grant’s supply base at
City Point.

50

11.
HARRISON’S CREEK
(3.5) is the major point of historic interest on
this road. On the banks of this stream the Confederate drive of March
25, 1865, was checked by a Union artillery barrage from a low ridge to
the east followed by charges of Blue-clad infantry.

Continue straight on Prince George Court House Road to Attack
Road (4.1). This is the first intersection past Harrison’s Creek.

12.
BATTERY 9.
The partially destroyed remains of this battery may be
seen across Attack Road. This Confederate artillery position was part of
the “Dimmock Line.” It was captured by Union troops advancing from
the north in the early evening of June 15, 1864. About one-third of a
mile southeast of this point Prince George Court House Road crossed
Grant’s military railroad.
MEADE’S STATION
, an important Union supply
and hospital depot, was located at this intersection.

A
left turn
is made on Attack Road. The tour now travels north along
the site of the original Confederate line (“Dimmock Line”).

13.
BATTERY 8
(4.5) lies to the left of a sharp curve in Attack Road.
This Confederate battery, like Battery 9, was part of the line which fell
on June 15, 1864. It was turned into a Union artillery post named
FORT
FRIEND
and, ironically, guns placed here by the Northerners were used
to repel the Confederates who had broken the line at Fort Stedman. The
spires of Petersburg may be seen about 2½ miles west of Battery 8.

Continue on Attack Road to the intersection (4.9) with State Route
36 (Petersburg-Hopewell Road).
Turn right
on this highway and continue
to the
entrance to the park on the left
. This entrance is marked by a
large “Petersburg National Military Park” sign (5.1).
Turn left
on this
road.

14.
BATTERY 5
(5.4) is located at the end of this short park road. This
is another of the original Confederate works which fell on the evening
of June 15. The Union Army renamed it
BATTERY 4
. You may follow
a path through the battery and observe the commanding position
it held against attack from the north and east. Grant’s troops overcame
this by slipping around to the southwest and entering it there. This path
also leads to a full-size replica of the large siege mortar known as “
THE
DICTATOR
,” or “
THE PETERSBURG EXPRESS
.” This huge 17,000-pound,
13-inch mortar shelled Petersburg from the approximate position where
the replica now stands.

To continue the tour proceed on Mortar Road, which encircles Battery
5, and brings you back to State Route 36 (1 mile). Retrace your route
from this point to the intersection (10.7) of U. S. 460 and 301.

At the intersection of U. S. 460 and 301A
turn left
on U. S. 301 and
continue to intersection (11.8) with U. S. 301A.

51

15. The
GOWEN MONUMENT
erected in honor of Col. George W. Gowen,
a Union officer from Pennsylvania, who was killed on the last day of
battle at Petersburg, April 2, 1865, stands at the right of this intersection.

16. “
FORT HELL
” (
FORT SEDGWICK
) of the Union line may be seen on
the left of U. S. 301, a short distance past the Gowen Monument. It
was given its nickname because of the heavy Confederate artillery fire,
which was concentrated there when the fort was begun. Fort Sedgwick
is now privately owned.

17.
FORT DAVIS.
Continue on U. S. 301 until you come to this fort,
on the right of the highway (12.5). It is one of the best remaining
examples of Union works. Near here Grant launched his first attack on
the
WELDON RAILROAD
on June 21-22, 1864, but was driven back.
Within the fort, evidences of “bombproofs” and traversing trenches still
exist.

Turn right
on to Flank Road at Fort Davis. This follows the Union
siege lines south and southwest of Petersburg. Low breastworks still
remain between the forts and batteries in many places.

18.
FORT ALEXANDER HAYS
(13.5). On the right of Flank Road may
be seen the almost completely obliterated remains of this fort. It was
built in August and September of 1864.

19. Union
BATTERY 24
(13.9) Stands on the left of Flank Road. This,
like other batteries on both sides, was very active during the siege
operations. It participated in the final artillery barrage during the night
of April 1-2, 1865.

20.
BATTERY 25
(14.4) will next be seen as you continue driving to the
west on the tour.

21. The site of
FORT HOWARD
is approximately one-third of a mile
beyond Battery 25, although not visible from the tour route. At Battery
25 the Union line crosses Flank Road and continues north, or right, of
the road.

22.
BATTERY 26
(15.3), like Battery 25, is found on the left. Near this
battery Flank Road recrosses the earthworks.

The next important landmark after passing Battery 26 is the junction
(16.0) of Flank Road with State Route 604 (Halifax Road). In front of
you is the monument to Johnson Hagood’s South Carolina brigade, and
Fort Wadsworth.

23.
FORT WADSWORTH
stands on the left, a short distance past this
intersection. This was a strategically located position for the Union
Army, as it was close to the tracks of the Weldon Railroad. In this vicinity,

52

but before Fort Wadsworth was built, the Battle of Globe Tavern
was fought on August 18-21, 1864. The site of
GLOBE TAVERN
is about
one-half mile southeast of Fort Wadsworth. Globe Tavern was Gen.
G. K. Warren’s headquarters during the August battle.

Directly west of Fort Wadsworth, Flank Road underpasses the Atlantic
Coast Line Railroad. The tour continues straight west, following
Union infantry breastworks on the left, to the intersection (16.7) with
State Route 675. State Route 675 may be found mentioned in Civil
War dispatches as
VAUGHAN ROAD
. A
left turn
is made on State
Route 675.

24. The
POPLAR GROVE NATIONAL CEMETERY
entrance (16.2) is
identified by a marker.
Turn left
on to the cemetery grounds. Poplar
Grove is situated on ground captured by the Union Army in the fight
for the Weldon Railroad, August 18-21. In the winter of 1864-65, the
50th New York Engineers, encamped here, constructed a large log
church. The cemetery contains the graves of more than 6,000 soldiers
and veterans, of which over 4,000 are unknown. Nearly all are Union
veterans of the Civil War.

After a drive through the cemetery grounds the tour returns to State
Route 675 (17.9).
Turn right
and drive north to the junction (18.3) with
State Route 676 which intersects 675 on the left. A
turn
is made on
Route 676. That route is followed to the end, where it connects with
State Route 613 (19.1), known to history as the
SQUIRREL LEVEL ROAD
.

The moat and embankments of Union Fort Davis.

53

25. Union
FORT URMSTON
was constructed in the autumn and early
winter of 1864 on the west side of the Squirrel Level Road. It was named
in honor of a Union officer killed at the Battle of Peebles’ Farm (September
29-October 1, 1864). The heaviest fighting of this engagement
took place around Peebles’ Farm, three-quarters of a mile southwest of
here.

Turn left
on State Route 613 and continue to the intersection (19.6)
with State Route 672 (
CHURCH ROAD
). State Route 672 is the right fork
at this intersection.
Turn
on this road and continue in a northwest
direction.

26.
FORT FISHER
(20.3) is situated on the right side of the road. This
Union stronghold is in an excellent state of preservation, and it is one of
the largest earthen forts constructed in the Civil War. Fort Fisher played
an important part in the campaign after it was built in late 1864. Near
it was a 150-foot Union watchtower used to observe enemy movements
and to spot artillery fire. Behind it, a short distance to the south, was a
field of execution for military offenders and spies where, according to
one observer, violators paid the supreme penalty nearly every week. It
was a signal gun from Fort Fisher which boomed the beginning of the
final assault on the defenses of Petersburg, April 2, 1865.

27.
FORTS WELCH
and
GREGG
. On the left of the road the Union line
continues to these forts, the remains of which are not visible from the
road.

The tour is resumed on State Route 672, or Church Road. This runs
from the Union to the Confederate line. The road crosses the tracks of
the Seaboard Air Line Railroad and, later, overpasses the Norfolk and
Western Beltline Railroad. The direction of the tour is north toward the
Appomattox River (21.8).
Turn right
at the intersection with State Route
603 and continue to the end of State Route 672 (21.3) where it intersects
State Route 142. This road (142) was named the
BOYDTON PLANK
ROAD
at the time of the siege.
Turn right
on State Route 142. The direction
of the tour is east along the Confederate defense line which was
built south of Petersburg.

28. Confederate
FORT GREGG
(22.4). The partially destroyed remains
of this fort are located nearly opposite a Union fort of the same name.
Fort Gregg is situated about 100 yards to the left, or north, of the highway.
It is memorable for the desperate struggle it put up against the
Union attack on April 2, 1865. When it fell, the last Confederate
stronghold on the outer line west of the city was in Northern hands.

29.
FORT LEE
(23.3). Continue on State Route 142 to this fort and junction
with Park Road (Defense Road) on the right. Originally Battery
45 on the “Dimmock Line,” Fort Lee was renamed in honor of the Confederate
commander in chief. It was successfully held after the outer line

54

fell on April 2, but was evacuated when the Confederates fled from
Petersburg that night.

Turn right
on Defense Road at Fort Lee and continue to the junction
(23.8) with the Squirrel Level Road (State Route 613). On the right, or
south, of Defense Road may be seen the remains of Confederate breastworks.

Cross
Squirrel Level Road and follow Defense Road. A short
distance past this intersection the route underpasses the Atlantic Coast
Line Railroad. After winding through a stand of tall pine trees, Defense
Road merges with City Park Road (25.0).

Poplar Grove National Cemetery.

30.
BATTERY PEGRAM
, an important Confederate artillery position, lies
100 yards to the right of this point.

The tour continues straight on City Park Road, which is a continuation
of Defense Road. This curves through a ravine and, on the right,
as the ascent from the ravine is begun, is Wilcox Lake, owned by the
city of Petersburg.

31.
FORT WALKER
(25.5) is at the top of the hill. This, like Fort Lee,
was taken by the Union troops after Lee’s withdrawal during the night
of April 2-3, 1865.

At Fort Walker, City Park Road
merges
with South Boulevard. This
street approximates the Confederate defense line and now passes through
the Walnut Hill section of Petersburg. Follow South Boulevard to the
junction (26.6) with South Sycamore Street (U. S. 301).

55

Interior of Confederate Fort Mahone as it looked shortly after
its capture in April 1865.
Courtesy, National Archives.

32. Confederate
FORT MAHONE
was situated near the large Pennsylvania
Monument which is visible 150 yards to the right of this intersection.
This fort was the scene of heavy fighting on April 2, 1865.

You may turn on South Sycamore Street if you so desire. A right turn
will lead toward Emporia, Va.; a left turn north toward Richmond.

Cross South Sycamore Street and continue on South Boulevard to
intersection (26.8) with U. S. 301.
Turn left
on U. S. 301 and return to
the Crater (28.0) and park museum where tour commenced.

In addition to these tours you may follow U. S. 1 south to the point
where Gen. A. P. Hill fell, and on to Hatcher’s Run, Burgess’ Mill, and
Dinwiddie Court House. These, and other important historical points,
are identified by Virginia State historical markers. Four miles south of
U. S. 460, west of Petersburg, is the Five Forks Battlefield where the
fight occurred on April 1, 1865. The point closest to it on U. S. 460 is
also indicated by a Virginia marker.

How To Reach the Park

The city of Petersburg, 23 miles south of Richmond, Va., is on U. S. 1,
301, 301A, and 460 and may also be reached by railroad or bus. Petersburg
National Military Park lies southeast of the city. You are advised to

56

begin your tour of the park by first going to the Crater and park
museum. They may be reached by U. S. 301 and 460.

Administration

Petersburg National Military Park, established by act of Congress
approved July 3, 1926, has a gross acreage of more than 1,500. It is a part
of the National Park System owned by the people of the United States
and administered for them by the National Park Service of the Department
of the Interior. Communications and inquiries should be addressed
to the Superintendent, Petersburg National Military Park, Petersburg, Va.

Related Areas

There are numerous other Civil War battlefields located in Virginia
within easy driving distance of Petersburg National Military Park.
Among them are Manassas and Richmond National Battlefield Parks
and Fredericksburg and Spotsylvania National Military Park. The site of
the surrender of Lee and the Army of Northern Virginia to Grant and
his Union forces is also commemorated by Appomattox Court House
National Historical Park.

Two important battles outside the boundaries of Virginia in which
the Army of Northern Virginia engaged were at Antietam National
Battlefield Site, Md., and Gettysburg National Military Park, Pa. These
areas are also administered by the National Park Service for the benefit
of the people of the United States.

Visitor Facilities

For the visitor’s convenience and information, the park offers the following
facilities and services: extensive drives and foot trails marked with
interpretive devices; a field museum and library which is located in the
Museum and Administration Building at the Crater; and frequent talks
on the Battle of the Crater and the Petersburg Campaign.

U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1961 0-584509

57

NATIONAL PARK SERVICE

HISTORICAL HANDBOOK SERIES

For Sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington 25, D.C.
Write to that office for Price List 35, which lists this series and other publications published by the
National Park Service.

Antietam

Bandelier

Chalmette

Chickamauga and Chattanooga Battlefields

Custer Battlefield

Custis-Lee Mansion, the Robert E. Lee Memorial

Fort Laramie

Fort McHenry

Fort Necessity

Fort Pulaski

Fort Raleigh

Fort Sumter

George Washington Birthplace

Gettysburg

Guilford Courthouse

Hopewell Village

Independence

Jamestown, Virginia

Kings Mountain

The Lincoln Museum and the House Where Lincoln Died

Manassas (Bull Run)

Montezuma Castle

Morristown, a Military Capital of the Revolution

Ocmulgee

Petersburg Battlefields

Saratoga

Scotts Bluff

Shiloh

Statue of Liberty

Vanderbilt Mansion

Vicksburg

Yorktown

“The Dictator”

Transcriber’s Notes

Silently corrected a few typos.

Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook is public-domain in the country of publication.

In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by _underscores_.

End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Petersburg National Military Park,
Virginia, by Richard Wayne Lykes

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PETERSBURG NATIONAL MILITARY PARK ***

***** This file should be named 58588-h.htm or 58588-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/8/5/8/58588/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.