The Project Gutenberg EBook of On Horseback Through Asia Minor, Volume 2
(of 2), by Fred Burnaby

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll
have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using
this ebook.

Title: On Horseback Through Asia Minor, Volume 2 (of 2)

Author: Fred Burnaby

Release Date: January 20, 2019 [EBook #58738]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ON HORSEBACK THROUGH ASIA ***

Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

Transcriber's Note:

Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
been preserved. Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

The following inconsistent spellings or possible printer's errors
were identified and left as printed:

Mollah and Moullah

Tschorock and Tschoroch

Malattia and Malatia

Djesireh and Djesire

Felujah and Feludjah

Trebizonde and Trebizond

Merdin and Mardin

Soukoum and Soukum

Melaskert and Meleskert

Mahmoud and Mahmod

Beilan and Beylan

Boghaz and Bogaz

Mousch and Moush

ON HORSEBACK THROUGH ASIA MINOR.

VOL. II.

LONDON:

GILBERT AND RIVINGTON, PRINTERS,

ST. JOHN'S SQUARE.

A MAP OF
THE ROUTES WHICH TRAVERSE

ASIA MINOR and MESOPOTAMIA

Stanford's Geog
l
Estab
t
, London.

London: Sampson Low, Marston, Searle & Rivington.

View larger image

ON HORSEBACK THROUGH

ASIA MINOR.

BY

CAPTAIN FRED BURNABY,

AUTHOR OF "A RIDE TO KHIVA."

WITH PORTRAIT AND MAPS.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. II.

London:

SAMPSON LOW, MARSTON, SEARLE, & RIVINGTON,

CROWN BUILDINGS, 188, FLEET STREET.

1877.

[
All rights reserved.
]

v

CONTENTS.

CHAPTER I.

PAGE

My host—A Russian servant—The Crimean war—How
the Russian soldiers were beaten—My father the
Tzar—I would sooner be hanged!—The civilized
way of eating a dinner—Knives and forks of Circassian
manufacture—The Caimacan's opinion of knives
and forks—My host's wife—His mother—Your
Queen likes riding—An Armenian lady inquiring
about balls—The barracks—The appearance of Arabkir—The
prison—The inmates—The troops—A
nation of soldiers—If Allah wills it—Capital required

1

CHAPTER II.

The Mohammedan school—The Governor—The Schoolmaster—His
impertinence—An Armenian song—The
Russians at Tiflis—Are the Russians so very
degraded?—The Hodja, or Schoolmaster—He is put
in prison—The fanatics amongst the Turks—A
school required for Hodjas—Qualified teachers
wanted—Do the Turks insult your religion?—Malattia—A
cross tied to the tail of a dog—We want
newspapers—Even they contradict each other—The

vi

streets are slippery—The precipices—Shephe—The
Kurds—Few Zaptiehs in the province—Hara Bazar—The
village of Ashoot—Arab horses—Deserters—The
Usebashe—God is evidently on our side

11

CHAPTER III.

Radford—His health—The farmer's house—The high elevation—My
brother will look down the precipices—The
Frat—The scenery—A caravan—How to pass
it—The weather—Turks in Egin—A coracle—Beautiful
fish—Sick soldiers—Twenty-four hours without
food—Egin—The Caimacan—The Cadi—His story—Daniel—Samson—His
riches, his 10,000 wives, all
of them fat and lovely—His treasure-chests—The
lovely daughters of the mountaineers—The officers
died; the Pachas died; and last of all, Samson died—The
fate of the Russians

22

CHAPTER IV.

The Armenian church—The devotees—The ladies—The
priest—His toilet—Little boys—A song in honour of
the Queen of England—These Armenians are very
dirty—A hymn sung in English—The inhabitants of
Egin—Turkish doctors—A
post mortem
examination—Price
of meat—Russian agents—The massacres in
Bulgaria—The Hasta Dagh mountain—The descent
of the glacier—I never thought as how a horse could
skate, sir, before!

32

CHAPTER V.

Hasta Khan—The Kurds—Their summer depredations—Our
Sultan ought to be Padishah in his own dominions—The
English Consul—A story about the

vii

Kurds—The Delsin—Arresting the major—The
major's dinner with the chief—Acknowledge the
Padishah—A sore back—The mule which is offered
in exchange—The pack-saddle—The Euphrates—Coal
in the neighbourhood—Kemach—The Caimacan—Djerrid—A
National Guard—A miniature
Gibraltar—Turkoman horses—Numerous wells—One
of the faithful

41

CHAPTER VI.

Kemach—Its population—Barley is very cheap—An
English traveller—Conversation about the impending
war—If we beat Russia, will England permit us
to take back the Caucasus?—Yakoob Khan—The
Poles to be freed—Germany to have the Baltic Provinces—What
about the Crimea?—We ought to
cripple Russia—The Floggers of Women—Crossing
the Euphrates—Radford is poorly—Erzingan—The
intendant of Issek Pacha—Pretty Armenian women—An
intelligent Turk—Iron, silver, gold—Coal—Lead-mines
worked by the Kurds—The peasantry
and coal—The Government and the mines—A relation
of the Pacha of Sivas—The old doctor—Firing
a patient for gout

50

CHAPTER VII.

Erzingan—The Mutasarraf Pacha—Widdin—Russian
official documents—Names of high functionaries—General
Ignatieff—Hindostan—The Kurds will be
excited to massacre the Armenians—The probable
final result of the war—If Turkey were to join
Russia—The boot manufactory—The shoemakers
being drilled—The gaol—Coiners—A jealous woman
in prison—The unfortunate shopkeeper

59

viii

CHAPTER VIII.

Russia's conduct in Servia—The Hodja—We have a great
many troops—If the Circassians will rise—The
Pacha—Raw cotton—The Mohammedan school—The
Hodja's sum—Three jealous husbands—The mosque—Issek
Pacha—A comparison between Mohammedan
Imaums and Christian priests—Provisions—The
old doctor—The road to Erzeroum—Want of sport—Soldiers
frost-bitten

68

CHAPTER IX.

Climbing the mountains—It is bitterly cold—Delan—The
soldiers—Kargan—A bridge over the Euphrates—Mohallata—Our
Padishah is poor now—The Captain
of the Zaptiehs—He wishes to be married—Promotion
wanted—The Erzingan track meets the
Trebizond road—Bashi Bazouks—The Kara Su—Zaptiehs—Erzeroum—The
fortifications of Erzeroum—Ismail
Pacha's residence—A pacific speech
made by Lord Derby—A decoration sent by the
Tzar to the Armenian Bishop of Erzeroum—An Armenian
demonstration—Caravan trade—
Timbaki
—Duties
increased—The price of Timbaki—The Kurds—Russian
agents—A massacre of the Christians to
be brought about by Russian agents

76

CHAPTER X.

The Pacha's interpreter—The Russian Consul—The telegram—
Un
ennemi acharné
of Russia—Mr. Zohrab—The
Russian Government encourages photography—The
paternal Government—Spies—Pregnant women
massacred—How to frighten the mountaineers—Go
and complain to the
Kralli
of the English.—Ask her

ix

to send you an oculist—A blood-stained placard—A
proof of Russian civilization—Two Circassian chiefs—Their
statement—The value of the Caucasus—A
Memoir drawn up by the Emperor Nicholas for
the instruction of the present Emperor Alexander—Our
inheritance is the East—The Circassians must
be freed

84

CHAPTER XI.

The European society in Erzeroum—The Russian Consul
is an energetic man—How to depopulate a country—Russian
passports—Consul Taylor—The intrigues
of the Russian Consul—The Armenian upper classes—How
corrupt they are—The soldiers in Erzeroum—Discontent—
Métallique
—The
Military Hospitals—Recruits
from the South—The head surgeon—The
wards—A valuable medicine—A bad habit—Wasting
ammunition

94

CHAPTER XII.

A conversation with the Pacha—The English Parliament
opened—What will they say about Turkey?—Can
the people at your Embassy speak Turkish?—The
French are brave soldiers—The fortifications—The
roads—The water supply—The posterns—Important
military positions—A dinner with our Consul—He
relates a story—A Kurdish robber—The Colonel—His
young wife—How the Kurd wished to revenge
himself—Many of the Kurds are in Russian pay

104

CHAPTER XIII.

The weather—The number of troops in the town—Wood
is very dear—Tezek—The shape of the town—Trade

x

with Persia—Ismail Pacha's head servant—Have
the Russians arrived?—No, Effendi, but the Pacha
has hanged himself! that is all—The Pacha's wives—He
was gay and handsome—The Consul's dragoman—An
attack of dysentery—Starting for Van—Major-General
Macintosh—His opinion about
the Kurds—The Bazaar at Van—Fezzee Pacha—Kiepert's
map—Erzeroum is very weak—Fezzee
Pacha's opinion about the impending war—The
curious Caves

114

CHAPTER XIV.

The Turkish cemetery—Entering the cavern—The narrow
passage—A branch tunnel—A candle went out—The
ball of string—The Garden of Eden—The serpent—A
dinner with the Engineer-general—Mashallah—The
evil eye—A whole nation of Hodjas—You
English are a marvellous nation—Some of our Pachas
cannot write—This is a miracle—Start for Van—The
postman—A caravan from Persia—The wives of the
Persian merchant—How to balance a fat wife—Herteff—My
host's wife—Stealing sugar

124

CHAPTER XV.

The Kurd—His bonnet—Mohammed is ill—Radford
doctors him—The mustard plaster—The plaster is
cold—Where has the Frank put the flames?—An
old frost-bite—The two merchants—Bayazid—A
Turkish lieutenant—A very dirty Christian—Crossing
the Araxes—Kupri Kui—Yusueri—Deli Baba—Earthenware
jars—How they are made—When the
winter is over—Procrastination

134

xi

CHAPTER XVI.

Low hills—Deep snow—The effect of the sun's rays—Nearly
blind—Daha—The road to Bayazid blocked—The
daughter of my host—Her costume—Soap and
water—A surprise—She is very dirty—If she were
well washed—Turkish merchants—Buying the
daughters—A course of Turkish baths—An addition
to the Seraglio—Rich men always get pretty wives—The
Kurd's sons—The Imaum of the village—My
host's tooth—It aches—I have heard of your great
skill—Cure my tooth—A mustard plaster a remedy
for toothache—A hakim for the stomach—Have
it out—Champagne nippers—My tooth is better
already

142

CHAPTER XVII.

Clearing the way—Leaving Daha—My father was well
cleaned last night—The wonderful medicine—Charging
the snow-drifts—Turkoman steeds—The
Persians—The lieutenant—Zedhane—Molla Suleiman—Toprak
Kale—A sanguinary drama—The
Caimacan—The rivals—An Armenian peasant—The
marriage ceremony—The Circassian Governor—The
Kurd's mother—Revenge—His father's bones—The
Circassian's wives—The Governor in bed—The fight—The
feud between the Kurds and Circassians—Camels
in the water—The ice has broken

151

CHAPTER XVIII.

Armenian lads—Riding calves—Buffaloes—A fair price for
a girl—Our daughters are our maid-servants—A
European wife—A useless incumbrance—A Dervish—The

xii

lieutenant roars at him—Kara Kelise—Kaize
Kuy—The streams in Anatolia—A source of annoyance—Persian
women—A Persian village—The
houses—Rugs manufactured by the inhabitants—Erivan—The
Russian invasion of Persia—Once a
Russian always a Russian—The Murad river—Diyadin—The
garrison—Rumours of peace—Persia—Ararat—The
view—Ophthalmia—Bayazid—The
Pacha's residence—The Russian authorities in Daghestan—Four
hundred people killed—Women and
children shot down and beaten to death—Major-General
Macintosh—His opinion about Bayazid—The
importance of this town from a military point of
view—Syria—Aleppo—Diarbekir—Van—The barracks—Mahmoud
Pacha—His descendants—The
irony of fate—A Hungarian doctor—Mahmoud
Pacha, the son of Issek Pacha, lies here

160

CHAPTER XIX.

A spy—The news from Erivan—The border line—How
he passed the frontier—The Mollahs—A war of extermination
preached by them—A Turkish newspaper—Turks
in Asia—Christians in Europe—The Conference—A
Conference in St. Petersburg—The European
Powers dislike Russia—General Ignatieff a judge
instead of a prisoner—The hour for the evening
prayer—A Turkish officer on prayer—His opinion
about European Bishops—They eat mutton every
day—A Turkish Captain

171

CHAPTER XX.

A Yezeed (devil-worshippers) village—The Usebashe—The
worshippers of Old Scratch—The Yezeed's religion—The

xiii

Spirit of good—The spirit of evil—The
rites—The Grand Vizier of Allah—The unmarried
priest—The wives and daughters in their congregation—A
high honour—Women honoured by the
attentions of a priest—Great excitement at the
priests' arrival—Mr. Layard—His admirable work—Kelise
Kandy—My host—His house—They want
to conquer the Shah—Nadir Shah—He once conquered
you English in Hindostan—The Tzar of
America—You pay Shere Ali a large sum of money—He
is a clever fellow

178

CHAPTER XXI.

Dinner—The Persian's wife is poorly—The wonderful
wet paper—The
samovar
—The harem—Be not
alarmed—She is in a delicate state of health—Jaundice—She
feels better already—No medicine for
your complaint—A mustard plaster would be useless—Sons
of the devil—My lord's baksheesh—Commotion
amongst the servants

188

CHAPTER XXII.

Villages—Arab Dize—Shadili—Shalendili—Karenee—Kurds—Radford
wishes to bleed the inhabitants—Persian
men with their beards dyed red—Every part
of a woman is false—These Persians are a nation of
women—The old fire-worshipper's superstition—Gardens—Irrigation—Soldiers—The
flint fire-locks—They
are unclean ones, these Persians—The little dogs
do some things well—a Persian will kiss you on one
cheek, and will stab you behind your back

196

xiv

CHAPTER XXIII.

No signs of Khoi—At last we arrive—The Turkish Consul—Russian
intrigues—Persian soldiers have attacked a
Turkish village—Kashka Beulah—A Turkish Usebashe
and seven men brought prisoners to Khoi—The
Ambassador at Teheran—Retaliation—The exchange
of prisoners—The origin of the disturbance—The
Shah's uncle—Russian agents in Teheran—Kurdish
girls make the best wives—They do not care about
fine clothes—How to make use of your mother-in-law—The
women in your country—A fortune on dress—My
last wife cost ten liras—Persian women—The
Persians are very cruel—Odd customs—The fortifications
of Khoi—Soldiers gambling

204

CHAPTER XXIV.

The bazaar—Recumbent Persians—Carpets—Cutlery—Russian
calicoes—The houses in Khoi—The schools—A
class of lads—The Pedlar—The schoolmaster
chastises him—Pillaff—Bonbons—Persian ladies like
sweetmeats—Articles of native manufacture—The
mosque—The Russian officials in Erivan—We leave
Khoi—Kotoor Boghaz—The Turkish captain who
was taken prisoner by the Persians—His explanation
of the affair—The Russians are our fathers—The
defile—Magnificent positions for defence—A mineral
spring—The change of temperature

212

CHAPTER XXV.

Kotoor—The Quarantine station—The medical officer in
charge—The Governor of Kotoor—A Russian disguised
as a Persian—Mineral wealth—The Russians

xv

would like this territory—A stepping-stone to Bagdad
and Mosul—A loyal Kurd—Aleshkert—The
people there take the strongest side—Moullah
Hassan—Kurdish merchants—The postman—His
mule in the water—My new yellow trousers—The
saddle-bags in the river—Nestorian villages—How
to buy a wife—Exchange and barter—A horse
and two sheep—Van—The Pacha—The barracks—The
garrison—Bitlis

221

CHAPTER XXVI.

The artillery at practice—The horses—The Commandant—The
Military School at Constantinople—The citadel—Typhus—The
swamp—The sanitary state of
the city—The lake—Natron—A substitute for soap—Stone
cannon-balls—Nadir Shah's attack upon Van—Greek
and Assyrian coins—Salutes during Bairam—An
inscription on the rock—An adventurous Englishman—The
Commandant—A Kurd—Hernia—How
to cure rupture—Three American Missionaries—The
English and American flags—The conflagration at
Van—Armenian inventions—The Commissioner—The
troops

230

CHAPTER XXVII.

An extempore market—Carbonate of soda—The population—The
Pacha's salary—The Commander's pay—The
Hungarian doctor's contract—The Armenian
church—An inscription—A heathen temple—The
Armenian clergy—Their different grades—The monks—The
two Patriarchs—The Catolicos—The
meira
—The
miraculous power of the Catolicos—The miracle
turned into £
s.

d.
—Baptismal and burial fees—Prayers

xvi

for the dead—A curious tradition—King
Abgar the leper—The journey from Van—The
mirage—Gull—Paz—Tishikoomlekui—Ardisch—A
Kurdish girl—A strange custom

240

CHAPTER XXVIII.

Akserai—The Kurds—Raids upon the villages—Five
females ravished—The Pacha at Van is powerless to
help the villagers—The hot springs in Lake Van—Fish—How
to catch them—Zerekli—Starlings—Intelligent
insects—Patnos—We cross the Murad
river—Dotah—The Caimacan—The devil-worshipper—His
house—A Yezeed sheik—Scarcity of accommodation

248

CHAPTER XXIX.

My host—The Sheik's appearance—My host's two
daughters—They attend upon the Sheik—Caressing
the flames—I love the fire—An insult to the Shaitan—Do
you believe in Allah?—Allah can do no harm—The
Yezeed fetish—The tomb of Sheik Adi—Your
cows shall not die—Mohammed wants a fetish—A
cure for rheumatism—The Melek Taoos—Do
you ever pray?—What is the use? Everything
is fixed—You cannot force Destiny to change her
mind—Hidden things—The balls of clay—Mr.
Layard—The seven archangels

253

CHAPTER XXX.

Alongside the river Murad—Waterfalls—The Melaskert
river—Tchekhane—An attack of fever—Quinine—The

xvii

doctor at Toprak Kale—He arrives—The consultation—Excitement
amongst the villagers—The
stethoscope—The audience—How clever these Franks
are—The Effendi is going to die—Rheumatic fever—Pressed
fruit—A native remedy—A long night

260

CHAPTER XXXI.

Mohammed's febrifuge—The doctor's medicine—Zedhane—Daha—Hassan
Bek—Bash—The garrison—We
cross the Araxes—The bridge made by a Circassian—Karakroot—The
Circassian horsemen—The inhabitants—Their
eyes and teeth—Gedjerharman—The
plain around Kars—The streets of the town—The
sewerage of the population—The civil governor—The
river—The war with the Persians—Mount Kara
Dagh—The fortifications

267

CHAPTER XXXII.

The garrison of Kars—Dr. Lanzoni—A probable outbreak
of typhus—The two Pachas—Whose fault is it?—If
God wills it, there will be no cholera—If God wills
it, the Russians will not come here—The hospitals
full of men suffering from typhus fever—The International
Commission—The Grand Duke Michael—Gumri—The
Armenians and their nationality—The
Speech of the Grand Duke—The Master of the
Armenian school—You shall go to prison—The
Emperor Nicholas—Religious liberty granted to Armenians
in Russia—The document—The Patriarch's
death—Suspicious circumstances—Cossacks firing
upon Mohammedans—Three children wounded—Clergymen
of the Church of England—Hankering
after the idolatrous practices of the Greek faith—Wolves

xviii

in sheep's clothing—Colonel Lake—A little
boy shot by the Cossacks—Russia the father of the
fatherless—The Rt. Hon. R. Lowe, M.P.—The
Author of
the Bulgarian horrors
—English officers
and soldiers massacred in the Crimea—The Court of
Inquiry—The Duke of Newcastle's speech—Russian
officers butchering the English wounded

275

CHAPTER XXXIII.

The march to Ardahan—Molla Hassan—A Turkish
major—The garrison of Ardahan—The position of
the town—The fortifications—Procrastination in
military matters—The possible invasion of Great
Britain or India—The military governor—A colonel
of artillery—The Russians might take Van—The
Ala Dagh Mountains—Freemasonry—The ancient
Assyrians—To Livana by road—By the river to
Batoum—Selling the horses—What they fetch—A
bad bargain

287

CHAPTER XXXIV.

Ardanusch—The Ardahan river—Shadavan scenery—Crossing
the mountains—The roof of the world—The
Tschorock river—Mohammed is afraid—Kismet—If
a Christian is ill—Going to Paradise—Does a
Christian send for a doctor?—A vast amphitheatre—Kale,
or the old fortress of Ardanusch—Akiska—War—The
Mostaphas are to be called out—The
road to Livana—The cayek

295

CHAPTER XXXV.

The precipice—Better to die to-morrow than to-day—Livana—The
Caimacan—The Padishah of the United
States—The Clerk—A man with a node on his forehead—A

xix

Christian with a hump-back—The cayek—The
owner of the boat—The Georgians—Mohammed's
alarm—The current—Miradet—The Mudir—A
deserter

301

CHAPTER XXXVI.

Price of corn—Indian corn—Barley—Hardly any horses
in the neighbourhood—Bashi Bazouks—The Persians—Bagdad—A
passenger had been drowned—Mohammed
is sea-sick—The harbour of Batoum—The
quarantine station—The garrison—The Cossack
outposts—Shooting down Turkish sentinels—The
encampment—The sanitary arrangements are good—The
new rifle—The market—Money changers—A
Turkish steamer—The agent—If the Lord wills it—Farewell
to Mohammed—His tears—Human
nature—Reform impossible in Turkey so long as
Russia keeps on intriguing—My fellow passengers—The
Pacha—Trebizond—Arrival in London

307

CHAPTER XXXVII.

The journey is over—Declaration of war—Her Majesty's
Government—An iniquitous and unnecessary step on
the part of the Tzar—The Treaty of Paris—Its
infringement—Impossible to foresee the consequences
of such an act—Russia's contempt for England—England
allied with Turkey—Applying the rod—A
Conference might be held in St. Petersburg—The
solemn assurances of the Emperor—Samarcand—Khiva—The
Black Sea Convention—Let the Russians
go to Constantinople—People who believe in Russian
promises—A non-military power like England—England
ought to join Turkey

316

xx

APPENDIX.

PAGE

I.

The Floggers of Women

323

II.

Christianity as understood in Russia

325

III.

Russian Civilization

327

IV.

Russian Agents and the Massacres in Bulgaria

330

V.

Stabbing under the Guise of Friendship

344

VI.

The Russian way of Christianizing the Turks

346

VII.

The Schoolmasters in Massacre

349

VIII.

Ought we to have saved the Circassians?

350

IX.

Lessons in Massacre

351

X.

Statement of the Circassian Deputies in reference
to the Crimean War

353

XI.

Holy Russia and the Cursed Crescent

361

XII.

The Corruption of Armenian Officials

363

XIII.

Female Brigandage

366

XIV.

The Routes which traverse Asia Minor, and the
Euphrates and Tigris

368

XV.

The Military Importance of Syria

383

XVI.

Sir John Burgoyne on the Defences of Constantinople

388

XVII.

The Chekmagee Lines

393

1

ON HORSEBACK THROUGH ASIA MINOR.

CHAPTER I.

My host—A Russian servant—The Crimean war—How the
Russian soldiers were beaten—My father the Tzar—I
would sooner be hanged!—The civilized way of eating a
dinner—Knives and forks of Circassian manufacture—The
Caimacan's opinion of knives and forks—My host's wife—His
mother—Your Queen likes riding—An Armenian
lady inquiring about balls—The barracks—The appearance
of Arabkir—The prison—The inmates—The troops—A
nation of soldiers—If Allah wills it—Capital required.

My host now called out in a loud voice, "Atech!"
(fire!) "I want to show you my Russian servant,"
he remarked. The door opened. A
man of about fifty years of age, with an unmistakable
Calmuck cast of countenance, brought
a piece of live charcoal, between a pair of
iron tongs, and placed it in the bowl of my
host's chibouk; then, retiring to the end of the

2

room, and crossing his arms, he awaited a fresh
order.

"So you are a Russian?" I said, addressing the
man in his native tongue.

"Yes, your excellency."

"And why did you not return to your own
country after the Crimean war was over?"

The man looked down upon the floor; presently
he remarked,—

"I was beaten."

"Who beat you?"

"I was beaten all day and all night. My
colonel beat me. The sergeant boxed my ears,
and the corporals kicked me!"

"But did you get flogged more than the rest of
your comrades?"

"No, your excellency; at that time we were all
beaten. I am told that now the officers do not flog
their men so much."

"You are a deserter," I remarked.

"No, your excellency, I did not desert. I
liked my father the Tzar too much to run away
when he required my services. I was taken
prisoner; when the war was over, I would not
return to Russia. That is all I have done."

"Well, and if the Russians come here, as it is
quite possible they may, what shall you do then?

3

For you would, in that case, have a very fair
chance of being hanged."

"It would be a dreadful thing, your excellency,
but I must take the risk. I would sooner be
hanged than go back."

"But things have improved in Russia since your
time."

"A little," replied the man. "Little by little
we advance in Russia. It is a nice country for the
rich, but it is a dreadful country for the poor!"

"Is Turkey better?"

"Yes, your excellency, no one is beaten here;
when a man is hungry, no Turk will ever refuse
him a mouthful of food—that is, if he has one
for himself. I hope my brothers will not come
here," continued the man, pointing presumably in
the direction of the Caucasus. "Allah has given
our father the Tzar much land; why does he
want more?" and, after putting some more red-hot
charcoal in the bowls of our pipes, the Moujik
left the room.

My host's frequent journeys to Erzeroum, where
he had occasionally met Europeans, had given him
a taste for the civilized way of eating a dinner.
He pointed with some pride to his knives and forks.
They had been brought to Erzeroum from the
Caucasus, and were a mixture of silver, lead, and

4

gold—the three metals being blended together by
the Circassian artificers, and then formed into the
articles in question.

The Caimacan was also supplied with a knife and
fork; however, this gentleman did not seem to
understand the use of his plate, and ate out of the
dish.

"Which do you like the best—to eat with a
knife and fork, or with your fingers?" I inquired.

"With my fingers," replied the Caimacan.
"It is so much cleaner," he continued. "I
first wash my hands, and then put them into the
dish; but I do not clean my own fork—that is
the duty of the servant, who, perhaps, is an idle
fellow. Besides this, who knows how many
dirty mouths this fork has been stuck into before
I put it in mine?"

Later in the evening, and when the governor
had retired, my host said that his wife and mother
would come and sit with us for a little while.

"I am not like the other Armenians in Anatolia,"
continued the speaker; "I have determined to shut
up my female relations no longer."

"Do they not cover their faces?" I inquired.

"Yes, in the street they do, but not inside the
house."

The ladies now entered. They were dressed

5

in loose yellow silk dressing-gowns. Making a
profound reverence to my host and self, they
seated themselves on a divan in the farther corner
of the room, tucking their legs underneath
them, and assuming the same position as my
companion.

"It is a great honour for them to see an Englishman,"
he observed.

"Yes," said the old lady, "and what a distance
you have come! Our roads are bad, and
travelling is very disagreeable for ladies," she
continued. "To have to go always on horseback, or
in a box slung on a mule, is not comfortable. Do
English ladies ride?"

"Yes."

"And why should they ride?" observed my
host's wife. "Have they not carriages and railways
in your country, so that when a man travels
he can take a woman with him without any
difficulty?"

"Yes, but they ride for pleasure. Our Queen is
very fond of riding, and often does so when she is
in Scotland."

"Your Queen likes riding! That is a miracle!"
said the old lady.

"I do not like it at all—it makes me so sore,"
said her companion; "but you Franks are wonderful

6

people, and your women seem to do what they
like!"

"Would not you like to do the same?" I inquired.

"A woman's place is to stay at home, and look
after the children," said my host's mother gravely.

"Do not the husbands in England often become
jealous of their wives?" inquired my host,—"and
the wives of their husbands?" interrupted the old
lady.

"Yes, sometimes."

"Well, there is a great deal to be said on both
sides of the question," observed the Armenian.
"It will be a long time before we follow you in
all your customs."

"You have places in your country where the
men and women meet and dance together in the
same way as our gipsies dance—at least so I have
been told," remarked my host's wife.

"Not exactly like your gipsies," I replied; "but
we have what are called balls, where men and
women meet and dance together."

"The husband with his own wife?"

"No, not always. In fact, more often with the
daughter or wife of a friend."

"I should like to see a ball very much,"
observed my host.

7

"We had better go," said his mother, "it is getting
late;" rising from the sofa, she made another
very obsequious reverence, and left the room with
her daughter-in-law.

The following day I rode to see the barracks.
Arabkir is built in such a straggling
fashion, that, although it only contains about
3000 houses, it extends for a distance of six miles.
The houses are built on each side of a deep ravine.
The streets, which are very precipitous, lead, in
some instances, over the flat roofs of the dwellings.
The latter were many of them built of
stone, and an air of cleanliness prevailed throughout
the town.

Large gardens, planted with all sorts of fruit-trees,
surrounded the houses. Long avenues of
mulberry-trees were to be met with in every
direction.

I stopped for a few minutes at the prison, and,
dismounting, walked into the building. There
were only seven prisoners—six Turks and one
Armenian—the latter for attempting to pass false
money, the Mohammedans for robberies and debt.

The population in Arabkir is equally divided
between the Turks and Armenians. It was
very creditable to the latter that there should be
only one Armenian in the gaol. By all accounts,

8

there was very little crime in this district, and the
prison of Arabkir would be often for weeks together
without a single criminal within its walls.

We arrived at the barracks, a square building,
with long dormitories for the troops, and which
were fairly clean. It contained at the time of my
visit 500 redif (reserve) soldiers. They were shortly
to start for Erzeroum. There were quarters for
three times that number of troops, and another
battalion was expected very shortly.

The men had not received their uniform. It
was to be given to them at Erzeroum; they were
clad for the most part in rags and tatters,
and had been armed with the needle rifle. I
was informed that the Martini-Peabody weapon
would be shortly served out to them. A squad of
men was being instructed in the manual exercise
in one of the passages. I spoke to the officer, and
inquired if the battalion had ever been out for
target practice.

"No," replied the man, apparently surprised at
the question, "we want all our ball-cartridges for
the enemy."

"But if your men do not practise at a target in
the time of peace, they will not be able to hit their
enemies in the time of war."

"We are a nation of soldiers," said the officer.

9

"Every Turk carries a fire-arm. You have
doubtless observed this on your journey," he
continued.

"Yes; but the weapons are for the most part
old flint guns, which, if fired, would be quite as
dangerous to the owners as to the foe, and are of
no use whatever as a means of enabling your
soldiers to aim correctly."

"If Allah wills it, our bullets will strike the
Russians," observed the Turk.

"If Allah wills it, there will be no war, and all
this instruction which you are giving the men in
the manual exercise will have been wasted. What
is the good of teaching your soldiers anything?"
I continued; "if Allah wills it so, they can
defeat the enemy with chibouks and nargilehs
(pipes) just as easily as with Martini rifles!"

"This is the effect of the doctrine of fatalism,"
observed my Armenian host, who had accompanied
me to the barracks; "it is the cause of half the
apathy which characterizes the Turks. Why, they
only commenced making roads after Sultan Abdul
Aziz's visit to Europe."

"But you Armenians are equally to blame in
that respect," I observed. "Only look at your
own town. There are no roads, the streets are
not paved, and they are full of ruts. The inhabitants

10

are half of them Armenians; then why do
not you Christians set the Turks an example, and
begin by making a road to Divriki?"

"We are quite as apathetic as the Mohammedans,"
replied the Armenian. "The same observation
which you have just made has been repeated
to us fifty times over; but there is no one who has
energy enough in his disposition to commence
taking the initiative."

"Why do not you set about the business yourself?"

"I have my own affairs to look after. We are
not public-spirited, or like Englishmen," continued
my companion; "each one of us thinks of
his purse first, and afterwards of how to benefit
his fellow-townsmen. What a good thing it
would be for the country if you English were to
come here!" he continued. "All we want is a
little of your energy, with it and capital, Anatolia
would soon become one of the richest countries
in the world."

11

CHAPTER II.

The Mohammedan school—The Governor—The Schoolmaster—His
impertinence—An Armenian song—The Russians at
Tiflis—Are the Russians so very degraded?—The Hodja,
or Schoolmaster—He is put in prison—The fanatics
amongst the Turks—A school required for Hodjas—Qualified
teachers wanted—Do the Turks insult your religion?—Malattia—A
cross tied to the tail of a dog—We want
newspapers—Even they contradict each other—The
streets are slippery—The precipices—Shephe—The Kurds—Few
Zaptiehs in the province—Hara Bazar—The village
of Ashoot—Arab horses—Deserters—The Usebashe—God
is evidently on our side.

From the barracks we rode to the Mohammedan
school. Here there were about thirty boys, all
squatting on the floor, and engaged in spelling
verses of the Koran. A few badly-drawn maps of
the different quarters of the world were hung round
the whitewashed walls. The governor accompanied
me to the school-room. On his entrance the boys
at once stood up and salaamed. The Hodja schoolmaster
made a gesture, as if he too would rise;

12

but then, seeing me, his countenance changed.
He sank back into a sitting position.

"This is done to show his contempt of you as a
giaour," whispered an Armenian. "This is how
he insults us Christians."

The Caimacan turned a little red when he saw
the schoolmaster thus seated in his presence.
However, he did not make any remark, but
accompanied me to the Armenian school.

There were about a hundred boys in the establishment.
The moment I arrived they commenced
an Armenian song, headed by one of the masters—an
elderly gentleman, who sang through his nose.
A performer on an ancient harpsichord, which
from its signs of age might have belonged to
Queen Anne, accompanied the vocalists. The
words, I was informed, were about the glories of
Armenia, what a fine nation the Armenians were,
and how some day Armenia will lift up her head
once more. My host interpreted to me these verses.

"Do you think that Armenia will ever be independent?"
I inquired.

He shook his head.

"Russia will very likely be here in a year or
two, and then we shall be much more oppressed
than we are at present. Why, the Russian Government
will not allow this song to be sung in our

13

schools at Tiflis. Everything is done to make my
fellow-countrymen in the Caucasus forget their
own language and nationality, and to thoroughly
Russify them. If the Russians were to come here,
our religion would soon disappear," he continued.

"But some of your priests rather like the
Russians?"

"Some people would sell their souls to obtain
a cross or an order," said another Armenian.
"But every patriot amongst us who has read of
what our country once was will scorn the idea of
being degraded into a Muscovite."

"Are the Russians so very degraded?" I
remarked.

"They possess all the vices of the Turks, and
none of their good qualities. They drink like
swine; many of their officials embezzle the public
money; and as to lying, they can even outdo the
Greeks in this respect."

"You have not a high opinion of the Tzar's
people?" I observed.

"No, Effendi; better a hundred times remain
as we are than be forced to submit to his rule."

"Is that really so? I thought that you were
always complaining about the want of liberty in
Turkey," I remarked.

"Yes, Effendi, all we wish for is to be placed on

14

the same footing as the Turks themselves. This
is the Sultan's desire; a firman has been issued to
that effect, but it is a dead letter. The Cadis ought
to carry out the law; they will not do so. They
ought to be forced to carry out the Padishah's
orders."

On returning to my quarters, the Caimacan,
who accompanied me, remarked,—

"Effendi, did you notice the Hodja's (schoolmaster)
conduct?"

"I did."

"I was sorry to remark that he did not stand
up when you entered the room."

"It was a very bad example for the boys; they
could plainly see that their preceptor did not hold
the chief magistrate of the town in much respect,"
I observed.

The Caimacan hesitated for a moment, and then
remarked,—

"Oh! it was not on my own account that I
spoke, but for the sake of the Effendi, who is an
Englishman. It was an insult to him."

"Not in the least," I remarked. "How could
it have been, when you were present? Why, you
would have taken notice of it immediately."

"I did," said the Caimacan drily, "and the
schoolmaster is in prison!"

15

"Is in prison? What for?"

"For contempt of his superiors."

"How long shall you keep him there?"

"That depends upon you, but he has been
shut up about two hours already."

"I should think that it would be sufficient," I
remarked.

"Shall I send and have him released?" said
the Caimacan.

"Yes, if you think that he has sufficiently atoned
for the way in which he insulted you; but make
him come here and apologize for his conduct."

My Armenian host now came to me.

"Do not ask for that," he remarked. "All the
fanatics amongst the Turks would be furious with
me if they heard that the schoolmaster had been
forcibly brought to my house to apologize to you,
a giaour. The fellow has had a good lesson," he
continued, "and will be more particular the next
time he sees a European."

"Are there many fanatics in this neighbourhood?"
I inquired.

"Not more so than in other parts of Turkey; it
is everywhere very much the same. What ought
to be done," continued the speaker, "would be
to establish large schools, and insist upon the
parents sending their children to be taught.

16

If Mohammedan and Christian boys and girls
were to meet in the same schoolroom, and
learn their lessons together, they would be more
likely to mutually respect each other in after-life.
To carry this idea into execution, it would first
be necessary to procure a staff of efficient schoolmasters.
There ought to be a college for Hodjas
in Constantinople, where Mohammedan and Christian
young men could be educated, and pass an
examination as to their efficiency. We should
then have qualified men as teachers, instead of
the ignorant fanatics who now usurp the office.
There is another reform which we require," continued
my host, "and this is that the Mudirs,
Caimacans and Pachas in the different provinces
should not be exclusively Turks. The various
posts ought to be open to every sect. We are all,
Christians as well as Mohammedans, the Sultan's
subjects; then why make a difference? If the
Turkish lower orders saw that Armenians were
sometimes selected to be Pachas and Caimacans,
they would be more likely to respect the Christian
community."

"Do the Turks often insult your religion?" I
inquired.

"No, not often, but they call us giaours
(infidels)."

17

"Yes," said another Armenian, a professor at
the Armenian school, and who could speak a little
French; "in Malattia there are twelve thousand
inhabitants, made up of three thousand Christians
and nine thousand Turks. Only three months
ago some Mohammedans in that town made a
cross and tied it to the tail of a dog. The hound
ran through the streets of the town; the little
boys threw stones at him, and the holy symbol
was dragged in the mud."

"This is very horrible," I remarked. "Did you
see it yourself?"

"No, but I have heard of it."

"Who told you?"

"A man in Arabkir."

"Had he seen it?"

"No, he had not been in Malattia, but he had
been told the story. Every one has heard of it."

"We are in the East," I observed to my
host, "and it appears to me that you Christians
are very much given to exaggeration."

"Yes, Effendi; we want newspapers. If we
only had newspapers we should then know the
truth. How fortunate you must be in England
to have so many newspapers!"

"Even they contradict each other sometimes,"
I remarked.

18

"Perhaps. But you are a great nation; I
should like to be an Englishman."

"So should I," said the schoolmaster.

The mercury in the thermometer fell very much
during the night. It was a frosty morning. The
steep streets of Arabkir were extremely slippery.
It was difficult enough for a man on foot to avoid
falling; as we led our horses down the treacherous
inclines, the poor brutes skated about in all
directions.

We crossed a rapid stream, fifty yards wide, on
a fairly strong bridge—this river runs into the
Euphrates, forty miles south of Arabkir—and
next had to lead our animals through a difficult
and mountainous district.

The track was very narrow. It generally
sloped towards a precipice. In some instances
there was a clear drop of at least 400 feet within
six inches of our horses. The surface upon which
they had to walk was like glass. A slip would
have been certain death; it was marvellous how
they avoided stumbling. In about three hours'
time we reached Shephe, an Armenian village. I
halted here for a few minutes to bait our animals.

The proprietor of the house where we dismounted
spoke highly of the Caimacan at Arabkir.
However, he freely cursed the Kurds, who in

19

the summer-time committed many depredations
in the neighbourhood. In the months of June
and July, no man's life was in safety. There
were so few Zaptiehs in the province that
the robbers could carry on their trade with
impunity.

Presently we passed a stream called the Erman
Su. It is spanned by a good stone bridge. On
reaching the other side, I found myself in a
broad, well-cultivated plain. The ruins of a large
city lay heaped up by the river's banks. This was
the site of Hara Bazar, an Armenian town which
flourished long before either Arabkir or Egin
were built. The ruins lay some little distance
from the path, I did not visit them. My
guide informed me that the débris consists of
enormous stones. These are the wonder of
the villagers, who generally build their houses of
mud. They cannot conceive what manner of men
were their ancestors who had taken the trouble
to bring such massive slabs from the distant
mountains. The village of Ashoot stands in the
middle of the plain, and is composed of fifty-one
houses, all belonging to Mohammedans. The
inhabitants, for Turks, were extremely wealthy;
some nice-looking Arab horses stood in my
host's drawing-room. He was the chief person

20

in the village, and presently informed me that
twenty soldiers, who were on their way to Erzeroum,
had deserted, a few days before, from a
hamlet about six miles distant. He had been on
their track, and would certainly have shot the
culprits if he had been able to catch them. There
had been no officer with these soldiers. The
men had been left to find their way to Erzeroum
without even being accompanied by a sergeant.

"Three days ago," continued my informant,
"a battalion, 800 strong, came to this village.
The officer in command demanded from the
inhabitants nine mules for the transport of his
sick men. The amount to be paid by him for the
hire of the animals to Egin was fixed at 200
piastres (about 1
l.
of our money). The officer
omitted to settle the account. The villagers
have applied to the police authorities at Egin for
the sum, and are very angry because it has not
been paid."

A Usebashe (captain) now called. He had just
arrived from Erzeroum, and declared that there
was a report in that town to the effect that
Yakoob, Khan of Kashgar, had attacked the
Russians near Tashkent—had utterly defeated
them, and taken 20,000 prisoners and twenty
guns.

21

"Allah grant that it may prove true!" said my
host. "Twenty thousand sons of dogs in captivity!
This is something! I hope Yakoob has cut all
their throats."

"God is evidently on our side!" said the
village Imaum.

"The Russians say He is on theirs," I remarked.

"Yes," replied the Imaum. "Infidels even can
take the name of the Highest One in vain. But
this time they will be punished, and the Prophet
is already arranging a plan for their destruction."

22

CHAPTER III.

Radford—His health—The farmer's house—The high elevation—My
brother will look down the precipices—The Frat—The
scenery—A caravan—How to pass it—The weather—Turks
in Egin—A coracle—Beautiful fish—Sick soldiers—Twenty-four
hours without food—Egin—The Caimacan—The
Cadi—His story—Daniel—Samson—His riches, his
10,000 wives, all of them fat and lovely—His treasure-chests—The
lovely daughters of the mountaineers—The
officers died; the Pachas died; and last of all, Samson died—The
fate of the Russians.

I was beginning to be a little alarmed about
the health of my servant Radford. So far he
had not been ill, and had resisted the fatigue
of wading through deep snow, of bad sleeping
accommodation and indifferent fare. He had
complained of a pain in his heart, during our march
that morning, and had not been able to walk uphill
save at a very slow rate. On arriving at the
farmer's house, he had lain down in a corner, and,
according to Mohammed, was very ill. I went

23

to him, and, feeling his pulse, found that it intermitted.
He was feverish, and complained of a
pain in the head.

"Would he be able to march the following
day?"

"He thought he should."

I was exceedingly doubtful about it; and,
leaving word with Mohammed to call me, should
his fellow-servant be taken worse in the night, I
lay down by the side of our horses and tried to
go to sleep.

I myself, for several days past, had experienced
considerable difficulty in wading through the snow,
but was inclined to believe that this was owing
to our elevation above the level of the sea, and
that the diminished pressure of air upon my
body, combined with the hard work, was the
real cause of this weakness. However, the fact remained
that the poor fellow was knocked up. It
would be impossible to remain for more than a
day or two in our present quarters. I determined
to push on as fast as his health would
permit to Erzingan; for once there we should be
within a nine days' march of Trebizonde, and it
would be possible, if he were still poorly, for me
to send him home to his relations.

To my great delight he was a little better

24

in the morning, though still very weak. He
would have been unable to walk; he had strength
enough left to sit on a horse. I gave orders
that he was on no account to go on foot, and
resolved to let him ride my horse from time to
time, should his own animal be unable to carry
him through the drifts.

"My brother will be on horseback all the day.
He will look well down the precipices," said
Mohammed with a chuckle.

He had observed that the Englishman did not
relish riding a few inches from a chasm, and
Mohammed was rather amused to learn that his
fellow-servant would now no longer have the
chance of walking by the precipices. He himself,
though not particularly brave in other respects,
never seemed to value his neck when on horseback.
No matter how steep the slopes might be,
Mohammed seldom or ever took the trouble to
dismount from his animal, which, under the influence
of two good feeds of barley every day,
had improved considerably since the march from
Tokat.

"Why should I dismount?" Mohammed would
say. "If I am to slip and be killed, it will
happen, and I cannot prevent it."

The fellow had been accustomed to a mountainous

25

country all his life, and had previously
been employed as a Zaptieh. This may account
for his coolness on horseback. But, at a later
period of the journey, and when it was necessary
for us to descend some rapids in a boat,
Mohammed showed unmistakable signs of fear,
and was not at all to be consoled by Radford's
remark that, if he (Mohammed) were to be
drowned, it would be his fate, and so would not
signify.

We reached the crest of a lofty height. A wide
stream appeared below our feet.

"What is the name of that river?" I inquired.
The welcome announcement, "The Frat," made
me aware that at last I had arrived on the banks
of the Euphrates—here a broad stream about
120 yards wide and nine or ten feet deep.
Numerous boulders half choked up the river's
channel. The waves splashed high in the air as
they bounded over these obstacles; the sound
of the troubled waters could be distinctly heard
even at our elevation.

We continued the march alongside the bank of
the world-renowned river. The path was cut
out of the solid rock. In some places the
track was not above four feet wide. No balustrade
or wall had been made to keep a horse

26

or rider from slipping down the chasm. Presently
the road wound still higher amidst the
mountains. The river beneath us seemed no
broader than a silver thread.

On we went. The sound of bells made us
aware that there was a caravan approaching.
Our guide rode first. A few moments later,
about 100 mules, all laden with merchandise,
could be seen coming towards our party. We
should have to pass them; how to do so seemed
a difficult problem to solve. The track was not
wider than an average dinner-table.

The guide soon settled the matter. Taking a
whip, he struck the leading mule; the latter, to
avoid punishment, ran with his load up a steep
slope along the side of the path. The rest of the
animals followed. There seemed to be scarcely
foothold for a goat, but the mules found one.
They were removed from the path on which we
stood, my people could advance in safety.

Numbers of vines clad the lower part of the
mountain slopes. Here and there a few châlets
made of white stone could be seen. These, I was
informed, belong to the wealthier Turks of Egin,
who come to reside here during the grape season.

Below us some fishermen were seated in a boat
apparently made of basket-work. It looked like a

27

Welsh coracle, but was of much larger dimensions.
They were engaged in fishing with a sort of dragnet,
one of them was busily employed in mending
a smaller one of the same kind.

"Beautiful fish are caught here," said the guide.
"Some are 100 okes in weight (about 260 lbs.).
The people salt, and eat them in the winter."

We met some sick soldiers lying across the
path. They had fallen out of the ranks and were
basking themselves in the sun, utterly regardless
of the fact that their battalion was, ere this, a two
hours' march ahead of them.

"What is the matter with you?" I inquired of
one man.

"Footsore," was his reply, at the same time
pointing to his frost-bitten feet.

"And with you?" to another.

"I, Effendi, I am weak and hungry."

"What! have you had no breakfast?"

"No."

I then discovered that these soldiers had
been twenty-four hours without food! There
was no grumbling at this breakdown in the commissariat
department. The men were solacing
themselves with a cigarette, the property of one
of the party, and which he was sharing with his
comrades.

28

Our route leads us by some high rocks. They
are broken into strange and fantastic forms;
they rear themselves up on each bank of the
Euphrates, and frown down on the waters below.
Here domes and pinnacles stand out in bold
relief; there, the figure of a man, shaped as if
from the hands of a sculptor, is balanced on a
projecting stone, and totters on the brink of the
abyss.

Mulberry and apple-trees grow in wild profusion
along the banks. We leave them behind.
The track steadily ascends. We are more than
1200 feet from the waters. I gaze down on the
mighty river; it winds its serpent-like coils at our
feet. They twist and foam and lose themselves
behind the crags. Higher we go.

Vegetation disappears, we are in the realms of
snow; continuing for some miles over the waste,
the path descends into a valley. Egin lies before
us.

It is a long, straggling town, with a population
of 10,000 souls, and much resembles Arabkir.
We rode over the roofs of many houses ere we
reached our destination—the house of an Armenian
merchant, who had ridden out himself to
place it at our disposal. The following day I
called upon the Caimacan—a little man, who spoke

29

Italian very fairly. He had been only seven months
at his present post. The Cadi was seated at his
side. After the governor had announced that the
Conference was a failure—a piece of news which
I had heard before—the Cadi observed that he
should like to tell me a story.

"He relates a story very well," said the Caimacan.

"We all like his stories," said the rest of the
company.

"By all means," I said; and the Cadi, thus
encouraged, began,—

"Many thousand years ago there was a prophet—he
was a great man, he was a marvel—his name
was Daniel!"

This last word was duly repeated by the assembled
guests; and the Caimacan gave a little
cough.

"I have heard this story before," he observed;
"but it is a good one. Go on."

"Well," continued the Cadi, "Daniel had a
dream. In his dream he saw a young man, Samson
was his name. Samson was beautifully
dressed; his clothes alone would have cost all the
gold and caime that have ever been circulated at
Constantinople. The rings on his fingers were
encrusted with precious stones—beautiful stones—each

30

one more bright and lovely than the eye of
the most beautiful woman whom mortal man has
ever seen.

"But, Samson himself was pale, his features
were wasted away; he was very thin, and, on
carefully looking at him, Daniel discovered that
he was dead. There was a large scroll of paper
lying at his feet. No other man could have deciphered
the letters on it; but the Prophet read
them at once, and he galloped his eye over the
scroll with the same rapidity as a hunter in pursuit
of a hare—"

"He read very quickly!" interrupted the Caimacan.

"Daniel was a Hodja" (learned man), observed
the Cadi indignantly; "of course he did!"

"Samson had conquered almost the whole
world," continued the speaker; "but, there was
one very poor and mountainous country which did
not acknowledge him as its lord.

"Samson had 10,000 wives, all of them fat and
lovely. The keys of his treasure-chests were in
themselves a load for 10,000 camels. He was all
vigorous and able to enjoy every blessing which
Allah had bestowed upon him—"

"Was he not satisfied with 10,000 wives?"
remarked one of the audience.

31

"No," said the Cadi. "Some men are never
satisfied; Samson was one of them. He wanted
more. His heart was not full, he wished to
conquer the poor country, and take a few wives
from the lovely daughters of the mountaineers.
He came with an enormous army. The people
fled. The troops ate up everything. There
were no more provisions. There was nothing
left even for the king. Samson offered 10,000
sacks of gold for a handful of millet-seed. It
could not be purchased. The soldiers died; the
sergeants died; the officers died; the Pachas
died; and, last of all, Samson died!"

"Let this be the fate of the Russians if they
come here," added the Cadi. "The Tzar has
much land—he is rich—he has many more soldiers
than we have, he has everything to make life
happy. Yet he is not content; he wishes to
take from his poor neighbour the pittance which
he possesses. Let Allah judge between him and
us," continued the speaker. "And God alone
knows who will be victorious!"

"We shall beat them!" said the Caimacan.

Soon afterwards my visit came to an end.

32

CHAPTER IV.

The Armenian church—The devotees—The ladies—The priest—His
toilet—Little boys—A song for the Queen of England—These
Armenians are very dirty—A hymn sung in
English—The inhabitants of Egin—Turkish doctors—A

post mortem
examination—Price of meat—Russian agents—The
massacres in Bulgaria—The Hasta Dagh mountain—The
descent of the glacier—I never thought as how a
horse could skate, sir, before!

I now went to the Armenian church. It was carpeted
with thick Persian rugs like a mosque.
Several pictures in gaudy frames were hung against
the wall. The building was crowded with devotees;
the galleries being filled with women; their
faces were invisible, owing to the lattice-work.
However, some bright eyes peering inquisitively
through the holes in the screen were quite
sufficient to turn a man's thoughts in their
direction.

The priest put on his robes—several little

33

boys assisting him in his toilette; a heavy, yellow
silk garment, with a cross emblazoned in gold
upon the back, was drawn on over his every-day
apparel. Some more little boys bustled about
with long candles, and seemed to do their best
to get into each other's way, then the service
began.

Two songs were sung by the choir—first one for
the Queen of England, as a sort of compliment to
the nationality of the foreign visitor; and then
another for the Sultan. The old priest next
addressed the congregation, and said that they
must do everything in their power to help the
Sultan in this war against Russia, who was a
mortal enemy to the Armenian religion.

The Caimacan was standing by me in the
church, and seemed pleased at the discourse.

"It is good! very good!" he said. "I wonder
if the priest means it."

The worthy Turk's meditations were suddenly
interrupted. Some insect had bitten him.

"These Armenians are very dirty, they do not
wash," he added. "Let us go."

Everybody bowed as he walked down the
nave, and we then proceeded to the Protestant
church.

This was nothing but a large room in the

34

clergyman's house. On our entry, some boys
sang a hymn in English. They pronounced the
words tolerably well, though they were ignorant
of their meaning, the clergyman who spoke our
language having taught his pupils merely to read
the Roman characters. There were no pictures
or images of any kind in the room. A simple
baptismal font was its sole ornament. After the
hymn had concluded, the clergyman, without putting
on any extra vestments, addressed his congregation
in a few straightforward and practical
sentences, saying that as it was the duty of the
Jews to pay tribute to Cæsar, it was equally proper
for all true Christians to respect the Turkish
authorities; that the Turks were on the eve of
a great struggle with a power which oppressed all
religions but its own, and consequently it was the
duty of all Armenian Protestants to aid the Government
in the forthcoming struggle, and shed
the last drop of their blood for the Padishah.

The inhabitants of the town are not a trading
community, most of them live by agriculture.
There was a considerable amount of grumbling to
be heard about the bankrupt state of the country;
I learnt that many of the farmers had invested
their savings in Turkish bonds, and had lost
their capital. A Greek doctor who gave me this

35

information had been established for many years
in Egin.

"What do you think of the Turkish doctors?"
I inquired.

"They are very ignorant," he replied; "but
what can you expect in a country where it is not
permitted to study anatomy, &c., in a practical
way?"

"What, do they not allow dissection?" I
asked.

"No. And even if you were convinced that a
patient had died of poison, it would be very difficult
to obtain permission to make a
post mortem

examination of his body. The result is that
poisoners go unpunished. The Turkish surgeons
are so ignorant that they cannot even tie up an
artery, much less perform an average operation."

The Caimacan now joined in our conversation,
which was in Italian, and began to find
fault with the old school of Turks, which is an
enemy to education, and bigoted about religious
matters.

"I make no difference between a Christian or a
Mussulman," said the governor. "All religions
are good, provided that the man who practises
them is honest."

"What we require are schools for the elder

36

Turks," he continued; "something to force them
to advance with the age, and to make them forget
that old maxim, 'What was good for my father, is
it not good enough for me?' Until they forget
this, there will not be much improvement in
Turkey. A company once offered to make a railway
from Diarbekir to Constantinople, and, if
Sultan Abdul Aziz had not spent all the money he
borrowed from you English people in palaces and
his harem, the railway might have been made.
Meat is here only one penny a pound; at our seaports
you have to pay fourpence for the same
quantity. We have mines, too, but no means of
transporting the mineral if we worked them. I
have been at Egin six months," he continued. "I
may be dismissed at any moment. What inducement
is there for a man to try and improve the
condition of the people, when all his work may be
upset by his successor? We Caimacans are underpaid,"
he added. "We have not enough to
live upon. If we received a better salary, and our
positions were more stable, there would be less
bribery throughout the Turkish empire."

"Do you believe that there are many Russian
agents in the neighbourhood?" I inquired.

"Undoubtedly; particularly at Erzeroum, and

37

there they intrigue with the Armenian clergy. In
the other towns the Armenians will not have
much to say to them. The Russians are more
unpopular near the frontier of the two empires
than elsewhere. We are spoken of very harshly
in Europe," continued the Caimacan. "The
massacres in Bulgaria were very horrible, but they
were the work of a few fanatics, and brought
about by Russian instigation. It is hard upon us
for people to judge of the entire Turkish nation
by the misdeeds of a few Circassians."

My host insisted upon seeing me off, and the
following morning we walked down to the narrow
wooden bridge which spans the Euphrates—here
about forty yards wide.

After crossing the river, our course lay across
the Hasta Dagh (mountain). Presently we came
to a glacier. The frozen surface extended for at
least one hundred yards. The incline was steeper
than the roof of an average English house.

How was this to be passed? Radford looked
at Mohammed. The latter gave a grunt.

"What do you think of it, Mohammed?" I
asked.

"Effendi, we shall go down very fast. If the
Lord wills it, we shall not break our bones."

"If we do not take this route," said the guide,

38

"we must make a détour for at least two hours.
I think the horses can manage it, Effendi."

"Very well," I said, "you can try."

The guide rode his horse to the glacier. The
poor animal trembled when he reached the brink.

"
Haide
, get on!" cried Mohammed from behind,
and, striking the quadruped on his flanks,
the animal stretched his fore-legs over the declivity,
almost touching the slippery surface with his
girth.

Another crack with the whip, away went the
guide and horse down the glacier. For the
first fifty yards the man succeeded in keeping
his steed's head straight. A slight inequality in
the ice gave the animal's hoof a twist in another
direction; horse, and rider went round in
mazy circles; they had nearly obtained the velocity
of an express train, when they were suddenly
brought up by a snow-drift. There was
not much damage done, and now I prepared to
make the descent. It was not an agreeable sensation.
I was on the edge of the precipice. The
yelling Mohammed was castigating my animal
from behind. I felt very much like Mr. Winkle,
as described in the "Pickwick Papers," the first
time he was on skates. I would have gladly
given Mohammed five shillings or a new coat to

39

desist from the flagellating process. However,
the die was cast. My followers were looking on.
What the guide had done it was very clear
that an Englishman ought to do. I committed
myself to Providence. Away we went. The
steam roundabouts in the Champs Elysées in Paris
revolve at a great pace; a slide down the artificial
ice-hills in St. Petersburg will sometimes try a
man's nerves; but the sensations experienced in
these manners of locomotion are nothing to what
I felt when sliding down that glacier. Was I on
my horse or was I not? Now we were waltzing
madly down the slippery surface, and then my
boots were touching the ice itself, owing to my
animal's position. One moment we ricochetted
from a rough piece of the hard substance, and
were flying in the air, as if jumping the Whissendine
brook; a second later we were buried, as the
guide had been, in six feet of snow.

Next came the turn of my followers. Their
descent was a fearful thing to witness, but, fortunately,
not half so dangerous as it appeared.
With the exception of some damage to the luggage
and saddlery, there was little harm done.

"I never thought as how a horse could skate,
sir, before!" remarked my English servant, as he
slowly extricated himself from the snow-drift. "It

40

was more than sliding, that it was—a cutting of
figures of eight all down the roof of a house! And
then I was buried alive in snow, to finish up with!
Mohammed will have something to pray about, if
he has to go down any more of these hills, for
nothing but Providence can save a man's neck in
these here parts."

41

CHAPTER V.

Hasta Khan—The Kurds—Their summer depredations—Our
Sultan ought to be Padishah in his own dominions—The
English Consul—A story about the Kurds—The Delsin—Arresting
the major—The major's dinner with the chief—Acknowledge
the Padishah—A sore back—The mule
which is offered in exchange—The pack-saddle—The
Euphrates—Coal in the neighbourhood—Kemach—The
Caimacan—Djerrid—A National Guard—A miniature
Gibraltar—Turkoman horses—Numerous wells—One of
the faithful.

On we went, fortunately not down any more
glaciers, and, after being upset about twenty times
in the snow-drifts, reached Hasta Khan. This was
a house built on the road-side for travellers. It
was kept by an old Turk. According to him, the
Kurds in the neighbourhood were engaged all the
summer in robbing their neighbours, and were
hardly ever brought to justice.

"They take our cattle," said the man, "and

42

they bribe the police. There is no sort of order
here. What we want is our Sultan to be Padishah
in his own dominions."

I subsequently heard from the English Consul
at Erzeroum a story which rather corroborated
the Turk's account of the Kurds.

It appeared that in the Delsin, not far from
Erzingan, a major commanding a battalion of
infantry received orders to apprehend a Kurdish
chief. Somehow or other the Kurd heard of this.
One day, taking with him about five thousand followers,
he managed to surround the place where
the troops were encamped. Riding up to the
commander's tent, he accosted the officer—who
was much surprised at the unexpected presence of
the culprit—with the words,—

"Peace be with you! I have come to dine
here this evening."

It was a very disagreeable position for the
major, but what could he do? His battalion had
been taken unawares; it was surrounded by the
Kurd's followers, and all of them were armed
men. He put on the best face he could about the
matter, and gave his guest an excellent dinner.
The following morning the Kurd said to
him,—

"I dined very well last night, and slept comfortably.

43

I have accepted your hospitality, and
now you must accept mine. I am going to take
you to dine with me. Nay, I am!" he continued,
to the officer, who appeared a little indignant
at the proposal, "and every man under your
command as well. They shall all dine and sleep
in my encampment this evening."

"It was a disagreeable position for the major,"
observed the Consul at Erzeroum, when he related
the story to me. "He was ordered to arrest the
Kurd, and now the Kurd was about to arrest
him! However, resistance was useless. His battalion
was surrounded by Kurds, who, at a sign
from their chief, would have massacred every
Turk on the spot. The only thing for the
officer to do was to accept the invitation. The
Kurd, when the soldiers arrived at his mountain
home, commanded his servants to make preparation
for a feast. Several hundred sheep were
killed, to be cooked for the occasion, and the
stream on the hill-side ran red with the blood of
the slaughtered animals."

After dinner the major tried very hard to persuade
the Kurd to recognize the Sultan as his
lord.

"You need only nominally acknowledge our
Padishah," remarked the officer; "you have

44

30,000 sheep; give 1500 piastres (10
l.
) a year to
the Sultan. You have 10,000 retainers; give
him 10 to serve in his army. I can arrange the
rest. You are a very rich man, but this need not
be known at Constantinople."

"I have never given any one of my children to
serve another master," replied the chieftain,
proudly. "Your Padishah is Sultan at Stamboul,
but I am Sultan here!"

The following morning, the Kurd allowed the
battalion to return to their quarters, and presented
the major with an Arab charger as a
memento of his visit.

"All the circumstances were reported to the
military authorities at Erzeroum," added the Consul
when he related the story, "and the officer
was afterwards promoted."

Shortly before leaving Hasta Khan, Mohammed
came to me with a smile on his countenance. I
at once thought that something disagreeable had
happened. The Turk seldom indulged in a smile.
Radford, too, in spite of his illness, seemed rather
more cheerful than usual. I began to be a little
alarmed.

"What is the matter?" I inquired.

"
At
—the horse!" said Mohammed.

"Yes, sir," said Radford, who had accompanied

45

him, and had acquired the habit of sometimes
interlarding his English with a few words of
Turkish; "the At has a hawful sore back, and all
the 'air is off it."

"Which horse?"

"The old pack-horse, the roarer."

Mohammed shook his head mournfully.

"We had better sell him," he said. "One of
the Zaptiehs has a mule; he is not a big mule,
but he is a nice animal, sleek and comely, besides
being strong. The man says that if the
Effendi will give him five liras and the horse
which makes a noise, that we may have his mule."

The animal in question was a brute which the
gendarme rode, and which was always trying to
run away. I had previously gathered from the
fellow that his mule had escaped three times
whilst he was being saddled. However, the gendarme
had forgotten that he had told me of this,
and in all probability had offered Mohammed a
share of the five liras, should I be fool enough to
accept the proposal.

"Let me see the pack-saddle!" I exclaimed.

On looking at it I found that by cutting out a
considerable portion of the lining, it would be
possible to prevent any weight pressing upon the
horse's sore place.

46

"He can carry his pack," I remarked to
Mohammed.

"If I cut the saddle he can," replied my servant;
"but it will cost twenty piastres to mend
it again."

"Yes," I observed, "and it will cost five liras
to exchange the horse, besides which we should
have a worse animal than at present."

"The Effendi knows best," said the Zaptieh,
with a grin.

"He knows," said Mohammed.

"Shall I have a little backsheesh?" remarked
the gendarme, rather alarmed lest his endeavour
to deceive me might have done away with his
chance of a present.

"Inshallah!" I replied; and, this matter being
arranged, we continued our march across the
mountains.

Presently we had to descend almost to the bed
of the Euphrates. Here there were traces of
copper ore. A little farther on we came to a
place where what seemed to be iron ore was lying
strewn along the mountain side; I was informed
by the guide that a few miles to the east there
is a substance in the earth which the villagers
use as fuel. According to my informant it is
hard and black, and gives a bright flame; so in all

47

probability coal is also to be met with in these
regions.

As we approached Kemach, the Euphrates became
narrower; in many places it was not more
than thirty yards wide. The stream was very
rapid. Any man, no matter how good a swimmer
he might be, would have a poor chance for his
life if he were to fall into the torrent. Here
and there large rocks and loose stones, which
have been washed down from the mountain
sides, block up the channel; they check the
waters for a second. The river bubbles and
roars; it lashes furiously against the boulders,
and, leaping over them, rushes headlong with a
fall of at least four thousand feet to the ocean.

The Caimacan of Kemach and a few of his
friends were engaged in playing at Djerrid near
the outskirts of the town. It was a lovely scene.
The sun was setting on the snow-capped mountains;
the river ran at my feet; bright-coloured
vegetation and many-tinted rocks looked down
upon us from either hand; cascades and waterfalls
dashed over the rugged crags; whilst the Caimacan
and his party, who were immensely excited
with their game, shouted "Allah! Allah!" as they
rode at each other and hurled the wooden missile.

The governor stopped playing when he saw our

48

party, and, riding up, asked the Zaptieh who I
was. He then introduced himself and the company
to me. They had been busily engaged in
learning drill all the morning. An order had
been received from Constantinople for the Caimacan
to form a National Guard. Every able-bodied
man in the district had at once enrolled
himself as a volunteer. On entering Kemach I
was struck by a high rock, which might have been
a miniature Gibraltar, and which stands immediately
behind the town. The rock was about
500 feet in height, and a ruined citadel on the
summit towers above the Euphrates and the
town.

The Caimacan and his friends were well
mounted, their horses being of a very different
stamp to those which I had seen during my
march from Constantinople. They were most of
them fifteen hands high, and one or two over
sixteen. On inquiry, I found that they were
Turkoman horses. I also learnt that most of the
animals in the district had been bought by
Government agents for the use of the army at
Erzeroum.

A large proportion of the houses in Kemach are
constructed of dried mud. Numerous wells, with
high cross-bars and long iron chains for the

49

buckets, were to be seen along our path. One of
the faithful, on a tower above our heads, was calling
the Mohammedans to prayer. His loud but
melancholy strains were being listened to with
great attention by Mohammed and my English
servant. It appeared that Mohammed, through
some strange inadvertence, had omitted praying
at mid-day. Radford was a little alarmed lest
the Turk might make up for his shortcoming by
an extra-long prayer that evening, which would
have kept him from attending to the horses.

50

CHAPTER VI.

Kemach—Its population—Barley is very cheap—An English
traveller—Conversation about the impending war—If we
beat Russia, will England permit us to take back the Caucasus?—Yakoob
Khan—The Poles to be freed—Germany
to have the Baltic Provinces—What about the Crimea?—We
ought to cripple Russia—The floggers of women—Crossing
the Euphrates—Radford is poorly—Erzingan—The
intendant of Issek Pacha—Pretty Armenian women—An
intelligent Turk—Iron, silver, gold—Coal—Lead-mines
worked by the Kurds—The peasantry and coal—The Government
and the mines—A relation of the Pacha of Sivas—The
old doctor—Firing a patient for gout.

There are 800 houses or about 4000 inhabitants
in Kemach, and barley is very plentiful throughout
the district, the price for the maintenance of my
five horses not exceeding sevenpence per day.

This town had been visited by an English traveller
about five years previous; whereas no
Englishman, so far as I could learn, had been in
Divriki or Arabkir in the memory of the oldest
inhabitant.

51

The Caimacan, who informed me about my
compatriot having been in Kemach, was very
curious to learn my opinion about the impending
war; and when I told him that I believed England
would remain neutral, remarked,—

"Yes; but if we beat Russia, will England
permit us to take back the Caucasus?"

"I really do not know, but I should hope
so."

"Well," continued the governor, "if we beat
Russia this time, we ought to cripple her. We must
take back the districts she has conquered in Central
Asia, and give them to the original possessors,
or else form one Mohammedan empire in Central
Asia, under Yakoob Khan, who nominally acknowledges
the Sultan. We ought to free the Poles in
Poland, and give Germany the Baltic Provinces."

"You seem to know a little about political
geography," I observed.

"Yes," said the Caimacan, "I take an interest
in the subject, and I love my country. Until we
can hem Russia in on every side, she will always
be a thorn, not only in our side, but also in that
of Europe."

"Well, what should you do about the Crimea?"
I inquired.

"That we should keep ourselves. Russia would

52

then have to be more or less an inland power, and
Moscow would become her capital."

"Do you like the Russian system of Government?"
inquired the Caimacan.

"No."

"I am not surprised," said the official. "Foreigners
say that there is no liberty in Turkey, but I
should like to know which Government is the most
liberal. Mohammedans tolerate every religion,
whilst the Russians make converts by force, and
flog women and children to induce them to change
their faith.
[1]
The Russian faith is very different to
the English religion, is it not?" he added.

"Yes, we do not worship idols, or venerate
mummified bodies."

"What do you worship?"

"The one true God, and Jesus Christ His
Son."

"We worship the one true God, and worship
Him through Mohammed His Prophet. But
Mohammedans dislike idols and all that sort of
thing, quite as much as you do."

The following morning the Caimacan was up
at daybreak to see me off. He accompanied us a

53

little way on the road. The moon was throwing
her pale beams on the old citadel as we rode beneath
the turrets. In a few minutes we crossed
the Euphrates on a narrow wooden bridge, and,
continuing for a short distance over mountains,
came again upon the valley of the river. Here
there were green fields in abundance. The country
in summer-time is said to be rich in corn and
barley. Hundreds of cattle and sheep, grazing on
some rich pasture-lands, testified to the wealth of
the inhabitants.

It was an eleven hours' march to Erzingan.
By the time we neared that city our horses showed
symptoms of being thoroughly exhausted. Indeed,
there was no reason to be surprised at this. They
had marched a thousand miles since we left Constantinople.
The last two hundred miles had
been exceptionally fatiguing, not only on account
of the snow and constant mountain-climbing, but
also owing to our high elevation and the rarefied
nature of the atmosphere. Radford was weak,
and from being a fourteen-stone man had come
down to about eleven. His clothes hung on his
wasted limbs. Some rest would be absolutely
necessary to enable him to reach Erzeroum.

The road became much better as we entered the
suburbs of Erzingan, and, to my surprise, I was

54

met by a man in a four-wheeled chaise. He
announced that he was the intendant of Issek
Pacha, the governor of Sivas. The governor had
written to him to say that I had promised to reside
in his house during my stay at Erzingan. A
servant advanced and took my horse; I dismounted,
and getting into the vehicle, drove to
the Pacha's residence.

Some pretty Armenian women were standing on
the roofs of their houses. They were not so particular
about veiling themselves as their compatriots
in Sivas. They stared at the procession
with wondering eyes. The Pacha's carriage was not
often seen in the streets of Erzingan. It was the
only vehicle of the kind within an area of 150
miles. It was only brought out on state occasions,
religious ceremonies, or when some very important
visitor arrived. This was quite enough to set the
ladies in Erzingan on the
qui-vive
; the European
dresses of my servant and self whetted their
curiosity still more.

Erzingan is different to either Egin or Arabkir,
both of which towns are built upon the sides of
a mountain. Erzingan stands in the middle of a
large plain, the Kara Su—Black Water—as the
Euphrates is here called, running through the
plain a few miles south of the city.

55

I now made the acquaintance of a very intelligent
Turk. He was an officer with the rank of
major, but employed as the superintendent of a
large manufactory, which had been established to
supply the troops in Asia Minor with boots. He
had spent three years in France, where he had
studied everything connected with the trade in
question. In addition to this he was a fair chemist
and mineralogist.

He informed me that there were ebony forests
in the neighbourhood of Erzeroum. A great
deal of this wood used formerly to be bought by
Armenian merchants and despatched to France.
Of late years this branch of industry has been
neglected. Iron, silver, and gold, could be
found here, but the people were much too idle
to search for these metals. The lead-mines were
worked to a small extent by the Kurds. These
mountaineers required this substance for bullets
and shot. The lead in the towns of Asia Minor
was all brought from Constantinople. It was,
consequently, very dear; this had led the Kurds
to make use of the metal beneath their feet.
According to my informant, there is coal of a
good quality in the neighbourhood of Kemach.
However, the peasantry do not like the idea, that
this mineral may some day replace wood as an

56

article of fuel. Cutting down trees is easy work in
comparison with mining. The villagers do their
best to keep the people in the towns from burning
coal; and they make their livelihood by bringing
firewood from the mountains, and selling it at a
large profit to the citizens.

The Government take twenty per cent. of the net
produce of all mines which are worked in Anatolia,
and only two-and-a-half per cent. from the price
fetched by sheep, oxen, and horses in the market.
The result is that the people think it more profitable,
and less laborious to breed cattle, than to
dig in the earth for treasure.

I called upon a relation of the Pacha at Sivas.
He was a stout, middle-aged man, and at that
time ill in bed. I was shown into his room.
During my conversation with him, an Italian
doctor came to see the patient. The medical
gentleman was the only European in Erzingan, he
had been there half a century; his age, according
to himself, being ninety-two years. The old man's
appearance belied his assertion. He at once commenced
talking with me in his native tongue.

"What is the matter with the invalid?" I inquired.

"Drink, my good sir, drink!" said the old
gentleman. "He is forty, and I am over ninety,

57

but, please God, as the Turks say, I shall outlive
him. If the upper classes of Mohammedans were
only sober, they would live for ever in this
delightful climate. But what with their women,
and what with their wine, they shorten their existence
by at least thirty years. This man would
have been dead ten years ago if he had lived in
Constantinople."

"Why so?"

"Because of the climate. He would have drunk
himself into a dropsy."

"What are you talking about?" said the sick
man.

"I was saying, Bey Effendi," said the doctor,
"how very popular you are in the neighbourhood,
and how much every one loves you!"

The sick man smiled benignantly, and the old
gentleman continued,—

"I should have been sorry if he had divined the
topic of our conversation. He would never have
employed me again, and might have called in the
Turkish practitioner, an ignorant ass, who does
not know so much about anatomy as a butcher in
the market, and who treats cases of inflammation
by firing his patient."

"What! would he fire the Bey's foot?" I
inquired.

58

"God knows! but he is quite capable of doing
so, if the Bey would let him."

The doctor now felt his patient's pulse, and
administered a few words of consolation; then,
promising to send some medicine, he left the
room.

59

CHAPTER VII.

Erzingan—The Mutasarraf Pacha—Widdin—Russian official
documents—Names of high functionaries—General Ignatieff—Your
Indian frontier—The Kurds will be excited
to massacre the Armenians—The probable final result of
the war—If Turkey were to join Russia—The boot manufactory—The
shoe-makers being drilled—The gaol—Coiners—A
jealous woman in prison—The unfortunate shopkeeper.

I next visited the Mutasarraf Pacha, the civil
governor of Erzingan. He was an active little
man, of about sixty years of age, full of energy.
He seemed to have more of the Gaul than the
Osmanli in his disposition. Formerly he had
been civil governor at Widdin. Whilst he
occupied this post some of his Zaptiehs had
arrested a Russian. The latter had documents on
his person which clearly showed that he was an
agent of a society in Moscow, formed with the
object of creating a revolution in Bulgaria.

60

Abdul Aziz was then Sultan, and the Mutasarraf
Pacha forwarded the documents to Constantinople.
Ignatieff's influence was at that
time paramount with the Sultan. No notice
was taken of the papers. Very shortly afterwards
the Pacha was removed from Widdin to
Erzingan.

"Were there any names upon the document?"
I inquired.

"Yes, names implicating some very high Russian
functionaries. I hope that we shall soon be
engaged in hostilities with Russia," said the
Pacha. "Ever since the battle of Sedan she has
been secretly at war with Turkey, and trying to
stab us under the guise of friendship.
[2]
Ignatieff
encouraged Abdul Aziz in his extravagance. He
knew that this would lead to bankruptcy, and to
a rupture of the alliance with England; and you
may depend upon it, that the Russian Ambassador
was one of the first men to advise his
majesty to repudiate the debt. They are very
clever, these Russian diplomats," continued the
Pacha; "and however poor Russia may be,

61

she has always enough gold to sow the seeds
of sedition and rebellion in her neighbour's territory.
You will find this out for yourselves one
day."

"How so?"

"When she touches your Indian frontier; by
that time you will have enough to do to keep your
native troops in order. Will England help us in
this war?"

"I do not know; but it is not likely. You see
the Turkish Government is very unpopular with
us, because it does not pay the interest of its
debt, and also because of the massacres which
have taken place in Bulgaria."

"Say for the first reason," replied the Pacha,
"and I agree with you, for you English, by all
accounts, dearly love your gold. However, I
should have thought that by this time your people
had learned that we were not the originators of
the massacres in Bulgaria."

"Who caused them, the Russians?"

The Pacha nodded his head affirmatively.

"If there be a war in Asia Minor, they will
do their best to excite our Kurds to massacre
the Armenians in the neighbourhood of Van,
and will then throw all the blame upon our
shoulders."

62

"Do you think that the Russians will be able to
conquer you in Asia Minor?" I inquired.

"No, we are the strongest in this part of the
world. The Georgians, Tartars, and Circassians
hate the Russians, and will rise against them;
besides that there are no roads."

"But Russia has taken Kars before."

"Yes, but she will not do so this time, and I
should not be surprised if we were to go to Tiflis
instead."

This I subsequently found to be the prevailing
opinion amidst all the civil and military Pachas in
Asia Minor.

"What do you think will be the final result of
the war?" I now inquired of the Pacha.

He shook his head sorrowfully.

"If we have no ally, it will go hard with us;
but your countrymen will be mad if they do not
help us."

"Why so?"

"Because, when we find that we have no
chance against our foe, what is to prevent us
from turning round and allying ourselves with
him; that alternative might be preferable to
annihilation. And when Russia has our fleet,
the Dardanelles, Batoum, and another port
or so in the Black Sea, she might leave us

63

alone at Constantinople. Anyhow, if she has
once crushed us, we shall no longer have the
power of lifting our heads, and however much
we may dislike the alternative of slavery or
destruction, shall end by being menials of the
Russians."

The following day I walked with the Turkish
major to see his boot manufactory; a large
building on the outskirts of the town. Four
hundred and fifty men were employed in the
business.

An order had arrived from Constantinople for
all the workmen to be drilled. Two hours per
day had been allotted for this purpose.

The shoemakers were drawn up in two ranks
outside the building.

The officer who was instructing them commenced
putting his men through the bayonet
exercise. Many of the townspeople were amongst
the spectators. They were greatly pleased at the
eager way in which the men gave their thrusts into
the air.

"If we only had some Russians to run
through!" said a corpulent, middle-aged Turk.

"Ah! if we had," replied his friend. "Our
bootmakers alone would be enough to make all
the Cossacks turn pale and run!"

64

The manufactory was clean, and great order
prevailed in the arrangements. Forty thousand
pairs of boots had been made during the previous
two months, my companion had received
instructions from the authorities to forward
12,000 more to Erzeroum. The order had only
just been issued, and was urgent. The result
was that the leather which under ordinary circumstances
would have been left in the tan for
four months could only be soaked for five weeks.
The major complained that he had not been
supplied either with a machine to triturate
the bark, or with a steam cutter's machine,
which would have very much facilitated the
work.

"I have written to the authorities at Constantinople
about the matter," remarked the
officer; "a reply has come to say that the
articles in question are on their way. They will
probably arrive when the war is over," added
the officer despondently. "In the meantime
some of our soldiers will have to march barefoot."

The thread used in the manufacture came
from an English firm, Finlayson, Bousfield,
and Co., of Glasgow; and the officer, as
he showed me some of the packets, observed,—"that

65

formerly he had been supplied with
French thread. It was a little cheaper than
the sort now employed; but after some trials he
had discovered that the English article was three
times as durable, and consequently far more
economical in the long-run."

The boots manufactured in the establishment
were made to lace high up over the ancle, and
with very thick soles. They are much heavier
than those furnished to English troops, and
would be apt to tire the soldiers during a
long day's march. In one room a number of
Armenian and Turkish lads were working sewing-machines.

All the hands in the manufactory were paid by
piecework. The boys could earn from one to
five piastres per day, and some of the men forty.
Owing to the pressure of business, the work-people
were employed sixteen hours per day,
fourteen hours in the manufactory, and two at
drill.

I now went to the gaol. Here there were
nineteen prisoners. They were made up of seventeen
Mohammedans and two Christians; the latter
had been arrested, one for coining money, the
other for murdering his wife. Whilst walking

66

through the building, I heard a great noise in
one of the cells, and a woman's voice.

"What is she doing?" I inquired of the
gaoler.

"Effendi, it is a curious case," said the man;
"she has a husband, but is very much in love
with a young Armenian shopkeeper. The latter
is a married man, and does not return the
enamoured female's affection; however, she is
continually leaving her husband's house and
invading the Armenian's premises. The husband
became annoyed and complained—he thinks that
the Armenian encourages his wife. Any how,"
continued the official, "the affair created a
scandal, the Cadi did not like it; he has
ordered the woman to be shut up for a day or
two, and the Armenian as well."

"What, together?"

"No, Effendi, apart; it is rather hard upon
the man," he added; "but who knows? perhaps
he encouraged her."

"Why is she making that noise?"

"Because she has learnt that the Armenian is
in the prison, and she wishes to be confined in
the same cell with him. He does not want it
himself, and of course it would not do; for what
would the husband say? A jealous female is a

67

first cousin of the devil," continued the gaoler:
"it is bad enough when she is jealous of her own
husband, but when she is jealous of some other
woman's, that is ten times worse."

68

CHAPTER VIII.

Russia's conduct in Servia—The Hodja—We have a great
many troops—If the Circassians will rise—The Pacha—Raw
cotton—The Mohammedan school—The Hodja's
sum—Three jealous husbands—The mosque—Issek Pacha—A
comparison between Mohammedan Imaums and
Christian priests—Provisions—The old doctor—The road
to Erzeroum—Want of sport—Soldiers frost-bitten.

Later in the day, the Mutasarraf called at my
house, and at once commenced his favourite
theme, politics.

"What do the people in your country say
about Russia's conduct in Servia?"

"Many of them do not like it," I replied.

"It was a cowardly act on the part of the
Tzar, was it not?" said the Pacha; "he pretended
to be at peace with our Sultan, and
allowed Russian officers and soldiers to take part
in the fight against us. I tell you what it is,"
added the speaker, "Ignatieff wishes to cut off
another arm from Turkey, by making Bulgaria

69

independent, like Servia. If we are to die, better
to perish at once than be torn to pieces limb by
limb!"

"But I thought you told me this morning
that in your opinion, sooner than that this
should occur, your Government ought to join
Russia?"

"Yes, I did," said the Pacha, "and if we
were to join Russia and attack Europe, who
will do nothing for us now, what would happen
then?"

"Yes; what would happen then?" said the
Hodja, or schoolmaster, a friend of the Pacha,
and who had accompanied him during his visit.

"Europe would probably swallow up both
Turkey and Russia!"

"You do not really think so," said the Pacha.

"We have a great many troops," said the
Hodja.

"Yes; but not many officers."

"He is right," said the Pacha sadly; "our
officers have not much brain, but we have one
chance," he added.

"What is it?"

"If the Circassians were to rise, the Russians
would have so much on their hands that they
would be unable to advance."

70

"Is it likely that there will be a rising?"

"There is sure to be one," said the Pacha;
"but it is doubtful whether it will be general,
or confined to some districts;" and shaking
hands with me he left the room with his companion.

The Pacha was an energetic man, and very
popular with the inhabitants. He had been at
Erzingan but a few months. He had found
time to put the streets in tolerable order,
and to make the town one of the cleanest in
Anatolia. He was desirous of purchasing some
machinery with the object of making cloth from
the cotton which grows in this district. As it
is, the raw cotton is sent to England, and is
then manufactured into the articles required.
The Pacha would have liked to save all this
expense, and have the work done on the spot.
He had tried to form a company, with the object
of realizing his idea; but there was no energy in
Erzingan—the people were afraid of risking the
little money they possessed; it was impossible
to carry the project into execution.

I now went to the Mohammedan School.

"Will you ask the boys some questions?" said
the Hodja.

I remembered the success which I had obtained

71

with the sum put by me to the lads at Yuzgat,
and at once gave it. The schoolmaster was at
his wits' end for a solution. However, later in
the day he came to my house and said—

"You set me a sum this morning—I cannot do
it. I should like to ask you one."

"Go on," I remarked.

"Three men," said the Hodja, "who were accompanied
by their three wives, arrived at a
river. The husbands were all jealous of their
wives. There was one boat in which to take the
party. The bark would only hold two persons,
and no woman could be trusted by her husband
unless there were two men with her. How did
they cross the river?"

"Can you do it?" said the schoolmaster.

"I will think it over," I replied.

"This sum has puzzled our Mutasarraf for six
months," said the Hodja; "it is a beautiful
sum!"

"Do you know the answer?" I inquired.

"Unfortunately, I have forgotten it," he replied.

I proceeded to visit the Mosque, which was
being built at the expense of Issek Pacha,
Governor of Sivas. It had been in the course
of construction for three years, and was only half
finished. The walls were made of stone and

72

marble, which had been brought from some
quarries, about eight miles from the town. It
was said that when the mosque was finished, it
would be the handsomest one in Anatolia.

I met the Italian doctor as I was returning to
my quarters.

"So you have seen the mosque?" he said.

"Yes."

"Well," he continued, "the Turks in some
ways resemble us Catholics. Issek Pacha probably
thinks that by building a magnificent
mosque, he will be less likely to be fried in a
future state of existence; and we are told that if
we leave money to the priests, to say masses for
our souls, we shall not have to remain so long in
purgatory."

"It all comes to the same thing," said the old
gentleman. "It is no matter where a man is
born, whether in the Mohammedan East or in the
Christian West, his Imaum or Priest will always
get money out of him in some manner or other."

"In this instance," I remarked, "the money
has gone to build a mosque and not to Imaums."

"Yes," said the Italian, "but whenever a priest
or dervish asks a good Mohammedan for anything
the latter will never refuse. The result is that
the religious profession in Turkey is made up of

73

as many idlers and beggars as can be seen in my
own country."

Provisions, according to the doctor, were not
very dear in Erzingan. A good sheep could be
bought for six shillings; 80 eggs for a shilling;
two pounds and a half of bread, or rather of the
thin unleavened cake which takes the place
of the staff of life in Anatolia, for a penny;
whilst eight pounds of potatoes could be purchased
for the same price. A nice-looking horse
would not cost more than 10
l.
Fuel was dear in
proportion to the other articles of consumption—charcoal
costing a farthing the pound.

"Erzingan is not a bad place for poor people
to live in," added the old doctor. "I have resided
here nearly half a century. A man can get on
very well if he has 50
l.
a year."

On leaving the town I found a fair carriage
road, which led in the direction of Erzeroum.
This state of things was not to last long, and after
marching two or three miles we were riding once
more along a track.

Marshes extended for some distance on either
side of our route. A number of geese and ducks,
some of the latter of a very peculiar breed
and different to any I had hitherto seen, were
feeding in the fields around us. I tried to

74

approach them, so as to have a shot, as goose or
duck would have been an agreeable change to the
chicken fare which awaited us in every village.
But the wild geese in Anatolia are quite as
wary as their kindred on this side the Channel.
It was impossible to stalk them.

I began to disbelieve in the stories which have
been written about the amount of sport which
can be obtained in Anatolia. With the exception
of a few snipe, partridges, and hares, I had seen
literally nothing in the shape of game since our
departure from Constantinople. Deer were said
to exist in some of the forests, but I had never
even heard of any being exposed for sale in the
different markets.

Should an Englishman ever think of undertaking
a journey through Anatolia, and have the
idea that he will be able to combine shooting with
the pleasure of travel, he will find himself very
much mistaken.

Now we overtook three hundred Kurds—redif
soldiers on the march to Erzeroum. There were
no officers with them. The men had to find their
way as best they could to their destination.
They were armed with needle rifles, but had no
uniform, and were clad for the most part in rags
and tatters. Many of them had no shoes or even

75

slippers, but were walking with bare feet through
the snow. A few men were riding on mules, and
on a closer inspection I found that these poor
fellows had been frost-bitten. Some of them had
lost their toes on the march.

76

CHAPTER IX.

Climbing the mountains—It is bitterly cold—Delan—The
soldiers—Kargan—A bridge over the Euphrates—Mohallata—Our
Padishah is poor now—The Captain of the
Zaptiehs—He wishes to be married—Promotion wanted—The
Erzingan track meets the Trebizond road—Bashi
Bazouks—The Kara Su—Zaptiehs—Erzeroum—The fortifications
of Erzeroum—Ismail Pacha's residence—A pacific
speech made by Lord Derby—A decoration sent by the
Tzar to the Armenian Bishop of Erzeroum—An Armenian
demonstration—Caravan trade—
Timbaki
—Duties increased—The
price of Timbaki—The Kurds—Russian agents—A
massacre of the Christians to be brought about by Russian
agents.

It was bitterly cold as we gradually climbed
the mountains which lie between Erzingan and
Erzeroum, and after a nine hours' march we
halted for the night at a little village called Delan.
There were only twelve mud hovels. The three
hundred Kurds stowed themselves away as best
they could. I was fortunate enough to obtain
a resting-place in a stable. My horses were

77

packed together as closely as possible on one side
of the building. There was just room for my
followers and myself on the other.

The inhabitants of this little hamlet were
Kurds, and the people did their best to make
the newly-arrived soldiers comfortable. The
latter were all fed at the expense of the villagers;
each inhabitant giving as much bread as he could
spare towards the rations of his countrymen. So
far as I could learn, none of the soldiers had any
money with them, and it was a five days' march
to Erzeroum. But they evidently had solved
the problem of how to get on without money; a
week later I saw them arrive at their destination,
and, with the exception of a few men laid
up with frost-bite, they were not much the worse
for their journey.

It was very slippery as we descended the
slope which leads from Delan. We drove our
horses before us; the little animals tacking
from side to side, like ships beating against
the wind, and putting their feet down with
the greatest caution, so as to make sure of
the ground before them. We then had to
lead the animals up the mountains, Radford
having great difficulty in wading through the
snow, owing to his state of debility. Fortunately

78

we soon arrived at a place where it was possible
to ride. Here another path branched off to the
village of Kargan, but continuing by our old track
we shortly came to a fine stone bridge, called
the Kutta Kupri. It is about seventy-five yards
wide, and spans the river Euphrates.

We passed through a series of natural basins,
each of them two or three miles in diameter,
and after an eight hours' tiring march put up for
the night in the village of Mohallata. It contains
about 100 houses, and a small barracks,
with quarters for a squadron of Zaptiehs.

A battalion of redifs had also halted here.
The men had marched from Erzingan without
having had anything to eat since they left that
town—the soldiers had gone more than thirty
hours without food. There were no grumblers
in the ranks.

One of the sergeants appeared rather an intelligent
fellow; I spoke to him about the matter.

"We came to a village," he said; "there was
nothing to eat, and so we went without our
dinners."

"Did the men make any remarks?"

"No, Effendi, they knew that the people would
have given them food if they had any to spare.
When we beat the Russians, go to St. Petersburg

79

and conquer all their country for our Padishah,"
said the sergeant, "we shall have many paras,
there will be plenty to eat. But our Padishah is
poor now," continued the man sorrowfully, "he
cannot give us any pay, there is no money in
Stamboul."

The captain of the Zaptiehs accompanied me
in my walk through the barracks. This officer
was anxious to obtain his promotion.

"I am forty years of age," he remarked, "and
a captain's pay is very little. It is not enough
for me to keep a wife. I want to be married, but
before that event can take place I must be a major.
Shall you see the Pacha at Erzeroum?" he added.

"Yes."

"Will you speak to him for me, and recommend
me for promotion?"

"How can I? I do not belong to your army,
and am only here as a traveller."

"But you are an Englishman!" exclaimed the
Zaptieh excitedly. "That is quite sufficient. The
Pacha would know that no Englishman would
recommend any one without a reason. I should
be promoted!"

"My good sir," I observed, "I have only seen
you for a few minutes; how could I solicit your
promotion on the ground of your merits?"

80

The captain was not to be rebuffed.

"I will write down my name," he said, "and
then you will speak to the Pacha."

Taking a dirty piece of paper from his pocket,
he scribbled something and handed it to me.

Forward again for twelve more hours, our
horses slipping up, or varying the performance
by falling into snow-drifts, and we came to
a spot where the Erzingan track meets the
Trebizond and Erzeroum road. Here most of
the snow had been cleared away. There was
but little to impede our progress. Large caravans
of several hundreds of horses and mules were
bringing cartridges from Trebizond; bands of
Bashi Bazouks were with them and on the march
to Kars.

We rode along the left bank of the Kara
Su (Black Water), the name given to the Euphrates
in this district, and presently were met
by some Zaptiehs. Their leader, advancing a
few steps, said that he had been ordered by the
Pacha to meet me, and escort my party into the
town.

Erzeroum lies at one end of a large plain. It
is surrounded on the north, south, and east
sides by hills. A few detached forts had been
thrown up on these heights. The town itself is

81

encircled by an intrenchment of loose earth—this
defence was in no place more than three quarters
of a mile from the city.

I rode to Ismail Pacha's residence. It is a
large building in the middle of the town, and is
also used as an office by the military Pacha.

Ismail, the civil governor, is a Kurd by
birth. Some of his female relatives have made
influential marriages: this, added to the talents
which the Pacha possesses, has raised him to his
present high position.

He did not think that war would take place
between Turkey and Russia. A pacific speech made
by Lord Derby had been telegraphed from London
to Erzeroum. It was the opinion of many of the
townspeople that the Tzar did not mean to break
the peace.

"It will be much better for us if we fight now,"
said the Pacha, when he gave me the above-mentioned
information. "If war is postponed,
Russia will continue her intrigues
[3]
amidst our
Christian population."

A few months previous the Tzar had sent a
decoration to the Armenian Bishop of Erzeroum.
The order had been forwarded through the

82

Russian Consul. The latter, instead of asking
Ismail to give the decoration to the Bishop, had
ignored the Pacha altogether, and had not even
invited him to the ceremony.

This had been converted into an Armenian
demonstration. The relations between the Mohammedans
and Christians were not so friendly
as could be desired.

Erzeroum is the principal depôt for the caravan
trade which is carried on by the merchants in
Teheran and their
confrères
in Constantinople.

Timbaki
, the tobacco used in nargilehs, is exported
from Persia to this part of Asia Minor. Of late,
the Turkish authorities have increased the duty on
timbaki from eight to seventy-six per cent. This
has been done in consequence of many Turks
liking the Persian plant better than that which is
grown in their own country. The price of
ordinary timbaki was formerly only twenty-five
piastres an oke at Constantinople, whilst Turkish
tobacco of the same quality costs as much as
sixty-one.

Ismail Pacha was doubtful whether in the event
of war he would be able to keep the Kurds quiet in
the neighbourhood of Erzeroum. Russian agents
had been busily engaged for some time past in
attempting to suborn these mountaineers. Money

83

had been lavished upon their chiefs. Anxiety was
expressed as to which side they would take.

"The Russians are nearly as poor as we are,"
continued the Pacha, "but they have enough
money left for the purpose of intrigue. If the
war breaks out, it is not at all improbable that
they will bring about a massacre of Christians in
Asia Minor. Some of the Kurds would obey any
order they might receive from St. Petersburg.
It would go very hard with us in the court of
European public opinion, if any fresh rebellions
had to be suppressed by strong measures on our
part."

84

CHAPTER X.

The Pacha's interpreter—The Russian Consul—The telegram—
Un
ennemi acharné
of Russia—Mr. Zohrab—The Russian
Government encourages photography—The paternal Government—Spies—Pregnant
women massacred—How to
frighten the mountaineers—Go and complain to the
Kralli

of the English. Ask her to send you an oculist—A
blood-stained placard—A proof of Russian civilization—Two
Circassian chiefs—Their statement—The value of the
Caucasus—A Memoir drawn up by the Emperor Nicholas
for the instruction of the present Emperor Alexander—Our
inheritance is the East—The Circassians must be freed.

An Armenian, the Pacha's interpreter, now
entered the room. Presently he observed that the
Russian Consul at Erzeroum had just received a
telegram.

"He read it to me himself," said the Armenian.
"He wants its contents to be made known to
you. It is from the Russian Authorities in the
Caucasus, and has come
viâ
Batoum. It runs
as follows: 'Two months ago, an Englishman,

85

a certain Captain Burnaby, left Constantinople
with the object of travelling in Asia Minor.
He is a desperate enemy (
un ennemi acharné
) of
Russia. We have lost all traces of him since his
departure from Stamboul. We believe that the real
object of his journey is to pass the frontier, and
enter Russia. Do your best, sir, to discover the
whereabouts of this aforesaid Captain. Find means
to inform him that in the event of his entering
our territory, he will be immediately expelled.'"

The following day I went to the English Consulate.
Mr. Zohrab is our Consul in Erzeroum.
He is a good Turkish scholar, besides knowing
most of the European languages.

I soon learnt that there was no exaggeration in
the interpreter's story. It was said that the
Russians had procured my photograph, and hung
it up in all the frontier stations, so as to enable
their officers to recognize me should I attempt to
enter Russian territory.

I must say that I was rather surprised to find
that the Paternal Government still took so much
interest in my movements. From the fact of the
Russian agents having lost all trace of me since I
left Constantinople, I presume that my movements
were watched during our journey on the steamer,
and also in the capital. This was doubtless done

86

with a kind motive, and to prevent my being
assaulted by any fanatical Mussulmans. When I
was in St. Petersburg, only twelve months previous,
General Milutin, the Russian Minister of
War, had shown a most fatherly interest in my
safety; he was much alarmed lest I might be
assassinated by the Khivans or Turkomans in
Central Asia. It was very kind of him. I had
evidently not sufficiently appreciated the philanthropy
of that gallant officer, and of the Government
which he serves.

I could hardly believe that the Russian Authorities
were so interested in my welfare as to set
spies to travel with me on board a steamer or to
track my steps in Constantinople.

I much regret that my short stay in that city
had not permitted me to call upon an old acquaintance,
General Ignatieff, the Russian Ambassador
to the Porte. I should then have been able to
give his Excellency my solemn assurances that I
had not the slightest intention to cross the Russo-Turkish
frontier. However, possibly the term
"solemn assurances" does not convey quite the
same meaning to a Muscovite Diplomate as to an
English officer; it might have been that his
Excellency would not have placed any reliance on
my promises.

87

The odd part of the matter was that I had not
even dreamed of entering the Tzar's dominions.
I was not ignorant of the state of Russia. Mr.
Schuyler had proclaimed to the world that several
of the Tzar's officials were corrupt. The scarcity
of gold and the overwhelming paper currency
proved the bankrupt state of the country. Every
traveller could testify that many of the inhabitants
of European Russian were drunkards. Major
Wood in his book, the "Sea of Aral," had declared
that some of the conquerors in Central
Asia were worse. These facts were well known
throughout Europe. I had travelled in Russia
myself. Then how could the Russian Authorities
be so childish as to think that I, of all
people, wished to revisit the empire? On second
thoughts, I could only account for it by the supposition
that they were afraid lest I should
travel through the Caucasus, and discover their
method of dealing with the Circassians.

A few years ago, a British Consul called attention,
in an official Report, to this subject. From
what the Circassians whom I had met during my
journey had said, there was every reason to believe
that the following manner of treating Circassian
ladies is still sometimes resorted to by the Russian
promoters of Christianity and civilization. Consul

88

Dickson remarks, in a despatch dated Soukoum
Kalé, March 17th, 1864, "A Russian detachment
captured the village of Toobeh, inhabited by
about 100 Abadzekh, and after these people had
surrendered themselves prisoners, they were all
massacred by the Russian troops. AMONG
THE VICTIMS WERE TWO WOMEN IN
AN ADVANCED STATE OF PREGNANCY
AND FIVE CHILDREN."

Some people who call themselves Christians,
and who sympathize, or for political motives pretend
to sympathize with Russia, attempt to gloss
over these facts by observing that the Circassians
are a nation of freebooters, and that it is necessary
to rule them with a rod of iron, and through their
fears. So in order to strike terror into thieves
and other malefactors, it is justifiable to murder
pregnant women, and fire upon little children!

Amongst other ways of compelling the Circassians
to submit to their conquerors was one so fiendish,
that if proof were not at hand to confirm the statement,
I should hesitate to place it before the reader.

In order to frighten the mountaineers and
civilize them
à la Russe
, the Tzar's soldiers cut off
the heads and scooped out the eyes of several men,
women, and children; then nailing the eyeless heads
on trees, they placed placards underneath them,

89

saying, "Go now and complain to the Kralli of
the English, and ask her to send you an oculist."

An Englishman, Mr. Stewart Rolland, of Dibden,
Hants, has travelled in Circassia. He can
authenticate my statement. One of these blood-stained
placards is in his possession. He will
show it to any one who wishes to see for himself
a proof of Russian civilization.

It may be asked why these Muscovite gentlemen
were so inveterate against Great Britain. The
Circassians formerly were of opinion that England
would help them against their foe. Some years
ago
[4]
they actually sent two chiefs, to state
their grievances to the people of this country.
These chiefs being asked why they counted upon
England's good offices, said,—

"We have been told that the English nation is
a great nation, and a nation that protects the distressed.
Our wives and our children, our little
ones and our old men said to us with groans and
tears, 'You must go to that nation, and get us
help.' And we replied, 'We will go, and we will
tell that nation that if they do not give us help,
we shall become the slaves of Russia, or shall be
destroyed by Russia. We grown men will not

90

become slaves, but who knows what will happen to
those who come after us; and once enslaved, they
will be an army in the hands of Russia to attack
the great English nation.'"

The Circassian chiefs visited England in 1862.
Some Englishmen thought that it would be dangerous
to interfere with a strong power like Russia,
for the sake of a few mountaineers. The assistance
asked for was denied. The Russian authorities
did not value the Caucasus so lightly as our
English officials.

This can be shown by the following extract
[5]

from a memoir drawn up by the Emperor Nicholas
for the instruction of the present Emperor
Alexander:—

"Our inheritance is the East, and we must not
suffer our activity in that quarter to relax for a
single moment. Our aim is, and remains, Constantinople,
which is destined in our hands to
become the centre of the world, and the eternal
door to Asia. For a long time England has had
the supremacy of the ocean; but the same position
which we have attained on land will be occupied
by our maritime power. The possession of Constantinople,
the Dardanelles, the whole littoral of

91

the Black Sea are indispensable to us. The sea is
to become one great Russian port and cruising-ground
for our fleets. The Emperor Alexander
claimed Constantinople and the Dardanelles, when
Napoleon proposed the partition of Turkey to him.
At a later period, at the Congress of Vienna, he
himself made a like proposal. The great Catherine
foretold in prophetical spirit, that the execution
of the grand scheme would be reserved for
her second grandson. The Emperor Nicholas
has taken the task upon himself. Everything of
a higher order on which Mussulman life rests has
disappeared. Old forms and habits are upset; all
higher education and activity are wanting; the
complete dissolution is near at hand. Europe
will try to oppose our taking possession of Turkey.
Our conquest advances step by step, without any
considerable sacrifice on our part. It extends
already to the vicinity of Stamboul. Our apparent
moderation restrains even our enemies from taking
up arms. Things, too, are not quite ripe yet.
The erection of forts and the arming of all important
spots on the Black Sea is an indispensable
preliminary. We have to continue our
struggle with the tribes of the Caucasus. It is
sometimes troublesome, but it exercises our
armies, and covers our preparations in the Black

92

Sea. Our moderation in the Treaty of Adrianople
deprived England itself of every pretext for interference;
yet we obtained everything that we wanted.
By fostering Egypt, we continued afterwards to
weaken Turkey. Events of the utmost importance
to the splendour of our arms are not far
distant. We keep the Divan in good disposition
towards us, and at the same time in dependence
upon us. It is most important to confirm the
Sultan in his pseudo-reforms, and to push him on
in the same way; but it will be expedient to
throw obstacles in the way of any real improvement
for the military regeneration. Of equal
importance is it that the Porte should never get
clear of financial embarrassment."

The possession of the Caucasus is undoubtedly
most important to Russia. It enables her to
make preparations for a march westward towards
Scutari, and another southward in the direction
of the Persian Gulf, without considering the possibility
of her some day taking a fancy to the Bay
of Iskenderoon.

Should Russia ever take possession of Armenia,
[6]

Persia would be at the mercy of the
Tzar. The latter would command the highlands
of Asia Minor. He could descend upon the

93

valleys
[7]
of the Euphrates and Tigris.
[8]
Syria
would be exposed to his attack. We should
have to be on our guard lest he might wish to
invade Egypt. It is quite true that England
could easily defend Syria against all the Tzar's
forces—but this would cost money. We should
have to increase our military expenditure by
several millions a year. This would not be
agreeable to the British tax-payer.

People may argue that the Caucasus is far off
from the points which I have mentioned; so it is;
the Russian frontier town in Asia Minor, Gumri,
is more than 1000 miles from Scutari. It is not
likely that in one, two, or even three campaigns,
the Tzar's troops would be able to reach that
town. The policy of the Russian officials is a
safe one. They do not attempt to swallow at one
time more territory than they can easily digest.

This is what the possession of the Caucasus
means to Russia. Should the fortune of war
ever enable us once again to place our heel upon
the throat of the Muscovite, we must not forget
the Circassians. The people ought to be freed to
act as a barrier between Russia and the Sultan's
eastern dominions.

94

CHAPTER XI.

The European society in Erzeroum—The Russian Consul an
energetic man—How to depopulate a country—Russian
passports—Consul Taylor—The intrigues of the Russian
Consul—The Armenian upper classes—How corrupt they
are—The soldiers in Erzeroum—Discontent—
Métallique
—The
military hospital—Recruits from the South—The
head surgeon—The wards—A valuable medicine—A bad
habit—Wasting ammunition.

There was not much European society at Erzeroum.
It was made up of the English, French,
and Russian Consuls and their families; no
other European, so far as I could learn, being in
the town. The Russian official was an energetic
man. A short time previous he had discovered
that some Circassians had the intention
to leave the Caucasus, and enter Turkey. He
had telegraphed the news in cypher to the Russian
authorities. Troops had been sent to the Circassian

95

villages. The inhabitants had been caught
in the act of packing up their goods and chattels.
Very strong measures had been taken. It was
not likely that any similar attempt would be
made by the inhabitants. There were now hardly
any of them left.

An empty house is better than a bad tenant;
this seems to be the policy of the Tzar's generals
in the Caucasus. It is undoubtedly cheaper to
hang a prisoner than to imprison him. The Russian
officers have great ideas of economy in this
respect. The Russian Consuls at Erzeroum had
been engaged for some time past in intriguing
with the Armenians. Many Christians belonging
to the higher monied classes were in favour of
Russian rule—almost all of them being supplied
with Russian passports. The traffic in such
documents carried on in the Erzeroum district
was very great. No large town in Armenia
is free from pseudo-Russians. Consul Taylor,
writing from Erzeroum to the Earl of Clarendon
on March the 19th, 1869, remarks about the
Russian Consul, who was then in that city, as
follows: "The exaggerated pretensions, overbearing
conduct, and ostentatious display of the
Russian Consul in his relations with the local
authorities, in which it is needless to say other

96

Consuls do not indulge, coupled with the unaccountable
servility of the Turkish officials here
in their intercourse with him, tend among an
ignorant people to give a false value to his particular
importance or rather to that of the country
he serves—which by still further strengthening
their belief (alluding to Armenians) that no other
power than Russia is so able or willing to help
them—makes them eager to apply to him in their
differences, and to acquire DOCUMENTS that to
them appear claims to the interference of a foreign
power in their behalf. That the INTRIGUING,
meddling conduct of the RUSSIAN CONSUL is
approved, I may state that although in disfavour
with the Embassy at Constantinople, he is SUPPORTED
by the AUTHORITIES in the CAUCASUS,
to whose diplomatic Chancery at Tiflis,
he is directly subordinate. It is the POLICY
of the RUSSIAN GOVERNMENT, and therefore
of its AGENTS, to encourage such ideas—as
also to exaggerate real existing evils,
or trump up imaginary complaints, in order
to keep up that CHRONIC DISAFFECTION
so suitable to the line of conduct it has always
pursued in the limits of Eastern countries."

I now learnt that a very large sum of money had
been nominally spent in throwing up some earthworks

97

round Erzeroum. They were said to have
cost a million of liras, nobody seemed to know
how the money had been spent. I had not as
yet visited the fortifications. From what I could
gather, the defences were in a very bad state.
It was stated that they would be utterly untenable
in the event of an attack.

One thing, seemed to be the unanimous opinion
of all classes in Erzeroum—with the exception
possibly of the Russian Consul, whose acquaintance
I did not have the pleasure of making;
this was, that should the Armenians ever get
the upper hand in Anatolia, their government
would be much more corrupt than the actual
administration. It was corroborated by the
Armenians themselves; the stories which they told
me of several of the wealthier and more influential
of their fellow-countrymen thoroughly
bore out the idea.
[9]

The soldiers in Erzeroum were very discontented
about the way in which they had received
their pay, or rather, I should say, some of their
back pay, as the amount owing to them was now
more than twelve months in arrear. Where formerly
they used to be paid in
métallique
—a debased

98

coinage of silver mixed with copper, but
which always keeps its value of about 140 piastres
to the lira—they were now being paid in
caime
or
bank-notes. Caime had depreciated enormously, a
lira being worth at Constantinople 200 piastres.
The Governor of Erzeroum had issued an order
that a paper piastre was to be considered as equal
to a metallic piastre. This did not prevent
things from rising in value. The soldiers were
not able to buy half so much with their caime as
formerly with their
métallique
. They had petitioned
the Governor on this subject, and were in
hopes that he would let them be paid after the
Constantinople rate of exchange.

The following day I went to the Military Hospital,
a large building in the middle of the town.
Many of the patients were suffering from typhoid
fever, and others from frost-bite. The men who
had marched from the southern provinces of
the empire had felt the extreme cold in Erzeroum.
Their clothes, well adapted for the climate
of Bagdad, were no protection against
the low temperature on the mountains. There
were also several cases of ophthalmia and pneumonia.

The head surgeon in the hospital was a
Greek, and one of his assistants a Hungarian.

99

They both appeared to be intelligent men, and
bewailed the lack of resources for the hospital.

"We have enough at present," said the Hungarian;
"but it is the time of peace. When the
war breaks out we shall require medicines and
instruments, how the Government will be able to
pay for them I do not know. Every para
[10]
will be
required for the soldiers in the field. Notwithstanding
the best intentions on the part of the
authorities, the wounded will many of them be left
to rot."

The wards were well ventilated. But, owing
to the dearth of accommodation, patients laid
up with typhus were lying next to men suffering
from ophthalmia. It was impossible to
separate the different cases. The doors, too, did
not fit. On opening one of them, a current of
cold air cut through the room, and attacked those
patients who were suffering from inflammation of
the lungs. Hollow coughs could be heard from all
sides of the apartment.

The name of every inmate, and the nature of
the case, was written in French over his pallet,
and the sufferers seemed to be much attached to
their attendants.

100

"One of the most valuable medicines in this
hospital," remarked the Greek, as I finished my
inspection, "is wine. The Turks who come from
the south suffer from poorness of blood. They
have never drunk wine before, their law prevents
them; when they receive alcohol as a medicine the
effect is marvellous."

I now walked to one of the barracks, to see
the cavalry regiment which had left Sivas whilst
I was in that town. It had just arrived in
Erzeroum. An officer accompanied me through
the stables. They were large and lofty. The
saddles, arms, and accoutrements were clean
and bright, and the men appeared very particular
about these matters; the colonel telling
me, with a certain amount of pride, that notwithstanding
the long march from Sivas, he had
no cases of sore backs amongst the horses in his
regiment.

Unfortunately there was only one other cavalry
regiment in that part of Anatolia. The Turks,
in the event of war, would have to depend upon
their Circassian irregulars for outpost duty. Now
if there is one branch of warfare which requires
study more than another it is outpost duty.
The safety of an army depends upon this being
well done. Intelligent cavalry officers are the

101

eyes and ears of the commander of an expedition.
A general who is not supplied with
a numerous and efficient cavalry is like a deaf
and blind man; he knows nothing of what is
going on around him.
[11]
My companion was well
aware of this. He regretted that there were not
more cavalry regiments on the frontier.

"We shall do our best," he said, "but there
are only 400 troopers; when we are killed there
will be no one to replace us."

He was not so sanguine about the result of
the war as many of the officers with whom I had
conversed.

"I fought against the Russians in the Crimea,"
was his remark on this subject. "They have very
little money," he continued; "however, we have
less. We shall have to buy arms from abroad.
So long as we have gold, your manufacturers will
supply us; when we have no liras left, there
will be no more rifles and cartridges. We have
plenty of men. We can recruit from the Mussulmans
throughout Asia. We can put into the field
quite as many troops as the Russians. The latter
are not to be despised as soldiers, they will die
in their places. Our men will do the same. It

102

will be a question of money and the longest purse
will win."

From the cavalry barracks I proceeded to a
large Khan, originally constructed for travellers,
but now given over to the troops. Here a
battalion of redifs (reserves) was quartered. They
had just received their uniform—a blue tunic and
trousers, very much like the dress worn by the
red French infantry, and were armed with Martini-Peabody
rifles—a quantity of these fire-arms
having been recently purchased from an American
firm.

The rooms in which the troops were lodged
had nothing to recommend them; they were
dirty and low, besides being overcrowded. The
officers' rooms adjoined the men's dormitories,
and were equally filthy.

A captain was drilling his company in one of
the passages, and was making the soldiers go
through the motions as if they were volley-firing.
The moment the men had their rifles to the
shoulder he gave the word "fire;" there was no
time allowed for taking aim.

The same fault I subsequently observed in a
battalion which was ordered to form a square to
resist cavalry. The band was placed in the
middle of the square, the men, so soon as the

103

music struck up, commenced firing independently—the
object of each soldier being to discharge his
rifle as rapidly as possible, the officers encouraging
them in this bad habit.
[12]
If the same system is
to be carried on in a war with Russia, the Sultan's
army in Anatolia will soon be without ammunition.

104

CHAPTER XII.

A conversation with the Pacha—The English Parliament
opened—What will they say about Turkey?—Can the
people at your Embassy speak Turkish?—The French
are brave soldiers—The fortifications—The roads—The
water supply—The posterns—Important military positions—A
dinner with our Consul—He relates a story—A
Kurdish robber—The colonel—His young wife—How the
Kurd wished to revenge himself—Many of the Kurds are
in Russian pay.

Erzeroum was certainly the land of rumours, or,
to use a slang expression, "shaves." Shortly
after returning to my quarters, the Pacha called
and said that he had received a telegram to the
effect, that England, Germany, and Turkey were
to be allies in the coming struggle.

"Do you believe it?" I inquired.

"Well," replied the Pacha, "the Germans, it is
said, do not like the Russians, and Russia is
believed to be an ally of France."

"If Germany does not fight France soon,"

105

observed another Turk, "France will be too
strong for Germany."

"That is what I think," said the Pacha;
"Germany sees the nation that she has beaten
making every effort to become strong, so as to
revenge herself for her defeat. Bismarck will
not be likely to await that event."

A Turkish engineer officer now entered the
room. He informed us that a telegram had
arrived to say that the English Parliament had
been opened.

"What will they say about Turkey?" continued
the officer.

"Probably some more about the Bulgarian
atrocities," I replied; "but I really do not
know."

"You English people," observed the engineer,
"think that you know a great deal about what is
passing in foreign countries. You know nothing
at all about Turkey. Can the people at your
Embassy speak Turkish?"

"One can."

"All our officials in England can speak
English," said the engineer. "Our newspapers
say that you receive your information from
people who are sent to travel for different English
journals, and that hardly any of these men

106

can speak Turkish: is that the case?" he continued.

"Our newspapers, as a rule, are very well
informed."

"They wrote a great many falsehoods about
us in Bulgaria," said the officer; "our journals
say that the writers were bribed by Russia."

"Englishmen do not sell their pens," I observed;
"this is a habit which is more likely to
exist in your country than in my own."

"If England, Austria, and ourselves fight
Russia," said the Pacha, "we shall annihilate
Russia. Do you think France will be against
us?"

"Probably not."

"I should be sorry if France were our foe,"
said the Pacha; "the French are brave soldiers,
and were our friends in the Crimea."

"Allah only knows what will happen," said
another of the company; "we are in His hands!"

I now mentioned to the Pacha that Mohammed
had come with me as a servant from Tokat, and
inquired if I might keep him during my stay in
Asia Minor?

"Is he a soldier?" said the Pacha.

"Yes."

"Well, there will be no fighting at present;

107

he can remain with you till you reach Batoum; a
battalion from Tokat is in that town, he can join
there."

Later in the day, I rode round the fortifications,
accompanied by a Turkish officer. There were
nineteen small forts—those on the Kars side
being on an average 3000 yards from the town,
but those in the direction of Ardahan only 1000.

On the south a mountain descends to within a
very short distance of Erzeroum. There is a
direct road from Van to Moush, and from that
town to the mountain which commands the city.
I learnt that no preparations had been made
to defend this height, but, Inshallah, so soon as
the winter was over, a redoubt would be thrown
up in that direction.

Two water-channels lead from this mountain
into Erzeroum, if an enemy once had possession
of the eminence, he would be able to turn
them off from the town. There are a few wells
in the city. The water-supply is insufficient for
the requirements of the population.

Erzeroum is entered by three posterns, known
by the name of the Stamboul, Ardahan, and Kars
gates. The roads from them lead to Ardahan,
Kars, Van, Erzingan, and Trebizond. On the
Van road, and about five miles from Erzeroum,

108

there is a position known as the Palandukain
defile, here it had been proposed to build a
fort—that is, so soon as the weather became a
little warmer. It was also the intention to construct
another at Gereguzek, eighteen miles from
Erzeroum, on the Ardahan road.

The officer now remarked that the Deve Boinou
Bogaz, five miles from Erzeroum, and on the
Kars road, would be a good place for a fort,
whilst redoubts, in his opinion, ought to be thrown
up at Kupri Kui—a place nine hours from Erzeroum,
and where there is a branch road to
Bayazid. He added that some more defences
should be made at the Soghana defile, which is
twenty-four hours from Erzeroum. If this were
done, it would be very difficult for the Russians to
advance by that route.

The important positions on the Bayazid road
are at Deli Baba—a narrow gorge through high
mountains, and which pass, the Turk declared,
was impregnable—at Taher Gedi, a five hours'
march from Deli Baba, and at Kara Kilissa; after
which the road is level to Bayazid.

The forts around Erzeroum were many of them
armed with bronze cannon, which had been manufactured
at Constantinople. The artillerymen
had very little knowledge of these pieces. The

109

officers in command of the different batteries
were ignorant of the distances to the different
points within range of their guns.

A million of liras had been spent in the
construction of the defences of Erzeroum, after
riding round them, it was difficult for me to
imagine what had been done with the money.
[13]

As it is, this sum has been entirely wasted;
Erzeroum, if assailed by a resolute foe, would not
be able to offer any resistance—the easiest points
of attack being by the Ardahan or the Van road.

Later in the day, I dined with our Consul, Mr.
Zohrab. There was an Armenian present, the
Pacha's interpreter, and also Mr. Zohrab's dragoman,
a gentleman who I believe is of Arab parentage.
The conversation after dinner turned upon
the Kurds; the Consul, lighting his cigarette, remarked
that there were several curious anecdotes
with reference to these wild mountaineers.

On being pressed to relate one, Mr. Zohrab
began,—

"Not long ago, and in the neighbourhood of
Karpoot, a Kurdish robber attacked a Turkish
merchant. The robber was wounded. He fled
from the scene of his crime, and took refuge in

110

the house of a Kurd known as Miri Mehmed, a
rich and powerful sheik or chief. News of the
outrage reached Erzeroum. The Pacha sent
orders to the colonel of a regiment in the neighbourhood
of the sheik's encampment to arrest the
robber. The chief soon heard of this. He was
able to dispose of several thousand armed men.
He was not at all inclined to submit. In the
meantime the officer, who did not know how to
arrest the Kurd, wrote to the sheik and invited
him to dinner.

"The colonel had lately taken to himself a
young and beautiful bride," added the Consul, by
way of a parenthesis. "Most of the officers in
his regiment were married men. The day fixed
for the dinner arrived. At the appointed hour
the sheik rode down to the encampment. He
was unaccompanied by any retainers, dismounting
at the door of the colonel's tent, he
passed the threshold. The officer received his
guest very courteously, gave him a magnificent
entertainment, and, after the dinner was over,
asked him to give up the Kurdish robber. To
this, however, the Kurd would not agree. 'He
has eaten bread and salt in my house,' was his
reply. 'I shall not surrender him.' The officer
exerted all his powers of persuasion, finally, discovering

111

that the Kurd was obdurate, he arose,
and, taking a document from his pocket, showed
him that his orders were to arrest the sheik
himself sooner than that the robber should be
allowed to escape. 'So you mean to arrest me?'
said the Kurd. 'You probably think that, because
I am unattended, I have no one at my beck
and call. Wait! If I have not returned to my
encampment in three hours' time, my men will
come here to look for me; and I tell you what
will happen. I shall take the wife you love
best, I will revenge myself by dishonouring her
before your eyes. My men shall do the same
to the wives of every officer in your regiment!'
The colonel was dreadfully alarmed at this," continued
the Consul. "He knew that the sheik
was quite capable of carrying his threat into effect,
he trembled at the vast superiority of numbers
on the side of the Kurds. He went down upon
his knees, and implored the chief for mercy.
The other officers were equally alarmed. They
entreated the Kurd to depart. The colonel,
kneeling down on the ground, embraced the
sheik's feet as a sign of humility and respect.
The chief was inflexible," added the speaker.
"He stood motionless as a block of stone. He
made no remark. At last the colonel, goaded to

112

a state of frenzy, sprang to his feet and cried out
to the chieftain, 'You are worse than a Christian!
you are not a Mohammedan! You have eaten
bread and salt in my house, and yet you wish to
do me this great wrong.' 'And what did you
wish to do to me?' said the Kurd. 'You thought
that I was without my followers and unprotected.
You wished to take me a prisoner to Egin; and
then what would have been my fate? Perhaps I
should have been put in gaol or hanged, as has
been the lot of some of my tribe. But,' added
the sheik, 'you have thrown in my teeth the
remark that I am worse than a Christian! I will
show you if I am so. My followers will be here
in a very short time. They shall not harm your
women. To-morrow morning I will go with
you to Karpoot; but only on one condition—that
we ride there without any of our men. I will
send for my wife whom I love, and you shall take
your wife whom you love. They shall accompany
us. We will go together to the governor of the
town.' The next day they started," added
Mr. Zohrab. "The governor was first of all for
treating the Kurd very severely; but when the
news had been telegraphed to the authorities, and
all the facts of the case were known, an order
came to release the chief."

113

"From whom did you learn this story?" I
inquired.

"From a Hungarian doctor who was attached
to the battalion in question, and who
was an eye-witness of the greater part of the
scheme."

"Some of these Kurds are very chivalrous fellows,"
remarked an Armenian. "However, they
are great robbers, and a curse to the neighbourhood.
They often bribe the Pachas," he continued,
"and when troops are sent to force the
mountaineers to submit, the general in command,
instead of surrounding the mountain, or blocking
up all the passes, will purposely leave one or two
defiles open. The Kurds then escape, and the
Pacha telegraphs back to Constantinople that perfect
order reigns throughout the district under
his command."

"What will the Kurds do in the event of a war
with Russia?" I inquired.

"They will go with the side which pays them
the most money," was the reply. "They are
many of them known to be in Russian pay, and
presents are continually being sent by the authorities
in the Caucasus to the chiefs in this part of
Anatolia."

114

CHAPTER XIII.

The weather—The number of troops in the town—Wood is
very dear—Tezek—The shape of the town—Trade with
Persia—Ismail Pacha's head servant—Have the Russians
arrived? No, Effendi, but the Pacha has hanged himself!
that is all—The Pacha's wives—He was gay and handsome—The
Consul's dragoman—An attack of dysentery—Starting
for Van—Major-General Macintosh—His opinion
about the Kurds—The Bazaar at Van—Fezzee Pacha—Kiepert's
map—Erzeroum is very weak—Fezzee Pacha's
opinion about the impending war—The curious Caves.

It was bitterly cold at Erzeroum. The thermometer
had fallen below zero. The half-clad recruits
could be seen running up and down in front
of their barracks endeavouring to keep themselves
warm. There were at that time about
12,000 troops in the town. The number was
continually changing, every week fresh battalions
of redifs arrived from the interior, and

115

then the older soldiers were marched off in the
direction of Bayazid, Kars, or Ardahan.

Wood was dear in the market. The inhabitants
had to trust to their tezek, the dried
excrement of cows, bulls, and oxen. The town
is in the form of a pentagon. Its appearance from
afar off has been compared by a traveller to a ship
of enormous size, raised by the waves and thrown
into a neglected bay. The mainmast is an old
tower which stands out conspicuously amidst the
mud-built houses.

Formerly there used to be a great trade between
this town and Persia. All the caravans going from
the latter country to Trebizond pass through
Erzeroum, and halt a few days to dispose of
some merchandise. Of late years, a great deal
of the Persian trade has found its way
viâ
Khoi
and Erivan to Tiflis. The caravans between
Persia and Erzeroum are not so numerous as they
were some eighteen years ago. Two per cent.
duty is charged upon all merchandise going from
Erzeroum to Persia, and eight per cent. upon
imported goods. Any article manufactured in
Erzeroum, and sent out of the town without being
marked with the Government stamp, as a sign that
it has paid the duty, is liable to be confiscated.

The following morning I was awoke by Ismail

116

Pacha's head servant. It was bitterly cold.
He proceeded to make a little fire in the stove.
From time to time he looked at me in an excited
manner, then he would blow the fire. There was
evidently something on his mind.

"What is it?" I inquired. "Have the Russians
arrived?"

"No, Effendi, but the Pacha has hanged himself!
that is all!"

"Not Ismail Pacha?" I exclaimed, at once
thinking of my hospitable old host.

"No, Effendi, not Ismail, but a military Pacha—a
young man, only forty. Woe is me! He
has hanged himself; our Pacha has gone to his
house, with all the other Pachas. The body is
quite cold; if the Effendi were to go there, perhaps
he might bring it to life again."

"I am not a Hakim," I said.

"Yes, Effendi, you are. Mohammed has told
me that you have some medicine."

"Nonsense! But what made the Pacha hang
himself?"

"Effendi, no one knows for certain. It may
have been owing to his wives; some people say
that he had lost all his money by lending it to
the Sultan. Allah only knows! I should say
his wives had something to do with it."

117

"Why so?"

"Because he was gay and handsome. His
wives were jealous. They were always scolding
him—that is, whenever he went to his harem. If
he had not been a military Pacha, he might have
abandoned his seraglio, but he could not leave
Erzeroum; the wives knew it, they had him in
their power. He was such a nice gentleman!"

Later in the day I met the Consul's dragoman.
He was of opinion that the Pacha
had not committed suicide, but that some
one in his house had saved him the trouble.
This was the impression of many people in the
town.

"Any how," continued my informant, "no one
will be the wiser. The poor fellow is in the
ground; coroners' inquests, or any sort of judicial
inquiry as to the causes of death, are unknown
in this part of the world."

Radford was still looking ill. I wished to leave
Erzeroum. It was necessary for me to make up
my mind as to what was to be done with him. It
is a six days' march from Erzeroum to Trebizond:
once there he might have gone on board a
vessel bound to Constantinople. But on my proposing
this plan, the poor fellow so entreated to

118

be allowed to continue the journey, that rather
reluctantly I consented.

When long forced marches have to be made
through deep snow, an invalid is a source of great
inconvenience. In addition to this, I was anything
but well myself; a sudden chill had left me
with an attack of dysentery. The food supplied
us by the Pacha at Erzeroum consisted of very
rich dishes. It was not the best thing for the
digestive organs.

I was eager to commence the journey to Van;
however, if both man and master were to fall
ill on the march, it would be next to impossible
to reach that city. When I announced to
Ismail Pacha my intention of starting for Van,
he did his best to dissuade me from the undertaking.

"It is a fourteen days' march," he observed.
"You will be in a country infested by Kurds,
many of whom are in Russia's pay.
[14]
The Russian

119

Consul in Erzeroum is aware that you are here,
he also knows that his Government looks upon
you as an enemy—this I have heard from the
interpreter. Should the Kurds kill you, your
countrymen would very likely throw the blame
on us. Take my advice," said Ismail Pacha; "do
not go to Van. There is nothing to be seen in that
town. Go straight to Kars, you will then meet
with no Kurds on the road."

But I had made up my mind to see Van,
and the more particularly because I had been
informed by many of my Armenian acquaintances
that the bazaar there had been recently set
on fire by some Turkish troops, and that the
Christians had been robbed of all their effects by
the Mussulman soldiers. The bazaar was represented
to me as having been of gigantic dimensions.

120

The Armenian merchants in Van were
said to have been reduced from a state of affluence
to one of abject poverty.

I was anxious to ascertain for myself how far
this story was true; and as it is perfectly impossible
to trust to any evidence in the east, save
to that of your own eyes, I had determined to visit
the seat of the conflagration.

Another Pacha called upon me, Fezzee Pacha
(General Kohlmann), the chief of the staff in
Erzeroum. He was a Hungarian gentleman,
and had formerly been engaged as one of the
leaders in a revolution in his own country. At
that time he had been ordered to blow up the
bridge over the river at Buda-Pesth, but had
not done so. Shortly afterwards he entered the
army of the Sultan. He showed me one of
Kiepert's maps of Asia Minor, dated 1856, but
with numerous corrections, which had been made
subsequently by European officers in the Turkish
service. The Pacha had enlarged this map
by photography, he had then distributed facsimiles
of it to the officers under his command.
He was a fine-looking old man, nearer seventy
than sixty, but upright as a lad of sixteen, and
with a pleasant, frank smile which did one's heart
good to witness.

121

The Turks, as a rule, are not in the habit of
smiling; indeed, Radford often used to expatiate
on the extreme melancholy which prevailed
throughout all the Mohammedan classes; his
favourite remark being "that they looked as if
they had found a sixpence and lost half-a-crown."
General Kohlmann was an exception to
this rule. He had adopted the Mohammedan religion,
but this had not taken away from him a
keen sense of the ridiculous. I have seldom found
myself in pleasanter company than that of the
chief of the staff in Erzeroum. He had been in
Kars during the last siege, and was personally
acquainted with Sir Fenwick Williams, Colonel
Teesdale, and several other Englishmen; besides
having a great deal to say about the gallantry and
skill which had been shown by the British officers
during the investment of the fortress.

"Shall you remain much longer in the Turkish
army?" I inquired.

"I am waiting here in hopes that there will be
a war with our enemies the Russians," said the
old general, "and, if we can only beat them,
shall then return to Constantinople, and take my
pension."

In the Pacha's opinion, Erzeroum was very
weak and could not stand a siege. He did not

122

apprehend any danger from an attack along the
Van road, as there is a very strong position near
Meleskert, and one which the Russians would not
be able to take without enormous loss. He did
not believe that the Tzar's troops were so strong
[15]

in the Caucasus as was generally supposed. If
the general could have had his way, he would at
once have commenced the war by an attack in
that direction.

Later in the day, I heard from an Armenian
that there were some curious caves in the neighbourhood
of Erzeroum, and which no one had
ever explored. They were said to extend for
miles, and to pass under the different detached
forts. My informant declared that a priest who
had been in them for a short distance had said
that they contained gigantic halls, and seemingly
never-ending passages.

I now asked the Pacha if I might undertake
the exploration of the cavern. It would be
interesting from a military point of view to know
where the passage ended. Should there be a
war, an attempt might be made by Russian agents
to blow up the batteries with gunpowder.

Ismail Pacha readily gave his consent, and at

123

the same time ordered an officer of engineers
to take some men with lanterns and pick-axes to
aid me in the task. The English Consul, Mr.
Zohrab, and his two sons, expressed a wish to
join the party. It was arranged that we should
meet the following morning at the consulate, and
go from there to the caves.

124

CHAPTER XIV.

The Turkish cemetery—Entering the cavern—The narrow
passage—A branch tunnel—A candle went out—The ball
of string—The Garden of Eden—The serpent—A dinner
with the Engineer general—Mashallah—The evil eye—A
whole nation of Hodjas—You English are a marvellous
nation—Some of our Pachas cannot write—This is a
miracle—Start for Van—The postman—A caravan from
Persia—The wives of the Persian merchant—How to
balance a fat wife—Herteff—My host's wife—Stealing
sugar.

When I arrived at Mr. Zohrab's residence, I
found that gentleman and his boys, two English-looking
lads with ruddy cheeks, prepared for a
journey to the centre of the earth, if the subterranean
passage would only lead us there; and
riding by a Turkish cemetery, which is just on the
outskirts of Erzeroum, we proceeded onward
towards our destination—a hill a short distance
from the walls of the city.

125

A few melancholy-looking dogs were walking
about the dead men's home. A grave-digger was
busily engaged in making a hole in the frost-bound
ground with a pick. Further on a small
band of people, howling and making a great noise,
showed that another follower of Islam had just
been committed to his last abode. Some of the
monuments were surrounded by wooden railings.
Others had the names of the departed written
on them in Arabic characters. Every stone was
upright, none of them being placed horizontally on
the ground, as is the custom with the Christians
in the east.

Some soldiers were standing near a small aperture
in a neighbouring hill. One of them advanced
as we rode up the slope, and said a few words to
the officer.

"We have arrived," said the latter, and, dismounting,
we followed his example.

The hole was not a large one. To enter the
cave it was necessary for each man to lie flat on
the ground, and gradually squeeze his body
through the aperture. The first to attempt the
passage was a thin Turk; he looked as if he had
never been properly fed, and was as emaciated in
appearance as some of the dogs about the cemetery.
Holding a candle in one hand and a box of

126

matches in the other, he disappeared head-foremost
down the cavity. I prepared to follow,
not without some misgivings, as I was not at
all sure whether there was room for me to
pass.

"You will stick!" said the Consul. And I did
stick.

However, by the aid of a friendly shove from
those behind, and a hand from the little Turk
in front, I succeeded in entering the cavern.
The others in turn followed. The passage
became higher, we could walk upright. There
were still no signs of any barrier, all of a
sudden we arrived at a branch tunnel. Leaving
some soldiers to explore this passage, we continued
onward and presently came to a small
cavern to the left of our path, the latter being
now blocked up by some loose stones.

The soldiers began clearing away the débris.
The rest of our party sat down in the cave
and began to discuss the grotto. The officer was
of opinion that it had been made several hundred
years ago, as a refuge for the women and children
of Erzeroum, in the event of that city being
attacked by an enemy.

"Erzeroum is supposed to have been the site of
the Garden of Eden. Perhaps this is the spot to

127

which the serpent retired after the fall," remarked
another of the explorers.

The officer shook his head; he did not believe
in serpents. He stuck to his original idea.

The soldiers by this time had succeeded in
clearing away the débris. An aperture was
exposed to view. It was about the same width
as the one through which we had previously
passed, and, on reaching the opposite side, several
tunnels were found, branching in different
directions.

Taking a ball of string, we attached it to a
stone by the entrance. Gradually unwinding the
cord, we advanced along one of the passages—now
crawling flat on our stomachs, and then
stumbling over heaps of rubbish—the Consul, who
was rather blown by his exertions, remaining in
the first room, and solacing himself during our
absence with a cigarette.

Presently a candle went out. We had to send
for another. Two or three small caverns were
now passed. Finally we arrived at the bare rock.
There was no exit. We had explored the caves
on one side.

Retracing our steps, we tried the other tunnels,
but, after a very short time, found that they too
ended in the bare rock. There was nothing more

128

to be done, and, returning to the open air, I soon
afterwards reached my quarters. My faith in
Armenian stories was still more shaken by the
events of the morning. I had been told that I
should see gigantic caverns: they had turned out
to be small places, most of them not more than
twelve feet square.

The officer who accompanied me was intelligent
for a Turk, but he could not understand our getting
up so early and riding through deep snow,
merely to explore an old cave. Curiosity about
antiquities does not enter into a Turk's composition.
He lives for the present. What has happened
is finished and done with.

That evening I dined with a general of engineers.
Some officers on his staff and Fezzee Pacha were
amongst the guests. After dinner the son of my
host—a child of ten years of age—came into
the room, accompanied by an attendant. The boy
was dressed in a cadet's uniform, and had a very
pleasant cast of countenance.

"He is a pretty boy," I remarked to his father.

"Mashallah!" interrupted the old Hungarian.
"Say Mashallah," he added, "or else the father
will be afraid of the evil eye! You have no
idea how superstitious the Turks are," continued
the speaker, in French; "if you had not said

129

Mashallah, and subsequently anything had happened
to the child, they would then have declared
that it was owing to you."

The engineer general was much surprised to
learn that almost every Englishman could read and
write, and would not believe me till the Hungarian
had corroborated my statement.

"It is wonderful!" exclaimed our host. "Only
think! A whole nation of Hodjas—schoolmasters!
No wonder that the English people are so clever.
It would never do for us Turks," he added.

"Why not?"

"Because it would make our poor people dissatisfied
to find that they knew as much as their
masters, but were only receiving a servant's wages.
Does it not make your lower orders dissatisfied?"
he inquired.

"No, because their masters know something
beyond reading and writing."

"You English are a marvellous nation," said
the Pacha; "but, I should not be surprised if one
day you had a revolution. Why, some of our
Pachas cannot write, and yet they get on very
well. All your labourers being able to read and
write—this is a miracle!"

I said farewell to my host, and to our
hospitable Consul, who had done his best to

130

dissuade me from the journey. The following
morning we started for Van.

It was a windy day. The postman who was
carrying the Van letter-bag did not much fancy
the march.

"It will be all right for a few hours," he remarked;
"but if it is like this to-morrow, we shall
not be able to pass the mountains."

I now learnt that, owing to the wind and snow,
the track was sometimes blocked for days together,
the path too was slippery, and there were precipices
on either side.

Presently we met a caravan of camels from
Persia—the huge beasts were covered with
icicles, owing to the extreme cold. The men who
accompanied the caravan were clad in sheepskins,
and wore high black hats. The track was
very narrow, not being more than twelve inches
broad; on either side of it there were five feet of
snow. The camels had to make way for the postman,
who preceded us. With a crack from his
whip, he sent the foremost of them off the track,
and breast-deep in the drift. The other camels,
more than a hundred in number, followed in their
leader's wake. There was one mule left in the
path; on approaching, we found that he bore two
ladies. They were the wives of the Persian merchant,

131

and were seated in large baskets—a pannier
being slung on either side of their animal.

The postman proved to be more chivalrous than
I expected. Spurring his horse, he made his
animal leave the track. Man and steed were half
buried in the snow. We followed him. The
mule was now able to pass with the ladies,
who seemed much alarmed lest their quadruped
should stumble. The women appeared
to be very uncomfortable in their conveyance.
One of them was much heavier than the other,
the Persian had balanced her weight by putting
a huge stone in the pannier containing his
thinner wife. Some parts of the road along which
they had come led by the side of a precipice.
It must have been very disagreeable for the ladies
to have sat still in their baskets, and have looked
down the abyss, with nothing save the sure-footedness
of their animal to insure them against
eternity.

This caravan had come from Khoi and Bayazid—the
owner reported that the roads were in a
dreadful state. He had been twenty days performing
the journey. We halted that evening at
an Armenian village called Herteff, containing about
ninety houses, and a short distance from Kupri
Kui. I was not sorry to reach a resting-place.

132

My illness had weakened me. I had discovered
this when we were obliged to wade on foot
through the snow, and was now quite as great a
cripple as Radford had been when on the road to
Erzeroum.

The owner of the house where we stopped was not
a cleanly object. His domicile was as dirty as his
person. His wife and children were manufacturing
some tezek for fuel in one of the two rooms the
house contained; this room was given over for the
use of my party and self. It was bitterly cold
outside. To keep the habitation tolerably warm,
the owner had blocked up a hole in the roof,
used as ventilator, chimney, and window. The
smell of the tezek, and the ammonia arising from
the horses and cattle, was excessively disagreeable.
There was no other accommodation to be obtained.
Mohammed presently informed me that
two merchants had been waiting three days in the
village. They wished to go to Van, and had
made several attempts to cross the mountain, but
in vain.

The wife of the Armenian host, and her children,
were not at all coy about showing their faces—at
least so much of them as the dirt did not hide
from our view. They squatted round my English
servant, who was making tea, and watched

133

his proceedings with great interest. Now the
woman, sticking her filthy fingers into the basin,
took out a lump of sugar; then, putting it
in turn into each of her children's mouths, she
had a suck herself. "Give it me!" suddenly
exclaimed her husband. The lady did not show
any signs of readiness to surrender the prize.
The man sprang to his feet; thrusting a finger
and thumb into the mouth of his helpmate, at the
same time clasping her tightly round the throat
with the other hand, so as to avoid being bitten,
he extracted the delicacy. Holding the sweet
morsel high in the air, he displayed the treasure
to the assembled guests; then, greatly to the
woman's indignation, he placed it within his own
jaws.

134

CHAPTER XV.

The Kurd—His bonnet—Mohammed is ill—Radford doctors
him—The mustard plaster—The plaster is cold—Where
has the Frank put the flames—An old frost-bite—The
two merchants—Bayazid—A Turkish lieutenant—A very
dirty Christian—Crossing the Araxes—Kupri Kui—Yusueri—Deli
Baba—Earthenware jars—How they are
made—When the winter is over—Procrastination.

In the next room, which was only separated
from us by a railing about three feet high,
there were buffaloes, cows, calves, and pigeons,
besides the relatives of the Armenian, the postman,
and a Kurd. The latter individual had a
wonderful turban in the shape of a bonnet on his
head. It was made of blue satin, and adorned
with gold thread. He was evidently very proud
of this attire, and told the Armenian that he had
purchased it at Erzeroum, and that, when he had
finished wearing the turban, he should give it to
his favourite wife.

135

Presently an Armenian woman brought in a
wooden tray, on which were several of the cakes
which are used as bread by the inhabitants, and
some oily soup.

The Kurd, postman, and Armenians, squatting
round the dishes, devoured the contents with
rapidity.

Mohammed was lying in a corner of my room;
from time to time a groan escaped his lips. I discovered
that he was suffering from rheumatism.
Radford had put a mustard plaster on him by
way of alleviating the pain. Mohammed had
been told that he was to keep it on all night. The
mustard was rapidly creating a blister.

"Atech—fire!" said the Turk, pointing to his
back.

"Yes," said Radford. "Hottish—I should say
it was. It will be better presently."

"Turkish is very like English, sir," observed my
man to me. "You see that he says it is 'hottish.'"

"Nonsense!" I replied. "He says 'atech—fire.'"

"'Atech,' or 'hottish,' it don't make much
difference, sir; the plaster is raising a beautiful
blister. I should not be surprised if Mohammed
left off complaining about his haches and pains

136

after this. I don't think that as how any other
Turks will ask me to doctor them again!"

Radford was wrong. The sound of Mohammed's
groans attracted the Kurd's attention:
accompanied by the Armenian, he came to the
side of the sufferer. They minutely inspected the
plaster.

"It is a wonder!" said the Kurd.  "The plaster
is cold, but Mohammed says he is on fire!  Where
has the Frank put the flames?  I should like a
plaster too." Turning to Radford, he held out
his hand for one.

"Plasters are for sick people, not for men in a
good state of health," I observed.

"But I am not well," said the Kurd.

"What is the matter with you?"

"I have a pain here;" taking off his slipper,
he showed the remains of an old frost-bite.  "The
cold did this," he added: "the fire there," pointing
to the wet paper, "will put it right again."

I had considerable difficulty in explaining to the
man that the plaster in question would be a useless
remedy.

The following morning the wind blew harder
than before. The mountain which barred our
progress was entirely hid from view in what
seemed to be a whirlwind of snowy particles.

137

The cold, too, was intense. The thermometer
was still several degrees below zero.

"It is no good starting," said the postman,
coming to me; "to-day the sun does not shower
its rays upon our destiny. Fortune is against
us. We must wait here till the wind goes down."

The two merchants had made another attempt
to ascend the mountain a little before daybreak.
They had found it impossible to cross the passes.
The track was hid from their view by the snow.
They were half blinded by the flakes which the
wind carried with it in its course.

There was nothing to be done but to wait patiently.
In conversation with a Turkish lieutenant,
I discovered that it would be possible to reach
Bayazid, and from Bayazid there was a road to
Van. It would be a much longer route than
the one which led direct from Erzeroum to
Van.

The officer interrupted me in my reflections,
and proposed that we should go to Bayazid.

"Who knows," he continued, "how long we
may have to wait here? The mountain is sometimes
impassable for two or three weeks at
a time; and, besides this, the smell in this room
is enough to poison any one. These Christians
do stink," he added, pointing to my Armenian

138

host and hostess, who, begrimed with dirt, were
squatting in a corner—the woman engaged in
making some cakes with flour and water, and the
man in looking for what it is not necessary to
mention amidst his clothes.

The Russian moujik is not a sweet animal; a
Souakim Arab, with hair piled up two feet above
his head, and covered with liquid fat, is an equally
unpleasant companion; but either of these gentlemen
would have smelt like Rowland's Macassar
oil in comparison with my Armenian host, who,
apparently, had no ideas beyond that of manufacturing
fuel from cows' dung. His conversation
was entirely engrossed with this subject. It was
also an important topic with the rest of his
family, who were all longing for the frost to go,
so as to commence making the article in question
on a large scale.

Wood is very dear in these parts. The inhabitants
would die if they had not a supply of
fuel. It is not surprising that they take a
considerable interest in their tezek. But to hear
this subject discussed from morning to night, and
in a room with an atmosphere like a sewer—besides
being ill at the time—was a little annoying
to my senses. I made up my mind that, if the
weather did not improve in the course of the next

139

twenty-four hours, I would continue my journey
towards Bayazid.

The lieutenant would accompany me in that
direction. He was a very cheery little fellow, and
not at all disposed to hide his own lights beneath
a bushel. He had been a lieutenant about six
years, and took an opportunity to mention to me
this fact. He knew that I had stayed with
Ismail Pacha in Erzeroum, and was in hopes that
I would write to the governor, and casually mention
his, the lieutenant's, name as a gallant and
exceedingly efficient officer.

There was no improvement in the weather.
The following morning I left Herteff for Bayazid—the
postman remaining behind with the letters.

We crossed the Araxes on the ice. The river
was said to be only two feet deep. Kupri Kui
was about one mile from our track. Here there
is a bridge over the stream, which is about
thirty yards wide, besides being deep. Our
track was firm and level. There were no mountains
to cross. Every now and then we passed
by villages; they all contained soldiers, and, so
far as I could learn, there were about 8000 troops
echeloned between Erzeroum and Bayazid.

After a seven hours' march, we halted at
Yusueri, an Armenian village. From here it

140

was a three hours' ride to Deli Baba, a celebrated
gorge or mountain pass, and the most important
place, from a military point of view, on the road
to the Russian frontier.

The women in the house where I was lodged
were busily engaged in making some large earthenware
jars. Taking some clay from the soil,
they knead it for several hours with their fingers,
and then form it into the shape they require.
In every house there is a hole left in the floor,
which is used as an oven. The women place the
jars in this receptacle, and, filling the space
between them with tezek, set fire to it. They
afterwards colour the pottery by some process
of which I am ignorant. The result is an extremely
well made and serviceable article, in
which they keep their corn, flour, and household
goods.

Now we came to the famous pass of Deli Baba.
It is about a quarter of a mile long. High
and precipitous rocks are on either hand, and the
gorge is not more than forty yards wide at the
exit from the defile towards Bayazid. It is a spot
where a thousand resolute men, well supplied with
ammunition, might keep at defiance a force of a
hundred times their number. However, in spite
of the extreme importance of the position, nothing

141

had been done to strengthen any part
of it.

"We are going to throw up earthworks, and
place some batteries here when the winter is over,"
was the reply of the lieutenant, when I interrogated
him on this subject.

"When the winter is over:" "Not to-day, to-morrow:"
this is the stereotyped answer which a
Turk has always at the tip of his tongue. Until the
Sultan's subjects can shake off the apathy which
prevails throughout the empire, it will be difficult
for them to hold their own against other nations.

142

CHAPTER XVI.

Low hills—Deep snow—The effect of the sun's rays—Nearly
blind—Daha—The road to Bayazid blocked—The daughter
of my host—Her costume—Soap and water—A surprise—She
is very dirty—If she were well washed—Turkish
merchants—Buying the daughters—A course of Turkish
baths—An addition to the Seraglio—Rich men always get
pretty wives—The Kurd's sons—The Imaum of the village—My
host's tooth—It aches—I have heard of your
great skill—Cure my tooth—A mustard plaster a remedy
for toothache—A hakim for the stomach—Have it
out—Champagne nippers—My tooth is better already.

Our track led over some low hills. The
ground was covered with deep snow. We had to
dismount, and struggle as best we could through
the treacherous soil. The sun shone bright above
our heads; the reflection from the white surface
at our feet was blinding in the extreme. We
staggered about, and followed in each other's track,
like a number of drunken men, and after eight

143

hours' incessant toil reached Daha, a Kurdish
village.

We were here informed that the road to Bayazid
had been blocked for eight days; and that the
village was full of caravans which had made daily
attempts to force a passage forward. All the
inhabitants were going to turn out at daybreak
on the following day. They intended, if possible,
to clear a track from Daha to the next
village.

The daughter of my host took a great deal of
interest in her father's guests. She was a tall,
fine-looking girl, with a high cone-shaped head-dress
made of black silk. A quantity of gold
spangles were fastened to this covering. A
red jacket and loose white trousers enveloped her
limbs and body, her feet were thrust in some
white slippers. If only she had been properly
washed, she would have been a very attractive-looking
young lady. But soap and water were
evidently strangers to the Kurd's dwelling, if I
might judge by the surprise the girl evinced when
Radford commenced washing his pans after he
had cooked my dinner.

"So you wash the dishes and pans in your
country?" she remarked.

"Yes."

144

"But it gives a great deal of trouble," observed
the girl; "and it does not make the dinner taste
any better."

The voice of her father on the outside of the
dwelling made the young lady aware that she
would probably receive a scolding if she were
found talking to a European. Sticking her fingers
into a tin box, and seizing a handful of biscuits,
she ran into the stable.

"She is very dirty," observed Mohammed, who
had overheard the conversation; "but, for all
that, if she were well washed, she would fetch a
good price as a wife for some Bey in Constantinople.
It is a pity that you are not a follower of
Islam, Effendi," continued my servant; "she is
tall, she would make a good wife for you."

I now learnt that certain Turkish merchants
were in the habit of visiting the Kurd district in the
summer months. If they meet with a pretty girl,
they buy her from her parents, and then, taking
the young lady to Constantinople, make her go
through a course of Turkish baths, and feed her
well. Under this régime the girl's complexion
improves. She will command a considerable price
as an addition to the seraglio of some magnate or
other. If she succeeds in gaining the favour of
her lord, she does not forget the relatives at

145

home, but sends them money and presents, besides
interesting herself for the advancement of
her brothers and other relations. The result of
this is, that a Kurd has no objection to part
with his pretty daughter. If she is well sold at
Constantinople, this is looked upon, by the young
lady's family, as rather a feather in their cap than
otherwise.

"Rich men generally get pretty wives," said
Mohammed, as he concluded giving me this information.
"Is it the same in your country, Effendi?"

"Occasionally," I replied, "but not always.
The girls are sometimes allowed to choose for
themselves. There are instances when they
prefer a poor man to a rich one."

"What do their fathers say to this?" said
Mohammed. "Do they not beat their daughters
if they do not like the rich man?"

"No."

"I cannot understand that," said Mohammed.
"If I had a daughter, and she might marry a rich
man, but she preferred a poor man, I should whip
the girl till she altered her mind!"

The owner of the house entered the room. He
was accompanied by three of his sons, all fine-looking
lads. They were dressed in green serge,
and in a costume which somewhat resembled that

146

worn by the foresters in the opera of Freischütz.
Several daggers and pistols were stuck in their
sashes, enormous orange-coloured turbans adorned
their heads. They squatted down beside the
Imaum of the village—a thin man dressed in a
white sheet.

The father rose from the divan, and, standing
before me, pointed to his tooth.

"What is the matter with it?" I inquired in
Turkish—a language which is generally understood
by every Kurd, though few of them speak
it well.

"It aches; I have heard, Effendi, of your great
skill as a hakim (doctor)," continued the man.
"Mohammed has told me how you set his shoulder
on fire with a piece of wet paper. This is very
wonderful, perhaps you could cure my tooth."

Now it is one thing to be able to prescribe a
mustard plaster, it is another to be called upon
to act as a dentist. However, the Kurd's children
were all expectant. They evidently believed
that if I put a mustard plaster on their
parent's tooth, that this would relieve him immediately.

Mohammed was also of this opinion. He went
through a sort of pantomimic performance in the
corner of the room, suggestive of the sufferings

147

which he had undergone, and of the subsequent
benefit which he had received.

A thought occurred to me. I remembered that,
three years before, my servant Radford had extracted
the tooth of a maid-servant in a country
house in Norfolk. Why should he not extract
the Kurd's tooth? And if he were able to do so,
would not my reputation as a hakim be higher
than ever amidst the inhabitants of Kurdistan?

"I am not a hakim for teeth," I remarked to
the patient. "I am a hakim for the stomach,
which is the nobler and more important portion
of a man's body."

The Imaum and the Kurd's children made a sign
of assent to this; the Kurd himself did not seem
to see it.

"You are in my house," he said. "You have
accepted my hospitality—cure my tooth!"

"Well," I continued, "I have a servant with
me; he is a hakim for teeth. If you like he shall
look in your mouth."

"By all means!" said the Kurd.

In a few minutes a servant of my host arrived,
leading Radford by the sleeve of his coat.

"Do you want me, sir?" inquired Radford,
touching his cap. "This dirty chap," pointing
to the man who had brought him to the room,

148

"came into the place where I was a cooking, laid
hold of me with his dirty fingers, and without
saying a word led me here!"

"Yes," I said; "this gentleman," pointing to
the old Kurd, "has something the matter with
one of his teeth. Look at it."

My servant, without moving a muscle of his
countenance, seized the patient by the nose with
the fingers of one hand; then, thrusting a finger
of the other into the sufferer's mouth, looked
well down the gaping orifice.

"It had better come out; but it is very tight
in his 'ead," remarked my man. "If I only had
a pair of champagne nippers, I would have it out
in a trice."

"Could not you pull it out with a piece of string?"

"No, sir; could not get a purchase on it;" and
with that remark my servant released the Kurd's
head.

"What does he say?" said the sufferer, rather
alarmed at our conversation in a language unknown
to him, and the more particularly at the
grave demeanour of my servant.

"He says that the tooth had better be extracted."

"Will it hurt much?" inquired the Kurd
excitedly.

149

"Yes, a good deal."

This observation of mine appeared to afford
great satisfaction to the Imaum and the Kurd's
children.

"Have it out!" they all cried.

But their parent did not see the matter from
his sons' point of view. He remarked in an
indignant tone of voice,—

"Silence!"

Then, turning to me, he inquired if I could not
give him some medicine for his stomach.

"But your tooth hurts you, not your stomach,"
I observed.

"Yes," replied the man, "but, for all that, I
should like some medicine."

Taking some pills from my medicine-chest, I
gave them to him. The old man, putting three
pills in his mouth, commenced chewing them with
great gusto.

"My tooth is better already," he remarked, and
in a few minutes prepared to leave the room,
accompanied by his sons and the Imaum. The
latter was very much disappointed that my host's
tooth had not been operated upon.

"If it had been my tooth, I should have had it
out," he observed to me
sotto voce
; "but he is
afraid."

150

The Kurd overheard the remark.

"You would have done nothing of the kind,"
he replied. "You would have swallowed the
medicine like me!"—and a whelping cry from a
dog outside the door announced to us that the
old gentleman had vented his bile on the ribs of
the animal in question.

151

CHAPTER XVII.

Clearing the way—Leaving Daha—My father was well cleaned
last night—The wonderful medicine—Charging the snow-drifts—Turkoman
steeds—The Persians—The lieutenant—Zedhane—Molla
Suleiman—Toprak Kale—A sanguinary
drama—The Caimacan—The rivals—An Armenian peasant—The
marriage ceremony—The Circassian Governor—The
Kurd's mother—Revenge—His father's bones—The
Circassian's wives—The Governor in bed—The fight—The
feud between the Kurds and Circassians—Camels in the
water.

On the morrow we were up before daybreak,
and not only ourselves, but almost all the male
inhabitants of the village. They had turned out,
some on horseback and others with spades and
shovels, to try and force a passage through the
snow. In addition to these men there were two
caravans, comprising between them over 200
camels, and accompanied by fifty Persians. It
was very cold. The lieutenant was doubtful

152

whether we should succeed in clearing a way
before us. According to the Kurd, there were
still six feet of snow in many places along the
track.

Just as we were leaving Daha, the eldest son
of my host approached and apologized for the
absence of his father. There was evidently something
on the lad's mind, he hesitated as he said
"Good-bye."

"Is there anything I can do for you?" I
observed.

"Yes, Effendi, there is," said the boy, delighted
at the ice being thus broken for him. "But I am
afraid to ask for it."

I now began to be a little alarmed, thinking
that possibly the lad had set his heart on possessing
my little express rifle or revolver, both
of which he had much admired on the previous
evening.

"What is it?"

"Effendi," replied the boy, "I know that it is
contrary to our ideas of hospitality for a host
to ask for a present from a guest; but in this
case my father—"

"What does he want?" I remarked a little
hastily, as it was anything but agreeable sitting
still in the cold.

153

"He was so well cleaned last evening," continued
the lad; "he has never been so well
cleaned before! He would like you to give him
some more of that wonderful medicine."

All the luggage was on the pack-horses. But
the boy so entreated me to comply with his
request that I could not refuse. Unpacking my
bag, I gave him a box of pills. The lad's face
became radiant with delight. Taking off the lid,
he took out a couple and ate them on the spot.
Then, touching his head with my hand, he hurried
off in another direction.

"He is a rogue," said Mohammed, chuckling.
"He does not want the medicine for his father.
It is for himself. He wants to set up as a hakim
in the village. When once it is known that
you have given him some medicine, he will be a
person of great importance in the neighbourhood."

Presently we came to a place where the camels,
which were in the van of our party, had come to
a halt. One of the animals had almost disappeared
in a snow-drift, nothing save his long
neck could be seen. The men coaxed and
whipped their unruly beasts, all was to no purpose,
they would not move a step.

I thought that we should have to dig out the
road with shovels. However, the Kurd who

154

directed the operations did not resort to this
measure. Ordering one of the Persians to make
his camels retire about 200 yards, the Kurd called
twenty of the best mounted of the villagers to his
side, then striking his horse and shouting wildly,
he galloped along the track and charged the drift.
In a second or two nothing could be seen but the
head of the rider, his steed was entirely hidden from
our view. After a few struggles the man backed
the animal out of the snow, having made a hole
in it some twenty feet long by four wide. The
next horseman rode at the place, like his leader.
Each Kurd followed in succession. They finally
forced a passage.

It was a wild sight to witness—these Kurds
in their quaint head-dresses, and on strong, fine-looking
steeds of Turkoman breed, many of them
quite sixteen hands high, charging the snow-drifts,
yelling and invoking Allah—the Persians, phlegmatic
and still, seemingly not caring a straw
about the matter—the lieutenant encouraging
the Kurds by cries and gesticulations, but having
too great a regard for his own safety to gallop at
the ridges—and the leading horseman now far
in front, his horse apparently swimming through
the snow as he slowly burst the barrier.

It was hard work even following in the steps of

155

the Kurds. If a horse or camel deviated a hair's
breadth from the line marked out, he would be
often buried in a drift, and a long time be wasted
in extricating him.

The track led over a succession of rising ground
until we reached Zedhane, an Armenian village
with about thirty houses.

We were close to the village of Molla Suleiman,
and were not far from Toprak Kale—a town in
which a sanguinary drama had been enacted but
a very few months previous. I will relate the
story as it has been told me by an eye-witness of
part of the scene.

Four years ago a Kurd was Caimacan at Toprak
Kale. His grandfather had been a sort of king
at Bayazid; the family being well off and having
relatives married to some magnates in Stamboul,
had considerable influence in the district. However,
many complaints had been made about the
conduct of this Caimacan. He was removed
from his post. It was given to a Circassian.
This gave rise to a feud between the ex- and
the new governors—the Kurd often vowing
vengeance against his newly-appointed successor.
Shortly before my informant's visit to Toprak
Kale, the Kurd's father had died. His family
was in mourning.

156

An Armenian peasant, who resided in Toprak
Kale, was about to be married. It is the custom
amongst the Christians in this part of Asia Minor,
when the wedding ceremony is concluded, to beat
drums, hire a band of what they call musicians,
and fire guns in the air, as a sign of general
rejoicing.

The peasant, knowing that the Kurd's father
had recently died, went to the ex-Caimacan, and
asked his permission for the wedding to take
place, as it would be impossible to have it without
the music, gun-firing, &c.

The Kurd consented, provided that he received
a present, this the Armenian gladly promised to
give. The marriage ceremony began, but when
the Armenians in Toprak Kale commenced beating
drums, &c., the noise reached the Kurd's mother's
ears. She hastened to her son, asked him how he
could allow people to insult his father's memory,
and insisted that he should instantly put a stop to
the proceedings.

The son allowed himself to be persuaded, and
sent some servants, who broke in the heads of the
drums. The peasant was very indignant. He
at once proceeded to the Circassian, the actual
Caimacan, and related everything that had
happened.

157

"Did the Kurd accept a present from you?"
inquired the governor.

"Yes."

"Very well," continued the Caimacan, "go
back to your house. My servants shall accompany
you. Make more noise than before. Get more
drums; beat them harder than ever, and do not
spare your powder. I will show the people in
Toprak Kale who is Caimacan—the Kurd or
myself."

This was done. When it came to the ears of
the Kurd's mother, she told him that he must
be revenged on the foe, or his father's bones
would not be able to rest in peace in the tomb.
The Kurd consented. That evening he went to
the Caimacan's house, accompanied by two of his
brothers, and inquired of a servant where his
master was.

"In the harem," replied the attendant, much
surprised at so late a visit on the part of the ex-Caimacan.

"Go and tell him I am here," said the Kurd;
then, without waiting for an answer, he pushed
aside the man, and tried to force a way into the
apartment reserved for the Circassian's wives.
The governor was in bed at the time. He
heard the noise: snatching his sword from the

158

sheath, he rushed to the entrance. The Kurd
fired at him with a pistol, the ball going through
the Circassian's shoulder; but the latter was
able to cut down his foe. The Kurd's relatives
now rushed upon the governor. He called
loudly for assistance; his brother, who slept
in another room, hurried to the rescue, the result
of the encounter being that three of the
opponents were killed, whilst the Circassian
governor was left desperately wounded on the
field of battle.

In the meantime hundreds of Kurds, who had
heard of the disturbance, came down from the
adjacent mountain. They vowed that they would
kill every Circassian in the neighbourhood. The
Circassians trooped into Toprak Kale, and swore
that they would exterminate the Kurds.

Fortunately the gentleman who related this
story to me was able to despatch a mounted
Armenian to the governor at Bayazid asking
him to send some troops to the scene of the
disturbance. The soldiers arrived in time to
prevent a battle royal between the two factions.
This probably would have ended in the annihilation
of every Kurd and Circassian in the district,
neither side being inclined to grant any quarter
to its foe.

159

We rode through Molla Suleiman. All the
houses in this village were filled with soldiery. On
emerging into the open country I found that the
path in front of us was blocked by a caravan
coming from Persia. A pond was on the right-hand
side of the path. The leading camel-driver
led his animals along the frozen water, so as
to avoid a collision with our party. He miscalculated
the thickness of the ice; a loud splash
made us aware that it had given way beneath the
camels. Five of the huge beasts were sprawling
in the water, here about five feet deep; their packs,
containing timbaki, Persian tobacco, became dripping
wet. The animals, frightened at the breaking
of the ice, lay down on all fours. They
refused to get up, in spite of the cries and the
whips of their drivers.

160

CHAPTER XVIII.

Armenian lads—Riding calves—Buffaloes—A fair price for a
girl—Our daughters are our maid-servants—A European
wife—A useless incumbrance—A Dervish—The lieutenant
roars at him—Kara Kelise—Kaize Kuy—The streams in
Anatolia—A source of annoyance—Persian women—A
Persian village—The houses—Rugs manufactured by the
inhabitants—Erivan—The Russian invasion of Persia—Once
a Russian always a Russian—The Murad river—Diyadin—The
garrison—Rumours of peace—Persia—Ararat—The
view—Ophthalmia—Bayazid—The Pacha's
residence—The Russian authorities in Daghestan—Four
hundred people killed—Women and children shot down
and beaten to death—Major-General Macintosh—His
opinion about Bayazid—The importance of this town from
a military point of view—Syria—Aleppo—Diarbekir—Van—The
barracks—Mahmoud Pacha—His descendants—The
irony of fate—A Hungarian doctor—Mahmoud Pacha,
the son of Issek Pacha, lies here.

We met with some Armenian lads riding calves,
and driving others before them, the driven
animals carrying pack-saddles, which were laden
with sacks of corn. The Christians in this

161

district make use of their cattle as beasts of burden.
It is not at all an uncommon sight to see Armenians,
man and wife, riding to market on cows and
oxen. Buffaloes are much in request with the
inhabitants on account of the great strength of
these animals. Some of the richer Christians possess
from twenty to thirty buffaloes, two of which
are considered a fair price for a girl—it being the
custom of the poorer Armenians in certain districts
to receive money from their sons-in-law,
and seldom, if ever, to give any dowry to their
daughters. On my remarking this one day, when in
conversation with a Christian, the latter replied,—

"Our daughters are our maid-servants, when
they marry we lose their services. It is quite
right that the husband should compensate us
for our loss. Europeans educate their girls very
well, but the latter are utterly useless as cooks
or sweepers. When they marry, the fathers lose
nothing, but, on the contrary, gain, as they have no
longer to pay for their daughters' maintenance or
clothes. It is quite proper that you should give a
husband something when he saddles himself with a
useless incumbrance; and you have no right to find
fault with us for our system."

Presently we met a dervish; his long black hair
was streaming below his waist; he brandished a

162

knotted stick. The fellow looked very hard at us, as
if he were of the opinion that we ought to leave the
track, and let our horses sink into the snow-drift
so as to enable him to pass. The lieutenant
did not see it in this light. This officer was a
little man, but had a tremendous voice, which
sounded as if it came from the very bottom
of his stomach. He roared at the dervish; the
latter who was greatly alarmed, sprang on one
side into the snow. Nothing but his head and
face were visible—his dark eyes glared fiercely at
the giaours as we rode past.

Kara Kilissa came in sight. It is a large
village, every house was crammed with soldiers.
It was impossible to obtain any
accommodation. We rode on towards Kaize
Kuy, another Armenian hamlet. The track
descended for a few yards, and then ascended
precipitously. I thought that we were in a
gully. However, the Zaptieh and his horse
floundering in some water made me aware that
we were crossing a frozen stream, and that
the ice had given way. It was very cold; the
man was wet from head to foot, in a minute
or two he looked like one gigantic icicle. Pushing
on as rapidly as possible, we reached our
quarters for the night.

163

The streams which traverse the tracks in many
parts of Anatolia are a source of constant annoyance
to travellers during the winter. The water
becomes frozen; snow falls; it covers the glassy
surface, and in time fills the space between the
banks. There is nothing to warn the wayfarer
that he is leaving the track, till he suddenly finds
himself upon the ice: a horseman is fortunate if it
is strong enough to bear him.

Now we saw some Persian women sitting
cross-legged on their horses, like the men. Some
of these ladies were mothers, they carried their
children slung in handkerchiefs round their necks.
In a short time I came to their village, one
amongst several others which are scattered about
in this part of Turkey. The houses were clean
inside, and in this respect a great improvement
upon those inhabited by the Kurds. The floors
were covered with very thick rugs made by the
wives of the proprietors. I was informed that
the people in the district send their manufactures
to Erzeroum.

The inhabitants formerly lived in the neighbourhood
of Erivan. When the Russians invaded
Persia, conquered the Shah, and annexed a
part of Persian soil, many of the vanquished
determined not to remain under the Muscovite

164

yoke. Leaving their houses, they crossed the
frontier and settled in Turkey. The Sultan gave
them land. They expressed themselves as being
much happier under their present rulers than
their relatives who are Russian subjects. The
latter would be delighted to pass the border-line
and join their countrymen in Anatolia; this the
Muscovite authorities do not allow. "Once a
Russian, always a Russian," is the answer given
to the Persians on this question.

Our track led us along the right bank of the
Murad, here about seventy yards wide. We
came to a bridge which spans the river—the road
on the opposite side leading in the direction of
Van. We did not cross the structure.

Soon Diyadin was reached. Here there were
two squadrons of cavalry, besides infantry. The
commandant, in spite of the rumours of peace
which had been telegraphed from Constantinople,
was daily expecting an outbreak of hostilities.
The Russians, according to him, had concentrated
a large force of Cossacks in the neighbourhood of
Erivan. It was believed that the war would
commence by an attack upon Bayazid.

We rode for an hour over a low mountain
ridge, and then entered a vast plain girt round
by sloping heights. On our right front lay

165

Persia. On my bridle-hand I could see the
territory of the Tzar. The mighty Ararat is in
front of us, and stretches upwards into the realms
of space, its lofty crest hidden in some vaporous
clouds.

It was extremely cold. A bright sun poured
its rays down upon our heads. The golden orb
gave out no warmth, but it half blinded us with
its splendour.

The people in this district suffer very much
from ophthalmia: a traveller rarely finds himself
in a house where one of the inmates is not labouring
under this complaint.

The plain narrows. A broad lake of water is
on our left. To our right front and amidst the
rocks lies the little town of Bayazid. The ruins of
an old castle are in the fields below. The track
begins to ascend. It winds higher and higher
amidst the crags. A few houses are passed, and
the barracks which contain two battalions of infantry.
We come to the Pacha's residence. Dismounting,
I proceeded to pay that official a visit.

He had been for some time in Egypt, and
spoke Arabic very fairly, having great pleasure
in showing off his proficiency in this language to
the officers of his household.

I learnt that, six weeks previous to my arrival,

166

the Russian authorities in Daghestan had
ordered a levy of troops to be made amidst the
inhabitants. The latter declared that they were
Mohammedans, and said they did not wish to
fight against their Lord, the Commander of the
Faithful. They added that the Tzar formerly had
promised that those men who wished might leave
Russia with their wives and children, and settle on
Turkish soil; they asked for this permission for
themselves.

"However," continued the Pacha, "the Russian
authorities would not allow them to leave the
country. Cossacks were sent to the district in
question, and 400 people—amongst them women
and children—were shot down and beaten to
death!"

Bayazid is only a twelve hours' march from
Erivan, the frontier town of Russia. There is a
level road between these two stations. The Russians
had a large artillery force in Erivan, and
there were only two mountain guns in Bayazid.
The Turkish officers were convinced that if an
attack were made upon Bayazid, they would be
unable to offer any effectual opposition. In their
opinion it would be better for them to retire upon
Karakilissa and Deli Baba, and make a stand at
these points.

167

Major-General Macintosh, when writing about
Kurdistan during the time of the Crimean War,
remarks that he does not think there is a place of
greater importance than Bayazid, in a military
point of view, in the whole of Western Asia.
There is a continuous descent along the banks of
the Euphrates to the Persian Gulf; but as this
great valley conducts through the range of Mount
Taurus into Syria, its value to Russia, on this
account alone, must be obvious. It is much nearer
to her present frontier, and much more accessible
than Erzeroum, which lies on the western branch
of the Euphrates; and should the contingencies
of the present war render it possible for Russia to
push on a force into the northern part of Syria,
the good-will of the Kurds
[16]
at the moment of
undertaking such an operation, would afford her
an immense advantage. There is another exceedingly
strong pass at Bayazid, on the Persian side,
where a very small regular force might completely
seal the entrance into Persia, from the side of
Erzeroum, except through the roads of central
Kurdistan. It may also be looked upon as a
key to Kurdistan, and to Diarbekir, Mosul, and

168

the whole course of the Tigris as far as Bagdad.
I have no hesitation in saying, that Russia, with
the assistance of the Kurdish tribes, could speedily
establish a route, and march an army down this
valley into Syria.
[17]
The distance from Erivan to
Aleppo is not above 500 miles, if so much, and the
route by Aleppo, Diarbekir, and Van, to Aderbzou,
from the Mediterranean, is quite practicable for an
army.

I rode to see the barracks. Eighty years
ago they formed part of a palace belonging to a
Kurdish chieftain, a certain Mahmoud Pacha.
He had expressed a wish to have the most beautiful
residence in the world, and, after conversing
with numerous architects upon this subject, had
accepted the service of an Armenian. The latter
had designed a very handsome building, with
large glass windows, and everything that could be
desired in the way of comfort. The Pacha was
satisfied with the palace, but not with the idea
that the Armenian architect might possibly construct
a similar building for some other kindred
chieftain. To prevent this Mahmoud ordered his
executioner to cut off the Armenian's hands.
This was done. The poor victim shortly afterwards

169

died a beggar. In the meantime the Pacha
was gathered to his fathers, leaving one son.
This man, after committing all sorts of excesses,
was bitten by a snake, and died at Alexandretta.
His child was brought up at Bayazid, and afterwards
became Caimacan at Toprak Kale. He
had lost his life in the affray with the Circassians,
which has already been mentioned in this
work.

On entering the barracks, sometimes called the
citadel, the irony of fate was clearly shown. The
large window-frames which had been brought to
Bayazid for Mahmoud eighty years ago, and at an
immense expense, had all disappeared; their places
were filled up with sheets of Turkish newspapers.
The marble pillars and carving in
alabaster over the portico were chipped and
hacked about, the harem of the former owner
was a dormitory for the troops. Four hundred
soldiers slept in the rooms allotted by Mahmoud
to his seraglio.

A Hungarian doctor in the Turkish service
accompanied me over the building. Descending a
flight of steps, he led the way to a large vault.
Here lay the bodies of Mahmoud and of his
favourite wife, in two tombs of the purest
marble.

170

"He was a great rogue when he lived," said a
Turkish officer who had joined our party, pointing
to an inscription which merely said, "Mahmoud
Pacha, son of Issek Pacha, lies here;" "but he
is still now, and can do no one any harm. Peace
be with his bones!"

171

CHAPTER XIX.

A spy—The news from Erivan—The border line—How he
passed the frontier—The Mollahs—A war of extermination
preached by them—A Turkish newspaper—Turks in Asia—Christians
in Europe—The Conference—A Conference in
St. Petersburg—The European Powers dislike Russia—General
Ignatieff a judge instead of a prisoner—The hour
for the evening prayer—A Turkish officer on prayer—His
opinion about European Bishops—They eat mutton every
day—A Turkish Captain.

We leave the barracks. A beautiful view extends
before us. We look down upon the red,
green, and white plateau which divides us from
the Tzar's dominions. In some places the sun
has slightly melted the snow, the sand is exposed
to view; in others, and nearer the lake
which lies in the midst of the plateau, patches of
vegetation can be seen. The clouds which
overhung Ararat have been dispelled by the sun:
the huge mountain, enveloped in its white pall,
stands out in bold relief.

172

I now called upon the Pacha. Whilst I was
conversing with him, a servant entered and whispered
something in his ear.

"Let the fellow come in," he observed; then,
turning to me, he remarked that a Turk had just
arrived from the Russian frontier, and brought the
latest news of the military preparations in Erivan.

For some time past the Russians had prohibited
any inhabitant of Turkey from crossing
the border-line. It was difficult to obtain any
authentic information as to the quantity of
troops the Tzar's generals had massed in the
neighbourhood. The new arrival succeeded
in passing the boundary-line by saying to the
Russian officers that he had been forcibly
enlisted as a soldier, and was a deserter from his
regiment. He had obtained permission to return
to Turkey by declaring that he wished to bring
his wife—who lived in a village near Bayazid—to
Erivan: the Russian general had ordered him
to obtain as much information as he could about
the strength and disposition of the Turkish forces.
He was a thick-set, sturdy-looking little fellow,
with a bull neck and keen grey eyes; his attire
consisting of a blue turban, a yellow shirt, and a
pair of crimson trousers. According to him, the
Mollahs were preaching a war of extermination

173

against the Russians in Persia. However, the
natives of that country were very lukewarm
in their friendship to the Turks. It was not
impossible that they would join Russia, or at all
events allow the Tzar's troops to march through
their territory in the event of an offensive movement
against Van.

The Pacha took up a Turkish newspaper which
he had just received from Constantinople.

"Listen!" he said. "The man who writes for
this paper knows what he is about."

The article was to the effect that Russia wished
to drive the Turks out of Europe because they
were Mohammedans, and because in European
Turkey the Christians were in the majority.
"Very good," said the writer, "let us abandon
Europe; but in Asia the Christians are in the
minority. According to the same reasoning, the
Russians and English ought to leave all their
Asiatic possessions, and give them up to the
original proprietors of the soil. Our Sultan has
no objection to let every Christian in his dominions
leave Turkey and go to Russia; but the
Tzar, on the contrary, he will not let the Mohammedans
in his empire cross the frontier: if they
try to do so, he sends his soldiers; they cut the
throats of our co-religionists. A Conference, composed

174

for the most part of Christians, has been
held at Constantinople to inquire into the way
the Sultan treats his Christian subjects. Why
should not a Conference be assembled at St.
Petersburg, composed for the most part of
Mohammedans, to inquire into the way the Tartars,
Turkomans, and other inhabitants of Central Asia
are treated by the Tzar?"

"Yes," said the Pacha, as he finished reading to
me these extracts. The European Powers dislike
Russia, and, although they hate her, and know that
she is the origin of all our difficulties, they are too
timid to allow the fact. What a mockery it must
have seemed to the representatives of England,
France, and Germany, to find themselves sitting
in judgment upon Turkey, and General Ignatieff,
instead of being equally on his trial, seated at
their side, and a judge instead of a prisoner!
Does it not make you smile to think of it?"
added the Pacha; "how the general must have
laughed in his sleeve!"

Another officer entered the room. He had
been educated in the military school at Constantinople.
From frequent intercourse with Europeans,
mostly Frenchmen, he had begun to
look down upon the religious observances of his
countrymen.

175

It was about the hour for the evening prayer.
The Pacha, Cadi, and several other Turks
commenced performing their devotions, regardless
of the presence of a stranger. The new
arrival, the Hungarian doctor, and myself, remained
seated, the former remarking that it was
very hard work praying, at the same time
glancing rather contemptuously at his superior
officers.

"Did you not pray when you were at Constantinople?"
I inquired.

"Effendi, I did everything
à la Franga
(in
European fashion). Europeans, from what I could
learn, do not pray much."

"Not pray!" I observed; "what do you
mean?"

"No, Effendi; the men, I have been told, go to
the churches to look at the women; the women,
some to pray, but others to look at the men and
show off their fine clothes the one to the other.
Is not that the case in your country?" he
added.

"No. Of course there are exceptions; but the
English people as a rule are religiously inclined."

"Effendi," continued the officer, "I have often
heard Frenchmen say that a Christian ought
to be a poor man—that is, if he carried out the

176

doctrines of his Prophet. But, my friends used
to laugh and declare that their bishops and
priests were rich men, and that some of the
Protestant Mollahs were so wealthy that they
could afford to keep carriages, eat mutton
every day, and have servants to wait upon
them."

"The fact of our bishops and priests eating
mutton or keeping carriages does not make the
Protestant religion the less true," I now observed.

"I do not know that," replied the Turk. "If
I were to be taught a religion by a man who did
not believe in it himself, or who did not carry
out its doctrines, I should think that I was
wasting my time."

The rest at Bayazid had done all our party
good. The horses, which were still very emaciated
on account of the long and frequent marches, had
picked up a little flesh. I determined to leave
Bayazid and accompany a Turkish captain who
was going through Persia to Van with despatches
for the governor of that town. The officer must
have been sixty. He was quite grey; but, he
sat his horse like a centaur, and was more enthusiastic
for the war than any Turk with whom I
had previously conversed.

177

"You may get killed," I remarked.

"Please God I shall not," was his reply;
"others may die, and then there will be some
promotion."

178

CHAPTER XX.

A Yezeed (devil-worshippers) village—The Usebashe—The
worshippers of Old Scratch—The Yezeed's religion—The
Spirit of good—The spirit of evil—The rites—The Grand
Vizier of Allah—The unmarried priests—The wives and
daughters of their congregation—A high honour—Women
honoured by the attentions of a priest—Great excitement
at the priests' arrival—Mr. Layard—His admirable
work—Kelise Kandy—My host—His house—They want
to conquer the Shah—Nadir Shah—He once conquered
you English in Hindostan—The Tzar of America—You
pay Shere Ali a large sum of money—He is a clever
fellow.

We turned our backs upon Mount Ararat, and,
ascending a low range of hills covered with loose
rocks and boulders, arrived at a Yezeed (devil-worshippers)
village.

The houses were built in the sides of a hill.
Cone-shaped huts made of tezek, and filled with
that fuel, showed that the inhabitants had no
objection to heat in this world, however hot they
might expect to be in the next.

179

An old man, considerably above the middle
stature, approached our party. Addressing the
Usebashe, he invited us to dismount. It was
about luncheon-time. I determined to avail myself
of the opportunity afforded me to learn a
little about the ways and habits of these strange
people.

"Here we are, sir, with the worshippers of
Old Scratch!" observed Radford, as he was preparing
the mid-day meal, which consisted of a
freshly-killed hen, boiled with some rice. "Mohammed
has just been telling me something about
them. All I know is that Old Nick has not
much to complain of so far as his flock is concerned.
They have been at our sugar already,
and would have carried off Mohammed's tobacco
if he had not been on the look out. I suppose
they think it right to steal, so as to keep on good
terms with their master."

The Yezeeds' religion, if such it may be called,
is based upon the following dogma: that there
are two spirits—a spirit of good and a spirit of
evil. Allah, the spirit of good, can do no harm
to any one, and is a friend to the human race.
The spirit of evil can do a great deal of harm, and
he is the cause of all our woes. From this starting-point
the Yezeeds have been brought to believe

180

that it is a waste of time to worship the spirit of
good, who will not hurt them, and that the proper
course to pursue is to try and propitiate the
spirit of evil, who can be very disagreeable if he
chooses. To do so they never venture to make use
of the name of the devil, as this they believe
would be an act of disrespect to their infernal
master.

They are visited twice a year by different high
priests, when certain rites are performed. These
rites are kept a great secret. The Turks who
gave me some information about the Yezeeds were
unable to give me any details about the nature
of the ceremonies. I was informed that the
Yezeeds are divided into two sects; that the
one looks upon the devil as the Grand Vizier of
Allah, and the other regards him as the private
secretary of the good spirit. It was said that
the two sects hated each other to such an extent
that, if a man belonging to the one which looks
upon the devil as being the Grand Vizier of
Allah were to enter a village belonging to
members of the rival faith, the new arrival would
have a great chance of losing his life.

The Yezeeds' priests are many of them unmarried.
However, should a priest or sheik arrive
in a village, the first thing which is done by the

181

inhabitants is to offer their wives and daughters
for his inspection. The sheik will select one.
It will then be considered that he has conferred
a very high honour on the young lady's
relatives. There are different laws as to the
subsequent treatment of these women. In one
of the sects they are not allowed to marry,
but are set apart; and, in the case of a married
woman, she is not permitted again to live with her
husband. In the other sect they are permitted
to marry, or if the lady has a spouse, she must
return to him. It is then the duty of every
Yezeed to make her rich presents, and the inhabitants
of the village must maintain her husband
and herself during the rest of their lives.
Under these circumstances a woman who has
been honoured by the attentions of a priest is
looked upon by a youthful Yezeed in much the
same light as a rich heiress by many impecunious
younger sons in a European ball-room; her
hand is eagerly sought for in marriage. If,
she already possesses a husband, the latter
considers himself as one of the most fortunate
of men. The result of this is, that when a
priest arrives in a village, great excitement
arises amidst the population—every man hoping
that his wife or daughter will be honoured

182

by being selected. The ladies take immense
interest in the proceedings. The visits of the
reverend gentlemen are eagerly looked forward to
by all classes of Yezeed society.

This information was given me by some
Turks with whom I had conversed during my
journey. I now asked my host if these statements
were true. He at once repudiated them,
and declared that they were inventions of the
followers of Islam.

"Do you look upon the devil as the Grand
Vizier of Allah?" I now inquired.

If a bombshell had exploded in the room
where I was sitting, there could not have been
greater consternation than that which was evinced
by the members of my host's family. Springing
to their feet, they fled from the building—an old
woman very nearly upsetting Radford's cooking-pot
in her haste to escape into the open air. The
captain looked at me, and then indulged in a sort
of suppressed laugh.

"What has frightened them?" I inquired.

"Effendi," he replied, "you mentioned the
word 'Shaitan' (devil). It is very lucky for
you," continued the old man, "that there are five
of us, and we are all well armed; for, if not, the
Yezeeds would have attacked our party for a

183

certainty. Any disaster which may happen in
this village during the next twelve months will
be put down to you. If a man's cow or camel
dies, the fellow will say that it is all your fault;
the sooner we continue our march the better."

It was getting late; the inhabitants had withdrawn
to some distance from their houses, they
were gazing at our party with lowering brows. I
would gladly have repaired the mischief that I
had done; but an apology might have only made
matters worse. I was the more sorry, as I had
hoped to have had the opportunity of questioning
the Yezeeds as to some of their customs. What
I had heard about them from the Turks was so
different to what is related of this singular people
by Mr. Layard in his admirable work, "Nineveh
and its Remains," that I had become rather sceptical
as to the veracity of my informants. The
old captain, however, consoled me by saying that,
on my journey from Van to Kars, I should have
to pass by many other Yezeed villages, and would
there be able to pursue my inquiries upon this
subject.

Very shortly after leaving our halting-place, the
guide stopped, and said something to the officer.

"What is he saying?" I inquired.

"The summit of this hill is the border-line,"

184

was the reply. In another minute we had entered
the territory of the Shah.

The track was good and firm; although there
was plenty of snow on the hills, there was but
little on the plain below. After a few hours'
march, we halted for the night in a village called
Kelise Kandy.

The Usebashe was well known to the chief
proprietor in the district, and, coming out to meet
us, he invited our party to enter his house.

Kelise Kandy is a large village, and much
cleaner than any of those which I had seen on the
Turkish side of the frontier. The houses were
well built, and many of them whitewashed.
Several haystacks were in a yard belonging to
our host, hundreds of sheep and cattle stood in a
large enclosure near his dwelling.

The proprietor was dressed at first sight a
little like a European. He had a black coat; a
red sash was tied round his waist; a pair of
white trousers covered his legs. But a very
high, cone-shaped, astrachan hat was on his
head, and this article of attire, much resembling
an extinguisher, did away with his otherwise
slightly European appearance.

A number of servants, all armed with daggers
stuck in their waist-belts, and with hats, if possible,

185

still more like an extinguisher than that
which their master wore, stood round the room.
It was a good-sized apartment, thirty feet long
by twenty broad. The floor was covered with a
thick Persian carpet, of beautiful design, but not
dear; indeed, I subsequently learnt that it had
only cost fifteen pounds of our money.

Light was let into the room by some double
windows—probably made in this fashion so as to
keep out the cold. Our host, after motioning to
me to squat down on one side of him, and to the
Usebashe to squat down on the other, produced
a cigar-case, and offered me a cigarette.

He had been often in Erzeroum, and also in Russia,
where he had imbibed a taste for smoking tobacco
in this form. His acquaintance with the Muscovites
had not prepossessed him in their favour.

"They want to conquer the Shah," he presently
remarked. "They will make use of us as a
stepping-stone to Van and Bagdad; after which
they will annex their catspaw. We ought to
have another Nadir Shah," he continued. "If we
had one, the Russians would not dare to laugh at
us as they do."

"I thought that there were very good relations
between the Courts of Teheran and St. Petersburg,"
I now remarked.

186

"The Shah is obliged to be on good terms with
the Tzar," replied the Persian. "The Tzar is too
strong for him."

"If there be a war between Russia and Turkey,
which side will Persia take?"

The proprietor shook his head.

"We ought to go with Islam," he remarked;
"but, better still, remain neutral. I am told
that there are many Russian officers in Teheran.
They are doing their best to influence the Shah
in their master's favour. Nadir Shah once
conquered you English in Hindostan," he
added.

"No, he conquered part of India before we
went there. However, now Hindostan belongs to
us."

"I thought he had," continued the man.
"I was told so in Russia; I was also informed
that the Tzar of America had defeated you, and
was an ally of the Emperor of Russia. Is that
the case?"

"There is no Tzar in America" I replied, "we
have had no war with the United States for many
years."

"But you paid them a certain sum of money to
prevent them going to war with you?" observed
my host; "and not only that, but you pay Shere

187

Ali, of Afghanistan, a large sum every year with
the same object. Will Shere Ali fight against
Russia if there is a war between the Tzar and
Turkey?"

"I do not know."

"Some Muscovites say that Shere Ali is on
their side," remarked the Persian. "But he is a
clever fellow, and is not likely to join the weakest
party."

188

CHAPTER XXI.

Dinner—The Persian's wife is poorly—The wonderful wet
paper—The
samovar
—The harem—Be not alarmed—She
is in a delicate state of health—Jaundice—She feels
better already—No medicine for your complaint—A
mustard plaster would be useless—Sons of the devil—My
lord's baksheesh—Commotion amongst the servants.

Later in the day dinner was brought in—a
chicken surrounded by a huge pile of rice. A
Turk as rich as our Persian host would have provided
his guest with fifteen or twenty courses, but
the Persians are satisfied with one. I was not
aware of the custom, and only tasted the chicken.
Presently it was taken away; instead of a fresh
dish making its appearance, some water was
brought, in an ewer, for us to wash our hands.

"You Englishmen are very temperate," said
the host, rising.

I did not tell him what was passing through
my mind. I was ravenously hungry, and would

189

gladly have had that chicken brought back again;
but it was already in the hands of the servants
outside. They were devouring the contents.

"You are a great hakim," now observed the
proprietor.

"Who told you that?" I remarked, surprised
that the reputation acquired in the Kurd's house
had thus preceded me.

"The Usebashe knows it. Mohammed, too, has
told my servant. Praise be to Allah who has
sent you here!"

"I am not a hakim!" I hastily replied. "I am
an officer."

"Do not say that," said the Persian, who spoke
Turkish fluently. "Do not deny the talents that
Allah has given you. Your arrival has cast a
gleam of sunshine on our threshold, and you will
not go away without gladdening the hearts of my
family."

"What do you want me to do?" I inquired.

"My wife is poorly: I ask you to cure her."

"But really I know very little about medicine.
I have only a few simple remedies with me."

"Simple remedies indeed!" said the Persian.
"A man who can set a person's shoulder on fire
with a piece of wet paper!"

"What is the matter with your wife?"

190

"I do not know, but you will tell me."

"Well, I must see her," I replied.

"Impossible!" said the Persian. "She is in
the harem. I cannot take you there!"

"But how can I tell you what is the matter
with her if I do not see her?"

"Give me a piece of that wonderful wet paper,
perhaps it will cure her."

"Effendi," said the Usebashe, turning to the
Persian, "you cannot tell a horse's age without
looking into his mouth. The Frank cannot tell
your wife's ailments without looking at her
tongue."

A consultation took place between my host
and some other Persian visitors. It was at
length agreed that, as a hakim, I might be admitted
into the harem.

In the meantime, a servant brought in a

samovar
(tea-urn), which the proprietor had purchased
at Erivan; and whilst the Usebashe and
myself were drinking tea, with lemon-juice instead
of cream—as is the custom in Persia as well as
in Russia—my host left the room and proceeded
to the harem to announce to his wife that I would
see her.

Presently he returned, and, taking my hand,
helped me to rise from the ground. Then, going

191

first, he led the way across a yard, surrounded by
a high wall and planted with fruit-trees, to a
detached building, which I had previously thought
was a mosque.

"This is the harem," said the proprietor.
We entered an outer room, he drew a thick
curtain which hung against one of the walls.
An opening now appeared: stooping low, I
entered the inner apartment. It was furnished,
or rather unfurnished, like the one set apart for
the Usebashe and myself. A pan of live charcoal
stood in one corner. In the other, reclining on
a quantity of silk cushions, was the wife of my
host.

She was enveloped from head to foot in a sheet
made of some gauze-like material. There were
so many folds that it was impossible to distinguish
her features or even divine the contour of her
form. Her feet, which were very small and stockingless,
were exposed to view. She had taken
them out of two tiny white slippers which lay by
the side of the charcoal pan, and was nervously
tapping the ground with her heel.

"She is alarmed," said my host. "Be not
alarmed," he added, turning to his wife. "It
is the hakim who has come to make you well."

These remarks did not tranquillize the lady.

192

Her heel tapped the ground more quickly than
before, the whole of her body shook like an
aspen-leaf.

"She has never seen any man save myself in
the harem," said her husband; "and you—you are
a European."

"What is the nature of her illness?"

"She is in a delicate state of health."

"Can I look at her tongue?"

There was a whispered conversation with the
lady. By this time she was a little more calm.
Removing the folds of her veil, she allowed the tip
of a very red little tongue to escape from her lips.

"Well, what do you think of it?" said my host,
who was taking the greatest interest in these proceedings.

"It is a nice tongue; but now I must see her
eyes."

"Why her eyes?"

"Because she may have what is called jaundice,
I must see if her eye is yellow."

"Perhaps she had better expose the whole face,"
said the Persian.

"Perhaps she had," I remarked.

And the poor little lady, whose nerves were now
less excited, slowly unwound the folds of muslin
from around her head. She was certainly pretty,

193

and had very regular features, whilst a pair of
large black eyes, which looked through me as I
gazed on them, were twinkling with an air of
humour more than of fear.

She understood Turkish well, as she came from
the border, and, looking at me, said something in a
low voice.

"She feels better already," said my host. "The
sight of you has done her good, when you
have given her some medicine, she will doubtless
be quite well."

"What is the matter with you?" I said, turning
to the patient.

She blushed. Her husband then remarked that
she fancied strange dishes at her meals, and in
fact was delicate.

It gradually dawned upon me what the nature
of her malady was, and the more particularly as
I was informed by my host that they had been
married but a very few months.

"I have no medicine for your complaint," I
remarked.

"No medicine!" said the Persian indignantly.
"Mohammed has shown me the bottles and the
little boxes. Besides that, you have the wet
paper!"

"A mustard plaster would be useless."

194

"But she must have something!" said the
husband.

Now, my medicine-chest was very limited in its
contents. It merely contained cholera medicine,
pills, and a few ounces of quinine, besides the prepared
mustard plasters.

A pill, in the lady's condition, would not have
been safe: I could not have answered for the
consequences. Cholera mixture might have been
equally disastrous in its effects. Quinine, I
thought, could not do any harm; it is exceedingly
nasty, an infinitesimally small dose leaves a very
disagreeable taste in the mouth.

"You shall have some medicine," I observed.
"Please God it will do you good."

"Inshallah! Inshallah!" replied my host
devoutly; and accompanying me to the room prepared
for the Usebashe and myself, I gave him
three grains of quinine, to be taken in three doses,
one grain in each dose.

"Will it do her much good?" inquired the
Persian.

"That depends upon Allah," I remarked.

"Of course it does," said my host, and taking
the medicine, he returned to his seraglio.

As we were leaving the house, I observed a
great commotion amidst my host's servants.

195

Mohammed was some time before he joined our
party.

"What was the matter?" I asked.

"Effendi, they are sons of the devil, these
Persians!" vociferated my man indignantly. "I
waited behind to give them my lord's baksheesh,
but they were greedy creatures, and one—a strong
man—snatched all the paras out of my hand, and
thrust the money in his waist-belt. The others
cursed and called him many dogs, but the fellow
did not care. They then wanted me to give them
more money; I had none to bestow. They are like
jackals, these Persians. They would cut a man's
throat as soon as eat a pillaff!"

196

CHAPTER XXII.

Villages—Arab Dize—Shadili—Shalendili—Karenee—Kurds—Radford
wishes to bleed the inhabitants—Persian men
with their beards dyed red—Every part of a woman is
false—These Persians are a nation of women—The old fire-worshippers'
superstition—Gardens—Irrigation—Soldiers—The
flint fire-locks—They are unclean ones, these
Persians—The little dogs do some things well—A Persian
will kiss you on one cheek, and will stab you behind your
back.

We rode along a flat country. A few hills could be
seen on our bridle-hand. The track was in capital
order for the march. After passing several small
hamlets—amongst others, Arab Dize, Shadili, and
Shalendili—we pulled up at a large village called
Karenee. It was inhabited by Kurds, all of them
being Persian subjects. Here there were 350
houses. Judging by the number of people who
came to ask for medicine, so soon as I dismounted
from my horse, the whole population was unwell.
It appeared that the Persian in whose house I had

197

stopped on the previous evening had sent word to
the chief proprietor in this Kurdish village, to say
that a celebrated hakim was on his way. No
amount of expostulation saved us from the
intrusion of the inhabitants. Every one wished
me to look at his tongue and to feel his pulse.
Radford, who was in another room, was interrupted
in his cooking by a crowd of the humbler Kurds,
who believed that, when the master was so great a
hakim, his servant must necessarily have some
medical skill.

Presently my servant entered.

"What has happened?" I remarked.

"I cannot get on with my cooking, sir," was the
reply. "They will come and shove out their dirty
tongues just over my cooking-pot. Some of the
people who have got nasty diseases and sore legs
insist upon showing them to me. Quite turns
me hup, that it does. I had two boxes of
hantibilious—I have given them all away. If
I had only a pair of champagne nippers, sir, I
would draw the rascals' teeth, perhaps that would
take away their taste for my doctoring. Do you
think it would do any harm if I were to bleed one
or two of them, sir ?"

"Could you stop the bleeding after the operation?"
I inquired.

198

"That, sir, is just what was passing in my mind.
If I thought as how I could, I would have taken
a little blood from each of them in turn. It would
have cooled them down a little, and they would
not have been so anxious for my company in
future."

On reaching a village about three hours' distance
from our sleeping quarters, we heard that the
short road over the mountains to Van was blocked
by the snow, and that it would be absolutely
necessary to go by Khoi, and by a circuitous route
which I had hoped to avoid.

I did not believe the statement, and ordered
the guide to take the mountain track. The man
reluctantly consented. Higher and higher we
ascended the steep which divided us from the
capital of Armenia. The snow at each moment
became more deep. At last the guide halted,
and distinctly refused to advance.

"I shall lose my life," he said. "You can do
what you like with your own, but I have children
for whom to provide."

The Usebashe interfered.

"The fellow is telling the truth about the road,"
he said. "I too, like yourself, thought that
he was deceiving us. We had better go to
Khoi."

199

There was nothing to be done but turn round
and continue towards that town. It was about
fifty miles distant from us. We halted for the
night at a Kurdish village called Melhamee. Here
the inhabitants received us very discourteously.
If it had not been for the Usebashe, who reminded
them of the laws of hospitality which are
prescribed by their religion, I much doubt whether
we should have obtained a resting-place. They
had learnt that I was an Englishman, and were
under the impression that they would be pleasing
the Russians if they threw difficulties in our
way.

"We know who you are," said a Kurd,
"and the people in Erivan know who you are
too. The Russians are our friends," he continued.

"Take care that your friends do not eat you
some day," said the Usebashe.

"They will eat you first, and we shall help
them!" said the Kurd.

This aroused the captain's indignation. I
thought that there would have been a disturbance.
But, after a little more verbal warfare, the
belligerents parted.

"All the people in this village are in Russian
pay," said the Usebashe, "and that is why they

200

are so hostile to you as well as to ourselves. These
men," he continued, "are foolish enough to
believe in the Russians, and think that because
the Tzar's agents give them money and presents,
this same sort of treatment will be continued.
Poor fools! they will find their mistake some day."

We rode by men driving before them oxen
laden with wood for fuel. There were many
villages on either side of the track. The Persian
inhabitants, attired in loose blue garments, and
with their beards dyed red, gazed curiously upon
us as we passed.

Some of the greater dandies amidst these
gentlemen had their finger-nails also stained;
and unless a man has his beard dyed a bright
colour, he has very little chance of meeting with
the approval of the fair sex. A stout red-haired
Welshman would have what is termed
un grand
succes
amidst the ladies in these regions.

"These Persians are ridiculous creatures," said
the Usebashe. "Only think of the men dyeing
their beards red! One would have thought that
black would have been a more appropriate colour."

"Some of our English women dye their hair a
light colour," I remarked.

"With women I can understand it," said the
Usebashe. "Every part of a woman is false from

201

her tongue to her smile, dyeing her hair red,
enables her to carry on the deception; but for
men to dye their hair red—they might as well
form part of a harem at once! However, these
Persians are a nation of women."

And the Usebashe pointed contemptuously at a
little knot of men who were seated outside a small
dwelling, and watching eagerly for the moment
when the sun would disappear behind the hills.

I have often wondered whether something connected
with the old fire-worshippers' superstition
has a lurking-place in the minds of the Persians
or Kurds. Day after day, and at the same hour,
I have seen the entire inhabitants of a village turn
out and gaze intently upon the great orb of light
slowly sinking into space on the distant horizon.
I have questioned them about this subject. They
indignantly repudiate the idea of any act of worship
to the sun; they say that they do so because it is
their habit, and because their fathers, grandfathers,
and ancestors did the same thing before
them.

We rode by many gardens surrounded by high
walls; some of these enclosures were five or
six acres in extent. Cherry, apple, peach, and
mulberry trees abound throughout the district;
A plentiful water-supply, which is brought from

202

the mountains by means of artificial dykes,
irrigates the various orchards. Little trenches
intersect each other at many places along the
fields, and when the proprietor wishes, he can at
once place his land under water. This must be
an inestimable boon to the inhabitants during the
hot months, as otherwise their entire crop would
be destroyed by the heat.

Soldiers dressed in a dirty sort of French
uniform, but with black sheepskin hats of the
extinguisher shape, sat outside the guard-houses
in the different villages. They looked askantly at
the Usebashe as he passed—for the Usebashe
was in uniform. A wonderful sort of blue cape
covered the upper part of his person, and red
knickerbockers, stuffed in high boots, his extremities.
A curved scimitar hung from his
waist-belt. The red fez on his head, and on our
guide's, showed their allegiance to the Sultan.

The two men clad in European costumes were
also a source of wonder to the soldiers. Some of
them gripped the flint fire-locks with which
they were armed, and made a movement as if
they would like to have had a shot at our little
party.

"Yes, you dogs! I have no doubt but that
you would like to do so," said the old Usebashe,

203

shaking his fist at them, after we had got to a
safe distance. "However, your guns are only
serviceable up to fifty yards, it takes you five
minutes to load them! They are unclean ones,
these Persians; do you not think so, Effendi?"
continued the old Usebashe.

"I have seen so little of them I cannot judge.
But, their roads and houses are much better and
cleaner than those which you have in Turkey.

"That is true," said the captain sorrowfully.
"The little dogs can do some things well, but they
are sly and deceitful. A Persian will kiss you on
one cheek, and will stab you behind your back.
He will call himself your friend, and will slander
you to your neighbours. He will offer you the
best horse in his stable: the offer comes from his
lips, and not from his heart. When you know
them better, you will find this out for yourself."

204

CHAPTER XXIII.

No signs of Khoi—At last we arrive—The Turkish Consul—Russian
intrigues—Persian soldiers have attacked a
Turkish village—Kashka Beulah—A Turkish Usebashe
and seven men brought prisoners to Khoi—The Ambassador
at Teheran—Retaliation—The exchange of prisoners—The
origin of the disturbance—The Shah's uncle—Russian
agents in Teheran—Kurdish girls make the best wives—They
do not care about fine clothes—How to make use of
your mother-in-law—The women in your country—A fortune
on dress—My last wife cost ten liras—Persian
women—The Persians are very cruel—Odd customs—The
fortifications of Khoi—Soldiers gambling.

Village after village were left behind us, still
there were no signs of Khoi. We had been
told that it was only an eight hours' march from
Melhamee, two more sped by ere the walls of
the city were in sight. Soon afterwards we rode
through a narrow gate which gives access to the
town, and presently pulled up at a house belonging
to the Turkish Consul, who is the only diplomatic
agent to be found in this city. He had

205

been educated in Constantinople, and spoke a
little French. For the last two years he had
been established in Khoi, and he greatly bewailed
his thus being cut off from all European
society.

I now learnt that Russian intrigues had been
the means of very nearly creating a war between
Persia and Turkey. There is a Turkish border-hamlet,
called Kashka Beulah, about nine miles
from Khoi. Some Persian soldiers had recently
attacked this village, and had robbed the inhabitants
of everything they possessed.

Whilst the Persians were engaged in their work
of pillage, some Turkish soldiers, under a Usebashe,
arrived from an adjacent guard-house. But
the Persians were more numerous. They captured
the captain and seven of his men, and
brought them prisoners to Khoi. A Turkish
lieutenant in the guard-house heard of the fate of
his Usebashe, and arrested two Persian merchants
who happened to be in the neighbourhood. He
sent them as prisoners to Van. The Consul, on
hearing of this, telegraphed to his Ambassador
at Teheran, for instructions how to act. The
latter official sent back an answer that the Persian
merchants were to be immediately released. The
Consul then wrote to the governor at Van, informing

206

him of the order he had received. The
governor, however, declared that he could not
comply with it without authority from Constantinople.
After several weeks' delay, during
which time the Turkish captain and his men had
been kept in chains in the prison at Khoi, and had
been treated like the commonest of malefactors,
orders came from Teheran and Constantinople for
the mutual exchange of prisoners.

A day was fixed. At the appointed time the
Turkish Consul, with the prisoners and three hundred
Persian soldiers, started for the frontier.
Here he was met by the Persian Consul from Van.
The latter was accompanied by the Persian captives
and by an escort of Turks. The troops then
retired to a short distance. The Consuls remained
alone with their prisoners. The exchange
was effected.

"What was the origin of the disturbance?"
I inquired of the Consul.

"That is exactly what I wished to discover,"
replied that official. "I went to the governor of
Khoi, who, by the way, is the Shah's uncle,
and asked him why his regular troops had
first of all attacked our village. The reply
was, 'My orders came from some one of higher
rank than I am.' Later on, it turned out that

207

Russian agents at Teheran were the origin of the
affair."

"I am very dull here," now remarked the Consul.
"My wife died six months ago. I have not
been able to find any one to replace her."

"Why do you not take a Kurdish girl?" observed
the Usebashe. "They make the best of
wives," he continued; "if their husbands have
money they do not ask for any, if the husbands
have no money the wives never bother their
heads about the matter. In addition to this, they
do not care about fine clothes. A long piece of
calico and a pair of slippers content each one of
them as well as all the silks and satins in the
bazaar at Erzeroum."

"My late wife was a Kurd," replied the Consul
sorrowfully. "She cost me very little."

A servant entered the room and lit the speaker's
pipe.

"This man is my father-in-law," he added.
"My mother-in-law cooks for me downstairs.
When I married their daughter I wanted some
servants; my wife proposed that we should engage
her father and mother. I did so, and have found
them hard-working people. When my poor
wife died, I allowed them to remain with me.
When I marry again, my new lady will probably

208

wish her own relations to come here: I shall be
obliged to get rid of my present servants."

"It is a very economical way of providing for a
wife's relatives," I observed.

"Yes," said the Consul, laughing. "You could
not make use of your mother-in-law as a cook in
either Constantinople or London. Besides that,
the women in your country cost their husbands a
fortune in dress."

"Yes," I replied, "some of the women's dresses
cost from 50 to 60 liras a piece, and, after having
been worn once or twice, they are thrown away or
given to the servants."

"Allah!" said the Usebashe, "50 or 60 liras!
Only think of it!"

"The Inglis speaks the truth," said the Consul.
"I have heard of this before, when I was at
Constantinople. My last wife cost 10 liras," he
continued; "I could buy five or six wives for the
same price as a great English lady gives for her
dress!"

"Why do you not marry a Persian woman?" I
now remarked. "By all account they are very
pretty, and you would have an opportunity of
learning the language"—the Consul having previously
bewailed to me his ignorance of that
tongue.

209

"Marry a Persian, indeed!" interrupted the
Usebashe. "The Persians will not give their
daughters in marriage to us Turks. They are
very selfish," he added. "We make no objections
to our daughters marrying Persians. But
the latter are most particular about this subject."

"You are both Mohammedan nations," I remarked.

"Yes, we are," said the Consul; "and the Armenians
and yourselves are both Christian nations,
but your forms of Christianity are very different.
There is as much difference between a Persian and
a Turk as between an Armenian and yourself."

"The Persians are very cruel," observed the
Usebashe. "If a man commits a crime, and is
detected, the authorities are not satisfied by taking
the culprit's life, but often torture him first—sometimes
by taking out his eyes, and at others by
mutilation.

"The inhabitants do very odd things," said
the Consul. "For instance, a short time ago
there was an official in this town who was extremely
unpopular. He died, and you would have
thought that the matter was over; but no, six
months after the man's decease, some of the
townspeople went to the cemetery, exhumed the
body, and hacked it to pieces. This was done by

210

way of revenging themselves upon the official.
There was a robbery in the bazaar," continued the
speaker. "A man was taken up on suspicion of
being implicated in the theft; he swore that he
was innocent, but accused another man. The
latter had nothing whatever to do with the
robbery, but was unpopular in the town. Some
people belonging to the bazaar went to the governor,
and said to him, 'The man last arrested is
the thief; you must order the executioner to cut
his throat.' The governor was weak enough to
consent, the innocent person was put to death.
Soon afterwards the governor repented of what
he had done. However, he was in need of money
at the time, he determined to turn his repentance
to some account. He ordered fifty of the
richest people amongst those who had pressed
him to execute the innocent man, to be imprisoned,
and he kept them in gaol until such time
as they had paid him a large sum of money."

I now walked round the fortifications of the
town. They consist of a wall about thirty-five feet
high, built of clay, with a brick foundation, and a
dry ditch, which can be filled with water if necessary.
There were sixteen old cannon on the ramparts.
The Kurds and the inhabitants think that
the place is impregnable. A battery of nine-pounders

211

would be quite sufficient to destroy the
fortifications, which are much out of repair. Any
properly equipped force ought to take the city,
which contains 7000 houses, in about half an
hour.

The soldiers in the different guard-houses ran
outside the buildings. They presented arms to the
Consul as he walked with me through the streets.
Presently we came to a place where two sentries
had been posted. The men had put their flint
muskets on the ground, and were engaged in
gambling with each other—small balls of dried
clay, something like marbles, taking the place of
dice.

212

CHAPTER XXIV.

The bazaar—Recumbent Persians—Carpets—Cutlery—Russian
calicoes—The houses in Khoi—The schools—A class of
lads—The pedlar—The schoolmaster chastises him—Pillaff—Bonbons—Persian
ladies like sweetmeats—Articles of
native manufacture—The mosque—The Russian officials
in Erivan—We leave Khoi—Kotoor Boghaz—The Turkish
captain who was taken prisoner by the Persians—His
explanation of the affair—The Russians are our fathers—The
defile—Magnificent positions for defence—A mineral
spring—The change of temperature.

I arrived at the bazaar. It is a very large
building, arched over in many places, and here
and there is constructed of bricks. It was a hot
afternoon. The bazaar was delightfully cool,
many of the inhabitants had gone there merely
with the object of lying in the shade. At almost
every step we took, we came upon the forms of
some recumbent Persians. It was rather dark.
The idlers' ribs must have suffered. A muttered
curse would be the only sign of the men's disgust;

213

they would turn over and be asleep again in
another minute.

The bazaar was better arranged than any of the
market-places which I had visited in Anatolia.
The shops belonging to men who sold one kind of
article were all side by side, and not mixed up
with the stalls belonging to traders in other
merchandise. Some carpets were very beautifully
designed, and could have been purchased for one-fourth
of the price they command in the London
market. The cutlery mostly came from Erivan
in Russia. An immense quantity of gaudily-coloured
Russian calicoes were exposed for
sale.

We came to a samovar (tea-urn) shop. The
owner, a sleepy-looking Persian, was very wide
awake, so far as his interests were concerned.
He was engaged in a wordy warfare with a Kurd
who wanted to buy an urn for his house. The
conversation became so loud, and the gesticulations
of the Kurd were so energetic, that I thought
he was about to attack the merchant. However,
a minute later the affair was settled, and the purchaser
was drinking a glass of tea with the salesman.

Most of the houses in Khoi are built of a sort
of brown clay. If it were not for the numerous

214

mosques which are painted blue and green, the
town would be very sombre in its appearance.
Many of the doors to the buildings were supplied
with massive iron knockers—a rarity in Asiatic
Turkey—and the many windows on the ground-floors,
which were guarded by iron bars, rather
reminded me of Cordova.

Streams of muddy water ran through the
streets. Hundreds of women were busily engaged
in washing the domestic apparel.

We passed by an open window, and, on looking
in, I found that the building was used as a school.
A master was seated on the window-sill, fifty or
more children were clustered round his feet. He
was teaching them pieces of the Koran, which the
little ones were endeavouring to learn by heart.
A class of lads, averaging, I should say, from
fifteen to twenty years of age, were squatting in
a corner occupied in learning how to write—a
very rare accomplishment in Persia, and principally
confined to the merchant classes. Some of
the lads had escaped for a moment from the
vigilance of their master, and were buying oranges
from a pedlar. The fruit had been brought from
Tabriz, as there are no orange-trees in the neighbourhood
of Khoi. Suddenly the Hodja discovered
their absence; he ran outside the school.

215

He did not confine his blows to the lads, but
allowed the pedlar to share them with his pupils.

We arrived at some pillaff shops; here legs
and wings of chickens, surrounded by piles of rice,
were placed before the merchants. One of them,
taking a piece of meat in his fingers from a plate,
handed it to me. He wanted my opinion of his
wares.

"Good!" I said.

"Have you pillaff in your country?" he inquired.

"Yes."

"But not like my pillaff?"

"No, not so good."

This greatly delighted the trader: running out
of his shop, he insisted that I should return with
him and taste his sweetmeats. These last were
some of them very well made and had been manufactured
with a considerable amount of skill—a
trade going on in bon-bons between Khoi and
other towns in the interior. The Persian ladies are
very fond of sweetmeats, a large quantity of these
delicacies being consumed in the different harems.

I wanted to buy some article of native
manufacture in silver. It was impossible; the
jewellers kept nothing by them ready made; they
could have executed an order, but this would
have been a tedious affair. After having visited

216

the mosque in the town—a building which was
rather more lofty than the Turkish mosques,
but in other respects very similar—I began to
think that it was time for me to continue my
journey to Van.

It was very warm here, but the route from
Van to Kars would be covered with snow, and I
had only two months left of my leave of absence
to complete the journey to England. The Consul
pressed me to stay another day in his house.
However, we had commenced making our preparations,
and I was the more eager to leave the town
as I had been given to understand that my arrival
had caused great uneasiness to the Russian officials
in Erivan. From their being so close to Khoi
they have begun to look upon this town as their
own territory.

The paternal Government was alarmed lest I
should be murdered by the Persians; and after the
extreme solicitude the Russian authorities had
shown for my safety when I was travelling to
Khiva, I should have been deeply grieved to have
given them any more annoyance on my account.

The following morning we left Khoi at daybreak.
The city stands on a plain, and is surrounded
by a chain of hills, but they are at a
considerable distance from the walls.

217

The latter gradually disappeared, and, after a
march of two hours and a half along a good road,
we arrived at Kotoor Boghaz, a famous pass which
divides the territory of the Sultan from that of the
Shah. There is no Persian military station in the
neighbourhood. The Turks have built a sort of
block-house at the entrance of the gorge. Here I
found a small force consisting of one captain,
two lieutenants, forty infantry, and twenty-eight
cavalry soldiers. Ahmed was the name of the
captain. I now discovered that he was the identical
officer who, six months previous, had been
made prisoner by the Persians, and taken to Khoi.
He informed me that one Turkish soldier, Osman
by name, had been killed in the fray, and that he
himself had been kept in chains for forty days in
the gaol at Khoi, during which time he had
nothing given him to eat save bread and water.
In addition to this he had to sleep on the bare
floor. According to my informant, the Persian
captives who had been sent to Van had been
well treated. They had been given beds in
which to sleep, and had been supplied with
pillaff.

"What do you think was the cause of the
Persians attacking the Turkish village?" I inquired.

218

"The Russians were the origin of the disturbance,"
replied the officer. "Whilst I was being
taken a prisoner to Khoi, I heard the Persian
soldiers say, 'The Russians are our fathers,' and
they laughed at me as they said so."

"The sooner we fight Russia the better," continued
the speaker. "She will not be half so
troublesome to us in open fight as she is at
present."

We proceeded onward through the Kotoor Pass.
A little stream, called the Kotoor Su, dashed
along at our feet, and gradually became wider as
it received a succession of small tributaries from
the adjacent mountains.

The defile presents a series of magnificent
positions for defence. It is in many places
not more than 200 yards broad. Precipitous
heights look down upon the stream from either
hand.

There are several mineral springs in this neighbourhood—some
being of a sulphurous nature.
These are largely used by the Kurds, who, if
unwell, come here during the summer months
and drink the waters.

Presently the guide turned off the path;
ascending some rising ground, he dismounted by
the side of a spring. Taking a tin cup from my

219

holster, I desired him to fill it, after which I
tasted the water. It was warm, and reminded
me of the Sprudel spring at Carlsbad, but is
much stronger. Two glasses full of this Kotoor
water are equivalent in their effects to at least
four of the Sprudel.

Snow lay on the ground beneath us. At
first in patches, then becoming more frequent it
covered the winding path. A hail storm came
on. A cutting wind whistled through the gorge.
The sudden difference between the heat at Khoi,
and the cold in the Kotoor Pass, struck a chill to
our very bones. We had been marching for six
hours; there were still five more ere we could
reach a resting-place.

Dismounting from our horses, we ran by their
side, and tried to restore the circulation in our
bodies. The rapid changes of climate in this part
of Asia Minor are very dangerous to travellers.
The natives have a saying: "A chill in the
evening is death in the morn." If any one experiences
a chill, and does not succeed in becoming
warm again immediately, he is certain to
feel some ill-effects. We passed by another hot-spring;
it issues from the bank of the Kotoor
river. The guide, borrowing my tin, dismounted,
and began to wash his mouth.

220

"Why are you doing that?" I inquired.

"For tooth-ache," was the reply.

We now learnt that the Kurds have an implicit
belief in the efficacy of this water for such
complaints.

221

CHAPTER XXV.

Kotoor—The Quarantine station—The medical officer in charge—The
Governor of Kotoor—A Russian disguised as a
Persian—Mineral wealth—The Russians would like this
territory—A stepping-stone to Bagdad and Mosul—A
loyal Kurd—Aleshkert—The people there take the
strongest side—Moullah Hassan—Kurdish merchants—The
postman—His mule—The mule in the water—My
new yellow trousers—The saddle-bags in the river—Nestorian
villages—How to buy a wife—Exchange and barter—A
horse and two sheep—Van—The Pacha—The barracks—The
garrison—Bitlis.

I was not sorry to reach Kotoor. The track had
been very bad for the last half of our journey.
An eleven hours' march made under such
circumstances is tiring for man as well as
beast.

There is a quarantine station in the town.
The medical officer in charge has to examine
all people travelling from Persia to Turkey by this
route. This is done to prevent persons suffering

222

from cholera or plague spreading these maladies
throughout the Sultan's dominions.

The governor of Kotoor was a Persian by birth.
His father had been in the Shah's service, but
had changed his allegiance and enabled the Sultan
to take possession of some land round Kotoor,
which originally belonged to Persia. He now
informed me that the Persians were forming a
military camp at Salmas, and said that probably
this was being done with the connivance of
Russia.

The medical officer, an Italian, entered the
room; he was about eighty years of age, and had
been in Kotoor since 1847. His emoluments
consist of ten piastres per head, which he receives
from every one who passes along the Kotoor
road from Persia to Turkey.

"A Russian came here the other day," observed
the doctor. "He was disguised as a Persian, and
thought that I did not recognize his nationality."

"What was the object of his journey?"

"Probably to stir up the Kurds, and invite
the Armenians to rise against the Mussulmans,"
replied the doctor. "There is a great deal of
mineral wealth in this neighbourhood," he continued;
"coal and iron abound within two miles
of this place."

223

"The Russians would like to take this territory
for two reasons," remarked the governor; "first,
because having Kotoor and Van, they would be
able to make depôts and preparations for a march
further south upon Bagdad and Mosul; and,
secondly, on account of the mines in the district."

A Kurdish chieftain who lived near Bitlis had
recently written to the Sultan, offering him the
services of 20,000 men, in the event of a war
between Turkey and Russia. His offer was accepted,
and the loyal Kurd's heart had been
gladdened by the present of a magnificent silk
turban and a sword.

The mountaineers near Kotoor could all be
relied upon by the Turks. But there was
reason to mistrust the sincerity and good faith
of the Kurds in the neighbourhood of Moush and
Aleshkert. They were said to have recently received
large sums of money, besides arms, from
Russia.

"If the Russians were to be worsted, the Kurds
would be the first to turn these arms against their
quondam friends," added the governor; "for
the people about Aleshkert are proverbial for one
thing,—namely, that they always take the winning
side."

The following morning I said good-bye to the

224

hospitable old doctor, in whose house I had slept.
He had kindly given me a bed in one corner of
his room—he himself, and the rest of his family,
having slept in the other.

We rode towards Van. It is about sixty
miles distant from Kotoor. Our track for the
first hour ran within the mountain gorge—a
continuation of the Kotoor Pass, but which here
is several miles wide. After riding by several
Kurdish villages, we began to ascend a succession
of rising slopes. Plateau after plateau, each
higher than its neighbour, were extended in
front of us; the snow at each moment became
deeper. It was evident that we could not reach
Van on that evening. I determined to break
the journey at the village of Moullah Hassan,
which would be about a ten hours' march from
Kotoor. Several Kurdish merchants had joined
our party; they were travelling from Khoi, and
drove before them oxen and calves laden with
timbaki (Persian tobacco).

One of the Kurds possessed a mule. This
animal, besides his master's personal effects,
carried the post-bag from Khoi to Van. The
Kurd led his mule for some time, but at length,
tiring of this, he turned the animal loose, and
drove him before our party, in company with the

225

oxen and calves belonging to the other traders.
We had nearly reached Moullah Hassan; the
mule had outstripped the rest of the caravan,
I was riding behind him. The road suddenly
dipped. There was a declivity in front of us. I
lost sight of the animal. He had disappeared.

It was becoming dark. I pulled up my horse
for a moment—it was lucky that I did so, for
in another moment we should have been in a
river—the dip being neither more nor less than
the bed of the stream, which was covered over
with a thin film of ice and two or three feet of
snow. In another second the mule's head appeared
above the surface. His frantic struggles
showed that he was endeavouring to gain a foothold.

The proprietor of the animal came up.

"My new yellow trousers!" was his first remark.
A fearful oath then resounded from his lips.

He had bought some clothes at Khoi. They
were in his saddle-bags and on the mule—the
letter-bag being evidently considered by the muleteer
as something quite secondary to his personal
attire. He tried to reach the animal, but the
ice, breaking, let him into the water. In the
meantime the exertions of the mule had loosened
his surcingle, presently it gave way; saddle, and

226

letters, in addition to the wardrobe of the Kurd,
slipped off the animal's back. They sank to the
bottom of the river.

Our guide, turning to the right, proposed that
we should ride up the stream, and try and find
a place where the ice would bear. This was done.
About half an hour afterwards we found ourselves
beneath the roof of a Kurdish farmer—the
chief proprietor in the village of Moullah
Hassan.

There were several Nestorian villages in the
neighbourhood; however, the inhabitants of these
hamlets possess the reputation of being dirtier
than the Kurds, so the traveller who is wise
will invariably elect to pass the night with the
mountaineers.

The Kurd whose mule had fallen into the
water entered the room. In one hand he bore
something which was dripping wet. He salaamed,
and then began to wring out the article he was
carrying; the trousers were exposed to view.
Once of a yellow colour, they were now a dull
brown. The Kurd, stretching them out on the
floor, gazed in a melancholy manner upon the
soiled vestments.

"A horse and two sheep," he remarked with a
sob; "Effendi, have pity upon me!"

227

"What does he want?" I inquired of Mohammed.

It appeared that the Kurd wished to buy a
wife from a neighbouring farmer who had some
marriageable daughters. Their father, nothing
loth, and who was in want of a pair of broad
yellow trousers, had consented, provided the candidate
for his girl's hand would provide him with a
beautiful pair, a turban, and some tea. Broad
yellow drawers, or pants, as Yankees would call
them, are not often to be met with in Kurdistan.
They are brought from Erivan in Russia, and are
greatly prized by the mountaineers. The Kurd
had been to Khoi on purpose, had sold there a
horse and two sheep; with the proceeds of the
sale he had purchased the attire in question. He
was now dreadfully alarmed lest the father of the
girl should decline giving his daughter in exchange
for the soiled apparel.

"But what can I do in the matter?" was my
next question.

"Give me a baksheesh," said the Kurd, "and
I will return to Khoi and buy some more garments."

The man had forgotten about the mail-bag,
which lay buried beneath the frozen surface of
the river.

228

Desiring him to go and fish up the letters, I
promised that, later in the day, I would take his
case into consideration.

The snow disappeared as we approached the
town of Van. We rode by a small lake, about
twelve miles from our halting-place. Continuing
on over a succession of table-lands, the path
sloped down towards the great lake or sea, to
which the capital of Armenia gives a name.

Van stands in a plain and is surrounded by
orchards filled with fruit-trees. The ground in
the neighbourhood is highly cultivated, corn
and other cereals flourishing throughout the
district.

I had sent forward a letter of introduction
to the governor of Van from Ismail Pacha of
Erzeroum. The man to whom I had entrusted
the epistle had not taken the trouble to deliver
it. The governor was quite ignorant of my
arrival.

I stopped at his house, and, going up to the
reception-chamber, found him busily engaged in
conversation with an official who had recently
arrived from Constantinople, to inquire into the
excesses said to have been committed by some
soldiers upon the Armenians in Van.

The Pacha received me very courteously, in

229

spite of my not having a letter for him; he
remarked, with a smile, that there were no
hotels in Van as in Constantinople, and said
that he would provide me with a room in a
barrack which had been lately erected in the
town.

The officer commanding the garrison now entered
the room, and accompanied me to my
quarters. The barrack was two stories high,
and in the form of a square, with a courtyard for
drill in the centre of the building. The officers
and men's rooms were on the first story, and
below them the stables for the horses. The
apartment given me was large and clean. The
walls were whitewashed, the floor was covered
with a Persian carpet. A large looking-glass—the
first I had seen since I quitted our consul's
house in Erzeroum—was suspended from the
walls.

There were only half a battalion of infantry
and a battery of Krupp guns at that time in Van.
The remainder of the garrison, consisting of one
battalion and a half, had marched the previous
week to the neighbourhood of Bitlis, where some
Kurds had burnt down a Turkish guard-house.

230

CHAPTER XXVI.

The artillery at practice—The horses—The Commandant—The
military school at Constantinople—The citadel—Typhus—The
swamp—The sanitary state of the city—The lake—Natron—A
substitute for soap—Stone cannon-balls—Nadir
Shah's attack upon Van—Greek and Assyrian coins—Salutes
during Bairam—An inscription on the rock—An
adventurous Englishman—The Commandant—A Kurd—Hernia—How
to cure rupture—Three American Missionaries—The
English and American flags—The conflagration
at Van—Armenian inventions—The Commissioner—The
troops.

The following morning I walked with the commandant
to see the artillery at practice. The
drill was fairly done. The guns were horsed
with fine-looking animals from 15-3 to 16
hands high, mostly greys, and brought from
European Turkey. The officer who commanded
took great pride in his battery. A few hours after
the drill was over, he accompanied me through
the stables. The steel was bright, and the harness

231

in thorough good order. When I remarked this
to the commander, he replied:—

"Effendi, I was educated in the Military-School
at Constantinople. If the rest of our
officers had been there, we should have a better
army. But, please God, for all that we shall give
the Russians more to do than they expect."

I now went to see the citadel. It stands on a
rock in the middle of the town, and is about 500
feet above the level of the lake.

Van is surrounded on three sides by a chain of
hills, which are at a distance of from three to seven
miles from the town. On the fourth side it is
bounded by the lake which bears its name.
There is a swamp towards the west, and close
to the houses. This makes the place very
unhealthy in the summer months—typhus and
other fevers are prevalent in the district. The
military surgeon, a Hungarian, who accompanied
me in my ride to the citadel, observed that
several complaints had been made to the authorities
at Constantinople as to the sanitary state of
Van, and a letter had been sent to the Medical
Department recommending that the swamp should
be drained. A Pacha had died of typhus only six
months before; this had thoroughly aroused the new
governor. It had acted upon him like the death

232

of a director, in a railway accident, acts upon the
other directors of the line. However, nothing had
been done up to the present time towards carrying
the governor's and doctor's suggestions into effect.

I now learnt that the lake contains natron. The
townspeople have a very simple manner of obtaining
this substance. In the summer months they pour
water from the lake into large shallow basins; the
heat of the sun evaporates the water, and carbonate
of soda is deposited at the bottom of the vessels.
It is afterwards sent to Erzeroum and Stamboul.
The inhabitants of Van use this substance for
washing purposes as a substitute for soap.

The road wound round the height on which the
citadel stands. After about a fifteen minutes'
climb, our horses reached the summit. Here
there were several very old guns, some dating
back more than 250 years. Large piles of stone
balls lay behind many of the pieces, the commander,
pointing at them, remarked that now-a-days they
would not be of any use, although in the last century
they had struck terror into the midst of a
Persian host. The modern citadel, if it may be
termed by that name, is merely a block-house,
with accommodation for about 100 soldiers.
There are many galleries cut in the solid rock,
some of which were used in old days as

233

quarters for the troops, and others as dungeons
for prisoners. Some heavy chains were lying on
the floors, or fastened to rings in the rock. Presently
we came to an enormous cavern filled with
stone cannon-balls. The commandant informed
me that these had been brought there just before
Nadir Shah's attack upon Van.

"Nadir Shah besieged this town for seven
years," continued the officer, "look at the
marks of some of his handiwork." With these
words he showed us a few holes in the wall
which had apparently been made by artillery fire.

Many ancient Greek and Assyrian coins had
been found in the neighbourhood of the citadel,
and, according to the doctor, the place abounds
with inscriptions in characters which cannot be
read by any of the inhabitants.

There is a well of naphtha about fifty yards from
the block-house. The commandant, going with
me to the spot, made a soldier draw out some of
the contents. The well was very deep, and the
inhabitants of Van had used the naphtha from
time immemorial. The doctor was doubtful as
to whether it was a natural well, or merely a
large cistern which had been filled many years
ago with this liquid, possibly for the use of the
garrison.

234

"Are the guns in the citadel ever discharged?"
I inquired.

"No," said the commandant, "they are all
useless with the exception of one small piece
which we keep for firing salutes during the
Bairam. This rock is much too near the town to
be used as a fort," he continued. "A hospital
ought to be built here, or it would be a good site
for a depôt of stores; but as a defensive position
it is useless against modern artillery."

We came to a place in the rock where it descends
abruptly for several hundred feet. "An Englishman
was let down from here by a cord some years
ago," observed the doctor. "About 200 feet
below this spot there is an inscription cut on the
stone. The inscription is about Semiramis.
Formerly we all wished to know what was the
meaning of the writing; but, no one in Van
was bold enough to descend the rock, or, even
if some Armenian or Turk had dared to
make the attempt, he would have been unable
to decipher the characters. Well," continued
the speaker, "an Englishman came here and
was lowered by cords over the precipice. If
he had fallen even from the spot where the inscription
is cut, he must have been dashed to
pieces, as it is a long way above the rocks. However,

235

your countryman succeeded in taking an
impression of the characters, and I believe a
translation of them is in the British Museum.
You can see the inscription from the town itself,"
he added. "The letters are very large, they
occupy a place about twelve feet long by eight
wide."

We returned towards the barrack. On the
way I took the opportunity of looking at the
characters on the rock. They are cut on four
square blocks, each block being placed by the side
of its fellow. Imagine four gigantic sheets of the

Times
, placed one alongside the other, and covered
with huge quaintly-formed letters; you will then
be able to form an idea of the appearance of the
inscription. As you look at the writing from the
ground, it appears that in the third square from
the right the letters are a little defaced, but in
the others the characters stand out as clear as on
the day when they were first chiselled. Several
Armenian children were playing at soldiers in the
street, their fathers and brothers were being
instructed in drill in the barrack-yard. Some
little military enthusiasm existed in the town even
amongst the Christians, and the governor had
promulgated the Sultan's edict that every one of
his subjects was to be taught the use of arms.

236

I paid the commandant a visit. His apartments
adjoined mine, whilst I was with him several
men arrived—some wishing to be soldiers, others
desirous of being released from the conscription.
A fine-looking Kurd was amongst the last-mentioned
applicants. He was dressed in the usual
picturesque costume of his race, but, in addition,
wore a sort of white muslin shawl, which enveloped
him from head to foot.

"You will make a capital soldier," said the
commandant. "You had better serve."

"Bey Effendi," replied the man, "I am ruptured."

"Really," said the doctor, who was present in
the room; "on which side?"

"The right," replied the man, pointing to his
groin.

"Then you will do very well for the infantry,"
observed the Hungarian. "A man must be ruptured
on both sides to be freed from service in
that branch of the army."

The Kurd went away rather crestfallen. I then
learnt that it is a common practice amongst
those mountaineers who do not wish to serve, to
purposely rupture themselves. This they do by
pressing with their finger and thumb on the lower
part of the stomach until a swelling arises.

237

The operation hurts. After a man has ruptured
himself on one side he does not feel inclined to
repeat the process on the other. The doctor, who
gave me the information, observed that the Kurds
have a way of curing ruptures which is not
generally known to the medical faculty. They
burn the skin around the ruptured spot with a
hot iron, the muscles will then contract, and this
often effects a cure.

Three American missionaries called: they were
living at a village about an hour's ride from Van.
They had been there for some years, but had not
succeeded in making many converts.

They described the country as being in a very
unsettled state, and said that they had lately
heard from some other missionaries near Bitlis
that a Kurdish sheik in that neighbourhood
had recommended them not to go to the mountains,
as they were in the habit of doing during
the summer months, for he could not guarantee
their safety.

The missionaries at Van were eager to know
what part England was likely to take in the event
of a war. Although Americans, they are looked
upon by the inhabitants as Englishmen, and the
English flag is much more respected in Asia Minor
than that of the United States.

238

The commissioner who had been sent from
Constantinople, to inquire about the recent disturbances
at Van, and the burning of the Armenian
bazaar, entered the room. He informed me
that immediately after the conflagration had
occurred, fabulous reports as to the amount of
the property destroyed had been published in
the Armenian papers. It was first stated that
1,000,000 liras would not cover the loss experienced
by the merchants in Van. Subsequently
it was said that 200,000 liras in specie had been
stolen by the Turkish soldiery, and that goods
to the value of 300,000 liras had been destroyed
by the flames.

When the commissioner arrived at Van, his first
act was to make a list of all the merchants who
had shops in the bazaar. Then, sending for each
man separately, he asked him what was the nature
of his merchandise, and at how much he valued
his losses. When the commissioner added up the
sums claimed by all the merchants in Van, he
found that the total amount did not exceed 96,000
liras. In addition to this the Armenians acknowledged
having saved goods to the value of 10,000
liras.

In the official's opinion 23,000 liras would cover
the entire loss; and from what I afterwards saw

239

of the ruins of the bazaar, and judging from the
small area over which they extended, I am inclined
to believe that he had fairly estimated the damage.

The Armenian newspapers, probably instigated
by Russian agents, had declared that the Turkish
troops stationed in Van had first set fire to the
bazaar, and then pillaged it in the confusion. The
commissioner, after the most searching inquiries,
was unable to discover that the troops were in any
way implicated in the affair. Several Armenians
kept petroleum and lucifer matches in their warehouses:
his idea was that the fire originated either
by spontaneous combustion, or through some one
accidentally dropping a lighted match.

The soldiers had been called out to help to extinguish
the fire. Thinking that the men might
have stolen something during the conflagration,
the commissioner asked the commander to issue
an order for all the garrison to march to Erzeroum
on the following morning. This was done.
Shortly afterwards the different battalions left
the town. The commissioner, accompanied by
some Armenian merchants, met the troops on the
road. The soldiers' baggage was then searched,
and each man in succession. Nothing was found
which could in any way connect the troops with
the robbery.

240

CHAPTER XXVII.

An extempore market—Carbonate of soda—The population—The
Pacha's salary—The Commander's pay—The Hungarian
doctor's contract—The Armenian church—An inscription—A
heathen temple—The Armenian clergy—Their
different grades—The monks—The two Patriarchs—The
Catolicos—The
meira
—The miraculous power of the
Catolicos—The miracle turned into £
s.

d.
—Baptismal and
burial fees—Prayers for the dead—A curious tradition—King
Abgar the leper—The journey from Van—The mirage—Gull—Paz—Tishikoomlekui—Ardisch—A
Kurdish girl—A strange custom.

I now walked to an extempore market which the
Armenians are making use of until the old one is
reconstructed. With the exception of quantities
of rough silk brought from Persia, raw cotton,
and carbonate of soda, which had been taken
from the lake, there was literally nothing to see.

It was said that there were 20,000 inhabitants
in the town; I am inclined to believe that the
number has been exaggerated. The market-place
which had been destroyed by fire stood on a very

241

small area of ground. The impression conveyed
to my mind was that the whole town did not contain
above 16,000 inhabitants. The Pacha receives a
yearly salary of 2200 liras, and is paid in gold. The
other officials are not so fortunate; the pay of the
commander of the garrison only amounted to 20
l.

a month, and was always several months in arrear;
in addition to this he was paid in Turkish banknotes.
The Hungarian had a contract with the Government;
his pay amounted to 17
l.
per month, and
had to be given him in gold; in consequence of
this, he was quite as well off as the commander.

From the market-place I went to the Armenian
church, which stands in the middle of the town.
It consists of several rooms, one of them being
very much like a wooden barn, the others are
built of stone with arched roofs. There was
nothing to be seen in the building save a few
tawdry pictures of saints; it was carpeted in the
same way as the Turkish mosques. The priest who
accompanied us, raising a curtain, showed me an
inscription in cuneiform characters cut in the stone.

"This part of the building is very old," he said;
"it was formerly a heathen temple."

"How old?" I inquired.

"One thousand eight hundred years," said the
priest.

242

"Nonsense, brother," said another. "It is
two thousand."

"Say three thousand, and you will be nearer the
mark," added a third.

It was evident that none of these gentlemen
had any data to go upon for their calculations, I
left the church rather disappointed. I had hoped
that some of the divines might be able to give
me information as to the antiquities of the city.
The Armenian clergy do not trouble their heads
about such matters; their time is so taken up
in the performance of idolatrous rites, and in
looking after the welfare of the fairer portion of
their flock, that they have not a moment to spare
for the study of the ancient history of Armenia.

The Armenian who wishes to be a priest must
serve in six different grades before he can be
ordained. He must be an exorcist, porter,
reader, sub-deacon, candle-lighter, and deacon.
If he has any interest with his bishop, he can pass
through all these grades in one day.

As a priest, he is allowed to marry; however,
like the clergy belonging to the Greek Church, if
his wife dies, the Armenian cannot take unto himself
a second spouse. He then may become a monk,
and live, free of expense, in one of the monasteries.
Next in order, but above the monks, are the

243

bishops and the two patriarchs—one residing in
Constantinople, the other at Jerusalem—the patriarch
at Constantinople being looked up to by
the Armenians as a sort of civil head, besides
being their spiritual guide. We now come to the
Catolicos, who is first of all in the ecclesiastical
hierarchy. He lives in Russia, near Mount Ararat,
and is the chief personage of the Armenian Church.

All bishops and priests have to wear beards.
The bishops are ordained by the Catolicos, and a
council of bishops consecrates the latter. The
Armenian Christians worship pictures; confess to
their priests; offer prayers for the dead, and ask
for the intercession of their saints. An oil is used
for the baptism of children. It is called
meira
.
The Armenians believe that this oil has boiled
without any fire having been placed under it, and
they think that this has been effected through the
miraculous power of the Catolicos. Whoever and
whatever touches this oil is made holy, and is
looked upon as having been sanctified.

The Catolicos sells the
meira
, and makes a very
large sum by the sale of the oil. The other
revenues of the Church arise from baptismal and
burial fees, prayers for the dead, taxes imposed
upon the people by the ecclesiastics, voluntary contributions,
and money left in the wills of devotees.

244

According to an American missionary at
Erzeroum, the Rev. Moses Parmelee, who has
published a work which treats of the Armenian
clergy, "many of the higher ecclesiastics become
very wealthy at the expense of the poor people
whom they cheat and oppress."

He also remarks that the Bible of the Armenians
is in their ancient language, which is not understood
by the masses of the people.

They were a free nation till the beginning of
the eleventh century, but later on the Moguls and
Turks devastated Armenia, and the inhabitants
have never raised their heads since.

There is a curious tradition connected with the
Armenian faith. It is to the effect that, at the
beginning of our era, some envoys from Abgar,
King of Armenia, happened to be in Jerusalem.
Whilst they were in the city they saw Jesus Christ,
and afterwards informed their sovereign of the
miracles which our Saviour was performing
throughout Syria. The monarch was a leper,
and, thinking that the same supernatural being
who had saved so many lives in Jerusalem
might be able to do something for him, the king
wrote, say the Armenians, the following letter to
the Saviour:—

"Abgar, son of Arsham, Prince of this land, to

245

Jesus the Saviour and benefactor of man. Greeting.
I have heard of Thee, and of the cures wrought by
Thy hands without remedies and without plants.
For it is said that Thou makest the blind to see,
the lame to walk. The lepers are healed, and
spirits are cast out. Thou healest the unfortunate
afflicted with long and inveterate diseases. Thou
dost raise the dead. As I have heard of all the
wonders done by Thee, I have concluded that
Thou art either God come down from heaven, or
the Son of God, to do such things. I therefore
have written beseeching Thee to deign to come
to me and cure my disease. I have also heard
that the Jews use Thee ill, and lay snares to
destroy Thee. I have here a little city pleasantly
situated, and sufficient for us both."

Jesus replied: "After I have gone I will send
one of My disciples, who shall cure thy malady,
and give life to thee and thine."

Some Armenians say that Christ caused the
imprint of His face to be left on a handkerchief,
and gave it to the envoys, telling them that it
would cure their master. This is cited to justify
the adoration of pictures, which is part of the
Armenian faith. According to another tradition,
the handkerchief never reached the leprous king;
for the envoys who were carrying it to their

246

master were attacked by brigands, and it was stolen
on the way. This version tells us that Thaddeus
subsequently healed the leprous sovereign.

It was the 7th of March. I had already spent
several days in Van, and, contrary to my hopes,
had not benefited by the rest. I was still suffering
from dysentery; instead of the complaint
getting better, it had become worse. By all
account we should be able to find milk in most
of the Kurd and Yezeed villages between Van
and Kars; so I determined to start for the latter
place and try what a milk and rice diet would do
towards restoring my health and strength. We
rode for two hours by the side of the lake; then,
leaving the blue water, ascended a low range
of hills. The sun's rays were very powerful;
a mirage was formed before us. Miles
upon miles of water were reflected in the sky.
Presently we crossed a little stream known as
the Mahmod Tchai, and after a short march
halted at Gull—a small village with thirty houses,
half belonging to Armenians, half to Mohammedans.

The morn breaks. We ride over some high
table-land, and then return to the lake. Our route
lies along its shores. Sand-hills slope down to
the water's edge; myriads of starlings flit about

247

the beach; pelicans and other wild fowl sail along
the surface of the deep. After a six hours'
journey we rest at Paz—a small Kurd village
with only ten houses.

The following day we marched along a good
track to Tishikoomlekui, a devil-worshippers' village.
Then crossing the Bendimah river—here
about thirty yards wide—on a stone bridge, we
continued to Karahana, and so on to Ardisch, an
Armenian village with 200 houses and a resident
Caimacan.

A pretty Kurdish girl, whom I had seen at Paz,
accompanied us to the latter place. I now learnt
that the females in some parts of Kurdistan have
a strange custom. This is to beset any
stranger who is about to enter or quit their
village. The girls dance round the wayfarer, and
take the opportunity to divest him of his apparel.
When he is in a nude state, they seize their victim
and carry him with them before some old
matron,
[18]
complaining to her that their prisoner
has grossly insulted them. The man is lucky if he
escapes with his clothes minus the cash in the
pockets.

248

CHAPTER XXVIII.

Akserai—The Kurds—Raids upon the villages—Five females
ravished—The Pacha at Van is powerless to help the villagers—The
hot springs in Lake Van—Fish—How to
catch them—Zerekli—Starlings—Patnos—We cross the
Murad river—Dotah—The Caimacan—The devil-worshipper—His
house—A Yezeed sheik—Scarcity of accommodation.

We reached Akserai. I was informed by my host,
an Armenian, that the Christians in this district
live in constant dread of their warlike neighbours,
the Kurds—and the more particularly of the
Kurds from Persia. These mountaineers sometimes
made raids upon the villages, and committed
all sorts of excesses on the women. Only three
months previous a scene of this description had
taken place at Akserai. The Kurds had come
there in the night: five of the females in the
village had been ravished by the assailants.

The Armenian who gave me this information
declared that he liked the Pacha at Van, but said
that the latter was powerless to prevent these
attacks. There were 5000 Kurds in the mountains,

249

and all were well-armed men. Artillery could not
be transported in those regions. The troops at the
disposal of the Government were too few to be of
any real assistance.

There were many hot springs in Lake Van, and
I was assured that, in places, a man could not put
his hand in the water without being scalded.

Fish, according to my informant, are only
caught in the spring months. The finny tribe
then descend the rivers to the Lake, and are taken
in large numbers.

The villagers draw three nets across the mouths
of the rivers. There are funnels in the first two
nets, which are left open for the fish to pass. The
apertures in the second net being much smaller
than those in the first. When the men discover,
by the pressure against the outer net,
that they have as many fish as the trammels
will hold, they close the funnels, and draw the
nets together. The captives, in their endeavours
to escape, leap several feet into the air, and the
scene is a highly animated one. No large
fishes are met with, their average size being
from one to two pounds. When a sufficient number
have been taken, the women salt them down,
and they are kept for winter consumption.

There is a great deal of plough-land in the

250

neighbourhood of Akserai, and, on inquiry, I
learnt that corn is grown here in large quantities.

We rode along the shores of the lake for
two hours, and, after traversing a well-cultivated
country, reached Zerekli. Here many of the inhabitants
were seated on the roofs of their houses—the
women working and the men basking in the
sun. A few soldiers could be seen mending their
uniform, and an old Armenian woman was occupied
in stitching a shirt belonging to a truculent-looking
sergeant. This gentleman sat beside her, sans
chemise, and smoking a long chibouk; volumes
of smoke from his pipe were slowly wreathing
themselves in the atmosphere.

My host was engaged in mending the roof of
his house. A buffalo, or some heavy animal, had
walked upon it. The part near the chimney had
given way.

Thousands of starlings were perched on some
trees in the rear of the dwellings. Many of
these birds could be seen hopping about in close
proximity to a crowd of Turkish and Armenian
urchins. The latter were very different to English
lads; for if the starlings had settled down
in one of our own villages, it would not have
been long ere some boy or other had thrown a
stone at them.

251

It was pleasanter sitting on the roof of
the house than being an inmate of its subterranean
recesses. But the night turned bitterly
cold. A thick mist arose from the lake. It warned
the villagers to retire within their dwellings, if
they did not wish to risk catching a fever.

We followed their example, and in a short time
experienced one of the plagues with which Moses
afflicted the Egyptians. There were some loose
boards in a corner of the stable; I took them, and
tried to remove my body from the onslaught of
the vermin by making a sort of scaffolding to
sleep upon, three feet from the floor. However,
it was all to no purpose. If my tormentors
could not reach me by climbing from the ground,
they ascended the sides of the building and
dropped down upon the scaffolding from the ceiling.

Sleep was out of the question. Starting before
daybreak, we continued our journey alongside the
lake. Thousands of geese and ducks were skimming
along the surface of its waters. In the
distance some broad-bottomed boats could be seen.
They were laden with wood, and were transporting
this article of fuel to the adjacent villages.

We crossed two small rivers, and then, continuing
through deep snow, arrived, after a six-hours'
march, at Patnos. A river of the same

252

name runs through the village, which contains fifty
houses, and the stream, continuing its course a few
miles farther, runs into the Murad. Patnos was
garrisoned by a company of soldiers. A Mudir
looked after the welfare of the inhabitants. The
troops were not strong enough to cope with the
Kurds in the neighbourhood. The result was that
the misdeeds of the mountaineers went unpunished.

A few hours later, and we crossed the Murad
river, here about sixty yards wide, the water being
up to our horses' shoulders, and, after an eight-hours'
march, halted in a Yezeed village called
Dotah.

The Caimacan in this place was not very
hospitably inclined. Instead of offering me a room
in his own house, as had been the custom with the
governors at our previous halting-places, he
ordered an old Yezeed farmer to provide us with
accommodation for the night.

The ancient devil-worshipper was anything but
pleased at having to find a shelter for my servants
and self. He had only two rooms, and one of the
travelling priests or sheiks of his community was
with him as a visitor. The sheik would want a
room to himself, and there would be only the
stable left for the old man, his family, our horses,
and selves.

253

CHAPTER XXIX.

My host—The sheik's appearance—My host's two daughters—They
attend upon the sheik—Caressing the flames—I love
the fire—An insult to the Shaitan—Do you believe in
Allah?—Allah can do no harm—The Yezeed fetish—The
tomb of Sheik Adi—Your cows shall not die—Mohammed
wants a fetish—A cure for rheumatism—The Melek
Taoos—Do you ever pray?—What is the use? Everything
is fixed—You cannot force Destiny to change her
mind—Hidden things—The balls of clay—Mr. Layard—The
seven archangels.

My landlord was not a sweet creature to look
upon. The sheik who was his guest had a
still more forbidding countenance; the latter gentleman,
with his deep-set eyes, high, narrow forehead,
coming almost to a point where it reached
his skull, and long cockatoo-like nose, having a
very demoniacal appearance. My host had two
daughters, who had been deputed to wait upon
the sheik. They followed him about like spaniels,

254

and vied with each other in obeying his commands.

I was seated beside the fireplace when the
distinguished individual entered the room. He
evidently expected that I was about to arise to
receive him in a way becoming to his dignity, and
made a sign as if to ask me not to move. I paid
no attention to this gesture, but motioned
to him to sit by the fire. This he did, and,
squatting opposite me, unbared a pair of long
shining arms and began to pass them through
the flames, as if he were caressing the fiery
element.

"You like heat?" I remarked, by way of commencing
a conversation.

The man slowly raised his eyes, which glittered
in his head and flashed like the embers on the
hearth.

"Heat is good, Effendi. Fire gives warmth—without
warmth we should die. Fire gives life,
and destroys it. I love the flames."

Mohammed came close to the fire and stooped
down. The sheik's eyes sparkled brighter than
before: he said something. My servant laughed,
but moved away from the hearth.

"What did he say?" I inquired.

"He was afraid, Effendi, that I was about to

255

spit in the fire. They think that this is a great
insult to the ——" Here Mohammed stopped; he
did not like to utter the word "Shaitan" (devil);
The sheikh, who appeared much frightened at the
beginning of the sentence, and had left off passing
his arms through the flames, commenced repeating
that operation.

"Do you believe in Allah?" I remarked.

"Allah is good," was the reply. "Allah can do
no harm."

My host now came up, and, bowing before the
sheik, said something. The latter, placing his
hand into his sash, produced two clay balls, which
he gave to the proprietor—the latter receiving
them with an air of the greatest satisfaction.

These balls had been manufactured with clay
taken from the tomb of Sheik Adi—a saint who
is highly reverenced by the Yezeeds—the travelling
sheiks make a certain sum of money by
selling them to the devotees.

"Your visit has brought happiness to my
daughters and myself," observed the proprietor.

The sheik did not reply immediately, but presently
remarked,—

"Your cows shall not die; no robbers shall
enter your doors; illness shall not attack your
family."

256

Mohammed approached.

"I too should like a ball," he remarked. "It
might keep off my rheumatism. The Effendi's
plasters do good, but they hurt. The ball would
not cause me any pain. Give me one;" and my
servant held out his hand to the sheik.

"Go away!" said the latter in rather strong
tones. "Go to your own saints, and let them cure
you."

Then, rising, the man left the room, closely
followed by the two daughters of the proprietor.

These girls were neither of them good-looking,
and dirty to an extent which no man who has not
been in the East could imagine.

It is said that there are pretty women amidst
the daughters of the worshippers of the devil;
my personal observations do not lead me to place
any credence in this statement.

I inquired of the proprietor if the sheik had
brought the Melek Taoos (King Peacock) with
him. This is a bird manufactured of bronze,
which is occasionally carried about by the leading
men amidst the Yezeeds, and which all devil-worshippers
are bound to reverence.

"No," replied my host; "our guest is not a
Cawal (a sort of priest). Who told you about the
Melek Taoos?"

257

"The Turks, and, besides, I have read about
it, and seen a picture of the bird in a book
written by a Frank."

"What a marvel!" said the host; "very few
of our sheiks can read, much less write."

"Do you ever pray?" I inquired.

"Pray? like the Mohammedans?"

"Yes."

"No; what is the use? You Christians do not
pray like the Mohammedans," continued the old
man.

"No; but we pray to the Founder of our
faith."

"Everything is fixed," observed the Yezeed;
"then what is the good of praying? You cannot
force Destiny to change her mind."

"Then what is the good of the balls you have
just received? for if your cows are destined to
die, they will die."

My host did not show any wish to continue
this conversation, and he presently remarked,—

"We are talking about hidden things; no
good will come of it."

"But if you have got the balls of clay," said
Mohammed, joining in the conversation, "they
ought to keep you from any harm."

"Who knows?" said the proprietor; and, rising

258

from the ground, he lay down in a farther corner
of the room, next some sheep, and was soon lost
to consciousness.

Mr. Layard, who lived some time amongst the
Yezeeds, remarked about these strange people,—

"They recognize one Supreme Being; but, as
far as I could learn, they do not offer up any
direct prayer or sacrifice to Him. My questions
on this subject were evaded, and every topic was
shunned connected with the attributes and existence
of the Deity.

"The name of the devil is never mentioned, and
any allusion to it by others so vexes and irritates
them that it is said that they have put to death
persons who have wantonly outraged their feelings
by its use.

"So far is their dread of offending the evil spirit
carried that they carefully avoid every expression
which may resemble in sound the name of
Satan, or the Arabic word for 'accursed.' When
they speak of the devil, they do so with reverence
as Melek-el, the mighty angel. The Yezeeds
believe Satan to be the chief of the angelic host
now suffering punishment for his rebellion against
the Divine will, but still powerful, and to be
restored hereafter to his high estate in the celestial
hierarchy. He must be conciliated and

259

reverenced, they say, for as he now has the
means of doing evil to mankind, so will he hereafter
have the power of rewarding them. Next
to Satan, but inferior to him in might and wisdom,
are seven archangels who exercise a great influence
over the world; they are Gabriel, Michail,
Raphail, Azrail, Dedrail, Azrapheel, and Shemkeel.
Christ, according to the Yezeeds, was also a great
angel who had taken the form of man. He did
not die on the cross, but ascended to heaven."

260

CHAPTER XXX.

Alongside the river Murad—Waterfalls—The Melaskert river—Tchekhane—An
attack of fever—Quinine—The doctor at
Toprak Kale—He arrives—The consultation—Excitement
amongst the villagers—The stethoscope—The audience—How
clever these Franks are!—The Effendi is going to
die—Rheumatic fever—Pressed fruit—A native remedy—A
long night.

We were once more in winter, deep snow lay
along our path. There were several Yezeed
villages by the track, which began to rise abruptly
by the side of the river Murad, and was here and
there cut out of the solid rock.

In many places waterfalls dashed over the
path, and we were literally riding beneath a
canopy of water, which fell, several hundred feet
over precipices into the river below. At others
the torrent dashed across the track itself. We
had to advance with the greatest caution to avoid
being swept down the abyss.

261

I now crossed the Melaskert river. Here
our guide had a narrow escape of being carried
away by the torrent. Presently we arrived at
Tchekhane, an Armenian village, about eight miles
distant from the town of Toprak Kale.

I had been suffering great pain during the last
two marches, and, on dismounting from my horse,
should have fallen to the ground, if it had not
been for Mohammed.

The latter helped me to enter the house of my
host, an Armenian peasant. Staggering up to
the hearth, I threw myself down beside the fire.
My legs seemed to have lost all their strength;
I had great pain in the head and back. My
pulse was beating very rapidly. It intermitted.

Thinking that it was an attack of fever, I
desired Radford to give me the medicine-chest,
and after taking ten grains of quinine, tried to
sleep. This, however, was impossible—the insects
in the house would have prevented slumber, even
if the fever had not done so.

The night passed away. In the morning I
found myself so weak that I could barely raise my
head from the pillow.

"There is a doctor at Toprak Kale," observed
my Armenian host. "He is a Frank: why not
send for him?"

262

I did so; but the medical man did not arrive.
I lay all that day racked by pain, and half
devoured by insects.

In the morning I overheard the following conversation
between Mohammed and the proprietor.

"There are many fleas; my Effendi cannot
sleep."

"It is true," replied the Armenian; "but there
are by no means so many here as in a Kurd village
a few miles distant. The Kurds have been obliged
to abandon their houses in consequence of these
insects. They have had to live in tents for several
months past."

Another night passed without my obtaining
any slumber. In the morning I had a visit from
the doctor, a Hungarian who was attached to a
regiment at Toprak Kale.

The news of the arrival of the son of Æsculapius
was soon spread through the village. My
bed-chamber, the stable, in which there were
three cows, was speedily thronged by as many
excited inhabitants as could find standing-room.

The doctor was a young man; he had not been
long in Asia Minor, and could only speak a few
words of Turkish. But he wore a uniform and
was accompanied by a Zaptieh. This was sufficient

263

at once to strike awe into the Armenian
villagers.

"Are you in pain?" said the doctor, in
German.

"Yes."

"Where?"

"Behind the shoulders and in the side."

"I will examine you."

Producing a stethoscope, he placed one end
of it upon my chest, and the other to his ear. This
proceeding gave rise to great astonishment amidst
the assembled visitors, who eagerly pressed forward
to witness the operation.

"Donnerwetter!" said the indignant physician
in German. "Haide, go away!" This last word
in Turkish to the Armenians, who, frightened at
the sonorous sounds of the "Donnerwetter," had
already withdrawn for a few steps.

There were also some Turkish peasants in the
room. They had made friends with Mohammed.
He had placed them behind two cows in a corner,
so that they might have a good view of the
doctor.

"What is he doing to the Effendi?" inquired
one of them of Mohammed.

"He is looking into his body," observed
another.

264

Mohammed himself now craned out his neck in
my direction.

"Effendi! is he looking into your stomach?"

"No; he is listening to the beats of my
heart."

"How clever these Franks are!" said one of the
Turks. "They do not even take the trouble to
look; they are quite satisfied by listening."

"I wish the hakim would put the instrument
on my chest; it would do me good," he continued.

"Perhaps he would if we asked him," added
the other.

"Silence!" said Mohammed. "The doctor is
saying something."

The face of the medical gentleman became a
little grave after he had sounded me. This gave
great satisfaction to the audience.

"See how solemn he looks!" remarked one of
the bystanders; "the Effendi is going to die."

"What is the matter with me?" I inquired.

"Rheumatic fever; and your heart is out of
order," said the doctor. "You must lie quiet for
several days, and I will send you some medicine.
My battalion probably marches to-morrow," he
continued, "and so I fear I cannot come here
again."

265

Pocketing his fee, the medical gentleman
mounted his horse, and rode off with the Zaptieh.

I had eaten nothing for two days, and my
mouth was parched. Mohammed, seeing this,
brought me some pressed fruit—a sort of wild
cranberry, which the natives dry, and then, if any
one has a fever, they soak the fruit in water and
give it him to drink. The pressed berries are
very nasty to look at. They much resemble
tezek. For a moment I thought that Mohammed
was giving me a piece of that fuel by way
of a febrifuge. On tasting the beverage I found
that the flavour was very agreeable. It was acid,
and, in Mohammed's opinion, was a most valuable
remedy for fever.

The day wore on. In the evening the cows inside
my bedroom were joined by three buffaloes.

The air in the room became fouler and more
dense. It was snowing outside, and the proprietor
had covered the hole, which took the place of a
chimney, with a large stone. I lay awake for the
greater part of the night, every now and then
drinking copious draughts of the pressed fruit
dissolved in water. Nature at last succumbed. I
had not slept for several nights. The figures of
the cows and buffaloes became smaller: they
gradually disappeared. The light given out by a

266

piece of cotton steeped in some melted fat, and
placed in an iron tripod, became more flickering:
the sounds of my followers' snoring seemed
to fade away. I shut my eyes and fell asleep.

I was awakened late the following afternoon by
something cold and clammy against my hand. On
looking up, I found it was one of the cows. My
arm was stretched out by her trough. The animal
was licking my fingers with her tongue.

"I was afraid that she would awake you, sir,"
remarked my servant Radford, coming to my
side. "I wished to drive her away, but was afraid
of disturbing you."

267

CHAPTER XXXI.

Mohammed's febrifuge—The doctor's medicine—Zedhane—Daha—Hassan
Bek—Bash—The garrison—We cross the
Araxes—The bridge made by a Circassian—Karakroot—The
Circassian horsemen—The inhabitants—Their eyes
and teeth—Gedjerharman—The plain around Kars—The
streets of the town—The sewerage of the population—The
civil governor—The river—The war with the Persians—Mount
Kara Dagh—The fortifications.

The rest had done me good. Mohammed's febrifuge
seemed to agree. Later on, the doctor's
medicine arrived. I took a dose, and felt myself
much worse in consequence. I determined to
stick to the native remedy.

Day after day passed by. At last I was able to
raise myself a little from the floor. My appetite
gradually returned; and one fine morning I
determined to make an attempt to reach Kars.
My servants lifted me on my horse: once on his
back, I made them strap me to the high pommel
in front of the saddle—a Turkish one.

268

The fresh air did wonders, and, though very
weak, I managed to reach Zedhane, a village
which we had stopped at on our way to Bayazid,
and which lay on the route between Van and
Kars.

We rode to Daha, passing by Kurdali, a small
village, seven miles from Zedhane, and with
some strong positions, from a military point of
view, in the neighbourhood. The track was very
different to what it had been a few weeks previous.
There was little snow, and we were able to reach
Daha in five hours. Our course was almost due
north, and ran through a broad mountain pass to
Hassan Bek, a Kurd hamlet, and from there to
Bash, an Armenian village with a hundred Khans.
Here a battalion was quartered. The men had
fought at Alexinatz, and, according to their lieutenant-colonel,
an officer whose acquaintance I
had made at Erzeroum, they were eager to cross
bayonets again with the Russians.

We left Bash, and after a two hours' march
crossed the Araxes on a rickety wooden bridge.
It had been made by an enterprising Circassian.
There is a ford several miles down the stream,
but the Circassian had thought that, if he were
to make this bridge, a great many passengers
would prefer taking the short cut, and would

269

gladly pay a few piastres for the privilege of
crossing the structure.

We came to the village of Karakroot, in which
the Circassian lived. The sheik, a fine-looking
man, informed us that here there were only
twenty-five houses, but there were 1005 houses
which belonged to people of his nation in the
neighbourhood. In the event of war, the inhabitants
of this district could muster 2000 horsemen.
The houses belonging to these Circassians
were far cleaner than any which I had seen in the
Kurdish or Armenian villages. They were all
built of wood, with wooden floors. A small enclosure,
made of sharp-pointed stakes, surrounded
each of the dwellings. There were quantities of
buffaloes, cows, and sheep in some adjacent fields,
and the granaries were said to be well supplied
with corn and barley.

The inhabitants were smart-looking fellows,
and all of them dressed in their national attire—in
tight-fitting sheepskin coats, with the wool
worn inside, and buckled round their waists by
a narrow leathern strap, studded with buttons;
broad leather trousers, stuffed into high boots
covered their legs, and small Astrachan caps their
heads.

For arms, the men carried long daggers in

270

their waist-belts—many of the hilts being beautifully
worked in silver.

There were several women and girls in the village.
They did not conceal themselves, as is
the custom of the Armenian or Turkish women.
We had the opportunity of looking at their
faces. I was under the impression that the
Circassian girls were very fair. This is not the
case; they more resemble the Spanish belles,
and have a clear olive complexion, through which
you can discern the blue veins. One girl was
very good-looking. She could not have been
more than sixteen, and sat the horse on which
she was mounted with more grace and ease than
any of her male companions.

The chief features in all these women are their
eyes and teeth. The former are very large, and
the latter small, well-shaped and white as pearls.
Tooth powder is unknown in this district. How
they preserve their teeth so perfectly is to a European
an enigma.

You see men of from sixty to seventy years of
age who have never lost a tooth, each one is as
white as the purest ivory. The Circassians have
another advantage, from a European point of
view, over the Kurds. They do not sleep
in their cow hovels. The stables are separated

271

from the apartments reserved for the
family.

We rode by several more Circassian villages,
and after passing Gedjerharman, which is a nine
hours' march from Bash, came to a district inhabited
by Turks and Armenians. The latter
complained of their warlike neighbours the Circassians,
and declared that a Turk had been killed
the previous evening, in a quarrel with one of the
mountaineers. All this part of the track was in
good order. Seven hours after leaving Gedjerharman
we entered the plain around Kars. In
rear of the town, which is built in the form of a
sickle or half-moon, are some high mountains.
A series of detached forts occupying commanding
positions defends the approaches to the citadel.
This last stands in the north-west angle of the
town.

Seven battalions of infantry were drilling in the
plain. They presented a more martial appearance
than any of the troops which I had previously
seen in Asia Minor.

The streets of Kars were in a filthy state.
Every house was crammed with soldiers. The
whole sewerage of the population had been
thrown in front of the buildings. Fortunately the
weather was cold. A very disagreeable smell

272

could be perceived, as our horses stirred up the
refuse beneath their hoofs.

We halted at the house of the civil governor.
He had been kind enough to place a room at my
disposal. The following morning I rode out to
visit the fortifications. The river Kars Tchai runs
through the town, and is crossed by three stone
bridges, each about forty yards wide. The
Persians in a war with the Turks had tried to
turn this river, so as to cut off the water from
the garrison, but failed in the attempt. I first
went to Mount Kara Dagh, which is about 1400
yards from the town, and commands the road
to the Russian fortress at Alexandropol or
Gumri. A small barracks had been erected for
half a battalion of infantry; some earthworks had
been thrown up around the position, which was
defended by twelve Krupp guns. The site for
the powder magazine had not been judiciously
selected; but, as it is possible that the war may
not be over ere this work is published, the reader
will pardon me if I do not mention its exact
situation.

On the plain below, 1600 yards from the Kara
Dagh, and 2000 from the town, was a small redoubt
called the Hafeez Pacha Tabia; here there
were nine guns, the battery facing the south.

273

Fifteen hundred-yards south-west of this point
and 3000 from the town, stood the Kanli Tabia, an
important redoubt, in very good repair, and with
sixteen guns in position. The only other defensive
works in the plain consisted of a small redoubt
called the Sowaree Tabia, in which were
two guns. No connecting lines had been made
to join the different redoubts; the ground
between them was entirely unprotected. On
my mentioning this to an engineer officer who
accompanied me, he remarked that it was winter,
and the ground was hard, when the weather
became milder, the troops would commence digging
trenches and forming breast-works.

On the north-west of the citadel, and in a
commanding position stood the Veli Pacha Tabia
with fourteen guns; and to the right of this
battery, and slightly in advance of it, some earthworks
had been thrown up at the suggestion of
Bloom Pacha, a German officer; here there were
five guns. The river separates these works from
the Kara Kalpak Tabia, a strong position adjoining
the Kara Dagh, and defended by ten guns.

In the citadel known as the Itch Kale, and
which is slightly in rear of Bloom Pacha Tabia,
and on the opposite side of the river, there were
twelve guns. To the left of Veli Pacha Tabia was

274

a battery of thirteen guns, known as the Tchim
Tabia. Closely adjoining this battery, but more
to the west I saw the Tamar Tabia with twenty-three
guns; here there was a barrack for one
battalion. Five hundred yards in rear of the
Tamar Tabia stood the Diktipe Tabia with thirteen
guns; and about the same distance behind Diktipe,
covering the northern slopes, the Tachmach
Tabia with eighteen guns. On the east of Bloom
Pacha Tabia there was a work with four guns,
known as Inglis Tabia; and slightly in advance
of this battery Williams Pacha Tabia with twelve
guns. This made up all the defences on the
north side of Kars. Most of these redoubts had
been very much neglected; however, the town
was better fortified on the northern side than
from the south. Every facility was afforded to me
for viewing the works in question, and I was permitted
to take the angles between the different
positions, besides being shown the exact bearings
of all the powder-magazines.

275

CHAPTER XXXII.

The garrison of Kars—Dr. Lanzoni—A probable outbreak of
typhus—The two Pachas—Whose fault is it?—If God
wills it, there will be no Cholera—If God wills it,
the Russians will not come here—The hospitals full
of men suffering from typhus fever—The International
Commission—The Grand Duke Michael—Gumri—The
Armenians and their nationality—The speech of the Grand
Duke—The Master of the Armenian school—You shall go
to prison—The Emperor Nicholas—Religious liberty
granted to Armenians in Russia—The document—The
Patriarch's death—Suspicious circumstances—Cossacks
firing upon Mohammedans—Three children wounded—Clergymen
of the Church of England—Hankering after
the idolatrous practices of the Greek faith—Wolves in
sheep's clothing—Colonel Lake—A little boy shot by the
Cossacks—Russia the father of the fatherless—The Right
Hon. R. Lowe, M.P.—The Author of
the Bulgarian
horrors
—English officers and soldiers massacred in the
Crimea—The Court of Inquiry—The Duke of Newcastle's
speech—Russian officers butchering the English wounded.

There were at the time of my visit to Kars about
20,000 troops quartered in and about the town;
but large reinforcements could be sent from Erzeroum
should occasion arise for their services. Later

276

in the day Dr. Lanzoni, of the Quarantine, called
upon me; he is an Italian, and in the International
Service. On my alluding to the state of the streets
in Kars, he remarked that he had written twice to
the authorities at Constantinople, but that no notice
had been taken of his letters. "We shall have an
outbreak of typhus or plague in the summer," continued
the doctor. "The mortality will be very great,
if we are besieged before the filth is cleared away."

The civil governor entered the room. He
joined in the conversation.

"It is the fault of the military Pacha," he
observed. "The soldiers have made this mess
in the streets, and the military Pacha thinks that
the civilians in the town ought to clear it up.
I have told him that this work ought to be done
by the troops, but he says that the soldiers are the
Padishah's servants, and that their duty is to
fight, and not to be scavengers."

"What have you done about the matter?" I
inquired.

"We have written to Constantinople," replied
the governor.

"How long does it take for a letter to go there?"

"About three weeks."

"Yes," said the doctor, "three weeks to go,
and three weeks to return, in all six weeks, without

277

considering the delay there will be in answering
the communication. We may have the cholera
here long before that time."

"If God wills it, there will be no cholera," said
the Pacha.

I interrupted him, "You are strengthening your
garrison?"

"Yes."

"You will repair the fortifications?"

"Yes."

"You are supplying the troops with Martini-Peabody rifles
at a great expense to your Government?"

"Yes."

"Well," I continued, "why are you doing this?"

"On account of the Russians," said the Pacha,
"but why do you ask me these questions?"

"Because if God wills it, the Russians will not
come here, and if He has decreed that Kars is to
fall, nothing that you can do will prevent that
event taking place."

"Then you think that armies are useless?" said
the Pacha.

"No, but you would seem to hold that opinion,
for you do not take the trouble to have the streets
cleared, and say, if God wills it so, that there will
be no epidemic."

"Allah is all-powerful. He knows everything

278

that has happened and that will happen," said the
governor devoutly. "We are all dust in His
sight. If we have the cholera in Kars, it will
be the military Pacha's fault."

Shortly afterwards my visitor left the room.

"I am very glad you spoke to him as you did,"
said the doctor. "Our hospitals are full of men
suffering from typhoid fever; more than 10 per
cent. of the poor fellows do not recover. This is a
case in which the European powers ought to interfere,"
continued the speaker. "I am a quarantine
officer, and am paid by the International
Commission. It is my duty to prevent the cholera
or any other infectious disease being brought from
the East, but these Turks are doing their best to
breed a plague in the heart of their principal
fortification. Kars is only thirty miles from
Gumri," he added, "if this place were to fall, the
whole of Asia Minor would follow."

"Do the Armenians in this town like the
Russians?" I now inquired.

"Not at all," said the doctor. "Only seven
months ago the Grand Duke Michael visited Gumri,
the Russian frontier fortress. When he was
there he inspected the Armenian schools, and
made a speech to the girls in one of these
institutions. After a few remarks about the

279

progress they were making, the Grand Duke concluded
his discourse by addressing their mothers
in these words, '
Rappelez-vous bien que le lait
avec lequel vous nourrissez vos enfants doit être
le lait Russe.
' The Armenians are immensely vain
of their nationality. This speech of the Grand Duke
incensed them very much against him. The Russian
prince made himself still more unpopular a few days
later," continued the doctor. "In the course of a
visit to the master of one of the Armenian schools,
he observed some pictures in the schoolroom.
'What pictures are these?' he inquired. 'They are
likenesses of some of the former kings of Armenia,'
replied the schoolmaster. 'You have no right
to have any portraits here save those of the Tzar
and of the members of the Imperial family,' said
the Grand Duke, 'you shall go to prison.'"

An Armenian gentleman entered the room;
he corroborated everything that the doctor had
said, and presently remarked that many years ago
the Emperor Nicholas had given the Patriarch
Mateos a document in which the Tzar granted full
religious liberty to all Armenians in Russia. "Our
Patriarch kept this deed always on his person,"
continued the speaker. One day he died very
suddenly, and under rather suspicious circumstances.
His successor searched everywhere for

280

the document, but could not find it. At length he
discovered a copy: he then wrote to the authorities
in Tiflis, and asked for a fresh paper. His request
was refused, and at the same time he was informed
that no such religious liberty had ever been granted
to the Armenians."

"Is it true that the Russian authorities do not
permit the Mohammedans to leave the Tzar's
dominion?" I now inquired.

"Yes," said the doctor; "a very few months
ago a case came under my own observation. Some
Mohammedans wished to leave Russia and escape to
Turkey; as they were passing the border-line, a band
of Cossacks fired upon them. They continued their
flight, but three children had been wounded and
were afterwards treated in the hospital at Kars."

As I copy the above lines from my note-book, I
cannot help thinking of some few Clergymen of the
Church of England who, secretly hankering after
the superstitions attached to the Greek faith, put
themselves forward as champions of Holy Russia.
But we need not be surprised. Those people who
are so deadened to a sense of right and wrong
as to imagine that they are doing God service by
instilling into the ears of our wives and children
sentences from the foul pamphlet entitled "The
Priest in Absolution," can readily bring themselves

281

to believe that killing pregnant women,
[19]
and
flogging Christian women and children,
[20]
to make
them change their religion, is justifiable on the part
of the Russian Government. Priests like these
would gladly re-establish the Inquisition in our
midst. They could defend the massacres of St. Bartholomew,
if the victims had been Mohammedans;
and on the seventh day of the week they stand up
in their pulpits and preach the doctrine of peace by
advocating the extermination of the Turks.

The above-mentioned way of treating Mohammedan
little children is no novelty on the part of
the Tzar's soldiery. Colonel Lake, in his work,
the "Defence of Kars," remarks that, "brought
up as savages from their infancy, some of these
Cossacks will not scruple to commit the most
barbarous actions. As an instance of this, on one
occasion, during the earlier period of the blockade,
a party of them made a dash at a small village by
the river side called Karaba Kilissa, and though
the inhabitants offered not the slightest opposition
to them, they beat a little boy, twelve years of
age, very cruelly with their whips, and finally
shot him—the ball passing through his thigh and
breaking the bone. It was heart-rending to see
the poor old mother weeping over her dying child.

282

He was packed up in an
araba
, or country cart,
and sent down to the hospital, where he was
attended by Dr. Sandwith. Every possible care
was taken of the little sufferer, but he died under
the amputation of the shattered limb.

We were told a few months ago by the Right Hon.
Robert Lowe, M.P., that Russia was the father of
the fatherless; judging from the way she has treated
these Mohammedan children, it would not put her
to much expense to provide for a numerous family.

It was a goodly spectacle this Holy Russia
putting herself forward last autumn as the
Champion of the Bulgarians, after she had done
her best to foment
[21]
the disturbances which led to
the massacres in their country. It may be refreshing
to some of the believers in Muscovite
philanthropy if I recall to their recollection what
took place very recently in Central Asia.

"Kill the Turkomans, kill them all!" was
General Kauffmann's order during the Khivan
campaign.

"I suppose you mean in the Circassian style,"
was the dry remark of an old colonel, well
acquainted with the Russian manner of making
war upon the Circassians.

283

"Yes; kill them all! Spare neither age nor
sex! Let none escape!"

Circassian
[22]
pregnant women cut to pieces!—does
this go for nothing in the eyes of those
gentlemen who called out for vengeance on the
Circassians in Bulgaria? Circassian children butchered
by Russian soldiery!—is this nothing to
two clergymen of the Church of England, who denounced
in the strongest language an imaginary
atrocity of the Turks?

Are these things nothing to the Right Hon.
W. Gladstone, M.P., who, writing last autumn
about a friendly power, remarked, "What seems
now to be certain in this sense (besides the
miserable daily misgovernment, which, however,
dwindles by the side of the Bulgarian horrors)
are the wholesale massacres—

"Murder most foul, as in the best it is;

But this most foul, strange, and unnatural!"
[23]

the elaborate and refined cruelty—the only refinement
of which Turkey boasts!—the utter disregard
of sex and age—the abominable and bestial
lust—and the entire and violent lawlessness
which still stalks over the land."

Two wrongs do not make one right. This is

284

an old saying and a true one. The atrocities
committed by the Russians in the Caucasus are
no excuse for those perpetrated by the Circassians
in Bulgaria; but the Circassians are Mohammedans,
the Muscovites profess the doctrines of
Christ. Why was the author of the Bulgarian
horrors silent when his own officials reported the
crimes of the Russian soldiery? We have been
told that Russia is the torch-bearer of civilization,
and our military attaché at St. Petersburg,
Captain and Lt.-Col. Wellesley, has stated that
he believes the Muscovite soldiers are incapable
of the atrocities laid to their charge. Mr. Gladstone
has quoted this officer as an authority.

It may be that our military attaché is ignorant
of what took place during the Crimean war. He
was a child in petticoats at the time. But Mr.
Gladstone cannot assign extreme youth in his
own case as an excuse for bad memory. He was
a member of the Cabinet, and, as such, had access
to all official despatches. Let me ask him if he
can remember the circumstances under which
many of our officers and soldiers met their death
at the battle of Inkerman, and when they were
lying helpless on the field? Does he know how
Captain the Hon. Henry Neville, of the 3rd battalion
of Grenadier Guards, was butchered? and

285

how Captain Sir Robert Newman, Bart., shared
the same fate? Does he know how poor Disbrowe
of the Coldstreams was tortured?
Possibly

all these things have escaped from his
memory, but the Cabinet to which he belonged
did not forget them at the time.

A Court of Inquiry
[24]
was held in the Crimea.
It investigated the accusations made against the
Russian troops. The proceedings of this Court
of Inquiry, accompanied by a despatch, were forwarded
by Lord Raglan to the authorities at
home. In these papers will be found the names
of many British officers and privates who were
proved to have been brutally massacred—by the
Russian soldiers—when imploring mercy, and
helpless owing to their wounds. Such horror
was created in the minds of some of the Cabinet,
that one of its members, the War Minister, the
late Duke of Newcastle, alluded to the matter on
the 12th of December, 1854, in the House of
Lords, as follows. I give his own words:—

"The enemy which our men met were not content
with the legitimate use of their weapons, but
had the BARBARITY, THE ATROCIOUS
VILLAINY, I will call it, TO MURDER IN

286

COLD BLOOD THE WOUNDED SOLDIERS
AS THEY LAY HELPLESS ON THE FIELD;
AND not the ignorant serfs alone did that,
but MEN HOLDING THE POSITION OF
OFFICERS. Our men have had to fight the
savage and uncivilized Kaffirs, but in no instance
have THEY EXPERIENCED SUCH BARBARISM
AS WITH THE RUSSIAN SOLDIERS!!!!"

A number of families in Great Britain were in
mourning after Inkerman. Many old fathers and
mothers thought that their sons had been killed
in fair fight. They have been deceived. The
proceedings of the Court of Inquiry were in the
War Office this summer. I challenge the author
of the Bulgarian horrors to ask the Government
to lay these papers, with Lord Raglan's and
Marshal Canrobert's despatches relating to them,
on the table of the House of Commons. It is to
be hoped that he will do so. The British public
would then be able to judge for itself what sort
of men the Russians are, and how thoroughly
Russia merits the terms—The Torch-bearer of
Civilization and the Protector of the Unprotected—which
have been applied to her by the Right Hon.
W. E. Gladstone and the Right Hon. Robert Lowe.

287

CHAPTER XXXIII.

The march to Ardahan—Molla Hassan—A Turkish major—The
garrison of Ardahan—The position of the town—The fortifications—Procrastination
in military matters—The military
governor—A colonel of artillery—The Russians might
take Van—The Ala Dagh mountains—Freemasonry—The
ancient Assyrians—To Livana by road—By the river to Batoum—Selling
the horses—What they fetch—A bad bargain.

I started early the following morning
en route

for Ardahan, a Turkish fortress about forty-two
miles from Kars. The road was good for the
first three hours, but then became very bad.
We rode over some mountains covered with
deep snow, and halted for the night in a small
village called Molla Hassan, inhabited by Kurds.
A Turkish major had recently inhabited the room
assigned to us. He had intended remaining there
for some time; but the insects proving too much
for him, he had taken up his abode in a Turkish
village near Kars.

"These Turks have thin skins," said an old
Kurd, my host, as he told me the story; "only

288

think of their being frightened by a few fleas.
You Ingliz are much braver people."

"My Effendi is very particular about these
matters," remarked Mohammed; "if he is bitten,
there will be no baksheesh."

The Kurd's face lengthened.

"I have a cart," he presently observed; "it
is clean, it has been standing in the cold. The
fleas are frozen. I will drag the cart into the
road and the Frank can sleep in it."

This was done, and I managed to secure a few
hours' rest, a very rare occurrence in a Kurdish
village. The track was very bad between Mollah
Hassan and Ardahan; after marching for six hours
and a half, we reached the latter place, which was
at that time garrisoned by 12,000 soldiers.

Ardahan is surrounded on the north, south,
and east by mountains—towards the west there
are some heights about five miles distant from the
town. The site is a bad one for defensive purposes.
The roads which lead from the Russian frontier
stations, Akellaki and Akiska, present a series
of commanding positions which dominate the
Turkish lines. A little river winds through a
valley on the west front of Ardahan, and finally
traverses the town. The stream is crossed by
two wooden bridges without parapets.

289

An attempt was being made to fortify Ardahan on
its western side by throwing up some earthworks
only eight hundred yards distant from the houses.
No guns had been placed in these batteries.

There were thirteen pieces in a fort on a hill
called Manusa, about 3000 yards to the north of
Ardahan, and in another position south of the
town on the Kars road. Here there were four
small earthworks, called Ahali, Sangher, Gaze, and
Kaptamele, mounting in all twenty-four guns.
Three hundred yards to the east there was one
more earthwork, called Kaiabashe, containing
eighteen guns. Fort Manusa, the strongest
point in the defences of the town, is commanded
by a height called Ramazan. The Turks had
not thought of occupying this last position;
although should an enemy once succeed in
placing some guns on the Ramazan height, Ardahan
must eventually be taken.

On my pointing this out to an engineer officer
who accompanied me, he acknowledged the truth
of the remark, at the same time observing that,
Inshallah, when the winter was over, he would
fortify the height in question.

Procrastination in military matters is the great
defect on the part of the Turkish authorities.
But it ill becomes an Englishman to blame them.

290

Perhaps no country is more negligent about these
subjects than our own.

"The Russians will not come, Inshallah," remarks
the Mohammedan, and he sits down and
lights his pipe.

"It is extremely unlikely that Germany will
invade Great Britain, or that India will ever be
attacked," says one Englishman. "It is highly improbable
that Russia will take Constantinople or the
highlands in Armenia," remarks another, "when
that moment arrives it will be time enough to go to
war. We can then talk about a conscription for
our army. We have more money than any other
nation, and should be stronger at the end of a campaign
than at the beginning." People who make
use of these arguments, forget that France was a
very rich country; but that with all her money and
her hastily levied troops she was unable to withstand
the disciplined armies of Moltke.

The military governor was despondent as to
his power of defending Ardahan. If he could
have had his own way, he would have selected
another position nearer the Russian frontier.
It was now too late to do this, and the more
particularly as the Pacha believed that hostilities
would break out immediately. He had no
cavalry at his disposal to bring him information

291

about what was going on near the border.
However, 2000 Circassian horsemen were shortly
expected, and wooden sheds were being built for
them close to the Kaiabashe earthworks. A
colonel of artillery called upon me: he had
been educated at Woolwich. He had not been in
England for more than twenty years, but he spoke
English remarkably well. On my observing that
I had heard that the Russians had lately withdrawn
their troops from Erivan, he remarked
that the Muscovite general had probably done
so through fear lest the Turks should advance
upon Tiflis from Batoum.

"What would be the result if the Russians
were to take Batoum?" I inquired.

"They might remain there. It would be very
difficult for them to advance inland," was the
reply. "There are no roads. The Russians
might take Van," he continued; "but even if
they were to do so, they would find it very difficult
to advance upon Erzeroum
viâ
Mousch. It
would be almost impossible for them to transport
their artillery over the Ala Dagh mountains."

"Would the Kurds help the Russians?"

"The Kurds would probably join the strongest
side. I have been a great deal in the mountains,
and know the Kurds well. There are freemasons

292

amongst them," added the Colonel. "Their freemasonry
dates back from the time of the ancient
Assyrians."

I now learnt that it would be better for me to
sell my horses in Ardahan, than to take them to
Batoum. The shortest route to the last-named
town was to go to Livana by road, and then down
the Tschoroch river, to the seaport in question.
We could hire five horses so far as Livana; if
we were to take our own animals there, we should
not be able to dispose of them. Calling Mohammed,
I desired him to go to the market and inform
any people who might wish to buy horses, that
there were four for sale.

"Five, Effendi," said Mohammed; "I shall sell
mine too. When we reach Batoum the Effendi will
go to Stamboul; but I must join my battalion.
That is, unless the Effendi will take me with him."

"Impossible, Mohammed," I replied. "I shall
only remain for twenty-four hours in Constantinople,
and from there go to my own country. You
would be taken up as a deserter after I had gone,
and perhaps shot. What would your wife say?"

"I could get a fresh wife at Stamboul."

"Go and sell the horses!"

A tear fell down Mohammed's cheek. He
sighed deeply and left the room.

Presently Radford came to me,—

293

"Bless my heart, sir, if that 'ere Mohammed
ain't a crying; he keeps on saying Stamboul, and
wants to go there. He says,
'et à la Franga
, meat
cooked in the European style, is nice; and that
he loves my cookery!' the fact is, sir, he don't
want to go to his regiment."

A sound in the courtyard attracted my attention,
I went to the window. Mohammed was outside
with the five horses; several Turks and Circassians
were looking at them. The animals had very little
flesh on their bones; but they were in much better
condition for work than on the day we left
Constantinople. Mohammed's horse was in a
wretched state, he was nearly blind, from the
effects of the snow. In addition to this he walked
lame.

"He is a brute," observed an old Turk; "take
him away, Mohammed; kill him for his skin,
make leather of it."

"His grandfather was a magnificent animal,"
replied Mohammed indignantly. "His sire was
the admiration of the people in Tohat. He himself
is thin, he will soon get fat again. Any
how," continued my servant, "my lord's horses
are for sale; unless you first buy mine you shall
not purchase his animals."

Some conversation ensued, a farmer at last
offered 10 liras for the five horses.

294

"The Effendi gave 16 liras for the grey at
Stamboul," remarked my servant.

"Ardahan is not Stamboul," replied the Circassian;
"the horses have carried the Effendi a very
long distance."

"This proves that they are good animals," said
Mohammed.

"It shows that they were good horses," observed
the Circassian drily.

No one would bid any higher, and as I was in a
hurry to start, I agreed to accept 7½ liras for my
own four horses, letting Mohammed have 2½ for
his own Rosinante-like steed. Seven liras and a
half, or 6
l.
15
s.
is not a great price for four serviceable
animals. I could have obtained the same
amount for four dead horses in London. However,
my stud had carried us for more than two
thousand miles, over a country without roads, and
for the greater part of the distance through snow.
I could not complain that the animals had been
dearly purchased. It cost me a pang to part with
the little grey. He was a sterling good horse, and
in England would have been worth from 60
l.
to
70
l.
The sale was concluded. In a few minutes I
was receiving from the Circassian a pile of Turkish
bank-notes, which he extracted one by one from
some hiding-place next his skin.

295

CHAPTER XXXIV.

Ardanusch—The Ardahan river—Shadavan scenery—Crossing
the mountains—The roof of the world—The Tschorock
river—Mohammed is afraid—Kismet—If a Christian is
ill—Going to Paradise—Does a Christian send for a
doctor?—A vast amphitheatre—Kale or the old fortress of
Ardanusch—Akiska—War—The Mostaphas are to be called
out—The road to Livana—The cayek.

We rode by several Turkish and Kurd villages
in the direction of Ardanusch. The track
was firm and tolerably level. After a four
hours' march we crossed the Ardahan river on a
wooden bridge about seventy yards long by sixteen
feet wide. The structure was very much out of
repair; the planks were loose in many places,
here and there large holes in the timber let us see
the river below. We halted at Shadavan, a
Turkish village containing about thirty houses,
and close to the water's edge. I had intended to
have made a longer march, but the hired steeds
were wretched brutes. They had shown unmistakable
signs of fatigue. The proprietor of the house

296

in which we stopped owned large flocks of sheep,
the country round Ardahan being chiefly grazing
land. He informed me that for every thousand
sheep he possessed, the tax collector took from
him the sum of thirty liras annually. There was
no tax for sheep under a year old, nor for cows
and oxen.

Two hours after leaving Shadavan, the path
crossed a high mountain. It was covered with
its winter garb; this fortunately was frozen hard
and afforded a firm foothold. The scenery around
us became each moment more wild; fir-trees,
shaded in their cold white robes, embroider the
sides of the steep; huge rocks, their northern
faces covered with snow, but black as ebony
towards the south, frown down on the glistening
carpet. The track wound higher and higher.
A thick oppressive mist enveloped us like a
shroud. We were above the clouds. The air
became each moment more rarefied. We breathed
with difficulty, owing to our elevation. It seemed
at last as if we had reached the roof of the earth.
A plateau lay before us.

Onward we march. Our horses struggle through
the drifts. Every minute we have to stop to let
them take breath. At last the road begins to
descend; now abruptly for a few hundred yards,

297

we slide down some glaciers; then it dips over a
succession of crests, each one lower than its predecessor.
We reach the regions of vegetation,
and, continuing for some time our descent, find
that winter has been left behind us.

There were many villages in this district, fruit-trees
abounded throughout the neighbourhood.
No more snow could be seen. The weather was
oppressively warm. The Tschoroch river dashed
along at our feet on its way to Batoum.
Mohammed, pointing at the rapid stream, said
something to my English servant.

"What is he saying?" I inquired.

"He don't like the idea of going in a boat, sir,"
replied Radford. "He is afraid that he will be
drowned."

"Do you know how to swim, Mohammed?" I
inquired.

"No, Effendi. Cannot we continue our journey
by road to Batoum?" he added. "The road is
safe, but the water is dangerous."

"Mohammed, it may be written in your kismet
that you are to be drowned."

"Perhaps, Effendi. But—"

"But what?"

"If I am to die, I would sooner end my days in
a bed."

298

"You ought to be very glad to have the chance of
dying," I now remarked. "Only think of the many
wives who are awaiting you in the next world."

Mohammed here shrugged his shoulders.

"Effendi, you are a Christian."

"Yes."

"Do Christians believe in a future state of
happiness?"

"Yes."

"Do they think that their heaven will be more
delightful than this earth?"

"Yes."

"If a Christian is ill, does he send for a
hakim (physician)?"

"Yes."

Then added Mohammed triumphantly, "Why
does he do so; he ought to be delighted at the
chance of speedily going to Paradise, and yet
Effendi, according to you, the Christian does his
best to postpone the pleasure."

The track now became very bad, it led several
times across the river which was spanned by
rickety wooden bridges. The may-trees were in
full blossom. The voices of a thousand songsters
chirruping amidst the branches echoed over the
waters.

We enter what appears to be a vast amphitheatre.

299

The Coliseum at Rome on a gigantic
scale lies before us. Its walls are represented
by a circular range of hills, the boxes looking
down upon the arena by numerous châlets, they
jut forth from the slopes. An enormous rock faces
us. It stands out on one side of the amphitheatre,
and might have been an emperor's throne. The
boxes grow larger as we ride across the arena.
The resemblance fades away. A speck appears
on the crest of a neighbouring height; bigger and
bigger it becomes.

"Kale, or the old fortress of Ardanusch," says
our guide, pointing to it. Soon afterwards we
put up for the night in a house belonging to the
Caimacan of the district. This official informed
me that it was only an eighteen hours' march to
Akiska, the Russian frontier station. The road
to the border was a good one; artillery could
be brought along it. There were no troops in
Ardanusch, and the governor was much alarmed
lest the Russians should commence the war by an
attack upon his town. Whilst we were conversing,
a servant brought him a letter which had been
sent on by special messengers from Ardahan.

The Caimacan opened the envelope. "War!" he
cried. "An order has come for me to call out all the
Mostaphas (the last reserve) in this district. The

300

Government would have never put itself to this
expense unless our Padishah had felt sure that
war was inevitable."

Leaving me, the governor went out to give
the necessary orders for the execution of the
Sultan's mandate.

We continued onward to Livana; the track was
sometimes so narrow that we had to ride or lead
our horses in Indian file. Now we come to a place
where ten men could defend the road against an
army, and then to a spot where the path has given
way altogether, and fallen into the stream below.
Our guide reins his horse backward. It is impossible
to turn. We essay another route, and presently
again strike the river. A large cayek was anchored
by the bank. A man coming up to me proposed
that we should go in his boat to Batoum.

"How much money do you want for taking us
there?" I inquired.

"Ten liras, Effendi."

"Go away, sheep's son!" ejaculated Mohammed
indignantly; "we will ride to Livana, which is only
four hours' march from here; and then, if it
pleases the Effendi to entrust himself to a boatman,
I will get a ship for two liras—rascal that
you are to ask ten liras for the hire of your little
cayek!"

301

CHAPTER XXXV.

The precipice—Better to die to-morrow than to-day—Livana—The
Caimacan—The Padishah of the United States—The
Clerk—A man with a node on his forehead—A Christian
with a hump-back—The cayek—The owner of the boat—The
Georgians—Mohammed's alarm—The current—Miradet—The
Mudir—A deserter.

The road took a very circuitous course as we
approached Livana. We were several hundred
feet above the Tschoroch river, and could gaze
down almost perpendicularly into the abyss below.
Suddenly the sound of a shout reached our ears.
We glanced in the direction of the noise.

"It is the cayek," said Mohammed eagerly.
"The men are taking it to Livana. They will next
propose that we should hire it from there to Batoum.
Holy Prophet!" he continued, "how the waters
roar, how near the boat goes to the rocks! My
body groans, Effendi, at the idea of going to
Batoum by water."

"You will very likely soon have to fight the

302

Russians," I replied; "what difference can it
make if you are drowned to-morrow in the
Tschoroch, or are shot a few weeks later?"

"To-morrow is close at hand, Effendi. It would
be better to die a few weeks later; besides that, when
the Russians are shooting at me, I shall be shooting
at them. I shall be frightened, but they will
be frightened too. It is very different to travel
on the river. I cannot drown the river, the
river can drown me,"—and Mohammed shuddered
as the cayek darting round a neighbouring crag,
suddenly disappeared from our view.

We crossed a stone bridge, which spans the
Tschoroch, and began to climb the steep hill on
which Livana is built.

I stayed at the house of the Caimacan, a Georgian
by birth. He was popular with the Armenians.
Several of the Christian merchants who came to
visit me spoke very highly in his praise. Formerly
there had been many robberies in the neighbourhood,
but Alinihat Bey, the Caimacan, had arrested
all the robbers, every man's life and property
were now secure. I now heard, amongst other
rumours, one which I had previously heard in
Persia, to the effect that the Padishah of the
United States had informed the Queen of England
that if she were to join Turkey against

303

Russia, that he, the Padishah of the United States,
would ally himself with the Tzar. According to
the Caimacan, this had restrained England up to
the present time from allying herself with the
Sultan. You will see the Pacha at Batoum,"
observed the speaker.

"Yes?"

"Will you do me a favour?"

"Certainly."

"Effendi, I have a Kateb (clerk), a good man—that
fellow on the carpet. Look how beautifully
he writes! He is nice-looking, too, and we
all like him. But the Pacha, he has a Kateb.
The fellow is hideous, besides that, he has a
node in the middle of his forehead. The governor
wishes to change Katebs with me. He says that
he does not like a man with a node on his forehead;
I do not like this either; and to sit all
day long with a man who is so disfigured would
make me very ill."

"It would make us all ill," observed the Armenians,
eager to please the Caimacan.

"Yes," continued the latter; "Effendi, you
would oblige us very much if you will tell the
Pacha that I like my Kateb, and do not wish to
part with him. A man with a node is a disgusting
sight," he added.

304

"Very disgusting," said the Armenians—the
man who spoke loudest being a Christian with a
hump-back.

In the meantime Mohammed had made an
arrangement with the owner of a large cayek
to take us the following morning to Batoum,
which would be about a nine hours' journey by
water from Livana. We rode down to the bank
of the river. Here, close by the bridge, was a
large boat. It was half full of firewood, which
was going to Batoum. Two oarsmen sat in the
stern of the cayek, and two more in the bows.
There were no rowers in the middle of the boat;
this part was filled with wood, some other passengers,
my party and self. Our fellow-travellers
and the boatmen were Georgians. A very stout
old gentleman who sat behind me was arrayed in
a bright blue jacket and a large white turban; in
addition to this he carried a gigantic scarlet umbrella.
A few drops of rain began to fall; the
umbrella was opened. Its happy possessor
looked proudly round; he was an object of
admiration and envy to the rest of his countrymen.

The boatmen, who were clad in brown serge
jackets and trowsers, had their breasts covered
with cartridge-cases, in the Circassian style. Each

305

man carried a long silver-mounted dagger in his
waist-belt, and a black
cufia
, a sort of head attire,
was worn by them instead of a turban. The river,
which was very high, ran through the arch of the
bridge at a great pace. Mohammed's face became
an ashen hue as the captain of the cayek, loosening
the cord which bound his bark to the shore,
pushed off into the boiling torrent. For the first
second or two the oarsmen could not get any
command over their boat. It turned round and
round, missing, as it were, by a miracle the many
rocks in the channel.

The rowers all this time were raising wild
cries to Allah. Mohammed, who had crouched
down in the bottom of the bark, was grasping
Radford's hand in a paroxysm of terror. In
another moment the crew succeeded in gaining
the mastery over their craft. They steered her
into the middle of the river. The current was
running like a mill-stream. We flew rather than
floated along the waters.

Numerous rocks interrupt the channel; some
of them are forty and fifty feet above the surface;
others can only be detected by the foam and surf
which bubble over their dangerous peaks. The
mountains on either side of us are of igneous
stone; they are covered with green bushes. A

306

white line winds amongst the heights; it marks
the track to Batoum, an eighteen hours' march by
land, but only nine by water. We pass the
ruins of an old castle. We dart round a promontory.
The scene changes. Vineyards deck
the river's banks. Oxen can be seen ploughing
the slopes above us. Many women, in bright red
garments, and with white head-dresses, follow the
plough. They knock to pieces the clods of earth
with iron hoes. Waterfalls pour down the heights.
The river grows wider; it becomes more rapid
every moment. The wind is rising. The chief
boatman remarks that we cannot arrive at Batoum
that evening.

To reach the town it was necessary to enter the
Black Sea; but to effect this in stormy weather, and
in an undecked boat, would be impossible. We
anchored for the night at the village of Miradet,
four hours from Livana by the river, but twelve
by land. I obtained accommodation in the house
of the Mudir of the district. There were some
cells in this building; in one of them was a
prisoner—a deserter, who had run away from the
army. There was a hearth in his dungeon, and
Radford was permitted to cook there, the deserter
taking great interest in the culinary operations.

307

CHAPTER XXXVI.

Price of corn—Indian corn—Barley—Hardly any horses in the
neighbourhood—Bashi Bazouks—The Persians—Bagdad—A
passenger had been drowned—Mohammed is sea-sick—The
harbour of Batoum—The quarantine station—The garrison—The
Cossack outposts—Shooting Turkish soldiers—The
encampment—The sanitary arrangements are good—The
new rifle—The market—Money-changers—A Turkish
steamer—The agent—If the Lord wills it—Farewell to Mohammed—His
tears—Human nature—Reform impossible in
Turkey so long as Russia keeps on intriguing—My fellow-passengers—The
Pacha—Trebizond—Arrival in London.

I now learnt that corn is dear in this district, costing
two piastres and a half the oke. It is chiefly
brought here from the neighbourhood of Ardahan,
the difficulty of transport adding enormously to
the price. Indian corn is grown in the vicinity of
Livana, but it is not easy to procure barley. This
last, however, is not so much required, as there
are hardly any horses in the neighbourhood.

Just above Miradet lie the ruins of an old
bridge. At this time of the year, the only way to
cross the river is in the cayeks of the peasants.
I was informed that in the summer months

308

a horseman could ford the Tschoroch in some
places near the village. According to the Mudir,
there are iron-mines in the neighbourhood, but
the inhabitants did not work them.

There was a battalion of infantry, Bashi
Bazouks, in his village. The men, Georgians,
were magnificent fellows, much taller than the
Turkish soldiers, and with that light and elastic
step which distinguishes mountaineers. A report
had just reached Miradet that the Persians were
attacking Bagdad with thirty thousand men;
In the opinion of the Mudir, this was the precursor
of an immediate outbreak of hostilities
between the Sultan's forces on the one hand and
Russia and Persia on the other.

We entered our cayek early the following morning.
Mohammed was more alarmed if possible,
than on the previous afternoon. A passenger
had been drowned two weeks before, when going
to Batoum. Mohammed had learnt this; he now
bandaged his eyes with a pocket-handkerchief.

"What are you doing that for?" I inquired.

"So as not to see the waters," replied Mohammed;
"they roar, my stomach aches."

"Tchok eyi (very nice), is it not?" suddenly
remarked Radford, nudging his fellow-servant
violently in the ribs. We were in the midst

309

of some rapids. Two or three violent bumps
announced our close proximity to the rocks.
"He will not laugh at me any more, sir, for not
liking to look down precipices. Have a hegg,
Mohammed;" taking one from his own pocket,
Radford handed it to the sufferer.

We had arrived at the open sea. Mohammed removed
his handkerchief from his eyes, the motion
of the cayek was different to that which he had
experienced on the river. He gazed upon the egg
for an instant, and then thrust it away indignantly;
the sea and his fears were too much for him; he
leaned against the side of the boat. Radford was
thoroughly revenged.

The harbour of Batoum is one of the finest in
the Black Sea. Numerous batteries mounted with
heavy guns defend it on the sea side. Three
large ironclads were anchored within thirty yards
of the shore, the water being very deep.

I landed at the quarantine station, and now
learnt that every house in the town, or rather
village, was crowded with troops. The doctor of
the quarantine offered me a room in the station;
I gladly availed myself of his kindness.

There were only 8000 men in Batoum itself;
the remainder of the garrison, consisting of
12,000 infantry, with some artillery, were stationed

310

at Tschoroch Su, a strong position about
six hours from the town, and defending the road
from Poti. Mohammed's Tokat battalion was
quartered here. It was probably the point against
which the Russians would make their first attack,
he was aware of that fact.

"Would you like to accompany me to Constantinople?"
I asked.

"No, Effendi, not for all the money in the
world will I go there. One hour on the sea is
very awful; five days would kill me. My brother,"
pointing to Radford, "is brave on the water; I
am brave on the land; we are both brave;"
seizing his fellow-servant's hand, Mohammed
shook it heartily.

A major on the staff called. According to
him, the Cossack outposts were in the habit of
firing upon the Turkish troops. It appeared that
on the 26th of March, 1877, a few Turkish
soldiers were walking in the Sultan's territory,
but on the edge of the frontier-line. Some Russian
soldiers fired and shot three of them; then,
fording a river, which divides the two countries,
the Cossacks carried the dead bodies and arms
to the Russian side of the border. They afterwards
complained to their officer that the Turks had
crossed over on Russian soil.

311

"War has not been declared," I remarked.

"No," said the major; "the Russians are
doing their best to make us attack them; but we
shall not do so. They shall have the whole odium
of the war, and Allah will judge between us!"

I accompanied the officer to an encampment close
to the coast. The tents had been pitched between
the mouth of the Tschoroch river and the town.
Three thousand infantry soldiers were quartered
in this place. The sanitary arrangements of the
camp left very little to be desired. Everything
was clean and orderly. An air of smartness
prevailed amongst the soldiers, which was refreshing
to witness after what I had seen in other parts
of the empire. The men's tents were banked up
with stones to a height of three feet from the
ground. Well-dug trenches carried off the rainfall.
Many of the officers lived in huts which
were surrounded by little gardens. All these
battalions were armed with the Martini-Peabody
rifle. I asked some of the men how they
liked their new weapon, being curious to know
if they objected to the recoil. There was no
fault found with the gun on this score. The troops
were highly pleased with the arm. They wished
for nothing better than to have the opportunity of
trying it upon their quarrelsome neighbours.

312

We next visited the market in the town, or
rather village, for Batoum with its few hundred
straggling houses does not deserve the former title.
There was hardly anything exposed for sale. A
solitary sheep was hung up in one shop. Some
stale fish were lying on the counter of another.
There were several money-changers in the streets;
business, however, was slack, and these gentlemen
lived by lending money on exorbitant terms
to the Turks—the usurers being many of them
Armenian Christians.

A Turkish steamer was to leave Batoum that
night for Constantinople. I made inquiries as
to when she would be likely to arrive at her
destination.

"In five days," said the agent at the booking-office—a
most saturnine-looking old Turk, "that
is if the Lord wills it; but the Lord may will that
the vessel shall lay to in Trebizond, and return
here with troops without going to Stamboul."

Under these circumstances I determined to go
in the Turkish boat as far as Trebizond, and continue
my journey in some other steamer to Constantinople.
Mohammed accompanied me on board
the vessel. The moment for parting at last arrived.
The poor fellow was much affected. Some big
tears began to roll down his cheeks.

313

"Will you go with me to Constantinople?" I
inquired.

"To the end of the world, Effendi!"

"But think how ill you will be."

"Never mind, Effendi, only let me come. It is
true that my stomach sank within me yesterday,
but my heart is very full to-day; for am I not
losing my lord as well as my brother?"—seizing
Radford's hand, Mohammed wrung it heartily.

The vessel had got up steam; the deck was being
cleared. Mohammed rubbed his eyes with the back
of his hand and clambered down the side of the
ship into a little boat. Several of his countrymen
tried to comfort him. He was not to be consoled.
As we steamed out of the harbour, I could still see
the poor fellow straining his eyes in our direction.

"That Mohammed was not such a bad chap after
all, sir," presently remarked Radford. "Them
Turks have stomachs, and like filling them they do;
but they have something in their hearts as well."

There was a great deal of truth in the observation.
Those people in England who have declared
that it is impossible to reform the Turks would do
well to learn the Turkish language, and travel in the
Sultan's dominions. Human nature is everywhere
much the same. There is more good in the world
than bad, or otherwise, as a French philosopher

314

once said, the bad would have destroyed the good,
and the human race would no longer exist. Give
the Turks a good government, and Turkey would
soon take her place amidst civilized nations.

This, however, would not be pleasing to the
Sultan's powerful neighbour. Reform is impossible
in Turkey so long as Russian agents
[25]
foment
rebellion amidst the Sultan's subjects.

One of my fellow-passengers was a Turkish
doctor. He had the rank of Pacha and was under
the Army Medical Department. He had left Constantinople
with orders to visit Kars, and report
to his Government about the sanitary state of this
town. On arriving at Batoum, he found that the
tracks were still covered with snow. The doctor,
who was suffering from heart disease, had determined
to return to Trebizond.

"In what state is the road between Erzeroum
and Kars?" he now asked.

"Probably it is covered with snow."

"Dear me," said the Pacha, "I shall wait a
little at Trebizond for a change of weather."

"You had better go to Kars as soon as possible,"
I remarked, "or there will be an outbreak of
fever there."

"If I travel quickly," observed the official, "I

315

shall die of heart disease. A little sooner or later
will not make much difference to the people in
Kars. I shall be able to leave the service in a
year and a half," he continued; "if I were to
hurry myself, death might carry me off before I
could enjoy my pension. Please God there will be
no war. We shall have so many cases to attend.
I was at Alexinatz," he added.

"Did you have a great deal to do?"

"Yes, so few of our surgeons know anything
about anatomy; dissecting a Mohammedan is
contrary to the tenets of Islam. But there were
plenty of dead Servians, and so our people practised
upon them."

The following morning we arrived at Trebizond.
There was a French steamer on the point of starting
for Constantinople. I had just time to take
my luggage on board of her. In a few minutes
we were again steaming ahead. Three days later,
and after a most delightful passage, we anchored
in the Bosphorus. My leave of absence had
nearly expired. There would be another French
vessel belonging to
Les Messageries Maritimes

leaving on the morrow for Marseilles. I took our
tickets on my way to the Hôtel de Luxembourg,
and eight days afterwards arrived in London.

316

CHAPTER XXXVII.

The journey is over—Declaration of war—Her Majesty's
Government—An iniquitous and unnecessary step on the
part of the Tzar—The Treaty of Paris—Its infringement—Impossible
to foresee the consequences of such an
act—Russia's contempt for England—England allied with
Turkey—Applying the rod—A Conference might be held
at St. Petersburg—The solemn assurances of the Emperor—Samarcand—Khiva—The
Black Sea Convention—Let
the Russians go to Constantinople—People who believe
in Russian promises—A non-military power like England—England
ought to join Turkey.

My journey was over. A few weeks after my
return to London, war was declared by Russia
against Turkey. In the opinion of her Majesty's
Government, this was a most iniquitous and unnecessary
step on the part of the Tzar. Her
Majesty's Government did not conceal its views
about the matter. The Earl of Derby, in a despatch
to Lord A. Loftus, dated May 1st, 1877,
made use of the following expressions:—

317

"They (i.e. her Majesty's Government) have
not concealed their feeling that the presence of
large Russian forces on the frontiers of Turkey,
menacing its safety, rendering disarmament impossible,
and exciting a feeling of apprehension
and fanaticism among the Mussulman population,
constituted a material obstacle to internal pacification
and reform. They cannot believe that
the entrance of these armies on Turkish soil will
alleviate the difficulty, or improve the condition of
the Christian population throughout the Sultan's
dominions. But the course on which the Russian
Government has entered involves graver and more
serious considerations. It is in contravention of
the stipulations of the Treaty of Paris of March
30, 1856, by which Russia and the other signatory
Powers engaged, each on its own part, to respect
the independence and the territorial integrity of
the Ottoman Empire. In the Conferences of London
of 1871, at the close of which the above
stipulation, with others, was again confirmed,
the Russian Plenipotentiary, in common with
those of the other Powers, signed a declaration
affirming it to be an essential principle of the law
of nations, that no Power can liberate itself from
the engagements of a Treaty, nor modify the
stipulations thereof, unless with the consent of

318

the contracting parties by means of an amicable
arrangement. In taking action against Turkey
on his own part, and having recourse to arms
without further consultation with his allies, the
Emperor of Russia has separated himself from the
European concert hitherto maintained, and has at
the same time departed from the rule to which he
himself had solemnly recorded his consent. It is
impossible to foresee the consequences of such an
act. Her Majesty's Government would willingly
have refrained from making any observations in
regard to it; but Prince Gortschakoff seems to
assume, in a declaration addressed to all the
Governments of Europe, that Russia is acting in
the interest of Great Britain and that of the other
Powers; they feel bound to state, in a manner
equally formal and public, that the decision of the
Russian Government is not one which can have
their concurrence or approval."

It is very clear, from this despatch, what the
opinion of her Majesty's Government was about
the matter. However, neither Prince Gortschakoff
nor his august master are easily affected by
verbal remonstrances.

They had shown how little they cared for
treaties by their conduct after the battle of
Sedan.

319

"France is beaten, and who cares for England?"
thought Prince Gortschakoff: he tore up the Black
Sea Convention.

His august master, animated of course with
the most peaceful intentions, wishes to destroy
the Turkish Empire. Verbal remonstrances are
of no use if applied to a semi-barbarous nation.
Some people can be appealed to through their
sense of right and wrong, others only through their
skins. The Russian nation has a peculiarly thick
skin; for this reason the rod ought to be a heavy
one. England, allied with Turkey, and before
the latter power is crippled, could easily apply it.
The Tzar might be compelled to fulfil his solemn
assurance about Khiva; Russia could be driven
out of Central Asia, and forced to relinquish her
hold on the Caucasus.

A Conference might then be held at St. Petersburg
to arrange about the conditions of peace,
and to inquire into the treatment of the United
Greek Christians. Lord Salisbury could inform
Prince Gortschakoff that some of the British nation
do not approve of the Russian authorities ordering
soldiers to flog Christian women and children,
[26]

by way of making them change their religion;

320

and that others object to the Tzar's troops killing
Circassian women in the family-way.
[27]

We have been told that these last-mentioned
individuals were Mohammedans, and that Prince
Gortschakoff's master would have liked to Christianize
and civilize them; but at the same time, and
in spite of the assertion of a member of the late
Liberal Government, that Russia is the protector
of the unprotected, our plenipotentiary might
be instructed to tell the Tzar that his soldiers
should have shown their amiable qualities in some
other manner. The subject of the Teke Turkomans,
and how they were massacred—men, women, and
children—during the Khivan campaign, could
also afford our representative an opportunity for
remonstrating with the Imperial Chancellor.

The latter should finally be distinctly given to
understand that Englishmen do not look upon the
establishment of a Constitution and a Parliament
by the Turkish Government as an insult and defiance
to Russia, whatever the Russians may do.
[28]

In the mean time, and while I pen these lines,
the Tzar's armies have crossed the Danube. They
are quartered on Turkish soil. The Treaty of
Paris has been once more broken by the Russian

321

Government. The solemn assurances made
by the Emperor have been cast to the four
winds. A climax has been put to the breaches of
good faith; displayed first of all about Samarcand;
secondly, Khiva; thirdly, the Black Sea
Convention and immediately after the battle of
Sedan. England has not declared war with
Russia. There are still some people amongst us
who place credence in the Russian Emperor's
statement that he has no intention to interfere
with British interests. "Let the Russians go to
Constantinople," is the remark, "they will not
stop there. The Tzar will dictate terms of peace
in the Sultan's capital. The Muscovite armies
will return to their own country. If the worst
comes to the worst, England with her fleet could
drive out the invader." Men who argue like this
do not care to remember that Russia has broken
faith with England four times in the last ten
years. Should the Sultan be forced to succumb
to his foe, and the Emperor's troops be once
established in Constantinople, it would be almost
impossible for a non-military power like England
to dislodge them from the position. Whatever
we might be able to do by sea would be counter-balanced
by our inability to follow up the advantage
by land. It must not be forgotten that

322

Turkey is fighting not only for herself, but also for
the security of our Indian Empire.
[29]
A few millions
sterling would enable the Turkish Government to
supply its soldiers with the munitions of war.

An English contingent force of fifty thousand
men could defend Constantinople against all the
Russian armies. It is to be hoped that the
Ottoman troops will do more than hold their own.
But this is doubtful. The Tzar has thrown down
the gauntlet to England by taking action on his
own part against the Sultan. We should accept
the challenge, and draw our swords for Turkey.

A SKETCH

OF THE PROPOSED

DEFENCES OF CONSTANTINOPLE

ON THE EUROPEAN SIDE OF

THE BOSPHORUS

Stanford's Geog
l
Estab
t
, London.

London: Sampson Low, Marston, Searle & Rivington.

View larger image

323

APPENDIX A. (I.)

THE FLOGGERS OF WOMEN.

Lieutenant-Colonel

Mansfield

to Earl

Granville
.

Official
(Received Feb. 16).

Warsaw,
January 29, 1874
.

My Lord
,

It is with, regret that I have to report to your Lordship
a renewal of disturbances in the districts inhabited by the
United Greeks in the Governments of Siedlce and Lublin,
resulting in bloodshed, loss of life, and the MOST
BARBAROUS TREATMENT inflicted on the peasants.

*
*
*
*
*

Several months since various of the United Greek
priests represented to M. Popiel, the Administrator of the
Diocese of Chelm, that the measures of assimilation had
been but partially carried out; and that those priests who
had done so were exposed to the gravest difficulties,
amounting almost to persecution, at the hands of the
peasants.

M. Popiel applied to Count Tolstoi, who forwarded
from St. Petersburg, within the last few weeks, a Circular,
enjoining the strictest uniformity in the abolition of
organs and benches, the disuse of the rosary, the bell at
the mass, chants in Polish, and many other details, too
numerous to be worth relation.

Such of the priests as had not, or were not prepared to
execute the recommendations of the Circular, have been
ejected from their cures. The number, however, is
insignificant, as almost all had previously acquiesced in

324

the views of the Government, and the Nonconformists had
been eliminated.

As may be supposed, the peasants care nothing about
the Synod of Zamosc, or about the purity and usages of
the Primitive Church, Oriental or otherwise; but they
have a deep-rooted veneration for the usages in which they
and their fathers have been brought up.

The operation of Count Tolstoi's Circular has been
most disastrous; in some few villages the peasants have
entirely abstained from frequenting the churches; but in
many the priests have been ill-treated, one having been
stoned to death.

The aid of the police and military has been called in; in
one parish three peasants were killed and many wounded.
Isolated Cossacks are waylaid and murdered by the peasants.
In some of the conflicts the military have been
roughly handled, stoned, wounded by scythes, bones broken,
and contusions, more especially among the officers.

In the district of Minciewicz, the peasants surrounded
the church, and defied the military to introduce the priest.
The former, with their wives and children, were finally
mastered and surrounded, and were given the option of
signing a declaration accepting the priest; on their
refusal FIFTY BLOWS WITH THE "NAGAIKA"
[30]

(COSSACK WHIP) were given to every adult man,
TWENTY-FIVE to EVERY WOMAN, AND TEN to
EVERY CHILD, IRRESPECTIVE OF AGE OR
SEX; ONE WOMAN more vehement than the rest,
receiving as much as ONE HUNDRED.

*
*
*
*
*

I have, &c.,

(Signed)
C. E. Mansfield
.

325

APPENDIX A. (II.)

CHRISTIANITY AS UNDERSTOOD IN RUSSIA.

Lieutenant-Colonel

Mansfield

to the Earl of

Derby
.

(Received, February 22.)

Warsaw,
January 29, 1875.

(
Extract.
)

I have the honour to report to your Lordship that
52,000 United Greeks in the Government of Siedlce have
been received into the Russian National Church.

I need not recall to your Lordship's notice, the PERSECUTION
of the UNITED GREEKS, which I have
had to report for several years past, and which, within
the last twelve months, has taken a more exaggerated
form.

THE PASSING OVER OF THESE 50,000 UNITED
GREEKS has been effected by various means, in which
PHYSICAL MALTREATMENT has formed a not inconsiderable
element.

In some parishes, THE MOST OBSTINATE having
been sent to the interior of the Empire OR SIBERIA,
THE REMAINDER, finding their substance being eaten
up by the Cossacks, gave in to the pressure of the subordinate
officials, and SIGNED THE PETITION DESIRING
TO BE RECEIVED INTO THE RUSSIAN
CHURCH.

326

In other districts money has been distributed, when
it was seen that the resistance was less obdurate.

In others CORPORAL MALTREATMENT was resorted
to, until the peasants gave in; but stating as
they did so, that they yielded only on compulsion.

The details of the different degrees of compulsion in the
various villages would take too much space to relate; but
I cite as a specimen what I have heard, from a gentleman
of whose veracity I have no reason to doubt, of what took
place in a village on his property.

The peasants were assembled and beaten by the Cossacks,
until the military surgeon stated that more would
endanger life; THEY WERE THEN DRIVEN
THROUGH A HALF-FROZEN RIVER UP TO
THEIR WAISTS INTO THE PARISH CHURCH,
through files of soldiers, where their names were entered
in the petitions as above, and passed out at an opposite
door, the peasants all the time crying out, "YOU MAY
CALL US ORTHODOX, BUT WE REMAIN IN THE
FAITH OF OUR FATHERS."

*
*
*
*
*

327

APPENDIX A. (III.)

RUSSIAN CIVILIZATION.

In an extract from the
Monde
, published in some correspondence
laid before the Houses of Parliament, I find the
following remarks:—

"Russia is anxious for a second Congress, and asks all
Europe to agree to it, in order to settle certain rules of
humanity to be observed during a war, and she aspires to
appear in the eyes of the world as a civilized nation full of
charity; how can we reconcile this with the fact that this
Power should be so barbarous in time of peace as regards
its peaceful subjects, whose only fault is that of remaining
faithful to the religion of their fathers?

"The cruelties that the Russian Government perpetrate
against the unhappy Catholics who are called United
Greeks, are worthy of the horrors of the time of Nero.
The Province of Podlachia, the people of which are Ruthenians,
is more especially persecuted. There blood has
flown in streams for more than a year. Troops have been
sent there who behave as if they were in an enemy's
country, for they live entirely at the expense of the
people, who are not rich. The soldiers are authorized to
kill for food all the cattle without exception, even the
draught oxen.

"The inhabitants who remain true to their faith are
delivered over to a THOUSAND TORTURES. The

328

commonest form is to STRIP THEM, then ONLY
CLOTHED IN THEIR SHIRT, THEY ARE
STRETCHED ON THE SNOW AND BEATEN
UNTIL THEY ARE NEARLY DEAD, as much from
the effects of the blows as from the loss of blood
and the cold they suffer. They are then taken to
the ambulances. If they recover those ingenious tortures
can be renewed on them, which Russia distributes
freely to those who refuse obstinately to embrace that
orthodox religion which is brought before them in so
benign and attractive a manner.

"This Polish province contains at least 300,000 United
Greeks, all under this same régime, for all are to be converted
by this apostolic proceeding. The number of
unfortunates crippled by the beatings is so great that it
has been found necessary to organize many new ambulances.
They are thrown into them; but it must not be
imagined that they are cared for there. God alone is
their doctor, for no trouble is taken either to treat or feed
them.

"Moreover, this same treatment is adopted for sick and
wounded soldiers. With the object of cheering them
they are given a kind of soup made of gruel of revolting
half-mouldy buckwheat, in which the grains are drowned
in a quantity of hot water. In time of war THE SORES
OF THE WOUNDED ARE OFTEN DRESSED WITH
STRAW, BECAUSE THE LINT AND THE CLOTH
WHICH ARE SENT BY CHARITABLE PEOPLE TO
THE HOSPITALS ARE SOLD BY THE OFFICERS
TO PAPER-MILLS.

"All this may give some idea of what is passing there,
where the passion of cruelty follows an unrestrained course,
proud to be able to advertise its unrighteous zeal in sight
of those whose orders are being carried out.

329

"One is filled with grief and astonishment when one
thinks of the people exposed to tortures by Russian
barbarity and wickedness. It is a counterpart of the
Chinese persecutions, which the Muscovites seem anxious
even to surpass.

"The heroism of the unhappy Podlachians is forgotten
by all the world, they are delivered up to rapine and
torture, deprived of union and hope, and bear all this
with calm gentleness and perseverance; they are ready
to die, so long as it is not outside the bosom of the
Church, and after having betrayed their faith.

"What an example to all, and what a disgrace for
those who, without being exposed to such trials, have not
been able to persevere!"

330

APPENDIX IV.

RUSSIAN AGENTS AND THE MASSACRES IN
BULGARIA.

Extract from Mr.

Layard's
(
H.M. Ambassador at Constantinople
)

Despatch to the Earl of

Derby

dated 30th
May, 1877
.

"Since my arrival in Constantinople my main object has
been to prepare the way for peace. I have thought that
in doing so I should best carry out the wishes and intentions
of her Majesty's Government. I had this end in
view, as I informed your lordship at the time when I
induced the Porte to appeal to the Powers for their
mediation under the 8th Article of the Treaty of Paris.
I had little hope that war could be averted by this
step, but it appeared to me that it might afford an
opening for the interference of those Powers in the
interests of peace on some future occasion. The opening
of the war has not been quite so favourable to Russia as
she appears to have expected. The extraordinary rise in
the Danube has checked her advance on the side of
Europe, and has enabled Turkey to increase her means
of resistance. Although the Porte might, no doubt, have
done more in this respect, there is no doubt that the
difficulties of the Russian campaign in Roumelia have
been much increased by the delay, and although Russia
may succeed in the end, it will probably be at a greater

331

sacrifice than she may have at first contemplated. The
simultaneous attack on the European and Asiatic territories
of Turkey has not, therefore, led to all the results
upon which Russia apparently counted. According to
information derived from various sources it would appear
that the rise in the waters of the Danube, and the consequent
floods over the surrounding country, will render
its passage very difficult, if not impossible, for three or
four weeks to come. Does not this delay afford an opening
for another effort in the interests of peace? The position
of affairs is this. Russia has succeeded in Asia, and
thus she holds a material guarantee for what she may
require on behalf of the Christians of Turkey in the shape
of a province; in Europe she cannot be said to have yet
succeeded, and she will probably have to encounter
a desperate resistance, and to make vast sacrifices before
she can impose her own terms upon the Porte.
Moreover, the longer the war lasts the greater the risk of
drawing other Powers in it against her. If hostilities be
prolonged, Turkey, in her despair, may have recourse to
measures to embarrass and injure Russia which may to
a certain extent effect that object. Although the rising
in the Caucasus may not have the importance that has
been attributed to it, and the negotiations between the
Porte and revolutionary and national leaders may not
lead to serious results, they are undoubtedly a danger to
Russia. The real intentions of Russia would also be
brought to a test by proposing to her at this moment a
mediation. If her real object is, as she asserts, the improvement
of the condition of the Christian populations,
she has surely now the means of obtaining a satisfactory
guarantee for it. The Turkish Government, it must be
admitted, has already done a good deal in the direction
pointed out by the Powers at the Conference and in the Protocol
of London. It is prepared to do more, and would do

332

more, if the war waged against Turkey by Russia permitted
it. The lesson which the Porte has received has, no doubt,
made it see the absolute necessity of complying with the
demands of Europe, without even the material guarantee
which Russia may require. If, on the other hand, Russia
has the ambitious designs generally attributed to her,
and has entered upon this war for the purposes of territorial
aggrandisement, her professions of humanity and
disinterestedness can now be gauged, and her Majesty's
Government will be able, at least, to judge what her
real objects and intentions are, and how far the interests
of the British Empire may be affected or endangered by
them. It must not, however, be inferred that the Porte
will be so easily induced to make peace, even were
it in extreme peril. There are some Turkish statesmen
who see the dangers which threaten their country,
and who would feel the absolute necessity of bringing
the war to an end almost at any sacrifice. Whilst
Russia might desire to exact much, no Turkish Ministers
could accept very hard or humiliating conditions without
risking their own lives, and even that of the Sultan,
and without exposing the Christian populations to a
massacre. I may be excused for pointing out the dangers
to England of a prolongation of the war, and of
a complete subjugation of a large part of the empire by
Russia. Should Russia desire to annex at this time any
of the European provinces of Turkey, European interests
would probably be called into play, and she would be
prevented from carrying out her intentions. The influence,
however, which she would inevitably establish
over these populations would be almost tantamount to
absolute possession, and would enable her to annex them,
sooner or later, when she could do so with impunity; but
as regards the acquisition by her of territory in Asia Minor

333

the case is different. The interests of England would then
be alone concerned. IT WOULD PROBABLY SIGNIFY
LITTLE TO THE REST OF EUROPE
WHETHER RUSSIA RETAINED ARMENIA OR
NOT. BUT ENGLAND HAS TO CONSIDER THE
EFFECT OF THE ANNEXATION TO RUSSIA of
this IMPORTANT PROVINCE UPON THE BRITISH
POSSESSIONS IN INDIA. RUSSIA WOULD
THEN COMMAND the WHOLE OF ASIA MINOR
and THE GREAT VALLEY OF THE EUPHRATES
AND TIGRIS, WHICH WOULD INEVITABLY
FALL INTO HER HANDS IN THE COURSE OF
TIME. Persia, moreover, would be placed entirely at
her mercy. The suspicion that Russia has already made
secret offers to Persia to assist her in acquiring the
province of Bagdad in exchange for Ghilan and Mazanderan
may be unfounded; but the fact that it exists,
and has been entertained by persons not generally ill-informed,
proves that this consideration is not one to be
altogether lost sight of. In most cases, when the evident
interests of two parties are concerned in effecting
an exchange, the exchange is sooner or later effected.
The desire of Persia to possess the province of Bagdad
and the holy shrines of their prophets and martyrs is of
very ancient date, and is shared by the whole Persian
nation. On the other hand, THE POSSESSION OF
THE ENTIRE COAST OF THE CASPIAN SEA
AND THE DIRECT ROAD through a rich and well-inhabited
country TO HERAT AND AFFGHANISTAN,
AND ULTIMATELY TO INDIA, is a
matter of VAST POLITICAL IMPORTANCE TO
RUSSIA. Such being the case, there is every reason
to believe that, when Persia finds that the Turkish
empire is threatened with dismemberment, her own

334

interests will get the better of any sympathy for it founded
upon community of faith, and that, completely under the
control of Russia, she will not be indisposed to agree to
an arrangement which would be acceptable to the religious
feelings and to the ambition of the Persian people.
The possession by Persia of the province of Bagdad would
be, as far as England is concerned, its possession by
Russia. It must not be forgotten that the possession of
Armenia by Russia, as regards any designs that she may
have upon India, supposing her to entertain them, would
be very different from that of any part of Turkestan or
Central Asia. In Armenia and the north of Persia she
would have a hardy and abundant population, affording
her excellent materials for a large army, ready at any
time to advance upon our Indian frontier, and resting
upon a convenient and sure base of operations, in direct
communication, by the Caspian Sea and by Batoum, with
the heart of the Russian Empire. The moral effect of the
conquest of Armenia and the annexation of Ghilan and
Mazanderan by Russia upon our Mohammedan subjects
and upon the populations of Central Asia cannot be overlooked
by a statesman who attaches any value to the
retention of India as part of the British Empire. It
would be out of place to enter at length in this despatch
upon the arguments in support of what has been above
stated. The great calamities which the prolongation of
the war may entail upon the various populations of this
country, Mussulman and non-Mussulman, and the vast
importance to the interests of humanity in bringing it to
a speedy end, may be briefly mentioned. It is scarcely
necessary to refer to the terrible loss of life and desolation
which such a war must occasion. If the slaughter of
thousands and tens of thousands of Turks is to be justified,
even those who profess to be the most humane of men
may feel some pity for their innocent women and

335

children, who will be left to perish in utter misery.
But the Christians may suffer scarcely less than the
Mohammedans; their homes will be rendered desolate;
their lives and property will be sacrificed to Turkish
fanaticism, or to the disorder and anarchy which the prolongation
of the war will cause. The Porte, believing
the very existence of the Empire to be at stake, has
already withdrawn from the provinces even the forces
absolutely necessary for the maintenance of tranquillity
and for personal security. From all sides come already
complaints of fears of disorders. In a country infinitely
more civilized than Turkey, such would probably be the
case under similar circumstances. An impartial man will
be surprised that as yet there have been so few excesses
committed. The reports of our consular agents prove
that the public peace has been maintained in a very remarkable
manner. Such outrages as have occurred have
been for the most part committed by Circassians, Kurds,
and other wild tribes, over which, even in times of peace,
the Government can exercise but small control. In Bulgaria
and Roumelia in general, as Mr. Blunt's despatches
show, the Mohammedan population are well disposed
towards the Christians, and their attitude towards them
is, for the present, friendly and peaceful. I am informed
that the transport of the new levies of many thousands
of men from the remotest part of the empire to the
armies in the field has been effected with the greatest
order. This fact has been confirmed to me by Englishmen
and others connected with railways which have been
used for conveying them. In Constantinople, notwithstanding
the alarm and panics which normally prevail in
Galata and Pera, there is also for the present perfect
quiet, and there is no reason, as far as I can judge, to
anticipate any hostile movement or demonstration against
the Christians. Although the state of things in Turkey

336

as regards the Christians is at this time such as I have
described it, yet we must not count upon its lasting. Any
serious reverses or disasters experienced by the Turkish
army in Europe, and the advance of the Russians upon the
capital, or a rising of any part of the Christian population,
might be used to provoke an outburst amongst the
Mussulmans, founded rather upon a feeling of despair
than upon fanaticism, that might have the most fatal
consequences. The Emperor of Russia has declared to his
people that THIS IS A RELIGIOUS WAR, WAGED
IN THE CAUSE OF THE ORTHODOX FAITH and
against its infidel enemies. If Mussulmans are once
convinced that it is a crusade against them and their religion
they may, in their agony, turn upon the Christians,
and frightful massacres may ensue. Another motive for
desiring peace before Russia can completely crush
Turkey and dictate her own terms is the REPUGNANCE
UNQUESTIONABLY FELT by the most
ENLIGHTENED and INTELLIGENT CHRISTIANS
of all denominations to being placed under RUSSIAN
RULE OR PROTECTION, or even under her predominant
influence. I have given your lordship evidence
of this fact which I believe to be indisputable. It is
shown by the encyclical of the Greek Patriarch, transmitted
to your lordship by to-day's messenger. It is
further confirmed by the remarkable statement of Dr.
Washburne, whose impartiality cannot be doubted, and
who is certainly no advocate of Turkish misrule, that of
the many hundred Bulgarians who have received an
American (equivalent to an English) education at Robert
College, not one was implicated in the attempted insurrection
in Bulgaria. The English people cannot, perhaps,
yet bear to hear the truth of the events of last year; but
it is my duty to state it to your lordship. The marvellous
ability shown by RUSSIA and HER AGENTS in

337

MISLEADING PUBLIC OPINION in England and
elsewhere has been amply rewarded. It will probably be
long before that which is true can be separated from that
which is false; when history does so it will be too late.
The Porte has taken no effective means to place its case
before Europe. It neither employs the Press nor competent
agents for such purposes. Its appeals to the
Powers, and the State papers that it issues, to refute
the charges against it are so prepared that they are
more calculated to injure its cause. A great portion of
the English public are, probably, still under the impression
that the statements upon which the denunciations
against Turkey were originally founded are true—the
60,000 Christians outraged and massacred; the cartloads
of human heads; the crowd of women burnt in a barn;
and other similar horrors. There are persons, and amongst
them, I grieve to say, Englishmen, who boast that they
invented these stories with the object of "writing down"
Turkey, to which they were impelled by a well-known
hand. People in England will scarcely believe that the
most accurate and complete inquiries into the events of
last year in Bulgaria now reduce the total number of
deaths to about 3500 souls, including the Turks who
were, in the first instance, slain by the Christians. No
impartial man can now deny that a RISING of the
CHRISTIANS, which was intended by its authors to
lead to a GENERAL MASSACRE of the MOHAMMEDANS,
was in contemplation, and that it was directed
by RUSSIAN and PANSLAVIST AGENTS. The panic
that it created amongst the Mohammedans was the cause
of the frightful vengeance they took. The great mass of
the Bulgarians did not join in the movement, but were, on
the contrary, opposed to it, and took no part in it.
The Porte dealt with the insurgents, and those whom

338

they suspected of being their accomplices, in a foolish
and barbarous manner. The agents it employed in
putting down the incipient insurrection were, for the
most part, ignorant, corrupt, and brutal men. The
Turkish Government has justly been held responsible
for their acts, especially as it has refused to punish with
condign severity those who committed horrible outrages;
and whether the number of the killed was 60,000 or
3000 the guilt of the Porte is the same. It must not,
however, be assumed that the condition of the Bulgarians
under the rule of the Sultan was as bad as the enemies of
Turkey desire to make it appear. That the administration
was vicious and corrupt, and that the Christians of all
denominations were unjustly treated, and were not placed
on that equality with their Mussulman fellow-subjects to
which they have a right, are admitted facts. But nevertheless
they have made great progress of late years in
material prosperity, education, and wealth. Englishmen
who have been engaged in works of charity amongst
them, and who were certainly very far from having any
prejudice in favour of the Turks when they first came out
to Turkey, have told me that they have seen with surprise
the condition of the Bulgarian villages and the general
comfort and prosperity of their inhabitants, and have
learnt with equal surprise how little they had really to
complain of before a secret agency excited the hopes and
passions which brought about the lamentable events of
last year. The Christian populations of Turkey, or rather
it may perhaps be said those who, by their knowledge
and intelligence, are capable of representing them, are
convinced that under the Turkish rule they have a far
better chance of carrying out their national aspirations, of
retaining their national faith, and developing their political
freedom than under that of Russia. They believe

339

that the pressure recently brought to bear upon the
Porte by the European Powers, and the lesson which the
Turkish Government has received, will contribute to these
objects. They are encouraged by the unexpected success
of a Turkish Parliament, in which they find that they can
freely express their opinions and expose their grievances.
They knew that the unchecked success of Russia would
at once lead to the destruction of this germ of future liberty
and good government. I believe that they are right.
A Russian gentleman observed to me, 'RUSSIA LOOKS
UPON THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A CONSTITUTION
AND A PARLIAMENT BY THE TURKISH
GOVERNMENT AS AN INSULT AND DEFIANCE
TO HER. Their existence would alone furnish us with
a sufficient reason to make war upon Turkey. We will
never consent to be the only Power left in Europe without
constitutional institutions, and as we are not yet prepared
for them, we cannot, it is evident, allow Turkey to
have them.' What I have ventured to write in this despatch
is, I can assure your lordship, founded upon no
preconceived ideas with regard to this country, but upon
the information that I have obtained in free and unrestrained
conversation with men of all classes, conditions,
and religions. Not a day has passed since I have been
here that I have not seen many such persons. Some
have come to me of their own accord; others, who may
have believed that their views would not be palatable to
me and have kept away, I have invited to call upon me.
I believe that the considerations which I have ventured
to place before your lordship will be of considerable
importance in the event of the mediation of her
Majesty's Government and other Powers being accepted
by Turkey and Russia. I must apologize to your lordship
for stating them thus frankly. The vast and

340

vital interests at stake in this war, and the confidence
which her Majesty's Government have placed in me could
alone justify me in doing so."

In a despatch to the Earl of Derby, dated May 23rd, Mr.
Layard says,—

"I have had a visit from the Servian agent, M. Christich,
who showed me a telegram which he had just received
from the Servian Prime Minister, and had communicated
this morning to Safvet Pasha. In it M. Ristics gave the
MOST POSITIVE ASSURANCES
[31]
that the SERVIAN
GOVERNMENT did not contemplate ANY ATTACK
upon Turkey; and that, so far from any troops having
been concentrated on the Turkish frontier with this
object, 'there was not in the whole principality a band of
more than five men together.' M. Christich said that
the Grand Vizier had informed him that the Porte had
received information that Russian troops were beginning
to arrive at Turn Severin, opposite Gladova, exactly
where the Russian volunteers had crossed last year into
Servia, and that there are therefore strong grounds for
suspecting that, notwithstanding the assurances given by
Russia to Austria, she intended to pass an army into
Servia. M. Christich added that he had assured the
Grand Vizier that the Servian Government had no reason
whatever to believe that Russia intended to cross the
Danube into Servia; but that, on the contrary, they were
convinced that she had no such intention. I thought the
opportunity a good one to speak to M. Christich of the
great danger that Prince Milan was running if he were
to plunge the Principality again into war; and I hinted
to him that his Highness might have to deal with Austria
as well as Russia."

In a despatch to Lord Derby, dated from St. Petersburg

341

on the 31st of May, Lord A. Loftus, the British
Ambassador, gives an account of an interview he had
with Prince Gortschakoff prior to his departure for the
seat of war:—

"His Highness," says Lord A. Loftus, "expressed his
conviction that the interests of the two countries in the
East ought not to clash (
se heurter
), and his hope and
expectation that the note of which Count Schouvaloff
was the bearer would be satisfactory to her Majesty's
Government. I inquired of his Highness in what light
the Imperial Government regarded the declaration of independence
by Roumania. Prince Gortschakoff replied that
he regarded it as a
fait accompli

de facto
, but not
de
jure
. It was a question which could only be treated
later, in conjunction with the European Powers. His
Highness believed that the Austrian Cabinet took a
similar view of it. In regard to Servia, Prince Gortschakoff
stated that Prince Milan and the Servian Government
had expressed their readiness in the present conjuncture
to act according to the (
volonté
) wish of the
Emperor, and that it had been signified to them in very
decided terms that the EMPEROR'S WISH
[32]
was that
SERVIA should remain PERFECTLY PASSIVE.
Prince Gortschakoff was unable to say what would be
the probable duration of the Emperor's absence, but I am
told that in the official and court circles it is expected
that his absence will not exceed six weeks."

THE TURKISH CHAMBER OF DEPUTIES.

In a despatch, bearing the date of June 2nd, and addressed
to the Earl of Derby, Mr. Layard gives an account

342

of his visit to the Turkish Chamber of Deputies. He
says,—

"At the time of my visit the Chamber was discussing
a bill concerning municipal taxation. I may state, with
confidence, and with some experience of the House of
Commons, that I never saw a debate carried on with more
order and propriety. Members may either speak from
their seats or from a tribune, after the French fashion.
With the exception of one individual, a Greek, they
addressed the speaker or president from their places.
Their speeches were short and to the point. Each
article of the bill before them was discussed, explanations
were demanded of the representatives of the department
of the Government that had submitted the law to the
Parliament, and were at once given. It was then put to
the vote, and was passed without a division. Each
deputy had a copy of the bill before him, and followed
with the greatest interest and attention the discussion.
I did not observe one exception. Once, during my presence,
there was a little expression of dissatisfaction in the
house. The exceptional Greek, to whom I have alluded,
went into the tribune with a bundle of papers, and began
to read a speech which threatened to last for an indefinite
time. It related to the history of Turkey in general, and
especially to the grievances of the Christians. The president
once or twice represented to him that, although
his speech might properly be delivered on a suitable
occasion, it had nothing to do with the question in discussion,
which referred to a matter of detail of local
administration. The deputy, however, persisted, and at
last the house, becoming impatient, called upon him to
comply with the regulations, to obey the president, and
to come down. This he was at last obliged to do. In
the English House of Commons the speaker would certainly

343

not have allowed him to go on as long as he did.
No public assembly of the kind in Europe could perhaps
show a more respectable, intelligent, and dignified body
of men than the present Turkish Parliament. Christians
and Mussulmans from all parts of the empire, even an
Arab with his half-Bedouin dress, are seated without
distinction together. Among the Mohammedans there
are many mollahs, or teachers of the Koran, in their
white turbans. The Christian speakers, who predominated
the day that I was present, were listened to without
any sign of impatience. They spoke with the most
complete freedom, and without any restraint. The president
rarely interfered, except to point out to a deputy
that he was wandering from the question in debate. It
must be borne in mind that this was the first attempt to
bring together in a popular assembly men from all parts
of the empire, Mussulmans and Christians, who were
entirely ignorant of the duties they had to perform, and
of the way to perform them. Had they not been directed
and controlled at first by a strong hand there would
have been general confusion, and the experiment would
probably have failed. I know no man in Turkey so competent
to be their president as Achmet Vefyk Pasha,
from his knowledge, his honesty, and his determination
and vigour of character. It is surprising, considering the
materials with which he had to deal, that he has succeeded
so soon in bringing the house into an orderly and
business-like assembly. For some months there have
been no complaints, even on the part of those who have
done their best to discredit the Turkish Parliament, that
the president has unnecessarily interfered in its discussions,
or has in any way restrained the perfect freedom of
debate. If there be any cause of complaint it is perhaps
in the opposite direction."

344

APPENDIX V.

STABBING UNDER THE GUISE OF
FRIENDSHIP.

Russian Government Officials encouraging the insurgents
against the Porte, whilst General Ignatieff
was the Russian Ambassador at Constantinople,
and Turkey and Russia were at peace together.

The following is a despatch from Sir
H. Elliott
to the
Earl of
Derby
on this subject:—

Constantinople, February 14th, 1876.

My Lord
,—The account of the encouragement and
countenance given to the insurgents at Ragusa greatly
exceeds all that I was prepared for.

THE RUSSIAN CONSULATE IS THE OPEN
RESORT OF THE INSURGENT CHIEFS. Their
correspondence is sent to the CONSUL, who is a PARTY
to all their PROJECTS, and ASSOCIATES HIMSELF
INTIMATELY WITH THEM.

He does not appear to make an attempt to conceal the
part he is playing, for on the occasion of the death
of the Chief Maxime, in one of the late encounters, the
Russian flag at the consulate was hoisted at half mast,
and M. Jonine himself joined the funeral procession.

With such acts as these it is not surprising that the

345

insurgents should suppose their attempt to be fully
APPROVED BY THE RUSSIAN GOVERNMENT,
for they can hardly be expected to believe that an
ACCREDITED AGENT would venture upon them
without knowing that it meets with the APPROVAL
OF HIS SUPERIOR AUTHORITIES.

Some of the wounded, when asked why they continue
to struggle when the Porte is ready to grant all their
demands, have answered plainly that THEY ARE
BOUND TO GO ON AS LONG AS THEY ARE
TOLD BY RUSSIA TO DO SO.

The assurances given at St. Petersburg of the wish
of the Imperial Government that the insurgents would
lay down their arms must naturally go for nothing as
long as its OFFICIAL REPRESENTATIVE, with
whom they are in communication, ENCOURAGES
THEM TO GO ON.

I have, &c.,

(Signed)
Henry Elliott
.

346

APPENDIX VI.

THE RUSSIAN WAY OF CHRISTIANIZING
THE TURKS.

(
Official.
)

Consul

Reade

to Mr.

Layard
.

Shumla, July 23rd, 1877.

Sir
,—Having on my arrival here heard that a number
of Mussulman men, women, and children, said to have
been attacked and wounded by Russian troops, were
lying here, I obtained permission to see them.

I have the honour to inclose a list of those whom I saw,
and who were lying in a "teke," a Dervish mosque, and
apparently well cared for. I saw most of their wounds,
and spoke to them.

Several of the elder ones gave very clear accounts
of what had occurred to them (as they all said) by horsemen
carrying lances, and many of them stated that they
were attacked in the long grass where they were hiding
themselves. One poor infant, of about nine months, had
two frightful gashes on the head and had one toe cut off.

Most of them had lance-thrusts about their bodies;
some, sabre-cuts. I saw them one by one, and a more
sickening spectacle I seldom witnessed, not only from
the nature of the wounds, but also from the youth and
simplicity of the younger ones.

347

As regards the rumour that any of these attacks were
committed by Bulgarians, I am able to state that,
according to those I saw, not one such case has occurred.
I asked all the sufferers one by one, separately, if they
had been maltreated by any Bulgarian Christian, or if
they had heard of any such case: they one and all said
not.

From what all asserted, these cruelties can only be
attributed to Cossacks, as the perpetrators were all
described as "horsemen with lances."

The number of these victims is increasing, as others are
brought in daily; and from what those I saw said, a considerable
number must have been killed on the spot.

I have, &c.,

(Signed)
R. Reade
.

List of Wounded Women and Children lying in the Teké,
or Dervish Mosque, at Shumla, and visited by Consul
Reade.

1. Habibe: a woman aged 25 years. Wounded in the
back by a lance.

2. Mehamed: a boy aged 7 years. Wounded in the
left thigh by a lance. Son of No. 1.

3. Ibrahim: a boy aged 5 years. Wounded on the
right thigh by a lance: also son of No. 1.

4. Hava: a woman aged 25 years. Lance-wound on
the head.

5. Aishé: a woman aged 30 years. Arm and head
wound by a sabre; a lance-wound on the breast.

6. Mehemet: a boy aged 6 years. Stomach pierced
by a lance. Son of No. 5.

7. Anfe: a woman aged 24. Four sabre-cuts on the

348

head, three lance-thrusts on left leg, one on right shoulder,
and one on right thigh. Sabre-cut on right hand.

8. Nazifé: a girl aged 15. Sabre-cuts on breast and
back; lance-thrust on right foot and right thigh.

9. Mustapha: an infant of about 9 months of age.
Top of head frightfully lacerated by a sabre. Toe of
right foot cut off. This was a sickening spectacle.

10. Féridé: a woman aged 55 years. Right shoulder
wounded by lance. Right hand cut off. Lance-wound
on back.

11. Eminé: a girl aged 9 years. Three sabre-cuts on
head and one on back.

12. Muzcié: a girl aged 12 years. Trampled upon by
a horse and severely wounded.

13. Féridé: a woman aged 40 years. Lance-wound on
back.

14. Mustafa: a boy aged 9 years. Lance-wound on
left leg. Son of No. 13.

15. Fatmé: a girl aged 12 years. Right thigh wounded
by lance. Daughter of No. 13.

16. Gursun: a woman aged 32 years. Lance-wound
on back.

17. Aishé: a girl aged 7 years. Lance-wound on
head.

18. Abrahim: a boy aged 9 years. Sabre-cut on head.
Lance-wounds on forehead and thigh.

(Signed)
R. Reade
.

Shumla, July 22nd, 1877.

349

APPENDIX VII.

THE SCHOOLMASTERS IN MASSACRE.

Consul

Dickson

to Earl

Russell
.—(
Received May 17th.
)

(
Extract.
)

Soukoum Kalé, March 17th, 1864.

I feel it a painful duty to report a deed that has come to
my knowledge, which has so exasperated the Circassians
as to excite them to further resistance, however desperate
their case may be.

A Russian detachment having captured the village of
Toobeh on the Soobashi River, inhabited by about 100
Abadzekhs, and after these had surrendered themselves
prisoners, they were all massacred by the Russian troops.
AMONG THE VICTIMS WERE TWO WOMEN IN
AN ADVANCED STATE OF PREGNANCY, AND
FIVE CHILDREN. The detachment in question belongs
to Count Evdokimoff's army, and is said to have
advanced from the Pshish valley.

As the Russian troops gain ground on the coast, the
natives are not allowed to remain there on any terms,
but are compelled either to transfer themselves to the
plains of the Kouban, or emigrate to Turkey.

350

APPENDIX VIII.

OUGHT WE TO HAVE SAVED THE CIRCASSIANS?

Sir

H. Bulwer

to Earl

Russell
.—(
Received May 20th.
)

(
Extract.
)

Constantinople, May 3rd, 1864.

You are aware of the large and sudden immigration of
Circassians into the Ottoman dominions.

The Russian Government has now acquired the territory
of that brave and devoted race, who have only prized one
thing more than country—liberty, or at least the life
which is free from the domination of a foreign foe. They
are flying the shores immortalized by their defence and
seeking an asylum in a neighbouring Empire. In short,
Circassia is gone; what yet remains to SAVE IS
THE CIRCASSIANS.

351

APPENDIX IX.

LESSONS IN MASSACRE.

A Petition from the Circassians forwarded to Earl
Russell by Sir H. Bulwer, dated Constantinople,
April 12th, 1864.

(
Translation.
)

Our most humble Petition to Her Magnificent Majesty
the Queen and Emperor of England is to the effect that—

It is now more than eighty years since the Russian
Government is unlawfully striving to subdue and annex
to its dominions Circassia, which since the creation of the
world has been our home and our country. It slaughters
like sheep the children, helpless women, and old men that
fall into its hands. It rolls about their heads with the
bayonet like melons, and there is no act of oppression or
cruelty which is beyond the pale of civilization and
humanity, and which defies description, that it has not
committed. We have not, from father to son, at the cost
of our lives and properties, refrained from opposing the
tyrannical acts of that Government in defence of our
country, which is dearer to us than our lives. But during
the last year or two it has taken advantage of a famine
caused by a drought with which the Almighty visited us,
as well as by its own ravages, and it has occasioned us

352

great distress by its severe attacks by sea and land.
Many are the lives which have been lost in battle, from
hunger in the mountains, from destitution on the sea-coast,
and from want of skill at sea.

WE THEREFORE INVOKE THE MEDIATION
AND PRECIOUS ASSISTANCE OF THE BRITISH
GOVERNMENT AND PEOPLE—THE GUARDIAN
OF HUMANITY AND CENTRE OF JUSTICE—IN
ORDER TO REPEL THE BRUTAL ATTACKS
OF THE RUSSIAN GOVERNMENT ON OUR
COUNTRY, AND SAVE OUR COUNTRY AND
OUR NATION TOGETHER.

But if it is not possible to afford this help for the preservation
of our country and race, then we pray to be
afforded facilities for removing to a place of safety our
helpless and miserable children and women that are
perishing by the brutal attacks of the enemy as well as
by the effects of famine; and if neither of these two
requests are taken into consideration, and if in our helpless
condition we are utterly annihilated notwithstanding
our appeals to the mercy and grace of the Governments,
then we shall not cease to invoke our right in the presence
of the Lord of the Universe, of Him who has confided to
your Majesty sovereignty, strength, and power for the
purpose of protecting the weak.

We beg your Excellency to be the medium of making
known to the great British Government and to the
glorious British nation our condition of helplessness and
misery, and we have therefore ventured to present to
your Excellency our most humble petition. A copy of it
has been submitted to the Sultan's Government and to
the Embassies of the other Powers.

Signed by the people of Circassia.

29 Sheval, 1280.

April 9th, 1864.

353

APPENDIX X.

STATEMENT OF THE CIRCASSIAN DEPUTIES IN
REFERENCE TO THE CRIMEAN WAR.

We, the undersigned, having been sent from the people
of the Nectouage and Abaseck, and further commissioned
on their behalf by the Deputies of the other tribes of Circassia
assembled at Constantinople, to carry to the Sovereigns
and to the people of England and France the appeal
of our nation, and to speak for our nation, and after that
appeal has been rejected by the Governments of France
and of England, and we have presented ourselves before
various assemblies of the English people, from whom we
have heard kind words, it has then been told to us that
there are, among the English people, some who say that
we are subjects of the Emperor of Russia, and others who
say that in the time of the war in the Crimea the generals
of England and France sent to us to require troops to aid
them in the war, and that we refused to give such troops,
and therefore it is not proper now for England to help us
in our distress, or to resist Russia in her violence and
aggressions. Therefore, we now say that the words so
spoken against us are not true words, but false ones, and
we further declare that any one who charges us with such
things privately, and who does not bring them forward in
such a manner that all shall hear and all shall judge, commits

354

an act not worthy of an honest man, and ought not
to be listened to by honest men.

It is easy for us to declare that we are a free people,
over whom no king or emperor, or government, has had
any power or authority since the world began, or as far
back as the memory of man can reach, but we do not do
so; we only ask what proof those can adduce who say
to the contrary? Let those persons show who the king
is who has conquered our country; let him tell what
taxes the Circassian people has paid, or what troops have
been raised amongst our tribes for the service of a foreign
master. This is what no man can tell.

So also let our accusers bring forth the letters, or repeat
the words, by which any request for aid was made to
us in the time of the war in the Crimea, and then let him
produce the answer given by us, refusing that aid or
succour, and when he has done so then he may say that
we did refuse to join the Allies, but not till then; but no
such letter can be produced, and if such demand and such
answer would be produced, it would not on that account
follow that the injustice of Russia should become justice,
that the danger from Russia should become security, or
that the taking possession of the Black Sea by the cruisers
of Russia, to interrupt all communication and all traffic,
and so to make a war with England as well as Circassia,
should become honourable and safe to the British nation.

The Circassians are a very small and weak people; they
have no money, they pay no taxes, they have no government,
they have no newspapers, they are ignorant; but
this they do know, that many years Russia has been
fighting against them, and that the thousands of men she
loses in fighting every year, and the great treasure she
expends every year, is not for the sake of Circassia. All
our mountains, from the Black Sea to the Caspian, would

355

not be worth to Russia, if she possessed them, so much
as she expends on trying to conquer them in one year
of the forty years she has been endeavouring to conquer
them.

We therefore know that she is expending her army and
her treasure, not because she wants Circassia, but because
she wants India and the Ottoman Empire; and, therefore,
do we say to ourselves, it is because of Turkey and
England that we have to fight night and day, that our
cattle are carried off, that our houses are burnt, and that
our young men have to die, and our old ones and children
and women to perish. Why do the Turks and the
English not help us; why are they the friends of the
Russians?

We will now tell that which happened in the Crimean
War.

It was in the year of your era 1854 that you drew your
sword against Russia; before then that sword was in the
scabbard, but our sword has never been in the scabbard;
peace there never had been between the Circassians
and Russians, and for thirty-three years there had been
fierce wars. It was at the end of that time that the
great nations of Europe went to make war. When we
heard this we were very happy, and thought that the
time was come when we might take breath: for we have
not only to fight but also to live; but it is very hard for
us to live when we have always to fight. We said to
ourselves, The great nations in whose hands Russia is
nothing, are going to stop her and give peace. Now we
can plough our fields, and pasture our flocks, and rest
from our long sufferings. Yet many amongst us got
ready to help, and when the Russian troops that lay all
along from Anapa to Soukum Kaleh withdrew and collected
together, and retired north, we also on our part

356

followed them; but when they crossed the Kouban they
did not retire further, but stopped there, and they were in
great force, being tens of thousands on one bank of the
river and we on the other, so that neither ventured across
to attack. We could not go across whilst they were so
posted, but when they saw us ready, neither could they
retire so as to go to the Crimea.

Now, every day we expected that some of the Allies
would appear behind them and enable us to do something
to destroy them; but none came, nor did they send us
any succour by the sea; and then we saw there was no
aid for us. So it was at the end as at the beginning, and
the Allies went away, and, as before, we remained the
only enemies of Russia. But it was not by sending our
horsemen into the steppes of Russia or into the Crimea
that anything could be done to make Russia less powerful
or give to us security after the peace.

The Lesghians on the east held a body of 50,000 men
ready to fall on Tiflis, so soon as word should be sent by
the generals of the English or French, or from Constantinople.
The people of our coast knew very well that what
they had to do was to crush the Russian armies in the
south of the Caucasus, and to restore the people of
Georgia, Gouriel, and Imerettia to independence. This
was the help they looked for in the war which England
and France was making against Russia.

At various times, to the number of seven or eight, on
news arriving of envoys sent to us, assemblies were called
among the Shapsug and Nectouage to be ready to hear
without delay their proposals, so that if any such envoy
had come to concert measures with us, such as that above
described, and which should be within our power to
attempt and for our benefit to achieve, 25,000 horsemen
from these tribes alone would have been ready to take the

357

field in a week. Our assemblies met and waited in vain;
no envoys came; and they dispersed with heavy hearts.

Then it was that we considered what we ourselves
could do, and as the Turkish commander in Kars sent no
word to us, we determined to send word to him; and
thereupon an envoy was sent, namely, one of the two
undersigned now present in London, Hadji Hassan by
name, to offer to Selim Pasha the co-operation of the
forces of the Circassians, so that whilst we descended
from the north they might march from the south, and
thus crush the Russian power in Georgia, rescuing a
Christian people from a barbarous yoke.

This envoy could only reach the Turkish camp by passing
through the Black Sea in a boat with four oars, and
had great difficulty in escaping the Russian cruisers. He
reached Batun, and then proceeded to the Turkish
quarters at Uzurget, twenty hours from Kars. The
Turkish commander was glad to hear his tidings, and the
plans were being prepared for the campaign, when a messenger
arrived from Constantinople. The Pasha read the
despatch which he had received; he did not say what it
contained, but with tears in his eyes exclaimed, "We are
betrayed!" The Circassian envoy understood that the
Governments of France and England would not allow the
Russians to be attacked where they could be really injured,
so he returned to his own country. After the
Russian army had been thus saved from destruction, Kars
itself became their prey.

Whilst the war was going on in the Crimea, various
Turks came from Constantinople; they called themselves
envoys, and every one had a different story; but they
never came amongst the Circassians, they all stayed at
Anapa and Soukum Kaleh, the posts abandoned by the
Russians.

358

There also came from the English and French, consuls
and envoys, and captains of ships, and they also said one
one thing and another another; one saying that he had
authority, and another saying he had authority; and then
they talked to the Turks, and the Turks talked to them,
but never came to the Circassians, but, like the Turks,
remained at Anapa and Soukum Kaleh; whilst we were
looking for men to propose to our tribes measures of war,
and to bring from their countless hosts troops, artillery,
and ammunition, to help in the war we were waging
against Russia, and had been waging for generations past.

We have since heard that at Anapa and Soukum Kaleh
many conversations took place; we have heard that between
the Europeans and the Turks, and some Circassians,
men who have no authority to act on behalf of the people,
that it was said that the European generals wanted a
large army of Circassians to leave their country to embark
on the sea, and fight in the Crimea. Such things could
never have been spoken in an assembly of Circassians,
for the long time which they have resisted Russia shows
that they are men who know how war is to be made. If
such things had been proposed in an assembly of Circassians,
our people would have answered, "That is not the
way to injure Russia, that is not the way to protect Circassia,
that is the way only to destroy your own armies."
But such proposals were never made to us, for we are a
free people, and nothing is done in secret. We have no
Minister as the people of England have. Our warriors
fight, not because they are paid, but because they have
hearts, and when anything is proposed to us then a meeting
must be held. Messengers go forth, and many
thousand people are collected together, sometimes 5000
and sometimes 20,000, and they give ear to what is said
to them, and when they have understood it, they appoint

359

twenty or thirty of the wise men and elders who consult
apart, and after that tell the people, and it is only when
the people say Yes to what is consulted that the answer
is given. Then all are willing to do what all have understood
and all consented to. But amongst our people
there is not one who would have consented to go to the
Crimea, while every man would have been ready to march
on Tiflis and save Kars. So that it appears to us that no
message came from the French and English commanders
to attack Tiflis for the same reason that the Russians remained
on the Kouban instead of retiring into the Crimea.
If our troops had not been detained on the Kouban we
ourselves would have attacked Tiflis without the aid of
the Allies or the co-operation of the Turks.

We have also learnt that when the envoys of England
and France at Anapa and Soukum Kaleh said that we
should send our forces to the Crimea, the Turkish envoys
and other persons replied to them that such proposals
could not be made unless the Allies engaged to secure our
independence at a peace, and that this was the first word
that had to be spoken on the matter; but these envoys
would not allow such a word to be spoken either first or last.

Now what advantage have we gained from this war in
the Crimea? That war is over seven years ago, and we
have been fighting ever since!

YOU MAKE A TREATY OF PEACE TO OPEN
THE SEA. THE SEA IS NOT OPEN. Had the
undersigned been taken by the Russian vessels in coming
to England, we should have been sent to the mines of
Siberia, and we know that we the undersigned, are in all
cases devoted to death because we have come here.

YOUR ARMIES HAVE BEEN IN THE CRIMEA,
WHAT BENEFIT HAS COME TO THE CRIMEAN
TARTARS? DID YOU RESTORE TO THEM

360

THEIR COUNTRY? NO, YOU GAVE IT BACK
TO RUSSIA.

WHAT BENEFIT DID THE TURKS GET
FROM YOUR WAR? You made your enemy pay none
of the expenses, and YOU ONLY DEPRIVED THE
TURKS OF THEIR VICTORIES.

THE POLES did go to the Crimea, and WHAT
BENEFIT did THEY GET FROM THAT WAR?

Did we too not help you? Did we not keep in check
100,000 men? Is Russia not sore and weak by the many
years she has been fighting with us? If we did not prefer
independence to slavery, would not 100,000 of our
men be in her ranks? If we were not engaged in defending
our country, would not the Russian frontiers be
at Batun?

WHY DO WE SUFFER FROM THIS WAR? Is
it not because RUSSIA WANTS TO BE MISTRESS
OF INDIA and MISTRESS OF CONSTANTINOPLE?
If you wait till her ends are gained it will be too late to
get aid from us. If you do not give us to-day a favourable
reply, we must go back to our people and tell them that
the English people are joined with Russia, so that what
Russia could not effect by her arms some people in England
will have effected by their calumnies.

All these things we tell you. If you wish to be sure
of the truth, make an assembly, as we do, and we will
prove them. If you make no such assembly, you have
no right to say them. From Europe or from England
no help has come to us. We have heard that if there
was justice to be found it was in England; we came
then to England, weak and poor, expecting to find justice
from you.

(Signed)

Hadji Hayden Hassan.

Kustar Ogli Ismael.

361

APPENDIX XI.

HOLY RUSSIA AND THE CURSED CRESCENT.

By A. Cleveland Coxe
,
[33]

Bishop of the Western Diocese of New York
.

Trump of the Lord, I hear it blow;

Forward the cross; the world shall know

Jehovah's arm's against the foe.

Down shall the cursed crescent go.

To arms! To arms!

God wills it so.

God help the Russians—God bless the Czar,

Shame on the swords that trade can mar,

Shame on the laggards, faint and far,

That rise not to the holy war.

To arms! To arms!

The Cross and Czar.

How long, O Lord, for Thou art just,

Vengeance is Thine, in Thee we trust

Wake, arm of God, and dash to dust

Those hordes of rapine and of lust.

To arms! To arms!

Wake swords that rust.

362

Forward the Cross. Break, clouds of Ire,

Break with the thunder and the fire,

To new Crusades let Faith inspire,

Down with the crescent to the mire.

To arms! To arms!

To vengeance dire.

The Bishop answered by Mr. W. Croffut.

Thou Man of God, who thus implore

Thy brother's sacred blood to pour

In hateful tides of turbid gore,

From Dardanelles to Danube's shore.

Be still! Be still!

Blaspheme no more.

God help the babes, God bless the wives;

Shame on the priests that whet the knives,

Shame on the Church whose altar thrives

By wrecking peaceful peasants' lives.

Be still! Be still!

'Tis hell that drives.

How long, O Lord, before Thy shrine

Shall men pray Vengeance, God, is Thine,

Then worship Moloch as divine,

And drink the battle's bloody wine?

Be still! Be still!

O heart of mine.

363

APPENDIX XII.

THE CORRUPTION OF ARMENIAN OFFICIALS.

Report of Mr. Taylor to her Majesty's Government
with reference to the Corruption of Armenian
Officials in his (the Erzeroum) District.

(
Extract.
)

Christians.
—The different sects into which the Christians
are divided in the Erzeroum Vilayet are:—

Souls.

Gregorian Armenians

287,700

Nestorians

110,000

Armenian Catholics

8,000

Orthodox Greeks

4,000

Protestants (natives)

1,300

Total

411,000

Armenians.
—The advice and ostentatious leaning
towards Russia of the Armenian clergy in my district,
headed by the Catholicas residing at Etchmiazin in
Russia, and his bishops in these parts, have naturally
enough inclined the more ignorant members of their
flocks—rich and poor—to adopt the same views; and considering
also that a whole Christian house of ten souls in
Russia pays only, for all taxes, 9 roubles (1
l.
10
s.
) annually
as against three times the sum here, if there has not been
a general emigration, it is simply owing to the fact that

364

disposable arable lands in Russian Armenia are scarce,
while the reverse prevails in Turkey.

Everywhere throughout these districts I found the
Armenians bitter in their complaints against the Turkish
Government, at the same time that they were unreserved
in their praises of Russia, openly avowing their determination
to emigrate. This bias is owing, as already stated,
to the constant hostile teaching of their clergy; at the
same time, ample cause for discontent, as has already been
shown further back, is afforded by the really wretched
system of Turkish provincial administration, the unequal
imposition of taxes, scandalous method of levying them
and the tithes, persistent denial or miscarriage of justice,
and practical disavowal of the Christians' claim to be
treated with the same consideration and respect as their
equals among Moslems. But experience has taught me
that which candour and strict impartiality compel me to
state, that the subordinate officers of the local Government
are aided and abetted in their disgraceful proceedings
or encouraged in persistent indifference to crying wrongs,
as well by the criminal assistance as wilful apathy or
silence of the Armenian Medjliss members, ostensibly
elected by the suffrages of their co-religionists to guard
their interests. Unfortunately, then, as the evil lies as
much with the Christians as the Turks, under existing
regulations there is no remedy for it, and there can be
none till the local authorities really see for themselves
that the Porte's orders are really carried out and to open
the way for the introduction of a higher class of people
for such employments. As it is, no man of wealth,
influence, or character will accept a seat in any one of the
Councils; he will not waste time in attending to official
duties in a place where he has to put up with the contumely
and impertinent insults of the Moslem members,

365

all which are patiently borne by the fawning and obsequious
Christians whose living depends upon this appointment.
And even were a man of character and ability to
accept a nomination at the hands of his community, the
Pasha, with whom in fact the fate of such elections lie,
as he has the power of rejection, would always prefer a
needy, pliant member to one whose riches and position
would place him beyond the reach of his menaces or
influence. The interests of the community are consequently
entrusted to speculators accustomed to the
atmosphere of the Serai in their capacity of revenue
farmers or Seraffs, who in such positions have, in addition
to their own disgusting servility, all the chicanery and
vices of Turkish officials—acquired a dangerous influence,
either as the partners or creditors of the chief provincial
officers. Such an influence might be meritorious and
useful if exercised in the interests of justice and duty,
but it becomes a downright evil when practised, as it
always is, for their own benefit or that of their partners
in corruption, and scarcely ever for their brethren. The
claims of the poor are either neglected or betrayed, and
those of the rich depend upon the amount of their presents
or degree of their sycophancy. The Armenian
clergy and head men, on their part, purposely ignoring
the villanous conduct of their Medjliss members representing
the repeated failures of justice that inevitably result
as due to the fanaticism or imbecility of a Government
determined to ignore all just claims, exaggerate actual
facts; the more readily to induce their dependents to
adopt the disloyal views they propagate. As they pursue
such intrigues, apparently unchecked and with the secret
approval of Russian agents, wavering members, formerly
content with or resigned to their lot, openly express disaffection
and traitorous ideas.

366

APPENDIX XIII.

FEMALE BRIGANDAGE.

Millingen remarks in "Wild Life amongst the Koords"—Amongst
the many acts of brigandage of which the
Koords are guilty—a peculiar kind of highway robbery
must here be stated, which is probably unparalleled. The
culprits, the brigands, are in this case young women, who
set out on plundering pursuits in order to turn a dishonest
penny. A troop of fair bandits take up a station at the
side of a road, there patiently to await for the arrival of
the doomed traveller. As soon as the vedettes announce his
approach, the fair troop starts off to meet him, welcoming
him with dances and with fiery glances of irresistible
power. He is compelled to stop, as a matter of course,
and the fair maids then politely request him to alight.
No sooner has the bewildered victim put his feet on the
ground than he finds himself at close quarters with the
whole troop. Immediately he is stripped of all he has
on his back, and is left in that primitive state in which
Adam was at one time. Then begins a series of dances
and fascinating gestures in the style of those performed
by the maids at the Lupercalian games, the object of
which is to make the unfortunate victim lose his self-control.
An attempt, however, on the part of the victim to
reciprocate the advances of his alluring tyrants, becomes
instantly fatal. The troop get hold of him in a summary

367

way, declare him to have made attempts on the virtue
of the fair maids, and condemn him to be pricked with
thorns upon a very sensitive part of his person. These
dances and the flagellations, which serve as entractes, are
repeated several times over, till the sufferer, exhausted
and bleeding, is nearly in a fainting condition. Then the
female troop of bandits drag the wretched traveller before
a court of matrons, which holds its sittings somewhere in
the neighbourhood. There a charge of attempting a
criminal assault is brought against the pretended culprit,
who not only receives a good dose of upbraiding, but is
also condemned to pay a fine.

368

APPENDIX XIV.

THE ROUTES WHICH TRAVERSE ASIA MINOR,
AND THE EUPHRATES AND TIGRIS.

The routes which traverse Asia Minor and cross the
Euphrates and Tigris commence at Constantinople on the
Bosphorus, or at Smyrna on the Ægean sea, and meet
upon the plateau of Asia Minor.

Of these routes the chief are—The Erzeroum and
Tabriz; the Diarbekir and Mosul; the Aleppo and
Bagdad. On leaving Constantinople, the Bosphorus is
crossed; the road then leads along the coast of the
Propontus from Scutari to Gebiseh, the ancient Lybissa,
and where the tomb of Hannibal can be seen; then
beside the Astacenian Gulf, from Gebiseh to Nicomedia
(Ismid). Here the three routes separate.

The Erzeroum road leads eastward, and parallel to the
coast of the Black Sea.

The Diarbekir route cuts Asia Minor longitudinally, and
descends into the valley of the Euphrates towards Malatia.
The Aleppo road cuts it obliquely, and descends upon
the shores of the Mediterranean near Tarsus.

The Erzeroum route crosses the Sakaria towards its
mouth, between Sabanja and Khanda, leads by the villages
of Dusdscheh or Muderli to the town of Boli, situated
near the ruins of Hadrianopolis; beyond Boli the road

369

is very hilly; it then traverses the towns of Gerideh and
Hamanli, and descends with the waters of the Parthenius
to the little town of Tcherkis. Tcherkis is at the junction
of the Trebizond and Tokat route. The Trebizond route
ascends more to the north, crosses the mountains which
separate the basin of the Parthenius from that of the
Halys, and descends with an affluent of the Halys to Kastamuni,
and from there, by Tach-kupri, to the town of
Voyavat.

Tach-kupri is built on the site of Pompeiopolis, and
Voyavat in a fertile plain, at the foot of a height crowned
by an old citadel. Voyavat is an important position,
because it is at the intersection of the Sinope and Trebizond
route.

The Sinope route turns to the north, and leads through
a very rich and undulating country. This is one of the
most fertile districts in Asia Minor.

The Trebizond route leads eastward, passes the Halys
near Vizir Kupri, and, after numerous ascents and descents,
issues beside a watercourse in a bay surrounded by
olive-trees. Here is the town of Samsoun. It then leads
along the coast of the Black Sea, crosses the Iris near
Tcharchembeh, and the Thermadon near Thermeh; and
leaving the little town of Unieh to the left and on the
sea-shore, it goes by Fatsa, Ordau, and Kerasun to Tripoli;
from there, after turning the bay of Platana, it leads
to Trebizond.

The Tokat road bends more to the south after leaving
Tcherkis; it crosses the mountains which border the
basin of the Parthenius near Karadjcur, and descends by
Kodja Hissar to the town of Tusia upon the Halys. It
next traverses the river near Hadji Hamzeh or Osmanjik,
and, after passing Marsivan, crosses the western affluent
of the Iris at Amasia; from here it goes by Turkhal to

370

Tokat. The direct route from Tokat to Erzeroum eastward
goes from Tokat or from Turkhal to Niksar, on the
Lycus, the eastern affluent of the Iris; and continuing by
this affluent to Kara Hissar, it ascends near the villages
of Kerkif or Lorri, the mountains which separate the
waters of the Black Sea from the Euphrates, and descends
into the plain of Erzeroum near Vijan.

There is another road from Constantinople to Sivas.
This is the regular Angora track; it leaves the Trebizond
route at Nicomedia, crosses the Sakaria near Geiweh; and
following the chord of the arc which this river describes as
it descends from the plateau of Asia Minor, leads by the
little towns of Terekli and Torbali to Nalihan, near the
ruins of Gordium; after which it ascends by the little
town of Bei Bazar on to the Angora plateau. This
plateau is one of the points which dominate Asia Minor;
hence the reason why formerly so much importance was
attached to the fortress of Gordium. The road then leads
by the village of Bei Bazar, or by Tabadji, on to a ridge of
mountains which separate the basin of the Sakaria from
that of the Halys, and descends by the village of Akserai
to the latter of these rivers. The stream is crossed either
at a ford or on a raft, and the route goes by the villages
of Sangor and Osman Koi to the town of Yuzgat; the
chief seat of the family Tchapan-Oglou,
[34]
formerly one of
the most powerful in Asia Minor. Yuzgat is an important
position, because it is at the junction of the two routes from
Tokat and Cæsarea. The first leads to the east; and
crossing the mountains which separate the basin of the
Halys from that of the Iris, it debouches through a deep
ravine on to the lofty plateau of Zela, celebrated for
Cæsar's victory over Pharnaces; from here it descends

371

and slopes gently down to the Western Iris, near Tokat.
The Cæsarea route turns to the south after leaving Yuzgat,
and leading by the villages of Ingourli, Kislan, and
Boghazlayan, recrosses the Halys near Emlar; after which
it goes by Erkelet (Hiklar) to Cæsarea.

Another route leads by Angora to Cæsarea, and from
Cæsarea to Malatia in the valley of the Euphrates. It
is the route from Constantinople to Diarbekir and to
Mosul. After leaving Nicomedia (Ismid) it turns south,
ascends the mountains which separate the Astacenian
from the Cianean Gulf, and descends to Lake Ascanius,
near Nicea; then turning eastward, and passing alongside
Mount Olympus, it crosses the Gallus at Lefke (Louka) near
its junction with the Sakaria; then ascending this river
along its left bank as far as Zugud (Soghat), it crosses
the Thymbrius near Eski-Shehr, the ancient Doryleum,
situated in the middle of a vast and bare plain. The road
now rises insensibly by Sidi Ghazi and Sever Hissar to
the Angora plateau. This is the easiest route to go from
Nicomedia to the plateau of Asia Minor. It follows the
watercourses.

Two routes lead from Angora to Cæsarea. One crosses
the Halys near the village of Kara Keni, from whence it
ascends the river along its right bank to the little town of
Mandjour, where its two principal affluents unite. Then
crossing the eastern affluent, between the villages of
Tchalik and Ambar, the route leads to the foot of Mount
Argea towards Cæsarea. The other road borders the
eastern plateau of Asia Minor; and ascending the Halys
along its right bank, passes the eastern affluent of this
river above Mandjour; from here the route goes to
Cæsarea, across a vast plain destitute of trees. It is the
easiest road, but there are no habitations, and provisions
are very scarce in this direction.

372

Cæsarea is a branching point for all the routes which
cross the Euphrates, or which descend from the plateau
of Asia Minor to the littoral of Cilicia. One of these
routes leads to Sivas, another to Diarbekir, a third to
Aintab, and a fourth to Adana and Tarsus. The first
leads in a north-easterly direction, and ascends the eastern
affluent of the Halys from Emlar to Sivas; this is the
easiest route by which to ascend to the plateau of Armenia.
The road from Angora by Tokat to Sivas is the
shortest. It is best provided with provisions; but the
route by Cæsarea is less broken and more accessible for
artillery. The route from Cæsarea to Diarbekir leads
eastward along the Melas till that river joins the Euphrates
below Malatia. The river is then crossed in a
ferry-boat at the village of Teis Oglan, and the road
continues by the little town of Kharput to a chain of
mountains which unite Mount Taurus to Mount Niphates.
It descends with the principal affluent of the Tigris to
Maïden, and from Maïden goes to the town of Arghana;
from here it leads alongside this river to Diarbekir, and
from Diarbekir goes by Djesire to Mosul.

The road from Cæsarea to Aintab leads in a south-easterly
direction, traverses one of the chains which
unite Mount Argea to the southern branch of Mount
Taurus, and descends by the village of Garrin into the
valley of El Bostan, towards the sources of the Sarus.
The valley of El Bostan, although very high, is fertile,
and planted with fruit-trees. El Bostan is the branching
point of three routes which lead—one to Samozate,
another to Aintab, and the third to Marash. The first
route turns to the east of Mount Amanus and descends
with an affluent of the Euphrates to Samozate; the
second crosses the mountain, descends by a profound
ravine to Aintab, and leads from Aintab to Aleppo

373

alongside the Chalus. The third turns Mount Amanus
on the west, and descends with the Pyramus to the little
town of Marash, and from Marash goes to the village
of Messis, on the gulf of Alexandretta.

The most frequented route from Cæsarea to Alexandretta
is
viâ
Adana or Tarsus. This route leads to the
south, turns Mount Argea towards the west, and goes
by Endjazou, the ancient Castabale, and by Kara Hissar,
the ancient Cybistra, to Yenji Bar, probably the ancient
Nora; from here it ascends to the high plain of Nigdeh,
which is watered, like El Bostan, by an affluent of the
Sarus. It descends from Nigdeh to Ketch Hissar, called
Dana by Xenophon, an important position, because it is
at the intersection of the two routes of Cæsarea and
Koniah; from there the road leads by the village of
Tchikisla into a deep and winding gorge, hollowed out
in the slopes of Mount Taurus, and where the different
affluents of the Sarus unite together. From here the
route debouches by the village of Abi Cheik into the
great plain of Cilicia, on one side of which is Tarsus,
and on the other Adana. In leaving the defile above
mentioned, the road branches to the right for Tarsus,
and to the left to Adana, and from Adana goes to Alexandretta.
The best-known route from Constantinople to
Syria is that of Koniah. It traverses the western
border of the plateau of Asia Minor, and cuts the
peninsula obliquely from the north-west to the south-east.
This route, leaving the road to Angora, at Nicea,
and ascending those branches of Mount Olympus which
bound Lake Ascanius on the south, descends to the little
town of Yeni Cheer, where the two routes from Brusa and
Kiutayah cross. The first turns to the west and leads to
Brusa; it passes by Mount Olympus, on the north. The
second turns southward, and passing by Mount Olympus

374

on the east, goes to the town of Ainegol (Yeni Ghoul),
towards the sources of the Gallus, and from Ainegol leads
by the village of Turbah to the town of Kiutayah upon the
Thymbrius. It then ascends by the Thymbrius to its
sources towards the village of Altyn Tash, and finally
reaches the plateau of Afiun Kara Hissar, bounded on the
west by the western chain of the Taurus, and on the east
by a range of little lakes which almost touch each other,
and which extend towards the south to the environs of
Koniah. This plateau is very high. It is separated from
the central plateau of Asia Minor by a series of hills,
which are crowned towards the south by the Baba Dagh
(mountain). The route passes between two chains of
mountains, and leads by Bulwadin, built upon the site of
Dynia, and by Izaklou to Ak-Shehr. This little town is
situated in a well-watered plain, at the foot of a mountain
covered with vegetation, and about six miles from
a lake which bounds the plain on the east. The route
leaves all the lakes to the left, and goes by Ilgyn and
Kadoun Khan to the village of Hi Ladik, built upon the
ruins of Laodicea Combusta; from here it is a ten hours'
march to Koniah, the road leading there at the foot of
the mountains which bound the plateau of Asia Minor on
the south, and which rise gradually to the southern chain of
Mount Taurus.

The most frequented route from Koniah is that which
leads by Tarsus or by Adana to Alexandretta. It is the
route from Smyrna and Constantinople to Aleppo and
Bagdad. It is the route of Antioch, Palmyra, and Babylon.
It is the route of all the conquerors.

This route, when it leaves the plain of Koniah, turns the
Kara Dagh (mountain) towards the north, goes by the villages
of Ismil, of Geiweh, and Hartan to Erekli; and after
joining with the Cæsarea route and below Ketch Hissar

375

descends with the river Sarus towards the village of
Tchikisla, and issues from a deep gorge of Mount Taurus
into the great plain of Cilicia.

The Alexandretta route cuts the plain obliquely; leaving
Tarsus to the right, it passes the Sarus at Adana,
the Pyramus at the village of Messis, three miles
from this village enters a cleft in the mountains which
border the gulf of Alexandretta; from here it debouches
into a fertile but desert plain, nine miles long, from three
to four wide, and surrounded on all sides by arid mountains.
There is an exit towards the east, and after a
difficult march for an hour, the route descends to the
ruined town of Kartanleh, which is now inhabited in
the winter by some Turkoman tribes. Kartanleh is
situated at the edge of a plateau, or rather a terrace,
about three miles long, and bordered on its eastern
extremity by some black rocks. They approach each
other very closely. The passage is excessively narrow.
The defile gradually becomes wider, and a mile farther
it debouches on to a little plain about two miles long and
one mile broad, bounded on the south by the Gulf of
Alexandretta, on the east by a vast marsh, and on the
north by a chain of heights, which rise gradually to
Mount Amanus. Ayas is at the foot of these heights,
and about one mile from the sea. The road now turns
south, leads for some time along a sandy shore, and then
crosses a little mountain torrent which flows into the
marsh, and which some travellers have taken, to be the
Carsus of Xenophon; others, the Pinarus of Arrien.
After having passed the torrent and rounded the gulf,
the road leaves the shore and rises gradually to Pias,
situated like Ayas a little distance from the sea, and at the
foot of some heights which keep on ascending till they culminate
in Mount Amanus. Pias is twenty-six miles from

376

Ayas, sixteen from Alexandretta, and at the south-eastern
angle of a bay. Its shore is more easily approached than
that of Ayas; troops could be easily disembarked here.
It is the most vulnerable point of the coast. From
Pias, as from Alexandretta, it is only three marches
to the plateau of Antioch, a dominating point and the
key to Syria.

The Aleppo route leaves the sea at Alexandretta, and
turning south-east ascends through a deep gorge to Beylan.
From here it leads over some mountains which bound the
gulf on the east, and which unite the Taurus to the Syrian
chain. The route then descends to the plain of Antioch.
The road here branches. One branch leads by some mountains,
which are on the north, to Killis and Aintab; it
then crosses the Euphrates at Kum Kaleh, the ancient
Zeugma. The other branch cuts the plain of Antioch
from the north to the south, passes the Orontes beneath
the walls of the town, and, turning to the east, crosses the
Chalus beneath Aleppo.

Aleppo is at the junction of two roads which cross
the Euphrates—the one at Bir, in taking a north-eastern
course, the other at Kerkisieh or Anah, in leading towards
the south-east. The first is the Mosul, and the second
the Bagdad route through Babylonia and the desert.
The Mosul route, after leaving Aleppo, ascends to a
bare plain, traversed by two affluents of the Sadjour,
which fall into the Euphrates near the ruins of Hierapolis.
The first station is at the village of Hardaran. The road
then leads across two affluents of the Sadjour, and goes
through olive-gardens to the Euphrates, which is crossed
at a ferry near Bir. It would be very difficult to ford the
river at this point. After leaving Bir, the road passes
over two chains of calcareous hills, between which is a
pretty valley, covered with fruit-trees. It descends from

377

the second chain by a steep path, which is paved with
big stones, and is cut in several places out of the rock.

Urfa, the ancient Edessa, is situated in a valley between
two hills, which are separated from the Tauric chain and
united to a series of other hills which cut like a curtain
the vast plain of Mesopotamia.

From Urfa to Mosul there are two routes; one, more
to the north than the other, joins the Samozate road
towards Severek, and, crossing one of the heights of
Mount Masius, descends with an affluent of the Tigris to
Diarbekir. It goes from here by Djesireh to Mosul. It is
a difficult route, but the only one where provisions can
be met with. The other route ascends in the direction of
the sources of the Khaboras, follows the chord of the arc
which forms the Tauric chain from Severek to Mardin,
leads from Mardin to Nisibin through a cultivated plain
watered by the Mygdonius, and goes from Nisibe to
Mosul through an uncultivated district, which extends
from the foot of the Tauric chain to the mountain of
Singare. There is nothing to stop an army marching
along this route save the scarcity of provisions. It is the
best road for cavalry. The other one would be more
convenient for infantry. Two roads lead from Mosul
to Bagdad. One passes along the right bank of the
Tigris, and the other the left. The first passes by
Tekrit and across the desert—the second by Arbeles and
through ancient Assyria. This last route is the longest.
It leaves the river, to avoid some hills which border
the left bank; but it is the only road where cultivated
lands and provisions can be found. Leaving
Mosul, it crosses the Tigris upon a bridge of boats,
and passes in succession the Bumadus and the Zabus,
six miles apart the one from the other. The plain between
the two rivers is elevated, and is undulating towards

378

the north-east; but it sinks and becomes flat towards
the south-west, in the direction of the angle where the
two rivers meet. From the ford where the road crosses the
Zabus, it is only twenty-seven miles to Arbeles, which
rises like an island in the midst of the most beautiful
plain of Assyria. The road undulates slightly, and the
position is a favourable one for manœuvring an army.
On leaving Arbeles, the route descends beside a small
watercourse to Altyn-Kupri. Here the Caprus is crossed
upon a stone bridge. The little town of Scherzour, at the
foot of the Median chain, is on the left of the route, and it
continues by Kerkut and Daour towards the villages of
Kifri and Kara Tepe in the plain of Bagdad.

The direct route from Aleppo to Bagdad leads in a south-easterly
direction. After leaving the plain of Aleppo, it
passes through a long valley closely bordered by two hills.
In the middle of the plain is the town of Taib. The
road now debouches upon the Euphrates—on one side
towards Racca, the ancient Nicephorium, and on the other
towards the ruins of Tapsaque, at the beginning of a bend
which the great river makes in its course towards Kerkisieh,
the ancient Circesium. It appears that the ancients
crossed the Euphrates sometimes at one and sometimes
at the other of these points. At the present time the
route leads along the right bank to Ana, the ancient
Anatho, and to Hit, the ancient Æiopolis. Here the river
is crossed in a ferry-boat. The road continues along the
left bank to Ambar, the ancient Perisabour, and to
Felujah, which is the point where the Euphrates in its
windings nearest approaches the Tigris. The Babylon
and Bagdad routes now separate. The first leads to the
south, along the Euphrates. Fifteen hours' march brings
you to Hillah, which is built on the site of Babylon. The
other road leads eastward; and, after crossing a bare

379

plain which divides the two rivers, you arrive in eleven
hours at Bagdad. To enter this town the river has to be
crossed on a bridge of boats. As the crow flies, it is only
fifty-four miles from Babylon to Bagdad. The route
leads from south to north. It is a difficult one. There
are fissures in the ground. They become filled with
water during the inundations caused by the two rivers.
Caravans going from one town to the other generally go
round by Feludjah; this lengthens the road by about
twenty-one miles.

The route from Aleppo to Bagdad by the desert and
by Babylon has this advantage over the Mosul road.
It is shorter, because it follows the cord, the other
following the circumference of the bow; but as the
ground between Aleppo and Tapsaque is no longer cultivated,
and as troops can no longer be accompanied by a
flotilla of vessels, it is not practicable for an army. It is
only suited for a division of cavalry and for caravans
with camels; even then there would be a risk of the force
perishing from hunger or thirst. The long zone which
the road traverses, and which loses itself in the Arabian
desert, is a plain with slight undulations, but they are so
slight that a man on horseback could scarcely conceal
himself. There are few plants: you find some wells
of petroleum, hardly any animals. There are no birds;
everywhere you see a white soil impregnated with gypsum
or salt.

A few palm and fruit trees announce to the traveller
that he has arrived at the environs of Bagdad.

Bagdad is the starting-point of two important roads:
they lead, one to the south of Persia, the other to the
north. The first leads to the south-east, and passing
alongside the foot of the Median chain, crosses the Kerah
or river of Kirmanchah, the ancient Eulee, near the ruins

380

of Suza, and the two branches of the Karoon, the ancient
Orontes, the one at Dizful, the other at Shuster; from
whence the route ascends to the plateau of Media, and to
Lourkian. It then passes the Persian Pyles towards the
sources of the Bendemir, or of the Persian Araxes, and
descends with this river upon the plateau of Persia
towards Ispahan.

The second road goes to the north-east, ascends the
Diala to Sheraban or Apollonia, from whence it rises
by Zar-Zil upon the plateau of Media towards Karmanshah.
It then passes the defiles of Mount Orontes towards
Kangawar, and descends to Hamadan. This is the
ancient route from Ecbatana, the great route from Turkey
to Persia, Hamadan is at the intersection of two roads
which lead—the one to Ispahan in turning south-east,
the other to Teheran in leading north-east.

Such are the different routes, remarks Baron Beaujour,
which lead from Asia Minor across the Euphrates and
Tigris into Asia proper. From what has been said, it
will be seen that they are reduced to three principal ones—to
the Erzeroum and Tabriz, which turns the two rivers
towards their sources; to the Urfa and Mosul, which
crosses the rivers in the middle of their course; and to the
Aleppo and Bagdad, which leads along the Euphrates to
Babylon, and which passes the Tigris near Bagdad. The
first route is impracticable for artillery, the last for
infantry. The centre road is the only one available for a
large army; for whilst cavalry and artillery could pass by
Merdin and Nisibin, infantry penetrating from Urfa through
the defiles of Severek, into the valley of the Tigris, could
descend with this river from Diarbekir to Mosul, and
from Mosul to Bagdad; from here, ascending the Diala,
the army might continue by the defiles of Mount Zagros
on to the plateau of Media towards Karmanshah, and from

381

the plateau of Media by the defiles of Mount Orontes
upon the Persian plateau towards Hamadan. Master of the
Persian plateau an army could march towards Teheran
as far as the foot of the Tauric chain, continue along this
chain to Mount Paropamisus, and descend by Kandahar or
Cabul into the valley of the Indus towards Attok.

Although this is a long and difficult route, it is not an
impracticable one for an army which has previously conquered
the Turks and the Persians.

Means of subsistence can be found everywhere along
this road. Troops would only meet with opposition
from wandering hordes, or from people like the Afghans.
However, the hordes are mere robbers. The Afghans
would have no chance of victory unless they were united
amongst themselves. To conquer the Afghans, all that
would be required would be to fight them in detail.

Alexander formerly marched along this route. In our
own times, Napoleon and Paul the First, the two most
powerful monarchs in Europe, wished to follow it, to
attack the English in India. This project, the boldest
which has been conceived in modern times, could only be
executed by generous princes, who would like to conquer
India, not to keep it, but to civilize the country. In the
present state of Europe, India could only be conquered
by the Russians, who are very little exposed to attacks
from other nations. Masters of Georgia and of the line
of the Araxes, the Russians can turn the western side of
the Caspian Sea, and penetrate by Casbin upon the plateau
of Persia, or penetrate by the east and by Bokhara across
the Oxus and Jaxartes, which are by no means insurmountable
obstacles.

Baron Beaujour concludes his remarks upon the subject
by saying,—

"This enterprise would be justifiable provided that

382

the attacking force had some glorious object in view,
such as that of civilizing India. The English, who are
already masters of the peninsula, can do this last better
than the Russians. THE LATTER OUGHT TO CIVILIZE
THEMSELVES BEFORE THEY THINK OF
CIVILIZING OTHER NATIONS."

383

APPENDIX XV.

THE MILITARY IMPORTANCE OF SYRIA.

Baron Beaujour, in his "
Voyage Militaire dans l'Empire
Ottoman
," published in 1829, remarks about the military
importance of Syria as follows:—

Syria has a great military importance. It is on
the route from Asia to Africa. If the Isthmus of Suez
were cut through, Syria would acquire a still greater
importance. This country is now open, art has not
defended it on any side; but Nature has defended it on
the east and south by deserts; on the west by the sea,
and on the north by a chain of mountains which surround
it like a rampart. Mount Amanus, which forms this
rampart, and which extends from the Mediterranean to
the Euphrates, dominates Syria; this is the reason why
the masters of Aleppo and Antioch have always been
the masters of the rest of the country. All the routes
were open to them. They could not be arrested on any
particular road, because each route could be turned by
the others. The road from Antioch to Jerusalem ascends
the Orontes, and traverses the two chains. It descends
by the Leontes into Cœle Syria, by the Jordan into Judea;
and by the Chrysorrhoas into the plain of Damascus.
This route is the only one which opens out all the interior
of the country. The others only open out the littoral.
An army can always be stopped by a foe who occupies
the first-mentioned route. The road from Gaza to

384

Laodicea along the coast is only suitable for an army
which is accompanied by a fleet. The transversal routes
of Caifa or Acre to Damascus by Nazareth, of Tyre
or Sidon to Emesa by Cœle Syria—from Tripoli to
Hamah by Akka, and from Laodicea to Schogr by
Abdama can only conveniently be used by an army which is
mistress of the sea.

Syria can be attacked from two sides—either through
Asia Minor or through Egypt. TO ATTACK SYRIA
FROM ASIA MINOR, MOUNT AMANUS MUST BE
PASSED EITHER AT ITS CENTRE NEAR AINTAB,
OR AT ITS TWO EXTREMITIES BY ZEUGMA OR
BY ISSUS. THE PASS BY ZEUGMA IS THE
EASIEST—TO HOLD THIS PASS IT IS NECESSARY
TO BE THE MASTER OF THE EUPHRATES.
The passage by Aintab is more difficult, but it can be
turned. An army can descend by several roads from
Mount Amanus along the watercourses into the plain of
Antioch as into the plain of Aleppo.

An attack by the gulf of Alexandretta is more difficult.
This gulf is closed by a cordon of mountains which
is bent on the seaside like a bow. Even if this bow
were pierced from one side, it would be necessary
to pierce it from the other and penetrate into Syria
by the defile of Beilan, after having entered by that of
Issus. Syria is defended on the Egyptian side by a
desert—here there is neither water nor grass; but so
soon as an army has crossed this desert and taken Gaza,
it can ascend the coast to Carmel, and if it is mistress of
the sea, can ascend at pleasure by the transversal valley
of Esdrelon upon the plain of Damascus, or by the transversal
valley of Balbek upon the plain of Emesa which
commands the entire valley of the Orontes. An army
could even ascend the coast to Laodicea, its right

385

supported on the Lebanon, its left on the sea, and sweep
before it the Turks dispersed amidst the towns of the
littoral, as the wind drives before it the dust. If the
Turks were to rally in the valley of Cœle Syria, or in the
plain of Damascus, a defeat here would drive them into the
desert. The Mutualis, Druses, Maronites, Ansares are
not united—to conquer them it is sufficient to sow dissension
in their ranks; even if they were to fight
beneath the same standards they could never arrest an
army in its march. These people know nothing about
tactics, they are only acquainted with mountain warfare.
They would never dare to risk themselves in the plain or
to sustain the shock of a European battalion. All these
people are like Arabs; they are only fit to rob caravans
or to follow an army with the object of pillage.

An attack upon Syria by the littoral of Palestine and
Phœnicia could only succeed so long as you were mistress
of the sea. It would be better to attack Syria by sea
than from Egypt; but to attack Syria by sea, one must
begin by establishing oneself in the island of Cyprus.
Cyprus is to Syria what Zante is to the Morea; it would
serve as a depôt for the army and a harbour for the
fleet. Larnaca and Famagusta are the most favourable
points for naval stations. The Syrian coast is too
straight, it possesses no good port, nor even any good
roads. The ports of Laodicea, Tripoli, Beyrout, and
Sidon are too small. The anchoring roads of Acre, Jaffa,
and Gaza are too exposed. Alexandretta and Tyre
are the sole points where an army can be disembarked
without danger. This is the reason why these two places
have always been considered the two keys of Syria, on
the side of the sea. An attack by Alexandretta has this
advantage, it separates Syria at once from the rest of
Turkey. It also has its disadvantages. Depôts must be

386

formed on a very unhealthy shore. The defiles of Mount
Rhosus must be passed; here there are difficult gorges
where a handful of soldiers could resist an army.

An attack by Tyre would be the easiest and the least
dangerous. The peninsula on which this town is built is
now no longer defended. This peninsula facilitates a
descent upon the neighbouring coast. The surrounding
plain is fertile. An army would be thoroughly protected
by guarding on one side the defile of Cape Blanc, and
on the other, that of the valley of the Leontes or of
Cœle Syria. From this valley an army could ascend
by Balbek to the highest point of the Syrian chain.
It could dominate the whole country as if from the
summit of an enormous citadel. This point surmounts
all the passes, and an army could descend by the Jordan
to Jerusalem by the Chrysorrhoas to Damascus, and by
the Orontes to Antioch.

Tyre and Alexandretta are the two most vulnerable
points in Syria. If history does not recall to the Turks
the importance of these two towns, Europeans have not
forgotten it. Acre and Laodicea are the next most
important points. In summer an army could easily disembark
there, and, like Tyre and Alexandretta, they give
access to the entire country. The Turks, then, ought to
fortify these places better, and especially Alexandretta
and Tyre, so as to make them the principal fortresses
in Syria; and not to think so much of Aleppo and
Damascus, which can be easily defended against the Arabs
of the desert.

If Syria is easy to attack—she is equally difficult to
conquer. Her territory is mountainous. A small army
could defend itself for a long time against a large force.
In Mesopotamia and in Egypt a single battle won would be
sufficient to reduce the entire country. In Syria it would

387

only enable the foe to occupy a more advanced position,
and to march from one valley to another, as from the
valley of the Orontes to the valley of the Jordan, or from
the littoral of Phœnicia to Palestine; but to march from
one of these positions to the other, it is necessary to
pass defiles. If the defenders were masters of the
transversal valleys which unite the littoral with the
interior of the country—and in particular of the valley of
Balbek—no enemy could advance a step without encountering
obstacles. This would protract the war and give
the defenders a great advantage. Syria, then, is difficult
to conquer, but, once conquered, is easy to defend. This
is the reason why it is so important from a military point
of view.

388

APPENDIX B. (XVI.)

SIR JOHN BURGOYNE ON THE DEFENCES OF
CONSTANTINOPLE.

The following remarks made by Sir John Burgoyne in
his work, "Military Opinions," and published in 1859,
may not be uninteresting to the reader. Alluding to the
events preceding the Crimean War, the author observes:

There can be but little doubt that the Turkish force on
the frontier will be numerically very inferior to that of the
Russians. It may be stated at about 120,000, while their
enemy must be able to dispose of at least 200,000 serviceable
forces. Under such a state of things it is manifest
that the best policy for Russia would be to use every
effort to strike a heavy blow at once, to force the Danube
in mass, and by rapid and vigorous movements to cut off,
or thoroughly defeat the divided hordes of the Turks. In
the event of success they would push on so far as their
arrangements would allow, towards the Balkan.

When once the Russians are firmly established on the
right bank of the Danube, the Turks must necessarily
retire to Shumla and the Balkan, and it is to be hoped
that this will be effected before the detached corps or
the flanks shall be too much compromised. The first real
defence, then, that it would appear could be prudently
made, would be on the Balkan passes. On the Balkan it

389

is to be hoped that the Turkish armies would, by due
arrangements, be under such great advantages of position
as to enable them to make an obstinate stand.

Still, the line is long, the passes must be many, and the
enemy, still numerous, would probably at length establish
himself across it; but by this time, feeling the effects of
the campaign and forward movement in such a country,
he would find a difficulty in keeping together such large
bodies, in maintaining their efficiency, and obtaining supplies
for them. These difficulties would increase as he
prolonged the advance.

It may be considered that at such a period a
well prepared field of battle along the line of the
Carasu river—from its mouth in the Lake of Bujuk
Checkmedge, on the Sea of Marmora, to Kara Bournu on
the Black Sea. The length of this line, from sea to sea,
is twenty-four or twenty-five miles; but each flank being
covered by lakes and rivers, would be easily watched and
secured, and the extent of the real fighting-ground would
be, by these features, reduced to nine or ten miles of
plain; but with favourable undulations affording a good
command over the front, and which might be improved in
strength in a most powerful degree by a great development
of respectable field-works. One most important
advantage to be obtained from the occupation of this
position would be that it covers the entire Bosphorus, and
would therefore enable our fleets to remain masters of the
Black Sea to the last, and preclude the enemy from the
use of it.

To apply the resources of this position with effect,
two ingredients must be available; first, early and
energetic measures for entrenching so great an extent, so
as to give it the greatest possible strength: and the
other, that an adequate force should remain available for

390

its occupation and defence. The first would require the
application of several thousand workmen for several
months, and could only be effected by the employment of
troops, but with an understanding that a degree of benefit
would be derived from their very first labours, which
could be progressively improved to the very last moment.
The second would require 50,000 good troops, or a proportionate
increase in number of such as might be inferior.

These may appear to be heavy demands, but can scarcely
be considered so, as the main and last stand to prevent
the fall of an empire. The situation of the Dardanelles is
detached, but presents far greater facilities for its protection,
though still requiring considerable means. This
is to be effected by occupying powerfully the neck of land
which connects the great European Peninsula (the old
Chersonese of Thrace) with the main land. At about
seven miles in front of Gallipoli, and near the village of
Boulaher, this neck is only three miles wide, being the
narrowest part, and presents at that identical part a position
that, duly fortified and garrisoned, may be given
enormous strength. The whole extent of coast round the
peninsula in rear of that line would be protected by the
naval forces. Large means would be required to be applied
to the preparation of this position within a short
time; 4000 workmen would do it in three months, and a
garrison of 12,000 good troops would be necessary for its
defence if properly attached.

The use of this position however, would not be solely
confined to securing the retreat of the fleet, but would
be very threatening for offensive measures also; it would
cover a very extensive district, within which might be
rapidly collected by sea any force that it might be
thought advisable at any time to advance, either to the
front or flank of the invader, with a comparatively short

391

communication and secure depôts and retreats. It is, in
fact, the point that would form the best line of operations
for any forces acting in alliance with Turkey, excepting
those which would be applied to the immediate protection
of Constantinople; although the water communication
would be open to the Gulf of Enos, and perhaps up the
Maritza, the depôts, hospitals, reserves, &c., should be
established on this peninsula.

To return to the consideration of the defences
for Constantinople. A second line has been designed
round the city, at only a mile or two in advance; the
ground is extremely favourable. It would cover the
whole space from the Sea of Marmora to the Bosphorus
and, well entrenched, would be capable of considerable
resistance, but it has several defects. 1. It can hardly
be deemed sufficiently extensive and influential for the
last resort of a great army. 2. It would be too near to
the city, and the proceedings and feelings of the forces
would be greatly influenced by the tumults, panics, insurrections,
treacheries, and confusion of the place; so
much so, that no vigorous defence could be expected from
it. 3. It would be considered as a last hold, and merely
as a point for surrender. 4. It would not cover the whole
of the Bosphorus, and consequently it would necessitate
the evacuation of the Black Sea by our fleet.

On these accounts I attach no value to it, provided the
Carasu frontier be taken up. If the disposable force was
only from 5000 to 12,000 strong, I would recommend its
services being exclusively engaged to secure the Dardanelles,
an additional force of 25,000 might form a valuable
nucleus for the preparation and defence of the frontier of
the Carasu. If a larger army could be collected it would
join and act in conjunction with the Turkish forces in the
Balkan, for which purpose their best landing-place

392

would be the Gulf of Enos, proceeding to Adrianople up
the Maritza river; or they might act elsewhere, according
to the circumstances of the times. An idea is suggested
that the Russians, on the understanding of the
preparation by the allies, may content themselves with
remaining in quiet possession of the Principalities, and
thus gain an absolute advantage. It is not for me, taking
in view military operations only, to judge of the effect of
such a course, further than to give an opinion that I am
not aware of any military measures that it would be
desirable to attempt to drive them out without the co-operation
of Austria.

The question is rather political than military, but it
would appear to me that by so doing they would certainly
abandon their cause for war, and would suffer more in
prestige than they would gain in substance.

393

APPENDIX B. (XVII.)

THE CHEKMAGEE LINES.

Major-General Macintosh in his work, "A Military Tour
in European Turkey," remarks on the possibility of a
winter campaign, and on the defences of Constantinople
as follows:—

"About the time that I visited the Dardanelles I made
an excursion from Constantinople into Bulgaria, noting as
I rode along all that appeared of professional interest in
the country through which I passed. It was the beginning
of November when I set out, but I found the passes of the
Balkan quite practicable as regarded snow, though this is
not always the case at that season. Excepting an occasional
rainy day, I travelled agreeably enough over the plains on
both sides of the mountains. On leaving Constantinople,
the Adrianople road carried me over a bleak track of undulating
country resembling our downs, but deeply furrowed in
many places with steep ravines, and showing few vestiges
of habitation beyond an occasional farm-yard enclosed by
a solid wall, and generally containing several dwellings
and sheds for cattle. These enclosures might often serve
for posts, but they could hardly resist artillery; although
there is a method employed in the East of digging outside
the wall a deep ditch, and throwing the earth up to a
certain height against it, which would in some degree

394

deaden the fire, at the same time that the ditch formed by
the excavation adds an obstacle compensating for the
facility which the earth thrown up within would otherwise
give to an escalade.

"The road passes at no great distance from the shore of
the Sea of Marmora, about ten miles from the city walls.
I reached the crest of one of the elevated downs commanding
a view of an extensive lake, about seven miles in
length, and two in breadth, bordered with marshy land,
and stretching from the sea into the country, and in the
direction of the ridge called the Lesser Balkan, which lies
to the north. The lake is separated from the sea at its
south-western extremity by a low ledge, not many yards
in breadth, traversed by the ancient highway, now in a
ruinous state, and supported in some places on low arches,
through which the brackish water passes and repasses,
according to the direction of the wind between the sea
and the lake. The causeway could be easily closed
artificially, when seven miles of country would be rendered
unassailable by an enemy; for, although boats might
navigate these lakes to a certain extent, its marshy shores
must always render navigation difficult, even if such
vessels were at hand, which, hitherto, has not been the
case.

"The spot which the Turks call Kuchuk Chekmagee is
designated by the Franks Ponte Piccolo, to distinguish
it from the greater bridge crossing the isthmus at Buyuk
Chekmagee, or Ponte Grande, the second lake, about six
miles and a half further on towards Adrianople.

"The ledge at Ponte Piccolo is about three quarters of a
mile in length, but the lake expands very considerably
further up, and at the distance of four miles is broken
into a fork, each branch being fed by a stream which flows
from the highlands to the north. Proceeding over the

395

ledge, a country of heights and valleys becoming bolder
to the northward extends for about six or seven miles,
when the second lake of equal length, but somewhat
narrower than the first, presents itself, divided like the
other from the sea by a narrow ledge, supporting a bad
causeway, the centre of which rests on the large bridge
above mentioned. From the brow or crest of the heights
above, which are lower than those at Kuchuk Chekmagee,
but which command the ledge at a very short distance;
a zigzag path leads down to the village of Buyuk
Chekmagee. Standing at this point, the spectator is
immediately impressed with the conviction of the great
strength of such a pass, and of its immense utility to
Turkey, if turned to proper account; being, as it were, the
abutment on which the left flank of a fine position rests,
covering the capital from an enemy in this direction, a
capital which, once attained by an hostile army, would
mark, most probably, in its own ruin, the fall of the
Ottoman Empire in Europe.

"A recent writer has described the locality as 'that formidable
position about twenty miles from the capital so
celebrated in history, where, owing to the nature of the
ground, Attila was stayed in his march to conquer the
Eastern Empire, and where at a later period the Huns
[35]

were signally defeated by Belisarius.' In reference to this
statement, however, it must be observed that, as regards
the advance of Attila, Gibbon especially mentions that he
was only arrested by the city walls of Constantinople, without
alluding to any position whatever. The following is the
passage from Gibbon. 'The armies of the Eastern Empire
were vanquished in three successive engagements, and the
progress of Attila may be traced by the fields of battle.
The two first on the banks of the Utus, and under the

396

walls of Marcianopolis, were fought on the extensive plains
between the Danube and Mount Hæmus. As the Romans
were pressed by a victorious enemy, they gradually and
unskilfully retired towards the Chersonesus of Thrace (the
peninsula of the Dardanelles), and that narrow peninsula,
the last extremity of the land, was marked by their third
and irreparable defeat. By the destruction of their army,
Attila acquired the indisputable possession of the field.
From the Hellespont to Thermopylæ and the suburbs of
Constantinople he ravaged without resistance and without
mercy the provinces of Thrace and Macedonia. Heraclia
[36]

and Constantinople might perhaps escape this dreadful
irruption of the Huns.'... Belisarius is said by the
historian to have intrenched himself at Melanthius, about
twenty miles from Constantinople, and there repulsed
seven thousand Bulgarians, by whom he was attacked."

Major-General Macintosh, after having described the
shore road from Constantinople to the lakes, describes the
inland road as follows:—

"Quitting the city by the gate of Adrianople, and leaving
on the right the River Sydaris, vulgarly called the Ali-bey,
which flows through a ravine into the Golden Horn,
not far from where it receives the Barbysis (now called
the Kheat-Khaneh-soo), the road passes between the two
great barracks of Ramish Chiflik and Daoud Pasha, situated
about two miles from the walls where the Turks,
looking much too near the city for its strongest defences,
formerly erected field-works, which, though fallen into
decay, might, if repaired, serve as the scene of a last
struggle with the enemy. This neighbourhood is intersected
by the subterranean conduits and lofty aqueducts

397

which convey water from Kalfas, Kavas-Kioi, and other
great reservoirs to Constantinople; and though when I
visited them they were quite undefended, the Chekmagee
lines if erected would effectually protect these works. The
vast importance of preserving them will be understood
when it is recollected that Constantinople is situated on
the extremity of a wedge of land ill supplied with springs
or running streams, and in a climate where, at certain
seasons, there is but little rain for months. Leaving the
aqueducts behind, a country is now traversed resembling
that on the parallel route already described, but in which
the heights are bolder, and the valleys more abrupt, while
small towns and farm-houses are of more frequent occurrence,
and the supply of water near the road is, by means
of copious artificial fountains and occasional rivers by
which it is crossed, considerably more abundant. This
highly defensible track extends as far as the Chekmagee
lines, which may be said to run from the two lakes on
the Sea of Marmora, nearly to the fort of Kara-bornoo,
on the Black Sea, where it has in its front the salt lake of
Derkos, and the narrow ledge dividing it from the sea,
which, no doubt, might be easily cut through so as to
admit the waters of the Euxine. Our approach to the first
of these lines, or that nearest Constantinople, is marked,
after passing a khan and fountain, by the summit of a
bold position on the Constantinople side of a river flowing
through a deep ravine towards the lesser lake, and hence
a view is obtained of Kuchuk Chekmagee and the neighbouring
sea. Descending into the ravine, the road, which
is generally good, crosses the river by a substantial stone
bridge, close to which is a fountain, and ascending the
steep bank on the opposite side passes a large walled farm,
where another position commences.

"From this point we come on a succession of inferior

398

slopes, dipping towards the lakes and marshes, each affording
a position.

"One of these about two miles from the Chatsalda marsh
in its front, to which it extends, has, in its course, a little
to the west of the road, a small isolated height, well
suited for a fort or telegraph. From this eminence there
is an extensive view, embracing the second lake, with its
town and isthmus; and several villages occur on both
sides of the road. This locality is well suited for
the encampment of troops, being elevated above the
marshes, and at the same time not far distant from
water.

"Descending the height the road commences the passage
of the marsh, by a narrow ancient causeway composed of
square blocks of stone, often much displaced, and frequently
intersected by the Kara-soo and other streams,
over which long stone slabs are placed, forming a species
of bridge removable at pleasure, thus adding to the other
means available here for preventing the advance of an
enemy. A similar road leads also from Chatsalda towards
Derkos, on the Black Sea, a distance of about ten miles,
where the right of the lines described would rest near the
Cape and Fort of Kara-bornoo. Chatsalda is also about
ten miles from the greater bridge, and fifteen or sixteen
from the lesser; and, unfortunately, is in front of the
lines, or it would have formed a good station for a depôt,
or might have been the head-quarters of a force during
the healthy season of the year.... The country extending
from the Sea of Marmora to the right of the
Chatsalda road is very well secured. Thence to the Black
Sea the heights become still bolder, and the valley deeper,
till the road crosses the Lesser Balkan. The course of the
River Kara-soo lies through one of the ravines peculiar
to the country, which look like abrupt cracks across the

399

mountain ranges, and of this peculiar formation the
Bosphorus itself affords the most striking example.

"A third pass to the right leads through the lines by the
village of Kastana-Kioi, and a fourth across the heights of
the Lesser Balkan transversely by a road which leads from
it along the shore to Midia, joining one from the mouth of
the Bosphorus. The three last-mentioned roads, as well
as the Chekmagees, could, if strengthened by defensive
works, be included in a position comparable with any
existing."

END OF VOL. II.

LONDON:

GILBERT AND RIVINGTON, PRINTERS,

ST. JOHN'S SQUARE.

FOOTNOTES

[1]
The Caimacan did not exaggerate, judging by Consul-Gen.
Mansfield's official Report, see
Appendix I. p. 323
, also
Appendices
II.
and
III
.

[2]
These remarks of the Mutasarraf Pacha resemble those
made on the same subject by other Pachas in Asia Minor.
All these Turkish gentlemen had the same opinion of the
Russian Ambassador.

[3]
See Consul Taylor's Report on this subject,
Appendix XII.,
p. 363.

[4]
See statement made by the Circassian Deputies,
Appendices
IX.
and
X.
,
p. 351-353
.

[5]
This extract is quoted from a remarkable pamphlet, entitled
"Circassia," published by Hardwicke in 1862.

[6]
See
Appendix IV., p. 333
.

[7]
See Routes which cross the Euphrates and Tigris,
Appendix
XIV.

[8]
See Importance of Syria from a Military Point of View,

Appendix XV.

[9]
See Mr. Taylor's Report to the British Government on this
matter,
Appendix XXII., p. 363
.

[10]
A small coin, but often used as a general term to express
money.

[11]
Fortunately for the Turks in the present war, the Russian
cavalry has so far proved itself very inefficient.

[12]
This actually happened in the first engagements in the
neighbourhood of Deli Baba.

[13]
Since my stay at Erzeroum, the defences of that city have
been strengthened.

[14]
Major-General Macintosh, writing in 1854 on the subject,
remarks that "in their desire to win over the Kurds, the Russian
authorities proceeded so far, that on the pretext that they
were a migratory people, they claimed a right for them to cross
the frontier for the purpose of grazing their cattle; and that
even in Turkey they should still be looked upon as Russian
subjects, and have no imports to pay on that side." He continues,
"I have no doubt it is the interest of Russia that the
Kurds should to a certain degree be weakened and scattered,
though it has been her crafty policy, while urging or encouraging
Turkey in this course (referring to attacks upon Kurds),
to pretend to be their champion and friend. She has pursued a
similar course among the Turkomans to the eastward of the
Caspian; and when in a contiguous part of Asia I heard of
dresses of honour having been given to the chiefs, at the same
time that the Shah of Persia was encouraged to attack them
from the south. The more these various tribes of barbarians
weaken themselves by their incessant conflicts, the more they
are paving the way for the dominion of such a power as
Russia."

[15]
Subsequent events have proved how right General Kohlmann
was in his opinion.

[16]
Fortunately during the present war the Kurds have
remained true to the Sultan, or Major-General Macintosh's
predictions might have been realized.

[17]
For Importance of Syria from a Military Point of View, see

Appendix XV., p. 383
.

[18]
Major Millingen goes more fully into particulars about this
custom of the Kurdish women. See
Appendix XIII., p. 366
.

[19]
See
Appendix IX., p. 351
.

[20]
See
Appendix I., p. 323
.

[21]
See
Appendix IV., p. 337
, Russian Agents and the Massacres
in Bulgaria.

[22]
See
Appendix VII, p. 349
, The Schoolmasters in Massacre.

[23]
Hamlet, i. 5.

[24]
The first witness examined at this Court of Inquiry was
Sir Charles Russell, Bart., M.P. for Westminster.

[25]
See
Appendix IV., p. 337
.

[26]
See
Appendix I., p. 323
, The Floggers of Women and
Children.

[27]
See
Appendix VII., p. 349
, The Schoolmasters in Massacre.

[28]
See
Appendix IV., p. 339
.

[29]
See
page 333
.

[30]
Is this the way the Rev. Mr. Malcolm Maccoll would like to see
the union of the Eastern and Western churches brought about?

[31]
This is worth while remembering—F. B.

[32]
This is worth while remembering—F. B.

[33]
I extract these lines from an American paper, which declares that
they were written by the Prelate in question. To the best of my
belief the Bishop has not denied the statement nor the sentiments
which the verses express.—F. B.

[34]
Daravish Bey is the last of that celebrated family. He is nearly
ruined owing to some dealings with an Armenian usurer.

[35]
Bulgarians.

[36]
Situated at the modern Erakler, forty miles beyond Busuk
Chekmagee.

End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of On Horseback Through Asia Minor,
Volume 2 (of 2), by Fred Burnaby

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ON HORSEBACK THROUGH ASIA ***

***** This file should be named 58738-h.htm or 58738-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/8/7/3/58738/

Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.