The Project Gutenberg EBook of The King's Ring, by Zacharias Topelius

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The King's Ring
Being a Romance of the Days of Gustavus Adolphus and the
Thirty Years' War

Author: Zacharias Topelius

Translator: Sophie Öhrwall
Herbert Arnold

Release Date: February 7, 2019 [EBook #58838]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE KING'S RING ***

Produced by Al Haines

THE KING'S RING

BEING A ROMANCE OF THE DAYS OF

GUSTAVUS ADOLPHUS

AND THE THIRTY YEARS' WAR

TRANSLATED FROM THE SWEDISH OF

ZACHARIAS TOPELIUS

BY

SOPHIE ÖHRWALL AND HERBERT ARNOLD

With a Photogravure Portrait of Topelius

(missing from source book)

LONDON

JARROLD & SONS, 10 & 11, WARWICK LANE, E.C.

[
All Rights Reserved
]

Copyright

London: Jarrold & Sons

Boston: L. C. Page & Company

CONTENTS.

INTRODUCTION—WHICH TREATS OF THE SURGEON'S PERSON AND LIFE

I.—
THE KING'S RING.

CHAPTER

I.
THE BATTLE OF BREITENFELD

II.
THE NOBLEMAN WITHOUT A NAME

III.
LADY REGINA

IV.
LADY REGINA'S OATH

V.
JUDITH AND HOLOFERNES

VI.
THE FINNS AT LECH

VII.
NEW ADVENTURES

VIII.
NÜRNBERG AND LÜTZEN

II.—
THE SWORD AND THE PLOUGH.

I.
A MAN FROM THE PEASANTS' WAR

II.
ASHAMED OF A PEASANT'S NAME

III.
THE SOUTHERN FLOWER COMES TO THE NORTH

IV.
THE PEASANT—THE BURGHERS—AND THE SOLDIER

V.
LADY REGINA ARRIVES AT KORSHOLM

VI.
THE LOVE OF THE NORTH AND THE SOUTH

VII.
THE SIEGE OF KORSHOLM

III.—
FIRE AND WATER.

I.
THE TREASURE FROM THE BATTLEFIELD

II.
TWO OLD ACQUAINTANCES

III.
THE TREASURY

IV.
DUKE BERNHARD AND BERTEL

V.
LOVE AND HATE AGREE

VI.
THE BATTLE OF NÖRDLINGEN

VII.
THE LOST SON

VIII.
THE FUGITIVE LADY

IX.
DON QUIXOTE DE LA MANCHA

X.
KAJANEBORG

XI.
THE PRISONER OF STATE

XII.
THE TEMPTER

XIII.
AVAUNT, EVIL SPIRIT

XIV.
THE JUDGMENT OF THE SAINTS

XV.
BERTEL AND REGINA

XVI.
THE KING'S RING—THE SWORD AND THE PLOUGH—FIRE AND WATER

INTRODUCTION.

WHICH TREATS OF THE SURGEON'S PERSON AND LIFE.

The surgeon was born in a small town of East
Bothnia, the same day as Napoleon I., August 15th,
1769.  I well remember the day, as he always used to
celebrate it with a little party of relatives and a dozen
children; and as he was very fond of the latter, we
were allowed to make as much noise as we pleased,
and throw everything into absolute confusion on this
anniversary.

It was the pride of the surgeon's life that he was
born on the same day as the Great Conqueror, and
this coincidence was also the cause of several of his
important experiences.  But his pride and ambition
were of a mild and good-tempered kind, and quite
different from the powerful desires which can force
their way through a thousand obstacles to attain an
exalted position.  How often does the famous one
count all the victims who have bled for his glory on
the battlefield, all the tears, all the human misery
through which his way leads to an illusionary greatness,
perhaps, doomed to last a few centuries at most?

The surgeon used to say that he was a great rogue
in his childhood; but exhibiting good intelligence,
he was sent by a wealthy uncle to a school in Vasa.

At eighteen, with a firkin of butter in a wagon, and
seventeen thalers in his purse, he went to Abo to
pass his examination.  This well accomplished, he
was at liberty to strive for the gown and surplice of
an ecclesiastic.  But his thoughts wandered far too
often from his Hebrew Codex to the square where the
troops frequently assembled.

"Oh!" thought he, "if I were only a soldier, standing
there in the ranks, and ready to fight like my
father, for king and country."

But his mother had placed an emphatic veto on the
matter, and exacted a solemn promise from him that
he would never become a warrior.

Before, however, he was through Genesis, an
incident suddenly occurred which completely altered his
good intentions.  This was an announcement in the
daily paper from the Medical Faculty, which stated
that students who wished to take service as surgeons
during the war could present themselves for private
medical instruction, after which they could reckon
upon being ordered out with five or six thalers per
month to begin with, as the war was at its height.

Now, young Bäck would no longer be denied; he
wrote home that as a surgeon's duty is to take off
the limbs of others, without losing his own, he wished
to volunteer.  After some trouble he received the
desired permission.  In a moment the Codex was
thrown away.  He did not learn, he devoured surgery,
and in a few months was as capable a chirurgeon as
most others; for in those times they were not very
particular.

Our youthful surgeon was in the land campaigns
of 1788 and 1789; but in 1790 at sea; was in many
a hard battle, drank prodigiously (according to his own
account), and cut off legs and arms wholesale in a most
skilful way.  He then knew nothing about the coincidence
of his birth with Napoleon's, and therefore did
not yet consider himself as under a lucky star.  He
often told the story of the eventful 3rd of July in
Wiborg Bay, when on board the "Styrbjörn" with
Stedingk, at the head of the fleet, they passed the
enemy's battery at Krosserort's Point, and he was
struck by a splinter on the right cheek, and carried
the mark to his grave.  The same shot which caused
this wound wrought great havoc in the ship, and
whizzing by the admiral's ear, made him stone-deaf
for a time; Bäck with his lancet and palsy drops
restored Stedingk's hearing in three minutes.  Just
then the danger was greatest and the balls flew thick
as hail.

The vessel ran aground.

"Boys, we are lost," cried a voice.

"Not so!" answered Henrik Fagel, from Ahlais
village, in Ulfsby, "send all the men to the bow; it
is the stern that has stuck."

"All men to the prow," shouted the commander.
Then the "Styrbjörn" was again afloat, and all the
Swedish fleet followed in her wake.  Bäck used to
say:

"What the deuce would have become of the fleet
if Stedingk had remained deaf?"

Everyone understood the old man; he had saved
the entire squadron.  Then he used to laugh and add,

"Yes, yes!  You see, brother, I was born on the
15th of August; that is the whole secret; I am not to
be blamed for it."

After the war was over, Bäck went to Stockholm,
and became devoted to the king.  He was young, and
needed no reason for his attachment.

"Such a stately monarch," was his only idea.

One day, in the beginning of March, 1792, the
surgeon, a handsome youth—to use his own expression—had
through a chamber-maid at Countess Lantingshausen's,
who in her turn stood on a confidential
footing with Count Horn's favourite lackey, obtained
a vague inkling of a conspiracy against the king's
life.  The surgeon resolved to act Providence in
Sweden's destiny, and reveal to the monarch all
that he knew, and perhaps a little more.  He tried
to obtain an audience of the king, but was denied
by the chamberlain, De Besche.  A second attempt
had the same result.  The third time, he stood in
the road before the royal carriage, waving his written
statement in the air.

"What does this man want?" asked Gustave III. of
the chamberlain.

"He is an unemployed surgeon," replied De Besche,
"and begs your Majesty to begin another war, that
he may go on lopping off legs and arms."

The king laughed, and the forlorn surgeon was
left behind.

A few days afterwards the king was shot.

"I was blameless," the surgeon used to say when
speaking of this matter.  "Had not that damned De
Besche been there—yes, I won't say anything more."

Everyone understood what he meant.  The "if"
in the way was also due to his birthday on the 15th
of August.

Shortly afterwards Bäck represented his profession
at a state execution.  Here his free tongue got him
into trouble, and he fled on board a Pomeranian yacht.
Next we find him tramping like a wandering quack
to Paris.  He arrived at an opportune moment, and
received a humble appointment in the army of Italy.
One night, under the influence of his birthday, he
left his hospital at Nissa, and hurried to Mantua to
see Bonaparte; he wished to make of the 15th of
August a ladder to eminence.  He managed to see
the General, and presented a petition for an
appointment as army physician.

"But," sighed the surgeon, every time he spoke of
this remarkable incident, "the General was very busy,
and asked one of his staff what I wanted."

"Citizen General," answered the adjutant, "it is a
surgeon, who requests the honour of sawing off your
leg at the first opportunity."

"Just then," added the surgeon, "the Austrian
cannon began to thunder, and General Bonaparte
told me to go to the devil."

Thus the surgeon, who had preserved so many
eminent personages, was deprived of the honour of
saving Napoleon.  He got camp fever instead, and
lay sick for some time at Brescia.

When well he travelled to Zurich, and here fell
in love with a rosy-cheeked Swiss girl; but before
he could marry her, the city was overrun, first by
the Russians, then French, and finally by Suvaroff.
The surgeon's betrothed ran away, and never returned.

One day he sat sorrowfully at his window, when
two Cossacks came up, dismounted, seized him, and
hurried him off at full speed.  The surgeon thought
his last hour had arrived.  But the Cossacks brought
him safely to a hut.  There sat some officers round a
punch bowl, and among them a stern man in large
boots.

"Surgeon," said the latter, short and sharp, "out
with your forceps; I have toothache."

Bäck ventured to ask which tooth it was that ached.

"You argue," said the man impatiently.

"No, I don't," replied the surgeon, and pulled out
the first tooth he got hold of.

"Good, my boy!  March," said the other, and the
surgeon was dismissed with ten ducats.

He had acquired another important merit by pulling
out the tooth of the hero Suvaroff.

The surgeon's next considerable journey was to
St. Petersburg, where he obtained an appointment
in a hospital, and made a little fortune.

Thus passed four or five years.  The surgeon was
now thirty-five.  He said to himself,

"It is not sufficient to have preserved the Swedish
fleet, Gustave III., and Armfelt; to have had an
interview with Napoleon, and pulled out a tooth for
Suvaroff.  One must also have an aim in life."  And
he began to realise that he had a Fatherland.

When the war of 1808 broke out, the surgeon
became an assistant physician in one of the Finnish
regiments; he no longer fought for glory and the
15th of August.  He took part in the campaigns of
1808 and 1809.  Then he fought manfully with
misery, disease, and death; cut off arms and legs,
dressed wounds, applied plasters, solaced the wounded,
with whom he shared his flask, bread, purse, and what
was much more, his unalterable good humour, and
told a thousand funny stories gathered in his travels.
He was called the "tobacco doctor," because he was
always ready to share his pipe and quid.  One can
be a Christian even with tobacco.  The surgeon was
not so stuck up that he, like Konow's corporal, went
about

"With two quids from sheer pride."

On the contrary, he went without himself when the
need was great, and a wounded comrade had got the
last bit of the roll in the pocket of his yellow nankeen
vest.  Hence the soldiers loved the tobacco doctor.

When peace was concluded between Russia and
Sweden in 1809, the latter having lost Finland
through a foreign traitor, who gave up Sveaborg to
the enemy, and so many Finns went over to Sweden,
the surgeon thought it more honourable to remain
and share the fortunes of his native land.  He
travelled round the country and practised amongst
the peasantry.  But the Medical Faculty of Abo
finally forbade him to continue, and he therefore
settled down at Jacobstad, his native place, and took
to fishing.  In the days of his prosperity the surgeon
had been too liberal; he now only owned his old
brown cloak, yellow nankeen vest, a hundred fish
hooks, and his cheerful disposition.  But he now
obtained the appointment of public vaccinator, which
allowed him to roam about the country twice a year,
like old times.  No one knew better than he how
to lull the little children to rest, whilst he pricked the
fine soft flesh of their arms; almost before they knew
it the pain was over.

This gained for him the goodwill of all the
mothers; they even forgave him the ugly habit of
chewing tobacco—it was too late to cure it now.

Then the snow of old age stole gently o'er the
surgeon's head.  He had gone through the storms of
life without losing faith in humanity; never
hardening under adversity, nor unduly puffed up when
fortune smiled.  He was throughout a good soul.

Often in our childhood and first youth we sat up
there in the old garret chamber around his leather-covered
arm-chair, by the light of the crackling fire,
listening to his tales from the world of fiction and
from life.  His memory was inexhaustible, and as the
old
runa
says, that even the wild stream does not
let its waves flow by all at once, so had the surgeon
continually new stories of his own time, and still
more from periods which had long passed away.

It sometimes happened after we had been listening
to the old man, that he took out an electric
battery, and drew from it a succession of sparks.

"In that way the world sparkled when I was young,"
he said smiling; "one had only to apply a finger, and
click it flashed in all directions.  But then it was our
Lord who turned the machine."

But rarely had he a story written like that of the
Duchess of Finland.  Most of them were given orally.
Many years have since passed; part I have forgotten,
and some I have compared with traditions and books.
If the reader finds a pleasure in them, then the
surgeon will not have told his tales in vain during the
long winter evenings.

I.—THE KING'S RING.

Reader, as you sit in your peaceful home, surrounded
by the calm of civilisation, can you recall the grand
heroic memories of the past, which after centuries
remain illuminated with a bright glow, and are also often
darkened with blood and tragedy?  Can you transport
yourself back to the joys and terrors of the past,
and take a vital interest in those struggles and battles
long since fought out, and become full of hopes or
fears as fortune smiled or betrayed?

Stand with me on the heights of History, and
looking far around on the wild arena of human
destiny, can you transfer yourself to the vale of the
past, the physically dead and buried, but spiritually
immortal life, which forms the being and substance
of all History?

Reader, have you ever seen History depicted as
an aged man with a frozen heart and wise brow,
trying all things in the balance of reason?  But is
not the Genius of History like an ever youthful virgin,
full of fire, with a living heart and a flaming
soul—human, warm, and beautiful?

If then you have the capacity to suffer or rejoice
with the generations that have passed away, to love,
and hate with them, to admire, despise, and curse as
they have done; in a word, to live amongst them
with your whole heart, and not merely with your cold
reflecting mentality, then follow me.  I will lead
down the valley; but your heart will guide you better
that I; upon that I rely—and begin.

THE KING'S RING.

CHAPTER I.

THE BATTLE OF BREITENFELD.

Through the histories of Germany and Sweden the
fame of mighty names has resounded for centuries;
at their mention the Swede raises his head aloft, and
the free German uncovers his with admiration.  These
are Leipzig, Breitenfeld, and the 7th of September,
1631.

King Gustaf Adolf, with his army of Swedes and
Finns, stood on German soil to protect the holiest
and highest things in life—Liberty and Faith.

Tilly, the terrible old corporal, had invaded Saxony,
and the king pursued him.  Twice had they met;
the tiger had challenged the lion to the combat, but
the latter would not move.  Now for the third time
they faced each other; the crushing blow must fall,
and the fate of Germany trembled in the balance.

At dawn the Swedes and Saxons crossed the Loder,
and placed themselves in battle array at the village
of Breitenfeld.

The king rode along the lines, and inspected
everything.  His eye beamed with delight on these brave
men; the left wing was composed of Gustave Horn's
cavalry, Teuffel was in the centre, and Torstensson
with his leathern cannon in front.  The Livonians
and Hepburn's Scots were both in the second line.

The king commanded the right wing, composed
of several regiments of cavalry and the Finns.

"Stälhandske," said he, checking his large steed
at the last Finnish division, "I suppose you
understand why you are here.  Pappenheim is opposite,
and longs to make your acquaintance," he added
smiling, "and I expect a vigorous attack from that
quarter.  I rely upon you Finns to receive him right
royally."

The king then raised his voice and said,

"Boys, do not blunt your swords upon those iron-clad
fellows, but first tackle the horses, and then you
will have light work with the riders."

The Finns were proud of their danger and the
honour of their position.  The king inspired all with
courage and self-reliance.  But these short, sturdy
fellows on their small horses seemed unequal to the
onset of the big Wallachians upon their strong and
heavy chargers.  Tilly held the same opinion.

"Ride them down," he said, "and horse and man
will fall powerless under the heels of your steeds."  But
Tilly did not know his foes.  The outer bearing
of the Finns was deceptive.  Their iron muscles and
calm courage, with the hardihood of their horses, gave
them a decided advantage over their enemies.

"Well, Bertila," said Stälhandske, turning to a
young man who in the first rank rode a handsome
black horse, and was noticeable from his height and
bearing, "do you feel inclined to win the knight's
spur to-day?"

The one addressed seemed astonished, and
coloured up to the brim of his helmet.

"I have never dared to aspire so high," he
answered.  "I—a peasant's son!" he added with
hesitation.

"Thunder and lightning, the boy blushes like a
bride at the altar!  A peasant's son?  What the
devil, then, have we all come from in the beginning?
Did you not provide four fully equipped horsemen?
Has not our Lord placed a heart in your breast, and
the king a weapon in your hand?  That is in itself a
coat of arms; you must attend to the rest."

A multitude of thoughts passed quickly through
the young man's mind.  He thought of the days of
his childhood in far-off Finland.  He remembered
his old father, whose name was also Bertila, and who
during the peasant war was one of Duke Carl's best
men.  When the latter became King Carl the Ninth,
he gave his follower four large farms; each of these
had to provide a man and horse for military service.
Owing to this, old Bertila became one of the richest
peasants in the country.  He thought of the time
when his father first sent him to Stockholm, in the
hope that he would some day attain honour and
distinction by the king's side; then of his own ambition
which had induced him to neglect study and take
private lessons in riding and fencing.  At last his
father gave him permission to join the king's Finnish
cavalry.  Now he, a peasant's son, was about to strive
to raise himself to the level of the haughty nobility.
It was this thought that made him blush, and under
its influence he felt he could face any danger.

Moreover, he was about to fight under the king's
eye, for his faith and the honour of his country.  The
whole army was animated by the same high principles,
which rendered them invincible, and made
them realise the victory before the battle had begun.

Before the young horseman had time to reply to
his generous leader, the king's high voice was heard
in the distance calling to prayer.  The hero took off
his helmet and lowered the point of his sword, and
all the troops did the same.  The king prayed:

"Thou all-merciful God, Who bearest victory and
defeat in Thy hand, turn Thy beneficent countenance
to us, Thy servants.  From distant lands and
peaceful homes have we come, to fight for freedom,
and Thy Gospel.  Give us victory for Thy Holy
Name's sake.  Amen."

A deep trust at these words filled every heart.

At noon the attacking Swedish army came within
range of the Imperial cannon.  The Swedish artillery
answered, and the conflict began.  As the sun shone
right in the assailants' eyes, the king made his army
wheel to the right, so as to get the wind and sun on
the side.  Pappenheim tried to prevent this.  He
rushed forward with the speed of lightning, and took
the Swedish right in flank.  At once the king threw
the Rhine Count's regiment and Baner's cavalry upon
him.  The shock was terrific; horses and riders fell
over each other in utter confusion.  Pappenheim drew
back, but only to throw himself the next instant on
the Finns.  But the furious charge of the Wallachians
was in vain; they met a wall of steel; their front
rank was crushed, and the next turned back.  The
second attack was no better, and Pappenheim raged;
for the third time he rushed to the assault; the
Livonians and Courlanders now assisted the Finns.
The latter received the enemy with calm courage;
nothing could break through that living wall.

The heat of the conflict had gradually excited the
Finns, and it was now scarcely possible to hold them
in.  Stälhandske's mighty voice sounded high above
the roar and din of the conflict; and once more the
foe was thrown back.  Now the Finnish lines broke,
but only to enclose the enemy.  Then it became a
hand-to-hand struggle.  Twice more the Wallachians
charged and were repulsed.  The seventh time
Pappenheim was followed only by a few of the most
determined of his followers, and when this last
desperate effort failed all was over.  The remaining
Wallachians scattered themselves in the wildest flight
toward Breitenfeld.

Covered with blood and dust the Finns took breath.
But as soon as the smoke cleared off, they saw other
foes in front.  These were the Holsteiners, who had
supported Pappenheim.  The Finns could not be
checked.  With the East Goths they surrounded the
Holsteiners and annihilated them; these brave fellows
died in their ranks to a man.

Whilst this happened on the right, the left was in
great danger.  Furstenberg's Croats had made the
Saxons give ground, and Tilly then advanced his
powerful centre.  Torstensson's cannon played havoc
in the ranks; Tilly moved aside and charged the
Saxons.  The ranks of the latter were immediately
broken, and they fled in the greatest disorder.  Tilly
now turned his victorious troops against the Swedish
left wing.  The latter were slowly pressed back.  The
king then hastened up and ordered Callenbach's
reserve to the rescue.  Almost immediately both
Callenbach and Teuffel fell.  Then Hepburn's Scots
and the Smälanders came up; the Croats fell upon
them, but the Scots opened their ranks, and several
masked batteries played with terrible effect on the
former.  Under the fire of the Scots whole ranks
were shattered, and amidst the dense smoke and
dust the combatants were mingled together in utter
confusion.

Victory still hung in the balance.

But now a diversion occurred which decided the
battle.  The king with his cavalry and the Finns had
captured the Imperial artillery on the heights, and
now turned it against the latter.  In vain Pappenheim
tried to recapture the guns; he was repulsed in
disorder.  Then the king, with his invincible right wing,
charged the enemy in flank; the Imperialists were
lost.  Tilly wept with rage: Pappenheim, who had
hewed down fourteen men with his own hand, was
mad with fury.  No one, however, could rally the
Imperial troops, and Tilly, whose horse was shot
under him, barely escaped being taken prisoner.  The
king's victory was decisive.

But a terrible sequel remained.  Four regiments
of Tilly's veteran infantry had reformed, and now
sought to check the pursuit.  The king charged them
with Tott's cavalry, the Smälanders, and Finns.  It
was a terrific combat; the Wallachians fought with
the fury of despair; no quarter was asked or given.
At last darkness saved the remnant of these brave
men, who retreated on Leipzig.

The battle was over.

Great results followed this victory; and in the
evening the king rode from rank to rank, to thank
his brave troops.

"Stälhandske," said he, when he came to the Finns,
"you and your men have fought like heroes, as I
expected.  I thank you, my children!  I am proud
of you."

The troops responded with a joyous cheer.

"But," continued the king, "there was one among
you who sprang from his horse, and first of all scaled
the heights to seize the Imperial guns.  Where is he?"

A young horseman rode from the ranks.

"Pardon, your Majesty!" he stammered.  "I did it
without orders, and therefore merit death."

The king smiled.  "Your name?"

"Bertila."

"From East Bothnia?"

"Yes, your Majesty."

"Good.  To-morrow morning, at seven o'clock, you
may present yourself, to hear your doom."

The king rode on, and the horseman returned to
the ranks.

Night broke over the awful field, covered with 9,000
dead.  The Finnish cavalry encamped on the heights,
where Tilly's guns were captured.  The dead were
taken away, and fires of broken gun-carriages and
musket-stocks spread their light in the September
night; through a clear sky the eternal stars looked
down upon the battlefield.

The cavalry gave their horses fodder, and watered
them at the muddy Loder.  Then they bivouacked,
each in his division, around the fires, armed and
ready to jump at the first call The ground was
damp with dew, and slippery with blood, but many
were so fatigued that they fell asleep as they sat
around the fires.  Others kept themselves in good
spirits by passing round cups of ale, of which they
had a good stock.  They drank in jesting fashion to
the health of the Imperialists.

"And that they to-night may die of thirst

Or drink to their own funeral

Eläköön kuningas!"

At this moment a woeful voice was heard quite
near, earnestly calling for help.  The soldiers,
accustomed to such things, knew by the accent that the
man was a foreigner, and did not trouble.  But the
cries continued without ceasing.

"Pekka, go and give the Austrian dog a final
thrust," cried some of the men, who were irritated by
these wailing sounds.

Pekka, one of Bertila's four dragoons, short, but
strong as a lion, went unwillingly to silence the
offender's voice.  Superstitious, like all these soldiers,
he was not at home amidst the dead on a dark night.
Bertila, absorbed in thinking of the next morning,
did not hear it.

In a few minutes Pekka returned, dragging after
him a dark body, which, to everyone's surprise, was
found to be a monk, easily recognised by his tonsure.
Around his common gown he wore a hempen rope,
and to this hung the scabbard of a sword.

"A monk!  A Jesuit!" exclaimed the soldiers.

"Yes, but what could I do," said Pekka, "he parried
my thrust with a crucifix."

"Kill him!  It is one of the devil's allies who
prowl around to murder kings and burn faithful
Christians at the stake.

"Away with him!  When we carried the heights,
this same man stood with his crucifix among the
Imperialists and fired off a cannon."

"Let's find out if the precious object is of silver,"
said one of the men, and pulling aside the monk's
gown he drew forth, in spite of his struggles, a crucifix
of silver, richly gilded.

"Just as I thought, the devil has plenty of gold."

"Let me see it," said an old veteran.  "I know
something about monks' tricks."

As he pressed a little spring in the image's breast,
a keen dagger sprang from it.  As if bitten by an
adder, he threw the crucifix from him.  Rage and
horror seized the bystanders.

"Hang the serpent by his own rope," shouted the men.

"There is no tree," said one, "and no one is
allowed to leave the lines."

"Drown him!"

"There is no water."

"Stab him!"

No one was willing, from aversion, to touch the
monk.

"What shall we do with him?"

"Misericordia!  Gnade!" said the prisoner, who
now began to recover his speech and strength.

"Give him a kick and let him go," said one.  "We
are Christians, and fear no devilry."

"At least I will mark you first, so that we may
know you if we meet again," cried one of the soldiers
named Vitikka, renowned for his strength and
brutality.  He flourished his sword several times round
the monk's head, and then with two dexterous strokes
cut off both the prisoner's ears, before he could be
prevented by his comrades.  It was most skilfully
accomplished.

"St. Peter could not have done it better," said
Vitikka laughing.

Those who were standing around turned away.
Although they were accustomed to the cruelties of
war, this was too savage even for them.

Bleeding, the Jesuit crawled away on his hands and
feet.  But long afterwards his voice was heard from
the darkness:

"Accursed Finns!  May the eternal fires consume
you!"

"Our Father, which art in Heaven," a voice
exclaimed from the group of soldiers.  And all uttered
the prayer with devotion.

CHAPTER II.

THE NOBLEMAN WITHOUT A NAME.

At dawn on the 8th of September, the Swedish army
was exercised.  They felt sure of complete victory.
From all parts news arrived that the enemy's army
was almost destroyed.  The king left one division
of his troops to follow the Imperialists; whilst the
rest received the agreeable order to loot Tilly's camp:
the spoil was divided into lots.  The treasures were
enormous, and many a man was enriched for life.
The whole army wore a joyous look; the dead were
quickly buried, and the wounded forgot their pains.
In the bright September morning, the battlefield was
covered with groups of delighted soldiers, and here,
if ever, Beskow's words could be used, "The air was
cooled with the waving of the flags gained in the
victory."

The king had passed the night in a carriage.  After
he had read the army prayers, and given orders for
the first part of the day, he called for those who had
most distinguished themselves in the battle.  And
now many a brave deed was recognised with honours
and promotion.  But higher than any other reward,
was the inner satisfaction, and the praise they received
from this hero, whom the whole of Europe had now
learnt to admire.

Amongst those who were specially called was a
young man, who plays a great part in this history.
Gustaf Bertila was only twenty years old, and his
heart was beating at this time more rapidly than it
had ever done in the most terrible moments of the
conflict.  He knew well that the noble king would
not take any account of his crime, which was that
he had disobeyed orders in battle; he blushed and
grew pale by turns, as he thought of what the king
might mean by this special summons, which was in
itself a great honour.

The king had erected his tent under one of the
great elms, at Gross Wetteritz, because all the
buildings in the neighbourhood were burnt or destroyed
by friends or enemies.

After waiting for half an hour, Bertila was
introduced into the royal presence.  Gustaf Adolf was
sitting on a low chair, and his arm was resting on a
table, covered with maps and papers.  The king was
tall and portly, and his tight-fitting buff coat made
him look still more corpulent.

When Bertila entered, the king lifted up his mild
and beautiful blue eyes; he had just signed an order,
and looked sharply at the young man.

Gustaf Adolf was short sighted, and therefore had
a difficulty in recognising persons, and when he met
individuals only slightly known to him, it gave his
look a peculiar sharpness, which, however, disappeared
immediately.

"Your name is Bertila," said the king, as if he
wished to assure himself that he had heard it correctly
the day before.

"Yes, your Majesty."

"Aged twenty years," said the king, watching him
closely with a strange look.

"Yes, your Majesty."

"His son did you say?"

The young man bowed his head and blushed.

"How strange!" the king muttered this to himself,
and seemed for a moment to be in deep thought.  He
then said,

"Why have you not announced yourself to me
before?  Your father has done my father and the
country great service.  He is then still alive."

"He is alive, and thankful for your Majesty's goodness."

"Really so."

The king said this more as if a secret thought had
escaped him, than as a remark to the listener.  The
young man felt the colour mount to his cheeks, and
the king noticed it.

"Your father and I once had a quarrel," continued
the king, and he smiled, but a cloud was seen on his
brow.  "But this was all forgotten long ago, and I
am glad that such a good man has such a brave
son.  You were amongst the seventy Finns at
Demmin."

"Yes, your Majesty."

"And no one has mentioned you for promotion?"

"My colonel has promised to remember me."

"Your king never forgets a real service.  Gustaf
Bertila, I have just signed your commission as
sub-lieutenant.  Take it, and continue to serve with
honour."

"Your Majesty," said the young man.

"I have something more to say to you.  Your
action yesterday was against orders."

"Yes, your Majesty."

"I want my soldiers to obey implicitly.  I have
been told that you dismounted at the foot of the
steepest hill, so that you could get up quicker."

"It is true your Majesty."

"And that you reached the top of the hill first,
whilst the others had to ride round; and that you
killed two of the enemy, and took the first cannon."

"Yes, your Majesty."

"It is good, sub-lieutenant Bertila; I forgive you,
and promote you to the rank of lieutenant in my
Finnish cavalry."

The young man could not speak.  The king himself
laboured under considerable emotion.

"Come nearer, young man," said the king.  "You
ought to know that once, in my youth, I did your
father a considerable injury.  Heaven knows that I
repent, and has at last given me an opportunity to
repair to the son the injustice done to the father.

"Lieutenant Bertila, you are brave and noble, and
you have received a military education.  You have
also brought into my service four soldiers.  In your
position as officer in my army you are already
considered a nobleman.  That none of my officers shall
look down upon you as a peasant's son, I will give
you a name, and the knight's spur."

"Go, young man.  Go, my son," repeated the king
with great emotion, "and show that you are worth
the king's favour."

"Until death."  And the young man bent his knee
to the king.  The latter stood up.  The emotion
which had for a moment passed over his fine face
now disappeared, and he was again the royal leader.

The young Bertila understood that the time had
come to retire.  But he still remained in his kneeling
position, and gave the king a letter, which he, until
this day, had carried sewed in his coat.

"May I ask your Majesty to read this letter.
When I said farewell to my old father he gave me
this letter, and said, 'My son, go and try to win your
king's favour, through your faithfulness and valour.
And if some day you can obtain it for your own
sake, and not only for the sake of your father's name,
then give him this letter, and tell him that it is my
last will.  His great heart will understand what I
mean.'"

The king opened the letter and read it, and on
his face was seen that deep flush, which in his later
years was the only sign of the struggles of a soul,
able to control itself.  It came as a light cloud on the
king's forehead, deepened for a moment, and then
passed away without leaving any trace.  When he
had finished reading, his eyes rested for a moment
on the handsome youth who was still kneeling at
his feet.

"Stand up," said the king at last.

Bertila obeyed.

"Do you know what this letter contains?"

"No, your Majesty."

The king watched him closely, but was satisfied
with the honest and truthful expression of his face.

"Your father is a strange man.  He hates all noblemen
since the days of the Peasants' War.  He fought
many tough battles as their leader; and Fleming's
troops took possession of his farm.  He forbids you
ever to bear a noble name, if you wish to avoid his
curse."

Bertila did not reply.  A thunder-bolt from a clear
sky had come down upon his happiness, and all his
dreams of a noble and knightly name had been
destroyed at one blow.

"A father's will must be obeyed," continued the
king with great seriousness.

"The noble name which I had intended for you,
you cannot accept.  Do not feel sad, my young friend,
you shall keep your sword and your lieutenant's
commission; with them, and your brave arm, the path
to honour will always be open to you."

The king now dismissed him, and the young man
left the tent with mixed feelings.

CHAPTER III.

LADY REGINA.

In the beginning of October, 1631, it was a dull
autumn day, about three or four weeks after the
battle of Breitenfeld, and in one of the rooms of the
tower of the castle of Würzburg the beautiful Regina
von Emmeritz was sitting with several of her
attendants; they were all working on a banner of white
silk with the image of the Holy Virgin on it.  It
was intended for a standard of victory to stimulate
the troops defending the castle.  The young maidens
indulged in an animated conversation, for the terror
of the castle, the old, selfish bishop, had just started
off, as he alleged, on a journey through the diocese,
but in reality to escape Gustaf Adolf's approaching
warriors.  Trembling for his treasures, he had
previously entrusted the defence of the town and castle
to the valiant and trustworthy captain of horse, Keller,
with fifteen hundred men; and this commander, relying
upon the impregnable position of the fortress on
the banks of the Main, had assured his reverence that
the heretic king should crush his head against the
walls, before any of his godless host obtained an
entrance.

The lovely Regina was scarcely sixteen, and her
curls were dark as the night, cheeks rosy as the dawn,
and black eyes shining like two stars which at midnight
mirror themselves in a mountain lake.  She was
the pet and idol of the aged bishop; he had therefore
unwillingly left her with his other treasures in
the castle, depending, however, upon Keller's
assurance that the thick walls well mounted with heavy
guns, were, in such uncertain times, the best harbour
for beauty and gold; and Keller was a commander
of fidelity and honour; with such a precious trust
he would sooner bury himself underneath the ruins
of the fortress than surrender.

Lady Regina raised her brilliant eyes from the
embroidery and glanced through the little turret
window over the river, where at that moment a
carriage, escorted by some troopers, was crossing the
bridge from the town to the castle.

"Who is this traveller?" she said, with the
concentrated gaze which rarely fixed itself upon any
object except the large and beautiful marble image
of the Madonna in her sanctuary.

"Ah!" exclaimed Ketchen, the youngest and most
talkative of the maidens, "ah, Holy Virgin, how
charming it is to live in such times as these!  Every
day, new faces, stately cavaliers, brave young knights,
and now and then a little feast in town.  It is quite
a different thing from sitting shut up in a cloister, and
hearing the monks chant De Profundis from morn
till eve.  Yes," continued she saucily, "may his
grace, the bishop, only stay away a good long time!"

"Ketchen," admonished Regina, "take care not to
speak ill of the services and masses of the monks!
Remember that our confessor, Father Hieronymus,
is a member of the Holy Inquisition, and that the
castle dungeons are deep and dark."

Ketchen remained silent for a moment.  But
directly afterwards she boldly said,

"If I were in your place, lady, I would rather
think of the handsome Count of Lichtenstein, than
of that terrible Father Hieronymus.  He is a valiant
knight; God grant that he may return victorious
from the war against the heretics!"

"May they all be exterminated by fire and sword!"
interjected one of the girls in a devout manner.

"Poor heretics!" said Ketchen smiling.

"Beware!" repeated Lady Regina, with naïve
earnestness.  "A heretic deserves no mercy.  Anyone
who kills a heretic has pardon for seven sins; Father
Hieronymus has often thus instructed me.  To hate
the heretics is the eighth sacrament, and to love a
single one of them is to consign your soul to eternal
torment."

Regina's black eyes emitted fire with these words.
One could easily see that the worthy father's
teachings had taken deep root in her soul.

Still Ketchen did not refrain.

"It is said that their king is good and noble, and
that he shelters all the weak, and does not allow his
soldiers to plunder and outrage their enemies."

"Satan often assumes the disguise of an angel."

"They also say that his men are brave and humane.
I myself heard an old Italian soldier tell the knights
in the armoury how seventy men belonging to a
heretic people called Finns, defended their king for
more than an hour against fifteen hundred
Neapolitans.  And when most of these Finns had fallen,
the rest were succoured and finally triumphed;
afterwards they bound up the wounds of their enemies as
well as their own."

Lady Regina rose, and was about to return a quick
answer to this unpalatable speech, but at that moment
a servant appeared at the door, and announced that
the Count of Lichtenstein, sick and wounded, had
arrived at the castle, and craved shelter.  The young
lady, who, as the niece of the old bishop, took the
part of hostess of the castle in his absence,
immediately hastened down to welcome the new arrival,
who was a distant relative of the family.

The maidens now exchanged significant glances,
as if they considered this event especially opportune.
It had long been gossiped amongst them that the
old bishop had chosen the count as the future husband
of the young lady.  But in vain had they endeavoured
to discover any signs of emotion on the part of their
young mistress at the intelligence of his arrival.  If
Lady Regina entertained any tender passion, she well
knew how to conceal it.

"Is it true," asked one of the girls, "that the king
of the heretics has won a great victory over the
soldiers of the true faith, and is now approaching this
castle with his godless army?"

"So it is said," answered another.  "But he is
unable to come here.  Our people have erected the
image of the Swedish saint, Brigitta, in his path, in
Thüringer forest, and she will stop his progress."

In the meanwhile, Lady Regina had ordered one
of the bishop's own apartments to be put in order for
the guest, and provided in every way for his comfort.
The young Count of Lichtenstein was a proud and
stately youth, dark as a Spaniard, and with eyes
almost as bright as Regina's.  He approached the
beautiful hostess with faltering steps, and with an
ardent glance, before which Regina cast down her
eyes.

"How grateful I should be to heaven," he said, "for
these wounds, which have procured me the happiness
of having such a beautiful hostess!"

The count's wounds were numerous, but not dangerous.
Taken captive at Breitenfeld, he had shortly
afterwards, still weak from his wounds, been
exchanged, and immediately hastened here, to regain
health and strength in the neighbourhood of his
heart's mistress.

"But," he added, "I heard with great alarm that
the enemy, seeking whom they may devour, were on
their march hither to the rich vales of Franconia.
Then I hurried, quickly as I could, to share with you,
beautiful Regina, all these dangers and terrors.  Be
calm!  Königshofen will make a stand against them,
and Father Hieronymus, who, also wounded, escaped
from the disastrous field of Breitenfeld, is busy
inciting the country people to resistance all along the
enemy's advance.

"And so you think," anxiously asked Regina, "that
these terrible heretics will venture as far as this
place?"

"The protection of the saints will be with beauty
and faith," answered the count evasively.  "Besides,
we shall soon receive more reliable news."

As he spoke, Regina looked out of the window, and
perceived a troop of horsemen, who were hurrying at
full speed towards the fortress.

"I cannot be mistaken," she exclaimed; "it is
Father Hieronymus himself who returns here."

"A bad omen," muttered the count between his
teeth.

Lady Regina was right; it was Father Hieronymus
who at that moment rode over the drawbridge.  In
appearance, the father was a little insignificant man,
thin and pallid, with sharp features, and deeply sunk,
hollow eyes, whose quick glance fled inquiringly from
one object to another.  He still wore the long sword
suspended from the rope round his waist.  But the
bald spot no longer shone on the crown of his head;
wounded at that place, he wore over it a sort of
skull-cap or calotte of leather, the black colour of
which made a ghastly contrast with his cadaverous-looking
face.  Never had the dreaded Jesuit showed
himself in so forbidding a form.  The men-at-arms
stood at attention, and all the servants in the castle
hastened to receive his commands.  A secret anxiety
took possession of all the bystanders.  It looked as
if terror and death had ridden in his train through
the gates of Würzburg Castle.

The monk hastily surveyed the garrison drawn up
in the courtyard, and then greeted Lady Regina with
a smile, which was probably intended to make him
look more agreeable, but which had exactly the
opposite effect.

"St. Petrus and all the saints protect you,
gracious lady!  The times are very awful, very bad.
The Holy Virgin has allowed the vile heretics to
penetrate to our very gates—on account of our sins!"
he added, crossing himself devoutly.

"And Königshofen?" inquired Count Fritz, who
anticipated the answer.

"The treacherous commander has capitulated."

"But did not the peasants oppose the enemy's
march through the forest?"

"All scattered like chaff—on account of our sins."

"And the holy Brigitta's image?"

"The vile heretics have placed it as a scarecrow in
a wheat-field.  But," continued the Jesuit, his voice
acquiring suddenly a commanding tone, "what is this
I see, my daughter?  Why are you still here, and
the castle filled with women and children, while the
enemy may arrive at any moment at your gates?"

"Lady Regina shall never need a protector as long
as I am alive," exclaimed Count Fritz.

"The castle is provisioned for a whole year," said
Regina timidly.  "But, worthy father, you are
fatigued, you are wounded, and need rest.  Allow me
to dress your wounds; you are hurt in the head."

"It is nothing, my daughter.  Do not think of me.
You must fly instantly to the impregnable fortress of
Aschaffenburg."

"Ha!  I fear it is too late," exclaimed Count Fritz,
who was looking out upon the river and town.

"Holy Virgin, are they already here?"

The Jesuit and Lady Regina rushed to the window.
The afternoon sun was shedding its rays over
Würzburg and the surrounding country.  Horsemen could
be seen riding at full gallop through the streets, and
a whole host of panic-stricken people were rapidly
moving towards the castle—monks and nuns, women
and children, dragging after them a number of
hand-carts containing the best of their household effects.
Beyond the town, in the direction of Schweinfurter,
on the east bank of the river, appeared a troop of
cavalry, from whose threatening but cautious advance
one could easily recognise the vanguard of the
Swedish army.

"Accursed devils!" burst out the Jesuit, with an
indescribable expression of hatred on his pallid face.
"These heretics can fly.  May the earth open and
devour them!"  And he ran out with frantic zeal to
place himself at the head of the garrison.

The bishop's castle, also called Marienburg, raises
its old walls high above the right bank of the Main.
On the river side of the town the rock is high and
precipitous, but on the other side sloping and easily
ascended.  A rampart in the shape of a half moon
formed a formidable outwork before the gates;
and if the enemy surmounted this obstacle, a deep
moat, cut in the solid rock, awaited him on the other
side; and even if he crossed this successfully, the
inner and higher castle wall blocked his way, lined
with steel-clad defenders, prepared to receive him
with a devastating fire, and crush him with the large
stones collected on the walls.  The only passage over
the river was a narrow bridge, and the forty-eight
guns of the fortress commanded and swept the whole
town and neighbourhood.  From this it will be seen
that Keller at the head of 1,500 valiant troops, and
well provided with all necessaries, had good reason
in bidding the departing bishop to be of good
heart.

But Gustaf Adolf had an overwhelming reason for
becoming master of this castle, cost what it would.
Tilly had now drawn to himself large reinforcements,
and stood, a few weeks after the battle of Breitenfeld,
fully equipped and eager for revenge, with
30,000 men on the march from Hessen, to assist
Würzburg.

The king summoned the town, and forced his way
into the suburbs, but it was already late in the day,
and the attack had to be postponed.  The next
morning the town surrendered.  But Keller had profited
by the darkness of the night to transfer his whole
force, a large number of fugitives, and the portable
property of the town, to the castle, after which he
blew up two arches of the bridge, and thus blockaded
the enemy's way.

But to return to the fortress.

That night none but the little children could sleep
in the bishop's castle.  Crowds of soldiers, monks, and
women, were constantly arriving; one baggage-wagon
after the other rattled in through the castle gates;
the vaults echoed with the cries of the watch, the
orders of the officers, and the children's crying, and
above all this noise and confusion one could plainly
hear the masses of the monks, who were invoking
in the chapel the protection of the Holy Virgin and
all the saints, on behalf of the threatened fortress, the
strongest castle of the Catholics in all Franconia.

In order to provide for this human host, Lady
Regina had not only opened the bishop's private
rooms, but also the two spacious drawing-rooms set
aside for her own use in the interior of the castle,
and with her maids moved up to the small chambers
in the east turret.  In vain it was represented to her
that this point was exposed to the fire of the enemy.
She here had the best and most extensive prospect
in the whole fortress, and was not willing to forego it.
"Do not interfere with me," she said to the
cautious Jesuit; "I wish to see the heretics mown
down by our guns.  It will be a fine spectacle."

"Amen," answered Father Hieronymus.  "You
remember, my daughter, that this castle is protected by
two miraculous images of the Virgin, one of pure
gold, the other of gilded wood.  I will hang up the
latter in your apartment; it will avert the enemy's
shot like so many puff-balls from your turret."

At daybreak, Lady Regina was on the look-out at
her little turret window.  It was a glorious sight,
when the sun rose over the autumn hills with their
still verdant vineyards, through which the River Main
wound like a glittering serpent of gold and silver in
the morning light.  In the town all was activity; four
Swedish regiments marched in with flags flying and
drums beating, their armour shining in the bright
sunlight, and the plumes of their officers waving in
the wind.  At this sight, fear and curiosity came into
conflict in the minds of the maidens.

"Do you see," said Lady Regina to Ketchen, "the
two cavaliers in their yellow waistcoats, who ride at
the head of the heretics?"

"How handsome they are!  Now they turn round
the street corner—there they are again.  Just see how
everyone makes way for them!"

"Send for Count Fritz.  He was in the Swedish
camp for more than a fortnight, and knows their
leaders."

The count, who was prevented by his wounds from
taking part in the defence of the castle, immediately
obeyed the Lady Regina's summons.

In the meantime the Swedes had taken full
possession of the town, and began to show
themselves in scattered groups on the river banks.  At
that moment the castle guns opened fire, and here
and there a ball fell among the Swedes, who
immediately sought shelter behind the houses by the
river.

"Holy Mary, a man was struck over there and does
not move again!" cried Ketchen, who could not
conceal her sympathy.

"St. Francis be praised, there is one heretic less
in the world!" rejoined old Dorthe, Lady Regina's
duenna, who had been appointed by Father Hieronymus
to guard all her steps.

"But it is terrible to shoot a man."

Count Fritz smiled.

"Fräulein Ketchen, you should have been on the
field of Breitenfeld.  Nine thousand corpses!"

"It is horrible!"

"Count, can you inform me who those horsemen
are, who, in spite of the storm of cannon-shot, keep on
the river bank and seem to be closely examining the
defences of our castle?"

"Pardon me, charming cousin, the smoke blocks
my sight.  Those cavaliers—upon my honour, it is
the king himself, and Count Pehr Brahe.  I would
not be in their shoes if Father Hieronymus sees them.
He would undoubtedly bring all the guns of the
fortress to bear upon them."

At these words old Dorthe crept silently from the
room.

"My cousin, why do you thus regard the heretic
leader?"

"Beautiful Regina, why do your eyes flash fire at
the thought.  You are, yourself, so generous and
noble, can you not understand my sympathy for a
brave and chivalrous foe?  The king of Sweden is a
hero, well worthy of our supreme admiration, as well
as of our great enmity."

"I fail to comprehend you.  A heretic!"

"God preserve you from some day seeing him
within these walls; you will then understand me much
better.  Ha! they are now preparing to assault the
bridge; they are throwing planks over the destroyed
arches.  By Heaven, that is courageous!"

"Now, four fell at once!" exclaimed the excited
Ketchen.

"I know them well," said Count Fritz, growing
more and more agitated by the sounds of the battle
and the loud thunder of the cannonade, which made
the fortress walls shake.  "They are the Scots.  There
are no finer soldiers in the whole Swedish army; the
Scots and Finns are always in the front of the battle."

"Ah! see there, my cousin, the Scots recoil; they
dare not try to leap the abyss.  That truly requires
superhuman courage.  Twenty-four feet underneath
the planks rushes the flood."

"Two young officers dash out on the planks."

"They are the youthful brothers Ramsay.  I recognise
them by their blue scarves.  They love the same
lady, and both sport her colours, without loving each
other any the less."

"Oh God, guard them!  Ah, Holy Virgin, this is
fearful!" and Ketchen hid her face in her apron.

Before the brave and intrepid Scots could reach
the centre of the planks, they lost their balance,
reeled, and then fell headlong into the river.  For a
short time they struggled with the flood, but wounded
by bullets from the castle, their strength soon failed
them, and their heavy armour made them sink in
the waters; another moment, and these gallant youths
sank to rise no more.

"You rejoiced at war not long ago," said Lady
Regina to Ketchen, assuming a calmness which she
did not feel in her agitated heart.

"Oh, yes, at the handsome young knights; the
feasts and music, but not at this!" exclaimed the
crying Ketchen.

"The Scots retreat!" exclaimed another of the
girls.

"Yes," replied the reflecting count, "but the Swedes
have begun to cross the river in boats."

"The Scots are returning to the attack."

"Just as I imagined," said the count calmly.

"God preserve us! they have succeeded; they are
now on this side.  Our troops attack them."

"Lady Regina, do not expose yourself so much at
the window.  The Swedes may aim their cannon at
the turret."

"Count, do you fear?" Regina smiled as she said
this.

Lichtenstein coloured up.

"I have satisfied myself that I have courage
enough," he answered.  "Hearken, and you will every
now and then distinguish a peculiar whizzing, and a
rattling like the fall of stones; you do not know what
this is.  I will tell you.  These are cannon-shot, Lady
Regina; you would know this better if the noise
outside was not so deafening.  For some time the
balls have been shattering the walls of the turret, and
almost always at the same place.  Fair cousin, these
are no sugar-plums.  The Swedes must have been
taught to shoot by the Wild Huntsman."

"Do you really think——"

"That the enemy intend to destroy this turret, and
will fill the castle moat with the debris?  Yes, cousin,
and I believe they will do it very soon.  You are in
danger here, every moment, and must go somewhere
else."

"Immediately, good count, at once!  Come, lady!"
cried Ketchen, trying with friendly violence to take
her young mistress away with her.  But Regina was
in an exalted mood.  In the habit of ruling, and
perhaps from the defiant nature of her character, full of
strange contrasts, joined to the burning fanaticism
which the Jesuit had implanted in her mind from
childhood ... she stepped backwards, grasped the
gilded image of the Virgin, which Father Hieronymus
had sent to guard her, and placed it in front of
herself on the window-sill.

"Go," she exclaimed; "you are weak in the faith;
you doubt the protection of the holy saints.  I shall
remain, and the efforts of the heretics will avail
nothing against——"

Lady Regina's speech was not finished, when a
ball struck the turret at an oblique angle, knocking
away a piece of the facing.  A shower of stone
fragments hurtled through the window, demolishing the
image of the Holy Virgin, and enveloping Lady
Regina in dust and dirt.

"You must away!  Now you see for yourself!"
cried the count.

"Let us go!" exclaimed all the girls nearly
paralyzed with fear.

But Regina, nearly overwhelmed for a moment,
recovered her self-confidence, and stooped down to
pick up the image, saying with faith,

"They cannot triumph over the Holy Mother."

She was deceived.  The wooden virgin had
broken into several fragments.  A sceptical smile
played around the count's lips, and he now led
without any opposition his terror-stricken relative from
the turret.

While this was happening, Keller, with the quickness
and perception of a thorough soldier, had made
every arrangement for a vigorous defence.  He was
unable to stop the Swedes from crossing the river,
but the nearer they came, the more destructive was
the fire of his artillery.  The enemy's ranks were
decimated by his shot; and the whole day they could
do nothing.

Father Hieronymus and his monks ran around
the walls, deluging the guns with holy water, and
making the sign of the cross over every touch-hole.

Old Dorthe had whispered in his ear, and the
Jesuit's gaze was directed towards the place where
someone had just seen the Swedish king and his
companion.  The worthy priest now wished to aim,
himself, one of the heavy guns towards the spot; but
before firing he fell on his knees and repeated four

pater nosters
and
ave Marias
.  Then followed the shot;
but in vain did the anxious Jesuit look for the effect.
Unhurt, as before, the forms of the two horsemen
were seen through the vanishing smoke.  The monk
now thought that four
paters
and four
aves
were
too little, and accordingly repeated eight of each sort,
and then fired again.  Disgusting!  The balls would
not touch the selected objects.  Providence had not
yet rung the death-knell of Gustaf Adolf, and Pehr
Brahe it wished to spare for the sake of Finland.
Who can estimate what would have succeeded
Sweden's victories, and Finland's learning, if the
Jesuit's shots had reached their mark?

Father Hieronymus fumed.  Once more he resolved
to try with twelve
paters
and twelve
aves
, when
someone touched him on the back; he turned round and
saw an old soldier, who had been exchanged with
Count Lichtenstein.

"Cease your efforts," said the veteran in a firm tone,
"it is a needless waste of powder; you are trying
to kill a man with a charmed life; he is invulnerable."

The superstitious Jesuit muttered something with
a low breath.

"I should have divined as much.  But how do you
know this, my son?" he added.

"I was told of it in the Swedish camp.  On the
forefinger of his right hand the king wears a little
copper ring, inscribed all over with magical signs.
This was given to him in his youth by a Finnish
witch, and as long as he wears this ring, neither fire,
water, iron, or lead can injure him."

"Nothing affects him, you believe?  Oh,
maledicti
Fennones
, why do you follow me everywhere?"

"No iron or lead," whispered the veteran, "but I
can tell you of something else."

"Say on, my son; you are absolved beforehand."

"But, good father, it is a sinful method."

"All means are justified for the benefit of our Holy
Faith.  Speak, my son."

"Gold from a holy image."

"Never, my son, no; we dare not do that.  Had it
been a dagger of glass, or an occult poison, it would
do; but gold from a saint's image, no, my son, let us
forget the unholy idea."

Meanwhile the cloak of night had descended, and
death's work for the time was finished.  The worn-out
soldiers refreshed themselves with food and drink,
and Keller passed around some fine liquors to sustain
their courage.

Lady Regina had moved down to one of the inner
apartments; Count Fritz had gone to bed.  Soon all
was silent, except the call of the sentinels, the songs of
drunken soldiers, and the murmur of the feast which
Keller gave to his officers in the armoury.  But in
the fine chapel, where stood the pure golden statues
of Christ and the Virgin Mary, the midnight mass
was over, and all the monks except one had gone to
rest, or—the wine-cup.  This lonely figure was still
kneeling before the altar, and the perpetually burning
lamp shed its dim rays over the praying pallid Jesuit.

"Holy Virgin," prayed he, "forgive thy humble
servant for daring to take from thee a small piece of
thy golden robe.  Thou knowest, oh sanctissima, that
it is for a holy and sacred end, in order to kill the
sworn enemy of the holy church, the heretic king,
whom the heathen Finns with their devilish arts have
rendered invulnerable to the steel and lead of the true
believers.  Grant that the gold, which I, in thy
honour, take from thy glorious mantle, may pierce
the wicked heart of the godless king, and I promise
thee, holy mother, to replace what thou hast lost by
a costly robe of velvet and pearls.  Three gilded
candles will I cause to burn also, night and day,
before thy image.  Amen."

When Father Hieronymus had finished his devotions,
he looked up, and it appeared to him as if the
image in the light of the eternal lamp smiled its
approval to the fanatical petition.

CHAPTER IV.

LADY REGINA'S OATH.

The next day was one of hot and furious battle.  The
Swedes bombarded the castle with a heavy fire, and
drew near to the walls under the cover of earthworks.
The Imperial troops fought well.  Time was precious
for both sides; in a few days Tilly would be in the
rear of Gustaf Adolf; a possible thunder-bolt to the
Swedes; a certain relief for the garrison.

Lady Regina and her attendants were now shut
up in the inner rooms, and could no longer view the
extraordinary spectacle of the siege.  But there was
much to do within.  Large numbers of wounded had
to be nursed; the young lady moved like a spirit of
light from couch to couch in the armoury, where the
wounded had been placed; her healing hands poured
balm on their wounds; her compassionate voice
poured consolation into their hearts.  She spoke of
the Holy Faith for which they suffered; promised
honours and rewards to those who recovered, and
eternal salvation to the dying.

The heavy artillery thunder made the walls tremble.
Lady Regina suddenly remembered that she had
left her rosary up in the little turret, and it was now
needed for the prayers of the dying.  She had already
reached the threshold of the armoury, when a terrific
crash shook the castle to its very base.  Pale with
fear, she hesitated, and at the same moment the Count
of Lichtenstein rushed in.

"What has happened?" exclaimed the young lady.

"Thank the saints, my fair cousin, that you took
my advice yesterday.  The turret has fallen."

"Then we are lost."

"Not yet.  The Swedes thought it would fall into
the moat, but it has fallen inside.  The enemy will
soon try an assault.  Come to this window which
overlooks the walls.  Can you see?  Father Hieronymus
is on his knees by the large gun.  I will wager
that he sees the Swedish king."

The count was right.  The Jesuit's keen glance
was fixed on one spot, and his lips hastily muttered
prayer after prayer.  He had discovered Gustaf
Adolf on horseback with Pehr Brahe.  The two kept
near the outworks, sheltered somewhat by a heap of
debris.  Father Hieronymus relied upon the heavy
shot, into which, with prayers and fasting, he had run
the gold from the Holy Mother's mantle.  He
stooped to direct the cannon, and the pupils of his
eyes contracted, his nostrils expanded, while Latin
prayers continued to flow from his lips.  Then he
rose quickly, and after swinging the lighted match
in the form of a cross, fired.

The gun belched forth flame and smoke.  Oh, hate
and fury!  When the smoke cleared off, the two
horsemen still rode unharmed side by side.  But this
time Gustaf Adolf had a narrow escape, for the
ball had struck the debris, and covered both with
dust.

Tired, weary, and quite exasperated, the Jesuit left
the ramparts.

"Wait, ruler of Belial, until I succeed in taking
your ring from you, and then you shalt be destroyed!"

The king now commanded an assault on the
outworks.  Axel Lilje, Jacob Ramsay, and Hamilton,
pressed on with their men.  Frightful difficulties were
here encountered.  They were obliged to climb up
the steep rocks under a heavy fire, and then cross
the moat and scale the walls.  The irresistible Scots
and Finns led the way.  Those who fell were
immediately replaced by others, with their swords
between their teeth.  The king himself rode as near
as possible in order to encourage his troops.  A bullet
tore away a piece of his glove, without wounding him.
It was now a common belief that Gustaf Adolf was
invulnerable.

At last, after two hours desperate conflict, the
Scots and the Finns triumphed.  The outworks were
captured, and the defenders driven back into the
castle.  It was then four in the afternoon.

A few hours rest ensued.  At a council of war it
was resolved to storm the castle at daybreak, and the
Finns were to lead the forlorn hope.

The position of the garrison was far from hopeless.
They could still concentrate 1,000 men at any
threatened point.  But they had lost their moral
courage.  In vain did Keller try to restore their
spirits; in vain did the monks carry the golden image
of the Virgin around the ramparts.  At nightfall
disorder reigned; the troops refused to obey orders,
and some wished to escape in the darkness.

At midnight, Lady Regina was praying before the
altar in the chapel to the mother of God.

"Holy Mary," she whispered, "guard this castle
against the heretics.  But if it be thy will that the
fortress shall fall, then also bury in its ruins all thy
enemies: the godless king, and his heathen Finns
who have fought the most to-day against thy Holy
Cause."

"Amen!" said the voice of Father Hieronymus
behind her.  A dark smile played over his pale
countenance.

"Do you realise what you are asking for, my
daughter?"

"Victory for the Catholic faith.  Death to the
heretics."

"The youthful mind is subject to change.  Have
you sufficient devotion to hate the enemies of the
faith, even if ever, as a woman, you felt tempted to
love one of them?"

"I have, my father; yes, I declare it!"

"You are my penitent, and I would save your soul
from eternal damnation.  Have you courage to sacrifice
yourself for the holy faith, and thereby secure
the eternal crown of a martyr?"

"Yes, my father!"

"Very well; then know that the fortress will be
taken in a short time.  You will be a prisoner; you
are young and beautiful, and may easily win the
king's favour.  When you can approach his person,
and the Holy Virgin grants an opportunity, you
must——"

The Jesuit now took out a crucifix of silver, and
when he pressed a spring in the breast of the
image, a keen dagger flew out.

"Grace, my father; this task is terrible.

"No respite.  The Holy Church demands a blind
obedience.
Perinde ac cadaver
.  As a corpse which
has no will of its own.  Do you love the Holy
Virgin?"

"You know that I do."

"Look at her golden robe.  She has lost a part
of it during the night.  It is a bad omen, and indicates
her anger.  Do you love me also, my daughter?"

"I revere you more than anyone else, my father."

"Then look at this mutilated head."

The Jesuit removed his black leather cap, and
exposed the horrible stumps of two severed ears.

"Thus have the blasphemous king's Finns treated
your confessor and friend.  Do you still hesitate to
avenge the mother of God and myself?"

"What must I do, my father?"

"Listen!  The heretic king wears on his right
forefinger a ring of copper; this is a talisman against
death and injury.  You must gain possession of this
ring by some artifice, and then if your arm is too weak
to deal the blow, call upon me.  We will reach his
heart, even if it was guarded by a dragon's scales."

"If it is the will of the saints ... so be it."

"Place two fingers on this crucifix, and repeat this
oath.  I swear by this cross, and by all the saints, to
accomplish what I now vow before the image of the
Holy Virgin.  If I ever break this oath, may a curse
rest upon me and my posterity to the seventh
generation.

"Thy will be done on earth, as it is done in
Heaven.  Amen!"

Lady Regina faithfully repeated these words after
the monk.

The night's silence sealed this terrible oath, which,
with iron fetters, chained the coming generations to
the hesitating decision of a girl of sixteen.

While this passed, the troops of stormers assembled
in the outworks.  A number of volunteers had
obtained permission to join them.  All relied upon
victory.

Among the volunteers appeared Lieutenant Bertel.

"Thunder and lightning! is that you, Bertel?"
exclaimed Lieutenant Larsson.

"As you see," said the youth, shaking his hand
cordially.

"Well, I declare, the good boy wishes to sport his
new commission.  There's not a single drop left in
my flask.  But say, why have you changed your
name, Bertel?  What sort of a mixture is it? neither
Swedish or Finnish."

"It was done at Breitenfeld," said Bertel, slightly
blushing.  "The comrades have long called me so,
and—it is shorter."

"Well, I hope you are not too proud to bear a
peasant's name, now you are an officer?"

"Have the lots already been drawn?" said Bertel.

"No.  You are just in time to try your luck."

As all the younger officers desired the honour of
leading the forlorn hope, the difficulty was settled
by drawing lots.  After these were shaken up in a
helmet, Bertel was the successful competitor.

"Look out for yourself, my boy!" cried little
Larsson.  "Thunder and lightning, remember that
the castle is full of Jesuits.  Trap-doors everywhere,
a dagger in every crucifix, and at the moment of
victory the castle will be blown up."

It was half an hour to the dawn.  Bertel with
seven men was ordered to closely reconnoitre the
fortress.  The rest of the troops were held in readiness.

The night was pitch dark.  Bertel's men approached
the drawbridge without being challenged: To their
complete astonishment they found it down.*

* Some authors say that the drawbridge could not be drawn up on
account of the weight of the many dead who were left there after the
strife.

Bertel stopped for an instant, remembering
Larsson's warnings.  Was this a trap?  All was
silent.  Then Bertel and his men stepped softly over
the bridge.

"Who goes there?" thundered a German sentinel
through the darkness.

"Swede!" cried Bertel, cleaving his head.  "Comrades,
the castle is ours!"

And the seven pushed on resolutely after him.

Inside the drawbridge stood two hundred
Imperialists on guard.  These became panic-stricken
and thought the whole Swedish army was upon them.
They tried to regain the sally-port, but the bold
lieutenant and his seven men opposed them.  The
darkness in the arched gateway was impenetrable;
friend could not be distinguished from foe.  The
press soon became so great that no sword could be
used, and the rash assailants were in danger of being
crushed to death by the rushing host of mailed
warriors.

But those in the outworks had heard Bertel's cry,
and the whole Swedish force now rushed against the
castle; the rest of the garrison seized their weapons
and hastened to defend the entrance.  But the Finns
had obtained a footing, and in a short time stood
inside the castle yard.  Keller and his men fought
desperately, and many Swedes and Finns fell here,
at the very moment of victory.  Their fall excited
their countrymen to revenge.  They began to cry,
"Magdeburger pardon," and this shout meant death
without quarter to all the Imperialists.  The carnage
became awful.  Many monks threw themselves into
the mêlée, some with torches, some sword in hand.
Most were cut down, others cast themselves on the
ground feigning death.  Day had broken over the
sanguinary scene.

Then Lennart Torstensson started forward, seized
the madly struggling Keller round the waist, and took
him prisoner.  The remainder of the Imperialists
laid down their arms, and all was over.

CHAPTER V.

JUDITH AND HOLOFERNES.

When the first rays of the sun glittered in the waves
of the River Main, the castle of Marienburg was in
the hands of the Swedes.  The king rode up to the
courtyard, which was covered with killed and wounded
enemies, and amongst these were more than a score
of monks.  Some of these appeared to the king to be
shamming death.

"Stand up," he said to them, "and no evil shall
befall you."

Immediately many of those who were pretending
to be dead stood on their feet sound and well, and
bowed low, full of joy and gratitude to the king.

The castle had been taken by storm, and the
soldiers were allowed to plunder.  The quantity of
silver, and gold, and weapons, and other valuable
things was enormous.  The king reserved the
armoury, with its complete equipments for 7,000
infantry and 4,000 cavalry, 48 guns and 4 mortars,
the stables with fine and valuable horses, and the
wine cellar filled with the very best wines.  The
library was sent to Upsala, and donated to the
university.  The sacred statues of gold and silver
found their way to the Treasury.  Although many of
the inhabitants of the town were allowed to take away
their property, the booty was so great that when the
soldiers divided it, the money was measured in
helmets.  At last Keller had to lead the way to the
concealed treasure vault.  This was deep down in
the rock underneath the cellar of the castle; here the
bishop kept his treasures.  Fryxell relates, that when
the soldiers carried up the heavy chests, the bottom
fell out of one of them, and the gold rolled over the
courtyard.  The soldiers hurried to pick it up.  Some
they gave to the king, but most of it went into their
own pockets.  Gustaf Adolf saw this, and said,
laughing, "Never mind, boys; now that it has once come
into your hands, you may as well keep it."  The
spoil was so great that after that day there was
scarcely a soldier in the whole army who did not
have a new suit of clothes.  In the camp a cow was
sold for a riks thaler, a sheep for a few stivers, and
the learned Salvius writes, "Our Finnish boys, who
are now accustomed to the winelands down here, are
not likely to wish to return to Savolax.  In the
Livonian war they often had to put up with water
and mouldy bread, now the Finns can concoct a
beverage in their helmets with wine and spices."

Amongst the prisoners was the Count of Lichtenstein
and Lady Regina.  The king ordered that they
should both be treated with the greatest respect.  He
offered the young lady a safe conduct to go to the
bishop, her uncle.  Lady Regina rejected this on
account of the insecurity of the times, and asked as
a favour to be allowed to remain under the king's
protection for the present.  Gustaf Adolf agreed to
this.

"I do this unwillingly," said the king, smiling, to
the Margrave of Baden Durlach, who was riding by
his side.  "Young ladies are a luxury in the camp,
and they turn the heads of my attendants; but she
may come with me to Frankfurt, as a hostage; it will
bind the hands of the bishop."

"Your Majesty knows how to attract everybody
through your generosity," replied the Margrave with
the politeness of a courtier.

"Lieutenant Bertel," said the king, turning to the
officer close to him, who had the command of a troop
of Finnish cavalry, "I give Lady Regina von
Emmeritz into your charge.  She has my permission
to bring with her an elderly lady, a young girl, and
her father confessor.  See to it, that you are not
smitten, lieutenant, and above all give close heed to
the monk; that set is not to be relied upon."

Bertel saluted with his sword, and remained silent.

"One thing more," continued the king.  "I have
not forgotten that you were the first one who entered
the sally-port.  When you have brought the young
lady to safety, you must appear on duty in my
life-guards.  Have you understood me?"

"Yes, your Majesty."

"Good."  And the king then said to the Margrave
with a smile, "Believe me, it would have been serious
to leave this beautiful dark-eyed girl in the charge
of one of my susceptible Swedes.  This boy is a
Finn; they are the most phlegmatic people I know
of.  They are poor gallants; they need a year to
catch fire.  A girl can drive twenty of them out of
a ball-room; but if it comes to a battle with
Pappenheim, then your grace knows what they can do."

Gustaf Adolf gained victory after victory in the
late autumn.  Tilly, who had come too late to save
Würzburg, did not dare to attack him, and irritated
by his bad luck and constant defeats, drew back to
the Bavarian frontier.  Gustaf Adolf marched down
the Main, entered Aschaffenburg, and compelled
the cautious Frankfurters to open their gates.  On
December the 6th the king forced a march over the
Rhine near Oppenheim, and entered Mainz on the
9th, which the Spaniard de Sylva had so proudly
thought that he could defend against three Swedish
kings.  The victorious Swedish army was now spread
over the north and west part of Germany, and the
conqueror had chosen his winter quarters in
Frankfurt-on-the-Main.  A splendid court here assembled
around the hero; it was here that flattery had
previously adorned his head with the crown of the
German Empire.  It was here that Maria Elenora
came flying on longing wings to embrace her
husband; in Henau, where he had come to meet her,
she clasped him in her arms and said,

"At last the great Gustaf Adolf is captured."

One day at the end of December, 1631, the king
gave a splendid banquet in Frankfurt on account of
the queen's arrival.  Great crowds of people filled the
place outside the castle, the high Gothic windows at
night shone bright as day.  Ale and wines flowed
constantly from big casks for the people's entertainment;
around the tap-holes workmen and soldiers
jostled each other, holding out tankards and goblets,
which were quickly filled and as suddenly empty
again.  The good citizens of Frankfurt were beside
themselves with admiration for the great king.  From
man to man, the famous tales of his justice and
mildness circulated: now he had ordered a soldier to be
hanged because he had taken with force a burgher's
hen; now he had stopped in the streets and spoken
familiarly with those whom he met.  They imagined
that they saw his shadow reflected by the small
window-panes and wondered whether the German
crown would not be placed upon that mighty head
that very evening.

In the saloon of the castle a royal magnificence
prevailed.  Gustaf Adolf knew his consort's weakness
for display, and probably wished to produce an effect
on the assembled German nobility.  The floor was
covered with rich Flemish carpets, and over the
windows were draperies of crimson velvet with tassels
of gold; costly chandeliers, heavy with a thousand
wax-lights, hung from the ceiling, which was adorned
with arabesques.

They had just finished one of those measured and
stately Spanish dances, which were at that time in
vogue, and the heavy-footed Northmen had tried in
vain to compete with the German and French aristocracy.

The king had offered his arm to the queen, and
they made a promenade through the magnificent
saloons.  His tall and corpulent figure, and simple
dignity of manner, which at once inspired reverence
and love, seemed still more majestic by the side of
the slender and delicate queen, who with sincere
devotion leaned on his arm.  Maria Elenora was then
thirty-two years of age, and had retained a great
portion of her beauty, which had gained her so many
admirers in her youth.  On her black hair, which was
arranged in small curls about her snow-white temples,
flashed a diadem of fabulous value, which was a recent
gift from the king; her expressive blue eyes rested
with indescribable affection upon her royal spouse;
she seemed to forget herself, absorbed in the
admiration which the king excited.

In the wake of the royal couple followed a crowd
of all the illustrious personages of whom Protestant
Germany could boast at that time.

One saw here the deposed King Frederick of
Bohemia, the Duke of Weimar and Würtemberg, the
Landgrave of Hesse, the Margrave of Baden Durlach,
the Count of Wetterau, as well as other distinguished
chevaliers; not less than twelve ambassadors from
foreign courts had assembled here round the hero
feared by all Europe.  Of the king's own, Tott,
Baner, and Gustaf Horn were occupied in other
directions with affairs of war; but here at Gustaf
Adolf's side, great as himself, even in outer form, was
the gifted Oxenstjerna, and behind him the man with
the pale, unpretending aspect, the calm, penetrating,
and commanding look, Lennart Torstensson, as well
as the proud Finn, Wittenberg, then colonel.  Many
of the Swedish generals, and almost all the Finns,
Stälhandske, Ruuth, Forbus, and others, did not
thrive well amidst the ceremonial of the royal saloon
and amongst this haughty nobility whose court
etiquette appeared to the stern warriors unbearably
tedious, and had therefore withdrawn in good time
to one of the smaller saloons, where pages in
gold-embroidered velvet suits profusely poured the
choicest Rhine wines into silver goblets.

Among this brilliant assemblage ought to be
included the members of the common council of the
city of Frankfurt, and many of its most prominent
citizens, with their wives and daughters, as well as a
large number of ladies, from the high-born duchess
down to the scarcely less proud councillor's wife.
Yes, and one saw here even a small number of
Catholic prelates, easily recognisable by their bald
heads; for the king wished to proclaim religious
freedom by word and deed; the prelates, although
in their hearts cursing the paltry
rôle
they played
here, once invited, did not dare to stay away.

This scene was doubly gorgeous from the
splendour of the attire.  The king, however, wore a
tight-fitting suit of black velvet stitched with silver,
a Spanish cape of white satin, embroidered by the
queen's hands, short yellow leather top-boots, and the
broad lace collar which one sees in all his portraits,
with the short hair and long goatee.  The luxury-loving
queen wore a richly jewelled dress of silver
brocade with a short waist and half-bare arms; even
the little white satin slippers glittered with brilliants.

The ladies of the aristocracy and the rich burghers'
wives vied with each other in display; silver
and gold fabrics, velvet, satin, and costly Brabant
laces; also ribbons of all sorts of colours, buckles,
rosettes, and long sashes, which, fluttering in the air,
gave a picturesque effect.  Princes and knights, some
in wide German, others in close-fitting Spanish
costumes, with their plumed hats under their arms, and
attendant pages in silver and velvet, completed this
bright scene in a time when uniforms were unknown.
Flattery and admiration followed the king.

"Sire," said the artful king of Bohemia to him,
"your Majesty can only be compared to Alexander
of Macedon."

"My cousin," answered Gustaf Adolf, smiling, "you
do not mean to liken the good city of Frankfurt to
Babylon?"

"No, sire," joined in the French ambassador, Breze,
who walked by their side; "his Bohemian Majesty
only wishes to liken the Rhine to Granicus, and hopes
that the new Alexander's Hyphasis may lie beyond
the frontiers of Bohemia."

"You must confess, Count Breze," said the king,
changing the conversation, "that our Northern
beauties and your French beauties have been
conquered to-day by a German."

"Sire, I am of your opinion, that her Majesty the
Queen does not need the enviable position by your
side to be truly victorious," replied the courteous
Frenchman.

"My consort will be grateful for your politeness,
minister, but she resigns to Lady von Emmentz the
preference that belongs to youth."

"Your Majesty flatters to a great extent our
national German pride," said the Duke of
Würtemberg bowing.

"Beauty is cosmopolitan, your grace.  It was truly
a great booty my soldiers took at Würzburg."

The king then approached Lady Regina.  Her
radiant beauty was still more charming through the
tight-fitting black velvet dress strewed with silver
stars in which she was robed.

"My lady," he said courteously.  "I should be happy
if the mourning you wear covered a heart that could
forget all sad memories and only live in the hope of
a brighter future, when war and battles no longer
frighten the colour away from your beautiful cheeks.
Believe me, lady, the time will come, and I am wishing
for it with all my heart as much as you are, and let
this hope bring joy to these lips where it always
ought to remain."

"By your Majesty's side one forgets everything,"
replied Lady Regina, and rose respectfully from her
high crimson-covered chair.  But her cheeks grew
still paler while she spoke, which showed that
she could not forget the past and her present
captivity.

"Are you not well, lady?"

"Very well, your Majesty."

"Perhaps you have something to complain of?
Have confidence in me—as a friend!"

"Your Majesty is very kind——"

Regina struggled with herself.  At last she said,
with her eyes on the floor,

"Your Majesty's goodness leaves nothing to wish for."

"We shall meet again."

The king continued his walk through the saloon.

Lady Regina withdrew to a deep window recess in
one of the other rooms and wept.

"Holy Virgin," she prayed, "forgive me, that my
heart does not belong to you alone.  You who can see
into my inmost being, you know that I have not
enough strength to hate this heretic king as you
demand of me.  He is so great, so noble.  Woe unto
me, I shudder to think of the holy charge you have
given me!"

"Courage, my daughter," whispered a voice close
by, and Lady Regina's evil spirit, the pale Jesuit,
stood behind her.

"The hour is approaching," he said in a low tone.
"The godless king has been taken by your beauty;
rejoice, my child.  The Holy Virgin has decided his
destruction.  This night he shall die."

"Oh, my father, my father, what do you demand
of me?"

"Listen to me, my daughter.  When Holofernes,
the King of Assyria, besieged Bethulia, there was
a widow, Judith, the daughter of Merari, beautiful as
you, my child, devoted as you.  She fasted three
times, and then she walked out and gained the
favour of the enemy of her faith and people.  The
saints gave his life into her hands, she drew his
sword and cut off his head, and delivered her people."

"Mercy, my father!"

"It was counted unto her great honour and
ever-lasting salvation, and her name was mentioned among
the greatest in Israel.  You will some day be mentioned
like that, my daughter, amongst the saints of
the Holy Catholic Church.  Last night the Holy
Franciscus was visible by my bedside.  He said, the
time has come, go to Judith, tell her that I will give
Holofernes' head into her hands."

"What shall I do, my father?"

"Mark closely how you ought to deport yourself.
This very evening you must request a private audience
of the king."

"Impossible!"

"You shall reveal to him a fictitious plot against
his life.  He will listen to you.  You shall entice the
ring from him.  Once in possession of it, I will be
ready to assist you.  But if he refuses you the ring,
then take this paper, it contains a deadly poison;
St. Franciscus has given it himself to me.  You
shall mix it in the beverage which the king drinks
at night."

Lady Regina took the paper, and leaned her curly
head against the window-frame, and she hardly
seemed to have taken any notice of the Jesuits
terrible injunction.  An entirely new thought had
seized this ardent soul, and was working itself to
clearness.  The Jesuit misunderstood her; he
supposed that her silence proceeded from submission to
his despotism, from fanatic ecstasy over the
martyr-crown he had held up to her.

"Have you understood me, my daughter?" asked he.

"Yes, my father."

"You will, then, this evening, ask the king for a
private audience?  You will..."

"Yes, my father."

"Benedicta, ten benedicta, thou thrice-blessed
instrument, go to thy heavenly glory!"  And the Jesuit
disappeared in the throng.

The large clock in the coronation chamber pointed
to midnight.  Through an ingenious mechanism,
invented by a Nuremberger, two immense tables, set
with elegant silver service, rolled out from an
adjoining room at the twelfth stroke, and stood at once,
as if risen from the floor, in the centre of the saloon.
Upon a given sign from the master of the ceremonies,
the king and queen placed themselves before two
crimson chairs at the middle of the upper table, and
all the guests in rows, according to rank and dignity,
around the festive boards.  One of the prelates
present said grace in a loud voice, after which the
king himself recited a short psalm, and the rest with
practised voices joined in.  They now seated
themselves with considerable bustle, and once arrived so
far, they did not allow themselves to be too much
incommoded by ceremony.  The courses were both
many and savoury.  Richelieu had sent Gustaf Adolf
a French cook; but the king, far from spoiled by
good living, only employed the fine Frenchman for
ornamental dishes on occasions like this; perhaps
he did not rely fully upon the cardinal's gift, for it
was said that Richelieu's dinners were scarcely less
dangerous than those of the former Borgias.  And
besides, the Netherland and German cooking was at
that time more praised than the French.  The tables'
greatest ornaments at this banquet were a wild boar
roasted whole, decorated with flowers and laurel
leaves, and a piece of pastry, presented by a baker
of Frankfurt, and representing the triumphant march
of a Roman Emperor.  Everyone believed that they
recognised in this small hero, Gustaf Adolf's features,
and many jesting words were exchanged, when each
found a resemblance between the attending Romans
and his neighbour.  The queen, whose delicate hand
was destined to break this masterpiece of culinary
art, with a smile put one of the last slaves in the
triumphal march on her silver plate; but Gustaf
Adolf, generally endowed with a good appetite, seized
the great pastry hero rather ungently with his warrior
hand, and placed a considerable portion of his person
upon his plate.

In the meantime the goblets were filled with the
best Rhenish and Spanish wines, and the king drank
the queen's health in a plain simple manner, and all
the other guests followed his example.  At the top
of the table stood the royal pages in glittering
uniforms, one behind each chair, and at the lower end
one stood behind every other chair.  They refilled
the goblets, and the king then drank to Frankfurt's
welfare; immediately afterwards he rose from the
table and left the room with the queen on his arm,
and they retired to their own apartments.  Gustaf
Adolf always lived as a plain soldier ought to do, and
was generally quick at his meals, but under favourable
circumstances would stay an hour at the table.  The
king, however, did not ask the others to follow his
example, and left in his place as host a high officer
of the court.

This time it was the old Scotchman, Patrick
Ruthwen, who was a good boon companion, and he
filled his post with great credit.  Oxenstjerna left
the room with the king.  The ladies also left the hall,
but the gentlemen remained behind enjoying themselves
over their wine and the nuts which had been
handed round on silver dishes; amongst the latter
were artificial ones made of stone, which looked so
natural that they were constantly mistaken for real
From this joke came the saying, "it is a hard nut to
crack."  The heroes of the Thirty Years' War were
nearly all great topers; to empty at a draught one
of the large beakers of Rhenish wine was a small
matter to them.  But on this occasion they had to
restrain themselves, because they all knew the high
moral principles of the king, and hence did not dare
to turn their goblets upside down too often.  They
did not break up until a late hour, and some of the
commanders treated each other to a rare product just
imported from the Low Countries, and it was passed
from hand to hand in small boxes; each man bit
off a piece, and some with frightful grimaces spat it
out again, whilst others kept it in their mouths with
evident enjoyment.  Doubtless, the reader has already
guessed, this was tobacco.

While this feasting was going on in the hall, the
queen had gone to rest with her ladies in waiting,
but the king was still talking to Axel Oxenstjerna.
What these two great men were conversing about is
easier to guess than to tell.  Perhaps it was about
Sweden's poverty, or the Emperor's power, or
the power of God, which is still greater, or the
victory of the Light, or the crown of the Roman
kingdom, or a German Protestant empire in the
future.  No one knows this for certain; for after the
king's death all his secrets followed Oxenstjerna to
the grave.

It was very late, and Oxenstjerna was about to
leave, when Bertel, the officer on duty, announced
that a closely veiled lady requested an audience of
the king.  It was a strange favour to ask at this time
of the night, and both Gustaf Adolf and his minister
were greatly surprised; but that there must be an
important reason for such a secret visit was obvious
to them both, and the king ordered Bertel to bring
the lady in, and told Oxenstjerna to remain.

Bertel left the room, and returned in a few moments
with a tall lady thickly veiled, and dressed in black.
She seemed greatly agitated and surprised not to
find the king alone; she was unable to utter a
word.

"Madam," said the king in a somewhat irritable
tone—he did not like such a visit at this late hour;
for if it was known it would tend to excite gossip
amongst the courtiers, and perhaps awaken the
jealousy of his sensitive wife—"a visit at this hour
of the night must have some important object in
order to justify it.  I should first of all like to know
who you are."

The lady was still silent.

The king thought he could guess the cause of her
silence, and continued, pointing to his companion:

"This is minister Oxenstjerna, my friend, and I
have no secrets from him."

The lady dressed in black then threw herself at the
king's feet and drew back her veil.  The king
retreated several paces when he recognised Lady Regina
von Emmeritz; her dark eyes flashed with an
enthusiastic fire, but her face was as pale as that of a
marble statue.

"Stand up, lady," said Gustaf Adolf in a kind tone,
and stretched out his hand to lift her up.  "What
now leads you to seek an audience with me?  Speak,
I beg of you; tell me without fear what troubles you
have in your heart; will you not comply with my
wish?"

Lady Regina sighed deeply, and began to speak
in a low voice almost impossible to hear, but she
gradually assumed a louder tone, supported by her
enthusiasm.

"Your Majesty, I have come to you because you
asked me to come.  I come to you because I have
hated you, sire; for a long time I have prayed daily
to the Holy Virgin, that she would destroy you, and
your whole army.  Your Majesty, I am only a weak
girl, but an honest Catholic; you have pursued our
Church with war, and plundered our convents; driven
away our holy fathers, and melted down our holy
golden images; you have slain our soldiers, and
dealt our cause deadly blows that can never be
repaired.  Therefore I have taken a Holy Oath to bring
about your destruction, and relying upon the Holy
Virgin's help I have followed your steps from
Würzburg in order to kill you."

The king and Oxenstjerna looked at each other as
if they doubted the young girl's sanity.  Lady Regina
saw this, and continued to speak with more vehemence
than before.

"Sire, you think me mad, because I speak thus
to the conqueror of Germany.  But listen to me
further.  When I saw you for the first time in the
castle of Würzburg, and how kindly and generously
you sheltered the weak, and spared those who had
been captured, I then said to myself, 'This conduct
seems to be inspired from Heaven, but nevertheless
it must come from hell.'  But when I followed you
here, and saw your greatness as a man combined with
your heroic qualities, sire, I hesitated to carry out
my vow, and my hatred became a burden to me.  I
struggled with myself, and your kindness to-night has
conquered my resolve.  Sire, now I love you as much
as I have hated you before.  I admire you, and am
devoted to you——"

The beautiful girl let her eyes sink to the floor.

"Well," said the king, hesitating with great emotion.

"Your Majesty, I have made this confession
because you are great and noble enough not to
misunderstand me.  But I have not come to you at this
late hour only to confess an unhappy girl's feelings.
I have come here to save you, sire."

"Explain yourself."

"Hear me, your Majesty.  I am disarmed, but
others much more dangerous remain.  Some of our
body, men without mercy, have sworn to kill you.
Oh! you do not know what these men are capable
of doing.  They have drawn lots in order to decide
who shall kill you, and the most dangerous of them
is near you in disguise daily.  Your Majesty cannot
escape from them.  To-day or to-morrow, perhaps,
you may be assassinated or poisoned.  Your death is
sure."

"My life is in the hand of God, and not at the
mercy of a murderous fanatic," said Gustaf Adolf in
a very calm voice.  "The evil have not as much
power as Will.  Be assured, Lady von Emmeritz, I
do not fear them."

"No, sire, the saints have decided your death.  I
know that you rely upon this ring"—and Regina
grasped the king's hand—"but it will not help you.
Sire, I say to you that your death is certain, and I
have not come here to save your life and thus betray
the cause of our Holy Church."

"Then why, lady, did you come here now?"

Lady Regina again threw herself at the king's
feet with almost adoration.

"Sire, I have come to save your soul.  I cannot
bear to think that a hero like yourself, so noble, so
great, should be lost for ever.  Hear me, I beg, I
implore you by your eternal salvation, with certain
death staring you in the face, do not continue in
your heretical faith, whose fruit is eternal damnation.
I pray you, abjure these evil doctrines while there
is still time, and come back to the only way of
redemption, the Holy Catholic Church; give up your
faith and go to the Holy Father in Rome; confess
your sins to him, and use your victorious sword in
the service of the true Church, instead of using it for
her destruction.  She will receive you with open arms,
and whether your Majesty lives or dies, your Majesty
can always depend upon being placed among the
chosen saints in Heaven."

The king for the second time raised the young
girl from the ground, and looked straight into her
burning eyes, and said in an impressive voice:

"When I was as young as you are, Lady von
Emmeritz, my teacher, old Skytte, brought me up
with the same enthusiastic devotion to the Protestant
faith that you have for the Catholic.  At that time
I hated the Pope with all my soul, as you now hate
Luther, and I prayed to God that the time might
come when I could destroy Antichrist and convert all
those that believed in him to the true light.  Since
then I have not altered my principles, but I have
learned through experience that the paths are many,
although the goal is One.  I stand steadily by my
faith, and am prepared to die for it, if God so decides.
But I respect the faith of a Christian, even if it is
quite different from my own, and I know that God's
mercy can bring a soul to salvation, even if its way
is obscured by dark mists and illusions.  Go, Lady
von Emmeritz, I forgive you; although deluded by the
fanatical teachings of the monks, you have tried to
draw me from the battle for the Light.  Go, poor
child, and let the Word of God, and the lessons of
Life, teach you not to rely upon saints, who are no
better than we are, or images, or rings, as they cannot
alter the highest law.  I thank you because your
intentions are good, although you are inexperienced.
Be without fear for my life, which is in the hand of
Him who knows how to use it."

King Gustaf Adolf was truly great when he spoke
these words.

Lady Regina stood there, at the same time crushed
and uplifted by the king's magnanimous spirit.
Perhaps she remembered his answer to the burghers of
Frankfurt, when they asked him to be allowed to
remain neutral; "neutrality is a word which I cannot
bear to hear, least of all amidst the battle between
light and darkness, betwixt liberty and slavery."  Brought
up to hate the Protestant faith, she could
not understand how it was possible for the sword
which had destroyed the worldly power of the church
to be laid aside in the presence of its spiritual power
over the hearts and minds of men.

The fanatical young girl raised her tear-stained
eyes towards the king.  Her cheeks turned pale, on
which had before burned the fire of enthusiasm, and
her eyes were fixed with terror on the scarlet-coloured
hangings which surrounded the king's bed.

Oxenstjerna, who was more suspicious than Gustaf
Adolf, had closely watched the young lady the whole
time, and at once noticed her agitation.

"Your Majesty," said he in Swedish to the king,
"be on your guard, there are owls in the marshes."

Then without waiting for an answer he drew his
sword and walked steadily towards the magnificent
bed, which was a gift from the burghers of Frankfurt;
the royal hero had exchanged the eider-down pillows
for a simple mattress, and a coarse blanket of Saxon
wool, the same as his soldiers used in their winter
camps.

"Stop!" cried Regina with evident reluctance.  But
it was too late.  Oxenstjerna had with a sudden
movement pulled back the hangings, and revealed
a pale face with dark burning eyes, surmounted by a
black leather skull-cap.  The hangings were still
further drawn back, and the whole features of the
monk became visible; his hands were clasped round
a crucifix of silver.

"Step forward, devoted father," said Oxenstjerna
in a satirical tone.  "A man of your merits should not
remain in concealment.  Your reverence has chosen
a peculiar place for your evening devotions.  With
his Majesty's permission I will furnish you with a
larger audience."

At the sound of the bell, Lieutenant Bertel with
two men from the life-guards entered, and placed
themselves on both sides of the exit with their long
halberts.

The king looked at Lady Regina, but more sadness
than anger was to be seen in his eyes.  It pained
him that so young and beautiful a girl could take
part in such a detestable plot.

"Mercy, your Majesty! mercy for my father
confessor!  He is innocent!" cried the unhappy girl.

"Will your Majesty allow me to ask a few questions
in your place?" said Oxenstjerna.

"Do as you think best, minister," said the king.

"Very well.  What did your reverence come here for?"

"To bring back a great sinner to the true fold,"
said the monk hypocritically, with his eyes turned
upwards.

"Really, one must say that you are very zealous.
And for such a holy purpose you carry with you the
image of the crucified Saviour?"

The monk bowed whilst devoutly making the sign
of the cross.

"Your reverence is very humble.  Give me the
crucifix, that I may admire this work of art."

The monk unwillingly handed it to him.

"A beautiful object.  It required a clever artist to
design this holy image."

The minister passed his hands over all parts of the
crucifix.  At last, when he touched the breast of the
image, a sharp dagger sprang forth.

"See, your reverence carries a very innocent-looking
toy.  A keen dagger, just suitable to thrust through
a noble king's heart!  Miserable monk," said
Oxenstjerna in a terrible voice, "do you know that your
horrible crime becomes a hundred times more detestable
through the blasphemous method you wish to
employ?"

Like all the kings of the Vasa line, Gustaf Adolf
had a hasty temper in his youth, which more than
once brought him into trouble.  But the experience
of manhood had cooled his blood; still one could
sometimes see the quick Vasa disposition get
beyond control.  This now happened.  He was quite
great enough, however, to look calmly upon this
treacherous attempt against his life, although the
preservation of Germany depended upon it, and
he looked down with great disgust upon the
discovered traitor, who now stood trembling before his
indignant judge.  But the horrible misuse of the
Saviour's holy image as a weapon against his life—he
who was prepared to sacrifice himself for the
pure teachings of Jesus Christ—appeared to him to
be such a terrible blasphemy against all in life that
he considered holy and right, that his calmness was
instantly changed to the most terrible anger.

Noble and great as a lion in his wrath, he stood in
front of the cringing Jesuit, who was unable to bear
the glance of his eyes.

"On your knees," said the king in a thunderous
voice, stamping violently with his foot on the floor.

The Jesuit fell down as if struck by lightning, and
crawled in mortal terror to the king's feet, like a
poisonous reptile, spell-bound by the king's look:
powerless at the conqueror's feet.

"Ye serpent's brood," continued the king beside
himself with anger, "how long do ye think that the
Almighty will endure your iniquities?  By God!  I
have seen much; I have seen your Antichrist and
Romish rule cover the world with all the deeds of
darkness; I have seen ye, monks and Jesuits, poison
frightened consciences with your devil's teachings
about murder and crimes committed for the glory of
Heaven; but a deed so black as this, a blasphemy
against everything that is holy in Heaven and upon
earth, I have never before dreamed of.  I have forgiven
ye all; ye have plotted against my life at Demmin
and other places; I have not taken revenge; ye have
acted worse than Turks and barbarians towards the
innocent Lutherans; wherever ye have had the
power ye have destroyed their churches, and burned
them at the stake, driven them away from house and
home; and what is worse, ye have tried to draw
them from their faith with arguments and force to
your idolatrous religion, which worships deeds and
miserable images instead of the living God and His
only Son.  For all this, I have not retaliated upon
your cloisters and churches and consciences; ye
have gone free in your faith, and no one has touched
a hair of your heads.  But now I know you, servants
of the devil; the Almighty God has delivered ye
into my hand; I shall scatter ye like chaff; I shall
punish you, ye desecrators of the temple; I shall
follow you to the end of the world, as long as this
arm is able to wield the Lord's sword.  Ye have
hitherto seen me mild and merciful, ye will now see
me hard and terrible; I will destroy you and your
accursed faith on earth; it will be such a judgment
as the world has not seen since the destruction of
Rome."

The king walked up and down the room with
hasty steps, without deigning to bestow a glance on
the prostrate Jesuit or the trembling Regina, who
was standing by the window covering her face with
her hands.  Oxenstjerna, always calm and collected,
was alarmed at the king's anger, and feared that he
would go too far, and now tried to modify it.

"Will your Majesty deign to order Lieutenant
Bertel to take the monk into safe custody, and let
a court-martial make a terrible example of him?"

"Mercy, your Majesty!" cried Regina, who was
blindly devoted to her father confessor.  "Mercy!  I
am the guilty one.  I have advised him to take this
terrible step.  I alone deserve to be punished for it."

At this noble self-sacrifice a faint ray of hope
illumined the Jesuit's pale features, but he did not
dare to rise up.  The king took no notice of this
appeal.  Instead, he turned all his wrath upon the
guard.

"Lieutenant Bertel," he said sharply, "you have
commanded my life-guard to-night; through your
neglect this wretch has slipped into the room.  Take
him at once to prison, and you shall answer for his
safety with your head.  Then you can go and take
your place in the ranks.  From this moment you are
degraded to the position of a private soldier."

Bertel saluted, but did not speak.  What pained
him more than the loss of his commission was the
sacrifice of the king's favour, especially as he knew
that he had kept a ceaseless watch.  It was a
complete mystery to him how the Jesuit had got in.
The latter had now grasped the king's knees and
prayed for mercy.  But in vain.  The king pushed
him backwards, and he was taken away gnashing his
teeth and his heart full of revenge.

Gustaf Adolf then turned to the trembling girl at
the window, took her hand and looked straight into
her eyes.

"Lady," he said with asperity, "it is said that when
the king of the darkness wishes to do a terrible evil
deed on earth, he sends his instruments dressed as
angels of light.  What do you wish me to think of
you?"

Lady Regina had courage enough to lift up her
eyes once more to the great king.

"I have nothing more to say.  Kill me, sire, but
save my father confessor!" she said with fanatical
resolution.

The king, still looking angrily into her eyes, could
not yet control himself.

"If your father, lady, had been an honest man, he
would have taught his daughter to fear God, honour
the king, and speak the truth to every man.  You
wished to convert me; I will instead educate you, you
seem to be in great want of it.  Go, you remain my
prisoner until you have learned to speak the truth.
Oxenstjerna, is the severe old Lady Marta at
Korsholm still alive?"

"Yes, your Majesty."

"She will have a pupil to educate.  At the first
opportunity this girl is to be sent to Finland."

Lady Regina, proud and silent, left the room.

"Your Majesty!" said Oxenstjerna reproachfully.

CHAPTER VI.

THE FINNS AT LECH.

Before our story proceeds further, it is necessary to
bestow one more look on Frankfurt.

Lady Regina was closely guarded after her midnight
visit to the king; and later in the spring,
when the waters were released from their icy fetters,
she was sent to Finland, where we may find her again.
No religious hatred, still less revenge, prompted the
anger of the usually generous Gustaf Adolf towards
the young girl; abused confidence deeply stabs a
noble heart, and Regina said nothing to remove the
idea of her guilt from the king's mind; in fact, she
strengthened it more and more by her fanaticism, and
hatred still possessed her young heart, which ought to
have been given to love alone.

An extraordinary incident increased the king's
resentment.  On the night that the Jesuit was taken to
prison, to be executed next day, the terrible monk
escaped; no one knew how.  These fearful men had
allies and secret emissaries and passages everywhere;
that very night a hitherto concealed door was
discovered in the king's bed-chamber.  Bertel's
innocence came to light through this, but the mysterious
escape of the monk again excited the king's wrath,
and the late lieutenant had still to remain a private
soldier.

By the middle of February, 1632, the king was
ready for departure; he then took the stronghold at
Kreutznach in March, after a short siege, and left
the queen, as well as Axel Oxenstjerna, in Mayence.
But Tilly had in the meantime surprised Gustaf Horn
at Bamberg, and done great mischief.  The king
pursued him down the Danube, and wished to invade
Bavaria by crossing the Lech.  In vain did his
generals object that the river was too deep and rapid,
and that the Elector, with Tilly, Altringer, and 22,000
men, stood on the opposite side.  The king spoke
like Alexander at the passage of the Granicus.

"Shall we, who have crossed the Elbe, Oder, and
Rhine, nay, even the Baltic, stop alarmed at the
River Lech?"

The passage was decided upon.

The king tried for some time to find a suitable
crossing.  At last he discovered it near a bend in the
stream; a dragoon disguised as a peasant heard that
the Lech was twenty-two feet deep.  Trestles were
made of timber torn from cabins; four batteries of
seventy cannon in all, were erected on the bank, and
breastworks thrown up for the skirmishers, while fires
of damp straw and green wood enveloped the
neighbourhood in thick smoke.  Still, Tilly was old and
experienced; he soon occupied the wood on the other
side with his force; dug trenches and made fortifications,
from which he directed a heavy fire.  On the
3rd of April the Swedish cannon replied with terrific
effect.  On April 5th the trestles for a bridge were
laid in spite of the fire of the enemy; planks were
then thrown across, and, as usual, the Finns led the
attack.  Three hundred infantry, headed by little
Larsson, and the brave Savolaxen Paavo Lyydikain,
were ordered to cross the planks, and defend the
bridge on the opposite shore; each was promised a
reward of ten riks thalers.  In a few moments the
fate of Bavaria would be decided.

The Finns carried spades and trenching tools, and
cheering as they advanced, rushed at the double over
the bridge.  Immediately a tremendous cross-fire from
all Tilly's batteries was directed upon them; every
moment balls dropped splashing into the foaming
waters, or flew over the charging Finns, and now
and then fell amongst them, scattering death on every
side.  Those who got over worked vigorously at
throwing up earthworks, which soon protected their
front, although their flanks were still exposed to the
enemy's fire.

Tilly realised the importance of this position, and
his fire redoubled.  The Swedes riddled the opposite
wood with a storm of shot, which struck the stones
and tree-tops, scattering fragments and branches
far and wide upon the Bavarians, who stood
underneath awaiting the order to charge.  The king, in
order to encourage his men, hastened to the front,
and himself fired sixty shots.  The cannon thunder
was heard for miles.

More than half of the Finns had now been killed,
wounded, or drowned, but the entrenchments were
completed.  And at that instant the king ordered the
afterwards celebrated Count Carl Gustaf Wrangel to
go to their assistance.  The Finns, exalted with pride
by their countrymen's success, and also anxious for
the safety of their comrades, begged eagerly to be
led into the midst of the fight, and in a moment
Wrangel was surrounded by 300 Finnish volunteers,
with whom he heroically charged across the shaking
planks.  The gallant Duke Bernhard, who, like the
king, had a certain partiality for the Finns, received
permission to make a diversion in their favour.
Followed by a troop of Finnish cavalry, he found and
passed over a ford, and fell upon the enemy's right
flank.  The surprised Bavarians fell into disorder, and
in spite of their numerical superiority, gave ground
before the attack.  Duke Bernhard's troop played
havoc with the enemy, and soon cut their way through
to their comrades at the end of the bridge.  Through
this daring exploit the Finns obtained the dreaded
name, "Hackapeliter," from the words "hakkaa
päälle!"  Go Ahead! which they shouted as they
charged.

Stimulated by the Finns' success, the Swedish and
German infantry now began to cross the bridge.
Tilly, avoiding exposing his troops to the murderous
Swedish fire till the last moment, now sent Altringer's
infantry to take the fortifications, and drive the enemy
into the river.  The Bavarians advanced at the double,
and although decimated by the hail of bullets, threw
themselves furiously on the earthworks.

Wrangel's men stood firm.  Almost enveloped by
the enemy's massive column, the Finns gave them
a hot reception.  Pouring in a deadly volley at fifty
yards, every bullet told.  The Bavarians wavered for
a moment; most of them were new recruits; they
faltered.  The Finns got time to reload; another
volley; and the assailants fled in disorder along the
bank.  Altringer rallied them with great difficulty,
and again led them to the onset; at that moment a
cannon-shot whizzed so close to his head that he
fell senseless to the ground.  Again the Bavarians
gave way.  Tilly saw this, and sent his favourite
Wallachians to their assistance.  But even these
veterans had to retreat, so terrific was the fire.  Then
Tilly seized a banner, and led the attack in person.
Before, however, he had taken many steps, he fell,
struck down by a falconet ball, which had smashed
one leg.  The old general was carried from the field,
and died a fortnight afterwards at Ingolstadt.

The Bavarian army now became utterly demoralised.
The Elector retreated under cover of the
darkness, leaving 2,000 dead on the field, and the
way open to the heart of Bavaria.

Next day the entire Swedish army crossed the
Lech.  The king with a liberal hand distributed
rewards to his brave troops.  Amongst these was a
horseman who had accompanied Duke Bernhard, who
praised him in the highest terms.  This was Bertel;
three slight wounds attested the duke's account.
Bertel regained his rank, but not the king's
confidence, which he valued above everything.  But he
resolved to win this back at all costs.

Gustaf Adolf then marched to Augsburg, which
took the oath of allegiance, and gave brilliant festivals
in his honour.  Here report, which joined the names
Gustafva Augusta, whispered that the king had
abandoned himself, like another Hannibal in Capua,
to effeminacy and pleasure.  Rumour was wrong.
Gustaf Adolf was merely resting, and revolving still
more daring enterprises in his mind.  But from this
time the king's pathway began to darken.  The death
angel went before him with drawn sword, and aimed
now here, now there, a blow at his life, as if to cry
constantly in his ear, "Mortal, thou art not a god."

One could almost think that the powers of darkness
had obtained more power over him; now ambition
began to gain ground in his mind, and he was no longer
solely animated by the sacred cause of Liberty and
Faith.  A secret and terrible enemy seemed everywhere
in his path, dealing deadly blows which could
not as yet reach their mark.  At the bold but
unsuccessful attack on Ingolstadt there was, relates
Fryxell, a cannon on the ramparts called a "Fikonet,"
and celebrated for shooting both far and true.  The
gunner on the ramparts saw out on the field a man
with a waving plume riding a fine charger, and
surrounded by attentive followers.  "There," he said,
"rides a great lord, but this will stop his career;"
then he aimed and fired the "Fikonet."  The ball
brought down horse and rider, and the others
hastened to the place in great dread; but the king,
for it was he, raised himself up, covered with blood
and dust, but unharmed, from underneath the dead
horse, exclaiming,

"The apple is not yet ripe."

The citizens of Ingolstadt buried the horse, and
stuffed his skin as a remembrance.  Shortly afterwards
the king was riding at the side of the young
Margrave of Baden Durlach, who had just before
been one of the most brilliant figures at the Augsburg
balls.  A cannon-shot passed very near the king, and
as he looked round, a headless horseman rode by his
side and then sank to the ground.

CHAPTER VII.

NEW ADVENTURES.

From Ingolstadt the king turned to Landshut, in the
centre of Bavaria.  The farther he advanced into this
country, where they had never seen an army of
heretics before, the people became more fanatical,
wild, and bloodthirsty.  Large bands of peasants
assembled, commanded by the monks, lying in ambush
everywhere for the Swedes, and cutting off every
straggler; they also tortured their prisoners in the
most horrible manner.  The king's army on their
side, inebriated by their successes, were infuriated by
this cruel guerilla warfare, and began to burn and
destroy all the places they passed through.  Hitherto
the Swedish army had been remarkable for its good
conduct in the field, but now they left in their rear
a broad track of murder and crime; and woe to
those troops who in insufficient numbers wandered
far from the main body.

The king had now marched far into the country,
and wished to send some new important orders to
Baner, who followed slowly in his steps from Ingolstadt.
On account of the lawless state of the country
this was attended with great risk, and the king would
not order a large body to go.  A young officer, a
Finn, volunteered to try, accompanied by two
horsemen.  The king agreed to this, and the three
horsemen set out one evening in May on this dangerous
journey.

The young officer was no other than our friend
Bertel, and his companions were Pekka from East
Bothnia, and Vitikka from Tavastland.  The night
was dark and gloomy, and the three horsemen rode
carefully in the middle of the road, much afraid of
missing their way in this strange country, and
dreading an ambush from their enemies.  It began to rain,
which made the roads still worse; these had already
been much damaged by the passage of the heavy
baggage-wagons, and at every step they risked an
accident.

"Here," said Vitikka ironically to his companion,
"you are a northern Finn, and ought to be able to
practise witchcraft."

"I should not be worth much if I could not do
it," responded Pekka in the same bantering tone.

"Try, then, and take us in a minute to Hattelmala
mountain and let us see the light shining from
Hämeenlinna's castle.  There is a little gipsy girl
whom I once loved, and I would rather be by her
side to-night, than here in the ruts of this damned
forest."

"That will be easy for me to do," said Pekka; "see,
you can already see the lights shining from Hämeenlinna."

His comrade looked sharply around, uncertain if
Pekka was joking or in earnest; he thought the latter
quite as likely as the former.  And truly, in the
brushwood underneath, a light appeared, but he soon
understood that he was still hundreds of miles away
from his home.  Suddenly their horses stopped, and
would not move.  A barrier of tree trunks was
stretched across the road.

"Hush!" whispered Bertel, "I hear a noise in the
wood."

The horsemen leaned forward and listened attentively.
On the opposite side of the wood they heard
footsteps and the breaking of branches.

"They must be here in a quarter of an hour," said
a voice in the well-known Bavarian dialect.

"How many of them are there?"

"Thirty horsemen, and ten or twelve baggage
animals.  They left Geisenfeld at dusk, and they have
a young girl with them as a prisoner."

"How many are we?"

"About fifty musketeers, and seventy or eighty
armed with pitchforks and axes."

"Good.  No firing is allowed until they are within
three paces."

At this moment Bertel's horse neighed, whose name
was Lapp; he was small but strong and active.

"Who is there?" sounded from the road.

"Swedes!" cried Bertel boldly, just as he did at
the Würzburg sally-port, and fired off a pistol in the
direction of the voice, and saw by the flash a large
band of peasants, who had encamped by the barricade.
He then turned his horse, and, calling upon
his companions to follow him, rode at full gallop on
the road back to Landshut.

But the peasants had by the flash also seen the
three horsemen, and now hurried to cut off their
retreat.  Bertel's horse easily distanced the pursuers,
but Vitikka's fell over the stump of a tree, and Pekka's
clumsy animal was hurt by the thrust of a pitchfork
in his neck as he tried to get out of the marsh.
Bertel saw his followers' danger, and would not leave
them; he turned back and killed the nearest peasants,
and caught Pekka's horse by the bridle and tried to
pull him up, calling also to Vitikka to leave his horse
and jump on the back of Lapp.  This brave effort
was successful, and the three were on their way to
safety, when suddenly a whizzing noise was heard,
and a lasso settled upon Bertel's shoulders, tightened,
and jerked him from his saddle.  Vitikka fell at the
same moment, and Lapp, thus delivered from his
heavy burden, galloped off, and Pekka followed with
or without his will.  Bertel and Vitikka were taken
prisoners and bound with their hands behind their
backs.

"Hang the dogs before the others arrive!" cried
one.

"Hang them by the heels!" suggested another.

"With a little fire underneath!" said a third.

"No fire! no noise!" ordered a fourth, who
appeared to be in command.  "Listen, comrades,"
whispered he Ito the prisoners lying on the ground,
"was it Finnish you spoke?"

"Go to the devil!" said Vitikka in a rage.

"
Maledicti, maledicti Fennones!
" said the former
speaker in the darkness.  "You are mine!"

"Now they are coming!" cried one of the band,
and the trampling of horses was heard on the road to
Ingolstadt.  The peasants remained still, and for
greater safety gagged the prisoners.  The approaching
troop were provided with torches, and seemed
to be Germans, who were returning from a marauding
expedition.  They were riding so quickly that they
did not notice the barricade until they were close
upon it; at the same moment a murderous fire opened
upon them from behind this obstruction.  Ten or
twelve of the foremost fell to the ground, and their
riderless horses reared and dragged them along by
the stirrups; the greatest confusion prevailed amongst
them, some turned back, riding over their comrades
and the pack-horses; others fired off their pistols
towards the enemy behind the barricade.  The
peasants rushed from their ambush and furiously
attacked those that remained, and pulled them off
their horses with lassos.  In vain the horsemen
endeavoured to defend themselves; in less than ten
minutes the whole troop was scattered; eight or ten
had escaped, fifteen were lying wounded on the road,
and six or seven were made prisoners.  Only four
of the peasants had fallen.  The revenge of the
Bavarians was inhuman.  They fired blank charges
in the prisoners' faces, which burnt them black, and
partially buried some of them in the ground and
stoned them slowly to death.

When this terrible work was finished, they carried
away the booty to a place of safety.  Bertel and his
companion were thrown across one of the horses, and
they marched deep into the forest.  After some time
they stopped at a lonely farm, and the prisoners were
dragged in and thrown on the floor in a separate
room, while the peasants in the next room rejoiced
over their victory, and drank captured wine.  A
deathly pale monk now entered the room, carrying
a sword by his side with a rope.  He held up a
torch to the prisoners' faces, took away their gags,
and looked at them in silence.

"Am I right," said he at last, sarcastically; "this
is Lieutenant Bertel, of the king's life-guards."

Bertel looked up and recognised the Jesuit Hieronymus.

"You are welcome to me, lieutenant, and thank you
for our last meeting.  Such an important guest must
be well entertained.  I fancy I have seen this comrade
before, also," he said, pointing to Vitikka.

The wild Finn looked him straight in the eyes and
opened his mouth with an obstinate grin.

"What have you done with your ears, monk?" he
said tauntingly.  "Take away your skull-cap, foul
thief, and let us see if you have grown any ass's
ears in their place."

At this daring remark about the incident at Breitenfeld
a dark frown contracted the Jesuit's eyebrows,
and a blush arose on his pale features; he bit his
lips with rage.

"Think of your own ears, comrade," said he.
"
Anathema maranatha
!  They will soon have heard
enough in this world."

With these words the Jesuit clapped his hands
twice, and a blacksmith with his leather apron entered,
carrying a pair of red-hot pincers.

"Well, comrade, do your ears begin to burn?" said
the monk cruelly.

Vitikka replied stubbornly, "Now you think you
are clever, but you are only a fumbler in comparison
with the devil.  Your lord and master does not need
any pincers, he uses his claws."

"The right ear," said the Jesuit.  The smith
approached the Finn and put the pincers to his head.
Vitikka smiled disdainfully.  A sudden blush coloured
his brown cheeks, but only for a moment.  He had
now only one ear.

"Will you now abjure your faith, and believe in
the Holy Father and damn Luther, and you shall
keep your other ear?"

"Niggard!" cried the Finn.  "Your lord and
master generally offers countries and kingdoms, and
you only offer me a wretched ear!"

"The left ear," continued the Jesuit coldly.
The smith carried out the order.  The mutilated
soldier smiled.

"Monk, it is shameful!" said Bertel, who was lying
close by.  "Kill us, if you like, but do it quickly!"

"Who has said that I intend to kill you?" replied
the Jesuit, smirking.  "Never; it entirely depends
upon yourself whether you regain your freedom this
very night."

"What do you ask of me?"

"You are a brave young man, Lieutenant Bertel!
I am sorry that the king so shamefully and unjustly
deprived you of your rank, which you had gained
with your blood."

"Are you really sorry?  And what then?"

"If I was in your place I should take revenge."

"Take revenge?  Oh yes, I have thought of it."

"You belong to Gustaf Adolf's life-guards.  Do you
know, young friend, what the Catholic princes would
give to anyone who brought the king, dead or alive,
into their power?"

"How could I know that, holy father?"

"A kingdom if he was a nobleman; 50,000 ducats
if he was a man of the people."

"Holy father, it is a small reward for such a great
service."

"You have your choice between death and a royal
reward!"

"This is the point you were trying to reach, holy
father?"

"Do as you please; think it over, and we will
talk about it again.  This time you can buy your life
and freedom for a less price; yes, a very small
service."

"What would that be, holy father?"

"Listen to me.  I wish you to swear that you will
do me a very small favour.  King Gustaf Adolf wears
on the forefinger of his right hand a small copper
ring.  It is of no value to him, but it is of great
importance to me, young friend; as I am an antiquary,
I should like to have a remembrance of a king,
whom I must hate as an enemy, but admire as a man."

"And the ring?"

"The ring; you must swear to deliver it into my
hands before the next new moon.  Do this, and you
are free!"

"Oh, only a small sin against the seventh commandment?
And you have the absolution ready before-hand;
is it not so?  Go, miserable thief, and thank
your stars that my arm is bound; or by Heaven, it
would teach you to have respect for a Christian's
honour!"

"Be still, young man, remember that your life is
in my hands.  When I have finished with your
comrade I shall begin with you."

Bertel looked at him with contempt.

"Smith, go on with your work!" said the Jesuit.

And the smith again took the pincers from the fire.

At the same instant a great confusion and noise
arose in the next room.  They shouted:

"To arms!  The Swedes are upon us!"

The door flew open.  Some of the peasants seized
their guns, others were lying in a drunken sleep on
the floor.  Outside one could plainly hear the Swedish
officer's commands.

"Set the house on fire, boys, we have them all in
a trap!"

At these words the Jesuit jumped out of the window.

A hot but short skirmish began by the door.  The
peasants were overpowered in a few moments and
begged for mercy.  In reply to this appeal, the
foremost were killed, and the rest taken prisoners and
bound; the house and booty were taken, and Bertel
and his mutilated comrade were released.

"Is it you, Larsson?" cried Bertel.

"Thunder and lightning, is it you, Bertel?  Is it
here you intend to leave the king's orders?"

"And yourself?"

"Yes, damn it, you know that I am always a lucky
child!  I was sent to guard a convoy, and met on
the road some rascally marauders, who told me that
there was an ambush in the forest.  I hurried after
them, and delivered a brave boy and a beautiful girl.
Look at her: cheeks like a poppy, and eyes to buy
fish with!"

Bertel turned round, and by his side stood a
trembling girl, paralyzed with fear.

"This is Ketchen, Lady Regina's maid!" cried
Bertel, who had often seen the bright girl in the
company of her dull mistress.

"Save me, lieutenant, save me!" cried the girl, and
caught hold of his arm.  "They have taken me by
force from my aunt's house."

"Larsson, I beg you to give me the girl!"

"What the devil are you thinking of?  Do you
want to take the girl from me?"

"Let her go free, I beg of you!"

"Later on, perhaps, yes.  Let her go, I say, or..."

The hot-tempered Finn drew his sword again, with
which he had just before killed a peasant.

"The cottage is on fire!" was heard from all
directions, and a thick smoke proved that it was true.
Bertel rushed out with the girl, and Larsson followed,
and the heat of his temper gave way before the heat
of the fire.  When Bertel got outside and saw the
flames, he remembered that the cottage was filled
with people; about thirty peasants were bound inside.

"Come, hurry, let us save the unfortunate
prisoners!" he cried.

"Are you mad?" said Larsson, laughing; "it is
only a few of the rascals who have killed so many
of our brave comrades.  Let it burn, boys!"

It was now too late to help.  The unfortunate
Bavarians were sacrificed to the barbarities with
which wars were then carried on; too often one
terrible deed was followed by another.

We turn with disgust from these wild scenes, which
essentially belong to the times in which they occurred,
and hasten to the grand picture of the Swedish lion's
last struggle.

CHAPTER VIII.

NÜRNBERG AND LÜTZEN.

The incidents of the campaign followed each other
quickly, like wave after wave on a stormy sea, and
history compressed into a narrow frame is obliged
to pursue the same course.  Hence we must hurry
over these marvellous occurrences and into a still
more extraordinary period, to find the thread of our
story, "The King's Ring," which passes through ages
and the destinies of great characters.

The terrible Wallenstein had become reconciled
to the emperor, and gathering a formidable army,
turned like a dark cloud upon the rich city of
Nürnberg.  Gustaf Adolf cut short his victorious
career in Bavaria, and hurried to meet him; and
here the two armies remained in entrenched camps
facing each other for eleven weeks—the panther and
the lion, ready to spring, sharply watched each other's
movements.  The surrounding country was stripped
bare to provide for the wants of the two hosts, and
foraging parties were constantly dispatched to more
remote places to get supplies.  Among the Imperialists
those mostly employed in this task were Isolani's
Croats; the Swedes generally sent Taupadel's
dragoons and Stälhandske's Finnish cavalry.

Famine, heat, and plague, and the plundering
German soldiers, spread want and misery everywhere.
Gustaf Adolf, having united himself with Oxenstjerna's
and Baner's forces, could now muster 50,000
men.  On the 24th of August, 1632, he marched
against Wallenstein, who stood behind impregnable
entrenchments.  Long before daylight the thunder of
Torstensson's guns was heard against Alte Veste.  In
the darkness of the night 500 musketeers of the
white brigade were climbing up the steep redoubts,
and reached the tops under a terrible fire.  For a
moment victory seemed to reward their strenuous
efforts; confusion reigned amongst the half-awakened
enemy; the cries of the women, and the fire from
the Swedes, added to the disorder, and made the
attack easy.  But Wallenstein, calm and unmoved,
sent away the women, and directed a murderous fire
on the assailants.  The brave brigade was driven
back with heavy losses.  The king, however, would
not give way; once more the white brigade renewed
the attack; but in vain.  Gustaf Adolf then called
his Finns, for, as Schiller relates, "the courage of the
Northmen puts the Germans to shame."  It was the
East Bothnians in the ranks of the Swedish brigade.
Death stared them in the face in the form of
hundreds of guns; with unsurpassed courage and
determination they climbed up the entrenchments,
slippery with rain and blood.  But against these
strong works and the deadly fire, nothing could
prevail; in the midst of death and destruction they tried
again to reach the top of the redoubts, but in vain;
those who escaped the shot and pikes were hurled
back; for the first time one saw Gustaf Adolf's Finns
retreat; and the attempts made by the other troops
were also in vain.  The Imperialists hastened out in
pursuit, but were driven back; again they sallied
forth with the same result.  With heavy losses on
both sides the battle continued all day, and many of
the bravest commanders were killed.  The angel of
death again sent a bullet towards the king, but it only
touched the sole of his boot.

The Imperial cavalry fought with the Swedish on
the left flank.  Cronenberg, with his cuirassiers, clad
in iron mail from head to feet, who were called
"the invincibles," overthrew the Hessians.  The
Landgrave of Hessen remarked with anger that the
king by the sacrifice of the German troops tried to
save his own.

"Very well," said Gustaf Adolf, "I will send my
Finns, and hope that the change of troops will bring a
change of fortune."

Stälhandske, with the Finns, was now sent against
Cronenberg and his invincibles.  A grand contest,
which will never be forgotten, then started between
these two powerful forces; on the shore of the River
Regnitz, which was covered with bushes, these troops
met in conflict, man to man, horse to horse; swords
were blunted on helmets, long pistols flashed, and
many a brave horseman was driven into the river.
The Finns' horses were hardier than the beautiful
Hungarian chargers, and thus they shared in the
victory.  The brave Cronenberg fell, and his invincibles
then fled from the Finns.  In his place, Fugger
appeared with a great force, and drew the Finns in
continuous battle slowly towards the enemy in the
forest.  But here the Imperialists were met with the
fire from the Swedish infantry.  Fugger fell, and his
horsemen were again routed by the exhausted Finns.

At the close of the day more than three thousand
killed covered the hills and the fields.  "In the battle
at Alte Veste, Gustaf Adolf was considered worsted,
because the attack failed," says Schiller.  The
following day he altered his position, and on the 8th of
September he marched away to Bavaria.  Forty-four
thousand men, both friends and foes, had been
destroyed by plague and war during these terrible
weeks in and around Nürnberg.

* * * * *

The darkness of the autumn increased, and its
fogs covered the blood-stained fields of Germany, and
still the battles did not cease.  Here it was ordained
that only one great spirit should find everlasting rest,
after many storms, and pass from life's dark night to
eternal light.  The angel of death came closer over
Gustaf Adolf's noble head, and threw over him a
gleam of light from a higher world, which is
sometimes seen shining around the great souls of the
earth in their last moments.  The bystanders do not
understand it, but the departing ones know what it
means.  Two days before his death, Gustaf Adolf
received the homage of a god from the people of
Naumburg, but through his soul fled the shadow of
the coming change, and he said to the royal chaplain,
Fabricius:

"Perhaps God will soon punish them for their
foolishness, and myself also, the object of it; and
show that I am only a weak mortal."

The king had marched into Saxony to follow the
traces of the destructive Wallenstein.  At Arnstadt
he bade farewell to Axel Oxenstjerna; in Erfurt he
said good-bye to the queen.  There, and in Naumburg,
one could see by his arrangements that he was
prepared for what would come.  Wallenstein, who
thought he had gone into winter quarters, sent
Pappenheim away to Halle with 12,000 men; he himself
stood at Lützen with 28,000, and the king was in
Naumburg with 20,000 men.

But on the 4th of November, when Gustaf Adolf
heard of Pappenheim's departure, he broke up his
camp and hurried to surprise his weakened enemy,
in which he would have succeeded if he had made
his attack on the 5th.  But Providence had thrown
in the way of his victorious career a small obstacle,
the brook Rippach, which with many newly ploughed
fields delayed his march.  It was late in the evening
on the 5th of November when the king approached
Lützen; thus Wallenstein had time, and he knew how
to make use of it.  Along the broad road to Leipzig
he deepened the ditches, and made redoubts on both
sides, which he filled with his best sharpshooters, and
it was decided that with their cross-fire they could
destroy the attacking Swedes.

The king's war council advised him not to make
the attack; Duke Bernhard was the only one who
advised him to the contrary, and the king shared his
opinion, "because," he said, "it is necessary to wash
one's self perfectly clean once you are in the bath."

The night was dull and dark.  The king spent it
in an old carriage with Kniephausen and Duke
Bernhard.  His restless soul had time to think of
everything, and then history says, he drew from the
forefinger of his right hand a small copper ring, and
gave it to Duke Bernhard, and asked him to give it
to a young officer in his Finnish cavalry, in case
anything should happen to himself.

Early in the morning Gustaf Adolf rode out to
inspect the positions of his troops.  He was dressed
in a buff waistcoat made of elk's skin, and wore a
grey great coat over it; when he was told to wear
harness on a day like this, he replied:

"God is my armour."

A heavy mist delayed the attack.  At dawn the
whole army sang a hymn.  The fog continued, and
the king began another hymn, which he had written
himself just before.  He then rode along the lines,
calling out:

"To-day, boys, we shall put an end to all our
trouble;" and his horse stumbled twice as he said
this.

The fog did not clear off till eleven o'clock through
a strong breeze.  The Swedish army at once advanced
to the attack; under the king in the right
wing was Stälhandske and the Finns, next came the
Swedish troops; in the centre were the Swedish
yellow and green brigades, commanded by Nils
Brahe; on the left wing the German cavalry, under
Duke Bernhard.  Against the duke was Colloredo,
with his strong cavalry, while in the centre was
Wallenstein, with four heavy columns of infantry and seven
cannon in front; against Stälhandske stood Isolani,
with his wild but brave Croats.  The war-cries on
both sides were the same as at Breitenfeld.  When
the king ordered the attack he clasped his hands, and
cried out:

"Jesus, help me to-day to fight for the glory of
Thy Holy Name!"

The Imperialists started firing, and the Swedish
army advanced and suffered heavy losses from the
beginning.  At last the Swedish centre passed the
redoubts, took the seven guns, and routed the two
first brigades of the enemy.  The third was preparing
for flight when Wallenstein rallied them.  The
Swedish left wing was attacked by the cavalry, and
the Finns, who had sent the Croats and the Polacks
flying, had not yet reached the redoubts.  The king
then rushed to the front with the troops from
Smaländ; but only a few were well-mounted enough to
follow him.  It is said that an Imperial musketeer
fired at him with a silver bullet; it is true that the
king's left arm was smashed, and that he tried to
conceal his wound; but soon he became so weak
from loss of blood, that he asked the Duke of Lauenburg,
who was riding by his side, to bring him unseen
out of the battle.

In the midst of the conflict Gotz's cuirassiers rushed
forward, and at the head of them was Moritz von
Falkenberg, who recognised the king and fired
point-blank at him, crying out:

"I have long sought for you!"

Soon afterwards Falkenberg himself fell from a
bullet.  The king was shot underneath the heart, and
reeled in his saddle; he told the duke to save his
own life; the latter had placed his arm around the
king's waist to support him, but the next moment
the rush of the enemy had separated them.  The
duke's hair was singed by the close discharge of a
pistol, and the king's horse was wounded in the
throat and staggered.  The king sunk from the
saddle, and was dragged a short distance along the
ground; his foot caught in the stirrup.  The young
page, Leubelfingen, from Nürnberg, offered him his
horse, but could not raise him up.  Some of the
Imperialists now came to the spot, and inquired who
the wounded man was, and when Leubelfingen would
not reply, one of them ran him through with a
sword-thrust, while another shot the king through the head;
others then shot at them, and both remained on the
field.  But Leubelfingen lived for a few days afterwards,
to relate for the benefit of future generations
the never-to-be-forgotten sad death of the great
hero, Gustaf Adolf.

In the meantime the Swedish centre was driven
back, the battlefield was covered with thousands of
mutilated corpses, and they had not yet gained a
foot of ground.  Both the armies occupied nearly the
same positions as before the battle.  The king's
wounded horse was then seen galloping between the
lines, with an empty saddle, covered with blood.

"The king has fallen!"

As Schiller has so beautifully put it, "Life was not
worth anything, when the most holy of all lives had
ceased to exist; death no longer had any terror for
the lowliest, since it had not spared this royal head."

Duke Bernhard flew from line to line, saying,
"Swedes, Finns, and Germans, yours, ours, and
Freedom's protector has fallen.  Well then, those who
love the king will rush forward to avenge his death."

The first to obey this order was Stälhandske, with
the Finns; with great difficulty they crossed the
ditches and drove the enemy in front of them; before
their terrific onslaught all fell or fled.  Isolani turned
back and attacked the baggage train, but was again
routed.  The centre of the Swedish army advanced
under Brahe, and Duke Bernhard, disregarding his
wounded arm, took one of the enemy's batteries.
The whole of the Imperial army was broken by this
terrible attack; its ammunition wagons exploded;
Wallenstein's orders, and brave Piccolomini's efforts,
could not stay the rout.  Just then a joyful cry arose
from the battlefield: "Pappenheim is here!" and
this leader, the bravest of the brave, appeared with
his horsemen; his first question was, "Where is the
King of Sweden?"  Someone pointed to the Finns,
and Pappenheim rushed to the spot.  Here began a
terrible battle.  The Imperialists, filled with new
courage, turned back and attacked on three sides at
once.  Not a man of the Swedes gave ground.  Brahe
died with the yellow brigade, who fell nearly to the
last man; Winckel with the blue, died in the same
order, man for man, as they stood in the ranks.  The
rest of the Swedish infantry slowly retreated, and
victory seemed to smile on the destructive Pappenheim.

But he, the Ajax of his time, the man of a hundred
scars, did not live to see success.  In the first attack
on the Finns, a falconet bullet smashed his hip; and
two musket balls pierced his chest; it was also said
that Stälhandske wounded him with his own hand.
He fell, but still in death rejoiced over Gustaf Adolf's
fall, and the news of his loss spread consternation
amongst the Imperialists.

"Pappenheim is dead; everything is lost!"

Once more the Swedes advanced; Duke Bernhard,
Kniephausen, and Stälhandske, performed prodigies
of valour.  But Piccolomini, with six wounds, mounted
his seventh horse, and fought with more than mortal
valour; the Imperialist centre held its ground, and
only the darkness stopped the battle.  Wallenstein
retired, and the exhausted Swedish army encamped
on the battlefield.  Nine thousand slain covered the
field of Lützen.

The result of this battle was disastrous to the
Imperialists.  They had lost all their artillery;
Pappenheim and Wallenstein had lost their invincible
names.  The latter raged with anger; he executed
the cowards with the same facility as he bestowed
gold on the brave.  Ill and disheartened he retired
with the rest of his army to Bohemia, where the
stars were his nightly companions, and treacherous
plans his only solace; and his death from Buttler's
hand was the end of his glorious life.

A thrill of joy passed over the whole Catholic
world, because the faith of Luther and the Swedes
had lost a great deal more than their enemies.

The arm was paralyzed which had so powerfully
wielded the victorious sword of light and freedom;
the grief of the Protestants was deep and universal,
mixed with fear for the future.  It was not for
nothing that the Te Deum was sung in the churches
of Vienna, Brussels, and Madrid; twelve days'
bull-fighting gratified Madrid on account of the dreaded
hero's fall.  But it is said that the Emperor
Ferdinand, who was greater than the men of his time,
shed bitter tears at the sight of his slain enemy's
bloody buff waistcoat.

Many stories circulated about the great Gustaf
Adolf's death.  Duke Franz Albert of Lauenburg,
Richelieu, and Duke Bernhard, were all said to have
had a share in his fall; but none of these surmises
have been verified by history.  A later German
author tells the following popular story:

"Gustaf Adolf, King of Sweden, received in his
youth, from a young woman whom he loved, a ring
of iron, which he ever afterwards wore.  The ring
was composed of seven circles, which formed the
letters Gustaf Adolf.  Seven days before his death
he missed the ring."

The reader knows that the threads of this story
are tied to the same ring, but we have several
reasons for saying that this ring was made of
copper.

On the evening after the battle, Duke Bernhard
sent his soldiers with torches to find the king's body;
and they found it plundered and hardly recognisable
under heaps of slain.  It was taken to the village of
Meuchen, and there embalmed.  The soldiers were
all allowed to see the dead body of their king and
leader.  Bitter tears were here shed, but tears full
of pride, for even the lowest considered it an honour
to have fought by the side of such a hero.

"See," said one of Stälhandske's old Finns, loudly
sniffing, "they have stolen his golden chain and his
copper ring; I still see the white mark on his forefinger."

"Why should they care about a copper ring?"
asked a Scotchman, who had lately joined the army,
and had not heard the stories which passed from
man to man.

"His ring!" said a Pomeranian.  "Be sure that
the Jesuits knew what is was good for.  The ring
was charmed by a Finnish witch, and as long as the
king wore it, he could not be hurt by steel or lead."

"But see to-day he has lost it, and therefore—you
understand."

"What is that fruit-eating Pomeranian saying?"
said the Finn angrily.  "The power of the Almighty,
and nothing else, has protected our great king, but
the ring was given to him long ago by a young
Finnish girl, whom he loved in his youth; I know
more about this than you do."

Duke Bernhard, who, sad and sorrowful, was watching
the king's pale features, turned round at these
words; he put his sound hand underneath his open
buff waistcoat, and said to the Finn:

"Comrade, do you know one of Stälhandske's
officers named Bertel?"

"Yes, your grace."

"Is he alive?"

"No, your grace."

The duke turned to another and gave several orders
abstractedly.  A few moments later, when he again
looked at the king, he seemed to remember something.

"Was he a brave man?" he asked.

"He was one of Stälhandske's horsemen!" said the
Finn with great pride.

"When did he fall, and where?"

"In the last struggle with the Pappenheimers."

"Go and search for him."

The duke's order was promptly obeyed by these
exhausted soldiers, who had reason to wonder why
one of the youngest officers should be searched for
this night, when Nils Brahe, Winckel, and many
other old leaders were lying uncared for in their blood
on the battlefield.  It was nearly morning when the
searchers returned and reported that Bertel's dead
body could not be found anywhere.

"Hum!" said the duke discontentedly; "great men
have sometimes funny ideas.  What shall I now do
with the king's ring?"

The November sun rose blood-red over the field
of Lützen.  A new time had come; the Master had
left, and the disciples had now to carry out his work
alone.

II.—THE SWORD AND THE PLOUGH.

Silence reigned after the conclusion of the narrative;
everyone was thinking of the great hero's fall,
and not realising that the tale was ended.  The old
grandmother sat on the stuffed sofa in her brown
woollen shawl, and near her the schoolmaster,
Svenonius, with his blue handkerchief and brass
spectacles.  Captain Svanholm, the postmaster, who
had lost a finger in the last war, was on the right;
on the left pretty Anne Sophie, eighteen years old,
with a high tortoise-shell comb in her long brown
hair; and around them, on the floor or on stools, sat
six or seven playful children, with mouths now wide
open, as if they had heard a ghost story.

The first to disturb the silence was Anne Sophie,
who sprang with a cry from her chair, stumbled, and
fell into the schoolmaster's arms.

The entranced company, who were still at Lützen,
were as much disturbed by this interruption as if
Isolani's Croats had suddenly broken into the room.
The postmaster, still in the midst of the battle, sprang
up and trod heavily upon old grandma's sore foot
with his iron heel.  The schoolmaster was quite upset,
not at all realising the value of the burden in his
arms—perhaps the first and also the prettiest in his whole
life; the children fled in all directions, and some
crept behind the surgeon's high chair.  But Andreas,
who had just followed the Finnish cavalry in their
charge over the trenches, seized the surgeon's
silver-headed Spanish cane, and prepared to receive the
Croats at the point of the bayonet.  Old Bäck was
undisturbed; he produced his tobacco box, bit off a
piece, and mildly said, "What is the matter with you,
Anne Sophie?"  The latter freed herself, blushing
and embarrassed, from the schoolmaster's arms, and
declaring that someone had pricked her with a pin,
looked around for the culprit.

Old grandma, always quick to scent out mischief,
immediately practised a method, and discovered that
Jonathan had inserted a pin at the top of his rattan,
and therewith upset his eldest sister, with the results
just indicated.  The punishment, like that under
martial law, was quick and short, and Jonathan had
then to retire to the nursery, and learn an extra
lesson for the next day.

When the principal power had thus restored order
without bloodshed, the company began to talk of the
surgeon's story.

"It is too violent a tale, my dear cousin," said the
old grandmother, whilst looking at the teller with
one of those mild and speaking glances, which captured
all hearts with their expression of intelligence
and sympathy; "altogether too turbulent.  It seems
to me that I still hear the noise of the cannon.  War
is frightful and detestable, when we consider all the
blood shed on the battlefield, and all the tears at
home.  When will the day arrive when men, instead
of destroying each other, will share the earth and our
Lord's good gifts together in Harmony and Universal
Brotherhood?"

Now the postmaster's martial spirit rose in arms.

"Peace?  Share?  No war?  Pshaw! cousin, pshaw! would
you make an ant's nest of the world?  What
a state of things!  Scribblers would smother everything
with ink; cowards and petty tyrants would sit
on honest men; and when one nation domineered
over another, people would lowly bow, thank them,
and act like sheep.  No; the devil take me! men like
Gustaf Adolf and Napoleon move nations and things;
they tap a little blood which has been spoilt by gross
living, and then the world improves.  I still remember
the 21st of August, at Karstula; Fieandt stood on
the left, and I at the right——"

"If I may interrupt the speech of my honoured
brother," said the schoolmaster, who had heard this
story one hundred and seventy times before, "I would
prove that the world would progress much better
through spilling ink than blood.
Inter arma silent
leges
.  In war times we could not sit here by the
fire, and drink our toddy in Bäck's room; we should
be serving a cannon on the ramparts; linstock in
hand, instead of a glass; powder in our pouches, and
not even a pinch of snuff.  Ink has made you, brother,
a postmaster; in ink you live and have your being;
ink brings your daily bread, and what would you
be with blood alone, and no ink, may I ask?

"What should I be?  Devils and heretics ... I?"

"Cousin Svanholm!" said the old grandmother,
with a warning glance at the children.

The postmaster stopped at once.  The surgeon
saw the necessity of re-establishing peace and concord.

"I think," he said, "that nations go through the
world like the individuals of which they are
composed.  In youth they are wild and passionate, fight,
rage, and tear each other to pieces.  When older and
wiser, they invent gunpowder, place host against host,
and let them destroy each other in cold blood at long
distances.  Finally the world comes to reason, and
seizes the pen which is very sharp when necessary.
And then begins the reign of universal knowledge,
which is certainly the best, according to my mind."

"It would be ... seven devils ... all right, cousin, I
will be as quiet as a wall," said the postmaster.  "I
only ask what kind of a man was Gustaf Adolf?  What
kind of a man was Napoleon?  Were they only
birthday eaters of sweetmeats?  What do you think?
Were they fools or savages?  I pray you.  Do you
hear, cousin?  I do not swear, cousin; you should
have heard Fieandt, how devilishly he swore at
Karstula."

The surgeon continued, without paying any attention
to the postmaster.

"Therefore, the youthful history of all nations
begins with war, and the first soldier in the world's
company was called Cain.  But as war is as old as
the world, it is likely to exist as long as it lasts.
I do not believe in the new ideas about a perpetual
peace.  I believe that as long as human hearts retain
selfish desires, the curse of war will prevail.  Eternal
peace consists in no longer fighting blindly, slavishly,
as before, but with glad courage comprehending the
reason why, and for a righteous cause; then one can
hack away with right goodwill."

"Then we should always fight for an idea," said the
schoolmaster thoughtfully.

"That's it, for an idea.  It is to the honour of the
Finnish soldier that with one exception he has always
fought for the defence of his fatherland.  Then he
has gone out to fight on foreign soil; and our Lord
has mercifully chosen that this should be for the
greatest and most righteous cause of all, namely, to
defend the pure Protestant faith and freedom of
conscience for the whole world.  The Finn was
proud to know this in the Thirty Years' War.  He
felt within himself that his heart was the same as
Gustaf Adolf's, who, I think, was the greatest
general who ever lived, whilst he fought and won
victories for one of the few causes that are worth
bleeding for."

"Tell us more about Gustaf Adolf!" exclaimed
Andreas, who could think only of that one name.

"Dear uncle, a little more about Gustaf Adolf,"
chimed in the rest of the children, who, with the
greatest trouble, had been held in check by grandma's
admonitions and sister Anne Sophie.

"Thank you.  No.  The great king is dead, and we
will allow him to peacefully slumber in the royal vault
of the church at Riddarholm, Stockholm.  And if
the story in future loses something from this, it will
also gain something, namely, that the other characters
will become more prominent.  Hitherto, we have
been compelled to almost exclusively fix our eyes
on the heroic king, and grandmother was right in
saying that we have been deafened by the thunder
of the cannon.  Thus, Lady Regina, and the Jesuit,
and especially Bertel, who is the real hero, have all
been kept in the background."

"And Ketchen," said the grandmother; "for my
part, I would like much to know more of the good,
charming child.  I will leave Regina alone, but this
I will maintain that such a black-eyed wild cat, who
would tear one's eyes out at any moment, cannot
come to any good."

"And the lordly Count of Lichtenstein, whom we
have not heard of lately," added Sophie.  "I am
certain he will become Regina's betrothed."

"Aha! little cousin listens with delight to that part
of it," said the postmaster with a sly smile.  "But
say, brother Bäck, do not busy yourself with
sentimentalities; let us hear more about Stälhandske, the
stout little Larsson, and the Tavastlander Vitikka.
How the d——l did the man get along without ears?
I remember to this day, that on the 21st of August,
there was a corporal at Karstula——"

"Brother Bäck," interrupted the schoolmaster,
"who has
justitia mundi
, the sword of justice in his
hand, will not fail to hoist the Jesuit Hieronymus up
to the top of the highest pine on the Hartz mountains."

"Take care, brother Svenonius," retorted the
post-master maliciously, "the Jesuit was very learned, and
knew a heap of Latin."

"I will tell you what I know about the Finns," said
the surgeon; "but I assure you beforehand that it
is altogether too little.  Wait ten or twenty years
longer, when some industrious man will take the
trouble to glean from the old chronicles our brave
countrymen's exploits."

"And what became of the king's ring?"

"Why, that we shall hear to-morrow evening."

CHAPTER I.

A MAN FROM THE PEASANTS' WAR.

Beyond the fertile plains of Germany a wild sea
extends itself towards the north, whose shores are
annually covered with the ice of winter, and whose
straits have sometimes borne entire armies on their
ice-bridges.  For ages the surrounding nations have
fought for the possession of this sea; but at the
time of our story the greatest power in the north
triumphed over nine-tenths of its wide shores, the
Baltic had almost become a Swedish lake; stretching
its mighty blue arms north and east, it folded in
its embrace a daughter of the sea, a land which had
arisen from its bosom, and elevated its granite rocks
high above its mother's heart.
Finland
is the most
favoured child of the Baltic; she empties her
treasures into the lap of her mother, and the great
sea does not disdain the offering, but withdraws
lovingly and tenderly like an indulgent mother, that
her daughter may develop, and every season clothes
the shores with grass and flowers.  Fortunate the
land which lulls to sleep in its bosom the waters of
a thousand lakes, and stretches one hundred and forty
Swedish miles along the shore.  The sea bears power,
freedom, and enlightenment; the ocean is an active
civilising element in the world; and a sea communicating
nation can never stagnate in need and under
oppression except by its own fault.

Far away in the north of Finland a region exists
which more than any other is the fostered child of
the sea, for from time unknown it has risen with a
gentle slope from the waters.  Numerous green isles
rise along this coast.  "In my youth," says the
grey-haired old salt, "fine ships floated where now the
water is quite shallow, and in a few years the cattle
will graze on the former sea-bottom.  The playing
child launches its little boat from the beach; look
around you, little one, and see well the point where
the waters trace their edges; when you become a
man, you will look in vain for your present
strand—beyond the green fields you will hear their distant
murmur; and when you are an old man, a village
may appear on the spot once occupied by the waves."  A
strange region, where the towns built hard by
deep sounds and tributaries, are twelve miles from
the waters in two hundred years, while the keels and
anchors of vessels are drawn up from the bogs fifty
miles inland.

This region is East Bothnia; greater than many
kingdoms, and extending to the verge of Lapland in
the north, where the sun never sets at midsummer,
and never rises during the Christmas darkness.

Nature is awake for three months of the year in
an unbroken day, and then at midnight you can read
the finest print; three months of night, but a night
of moonlight and glittering snow—clear, cold, and
solemn.  The flower's beauty perishes sooner there
than human joy; for seven months the plains are
covered with snow and the lakes with solid ice;
but never is spring more delightful than such a
winter; still a melancholy mingles with this joy,
which the heart well understands.

Two races live on the coasts of this land, unmixed
and unlike; a variegated picture of national and
local peculiarities of language and habits; one parish
sharply contrasting with another.  Certain common
traits exist, however, which all present.  It is not a
historical accident that the greatest and bloodiest
battles of Finland have been fought on the soil of
East Bothnia.

Twenty-five miles east of Vasa, on the banks of
Kyro River, is the rich Storkyro parish—the granary
of East Bothnia.  Here grows the well-known rye-seed,
which is exported in large quantities to Sweden.
The parish presents a plain of waving grain-fields,
from which arose the saying, "that Storkyro fields
and Limingo meadows have no equals in length and
breadth."  The people are Finns, of Tavastlandish
origin in remote times.  Their old church, built in
1304, is one of the oldest in the country.

We now ask our reader to follow us there.  At the
time of our story this region was badly cultivated,
compared with later times.  The ravages of the
Peasants' War had retarded its growth, so that for
a generation traces of this disastrous struggle were
visible, whilst other wars, with heavy conscriptions,
prevented time from healing these wounds.  Hence,
in the summer of 1632, many farmhouses still stood
empty; the grain-fields did not spread far from the
river banks, and unhealthy fogs covered the country
when the nights were cool.  The forests, then already
thinned, still yielded fuel for the tar pits; part of
the peasantry fished among the Michel Islands, and
the worthy pastor, Herr Georgius Thomoe Patur, had
not then, like his present successor, a yearly income
of 4,000 silver roubles.  Therefore the eye lingered
with delight on Bertila's farmhouse close to the
church, finer and better built than any of the others,
and surrounded by the most fertile fields.

The summer had advanced to the middle of August,
and the harvesting had just begun.  More than sixty
persons, men, women, and children—for the East
Bothnian peasant women work the whole summer out
of doors—were busily cutting the golden rye, which
they gathered into sheaves and placed with skilful
hands in high, handsome ricks.  The day was hot,
and the stooping posture of the work wearisome;
so it often happened that the petted boys amongst
the reapers threw longing glances at the soft grass
round the edge of the field, which evidently seemed
intended for a resting-place.  At the same time they
did not forget to look for the overseer, an old man
in a loose, grey homespun jacket.  Whenever anyone
stopped, he heard his neighbour whisper, "Larsson
is coming!" which had an instantaneous effect, like
the stroke of a whip.

But Larsson, a small man, between whose bushy
head and eyebrows a good-hearted look glanced forth,
was now concerned with one of the women, who, on
account of the heat and work, had sunk to the
ground.

Judging from her features this woman was no
longer young; perhaps about thirty-six; but to look
at her slender figure, and the mild sympathetic
expression of her blue eyes, she seemed no more than
twenty.  She exhibited a rare but prematurely faded
beauty, with much suffering and resignation.  She
wore a fine white flannel jacket, which being
thrown aside on account of the sun, showed sleeves
of the finest linen, a red bodice, like the peasantry
wore, with a short striped woollen skirt, and a little
plaid handkerchief tied around her head, to support
her long flaxen hair.  She had worked hard, but her
strength was insufficient; she had fallen with her
scythe in her hand, and those nearest to her, with
respect and love, had carried her to the soft turf,
and tried with fresh water from the spring to bring
her back to life.

"There now, Meri!" said old Larsson with fatherly
sympathy, as he held the fainting woman's head on
his knees and bathed her forehead with cold water;
"there, my child, don't be foolish enough to die and
leave your old friend; what joy would he then have
on earth? ... She cannot hear me, poor child!
Who ever had such a father as hers?  To compel
this delicate thing to work in such heat! ... Drink
a little—that's right ... it is very good of you;
now open your lovely eyes once more.  Do not
trouble, Meri; we will go to the house, and you shall
not work any more to-day."

The pale and delicate creature endeavoured to rise
and seize her sickle.

"Thank you, Larsson," she said in a low but
melodious voice, "I am better now.  I will work;
father washes it."

"Father wishes it!" exclaimed the old man testily.
"You see, I do not; I forbid you to work.  Even
if your father turned me out of doors, and I had to
beg my bread, you should not work any more to-day.
Well, well, my child, don't take it so hard; your
father is not so foolish.  He knows that you are not
strong; you are like your dead mother, who was a
lady by birth, and from your education in Stockholm
... There, there; let us go home; don't be
obstinate now, Meri!"

"Let me go, Larsson; see, he comes himself!"
cried Meri, tearing herself free and grasping the
scythe, with which she again tried to mow the golden
rye.  But as she stooped down, it grew dark before
her eyes, and for the second time she sank fainting
between the waving stalks.

At that instant the efforts of all the workers
redoubled; he approached in person, the severe and
dreaded owner of Bertila farm.  Like a gloomy
shadow he came slowly along the path—a tall old
man of seventy, but little bent by age.  His costume
was the same as that of the peasants in summer:
wide shirt-sleeves, a long red-striped vest, short linen
pantaloons, blue stockings, and bark-shoes.  He wore
a high pointed cap of red yarn on his white head,
which made his tall figure still more imposing.  In
spite of his simple costume, his whole bearing was
commanding.  The decided carriage, sharp penetrating
look, resolute expression, love of authority
around the tightly drawn upper lip, indicated the
former political leader and the rich and powerful
land-owner, accustomed to rule over many hundreds
of subordinates.  Seeing this old man, one
understood why he was known in many neighbouring
parishes as the
Peasant King
.

Cold and calm, old Aron Bertila approached the
spot where his only daughter lay in a dead faint.

"Put her in the hay-wagon and take her up to
the house," he said.  "In two hours she will be back
to her work."

"But, Bertila!" exclaimed Larsson excitedly.

Bertila looked round with a glance before which
the other quailed; then he stalked on through the
field as if nothing had occurred, observing with a
keen eye the labours of the reapers; here and there
breaking off an ear and closely examining the
number and weight of the seeds.  From the barn the
whole harvest-field was visible; it was new, and more
than a hundred acres in extent.  The old man looked
with great pride on the waving sea of golden ears;
his carriage became more erect, his breast expanded,
as he beckoned Larsson to him.

"Do you remember this tract thirty-four years ago,
when Fleming's cavalry scoured the country like
savages, the village lay in ruins, and the fields were
trampled down by the horses' hoofs.  Here, close to
the village, was the desert; naked, charred stumps
stood between mud puddles and quagmires; no road
or path led here, and even the forest wolves avoided
the desolate spot."

"I remember it well," said Larsson in a monotonous
tone.

"Look now around, old friend, and say.  Who
rebuilt this village, more lovely than ever before?
Who tilled this wilderness, made roads and paths,
measured the land, drained the morass, ploughed this
fertile soil, and sowed this great field which now
waves in the breeze, and will soon supply hundreds
of human beings with its harvest?  Say, Larsson,
who is the man who did this mighty work?" and
the old man's eyes flamed with enthusiasm.

But the little, plump person at his side seemed to
be possessed with quite another feeling.  He humbly
took off his old hat, clasped his hands, and earnestly
said,

"Nothing is he who sows; nothing is he who
waters; God alone gives the growth!"

Bertila, absorbed in thought, heeded him not, and
continued,

"Yes, by God!  I have seen evil times, days of
want, misery, and despair, which the sword brought
upon earth, and I have myself drawn the weapon to
destroy my enemies.  I have had victory and defeat,
both to my injury.  Hence I can rejoice in the work
of peace.  I know the fruit of the sword, and what
the plough produces.  In the sword lurks a spirit
of evil, which revels in blood and tears; the sword
kills and destroys, but the plough gives life and
happiness.  You see, Larsson, the plough has made
this field.  Over at Korsholm is the Finnish coat of
arms, a lion with a naked sword.  Were I king, I
would say, Away with the sword and take the plough.
The latter is the true weapon of Finland; if we
possess bread we have plenty of arms; with arms we
can drive our enemies from our homes.  But without
bread, Larsson, what use is steel and powder to us?"

"Bertila," said Larsson, "you are a singular man.
You hate war, but that I understand; in war they
burnt your farm, and drove your first wife and her
little children into the woods to perish.  You yourself
have fought at the head of the peasantry, and barely
escaped
the blood bath on Ilmola's ice
.  Such things
are not easily forgotten; but what I cannot
comprehend is, that you, a friend of the peasants, a
soldier hater, first took me, an old starving soldier,
as overseer on your farm, then equipped my Lasse—God
bless the boy—for the war, and finally sent
your own grandson, Meri's child, little Gösta,* yet
beardless, to the field among the king's cavalry."

* From Gustaf.

Old Bertila's look darkened.  Some sensitive chord
had been touched, and he glanced around as if he
feared a listener behind the barn walls.

"Who dares to speak to me of Meri's child?" he
said in a low tone.  "I know none other than my
son Gösta, born of my second wife during the
journey to Stockholm; and God be merciful unto
you if ever ... Let us forget that matter.  Why
I took you?  Why I sent your boy into the field?
H'm! it does not concern anyone."

"Well, keep it to yourself; I know too much
already."

"Tell me, if you can, Larsson, what constituents
are required for an honest Christian Government?"

Larsson looked at him with surprise.

"I will tell you.  The sword has two parts, the
blade and the handle.  Two forces are likewise
necessary for the plough: one that draws and one
that drives.  And two forces united form a Christian
Government, namely, the people and the king.  But
that which comes between brings discord and ruin;
it arrogates to itself the king's power and the people's
property.  It is a monster."

"I know you hate the nobles."

"And therefore," Bertila laid an emphasis on his
words, and uttered them with an almost ironical
smile, which seemed to turn his meaning into a jest,
"you see,
my
son must either be
peasant or king
;
nothing more or less!"

Larsson looked at him with dismay.  He had not
imagined the depth of ambition which had hitherto
glowed concealed in the old peasant's heart.  He
thought it the extreme of crazy presumption.

"You can certainly never hope," he timidly said,
"that Meri's son, with his birth——"

The old man's eyes flashed, but the words were
inaudible that came from his lips, as if he tried to
struggle against an inner impulse, to express for the
first and perhaps for the last time, the bold idea
which had already for many years grown in his
tempestuous soul.

"King Gustaf Adolf has only a daughter," he
said finally, with a peculiar look.

"Princess Christina ... Yes."

"But the kingdom at war with half the world, after
his death, needs a man upon the throne."

"Bertila, what do you mean?"

"I mean that in my childhood I heard King Erik's
son, in spite of his peasant wife, Karin, declared the
successor to the crown."

"Are you in your senses?"

Again an ironical smile played around the old
man's lips.

"Do you not understand," he coldly said, "how it
is possible to hate soldiers and aristocrats, and yet
send one's son to war as the nearest road to
distinction, under a king's eyes?"

"I beg of you, Bertila, put aside such wild fancies;
you are a reasonable man when the demon of pride
does not get possession of your restless mind.  Your
plan will fail; it must fail."

"It cannot fail."

"What!  Not fail!"

"No!  Have I not told you that Gösta must be
either king or peasant?  Either.  I do not care.  If
he wishes to remain a peasant, so be it."

"But if he will not remain a peasant?  Supposing
he wishes to fight for a coat of arms, and becomes
a nobleman?  Remember, you have started him on
the right road for that end; as an officer he is
already an equal of the nobility."

Bertila seemed to be cogitating.

"No!" he cried, "it is impossible.  His blood
... his education ... my will."

"His blood!  Then you no longer remember that
nobility is in it from both sides?  His education! and
you sent him to Stockholm at twelve, and allowed
him to grow up amongst young aristocrats, whom he
has constantly heard express themselves with contempt
about the peasantry.  Your will! foolish father
to think that you can bend a youth's desires from the
direction given to them by such powerful influences."

The old man remained silent for a time, then he
said, coldly,

"Larsson, you are a credulous fool; I joke, and
you take it seriously.  I will answer for the youth.
Let us say no more about it; but take care, not a
word of what has passed!  Do you understand?"

"I am your old friend, Bertila.  Since the time
when I, a horseman with Svidje Klas, helped you
to escape from Ilmola, you have repaid me the
service many times over; I shall never betray you.
But, you see, I love your children as my own, and
cannot bear to see you make the boy unhappy; and
Meri ... are you a father, Bertila?  How do you
treat your child, your only daughter, who attends to
your lightest wish, and does everything to atone for
the fault of her youth?  You treat her worse than
any of your servants; you allow her frail and weak
body to perform the hardest work; she sinks to the
ground, and you do not raise her.  You are cruel,
Bertila; you are an inhuman father."

"You do not understand the matter," answered the
morose old man.  "You are too tender-hearted to
comprehend what it means to go straight ahead without
compunction.  Meri, like her mother, has the fine lady
in her, and that must be uprooted.  She cannot
become a queen; well, then, she shall be a thorough
peasant.  I have said what I think about the
intermediate class, and now you know the reason for my
actions.  Come, let us return to the labourers."

"And Meri ... spare her to-day, at least."

"She shall work with the rest this afternoon."

CHAPTER II.

ASHAMED OF A PEASANT'S NAME.

The log-house of the East Bothnian peasant is now
always more roomy, lighter, and more pretentious in
its whole appearance than in any other part of
Finland.  It sometimes consists of two storeys, or has
at least a garret; the windows are of good size; it
it almost always painted red or yellow, with white
corners, and occasionally possesses window shutters.
The whole bears evidence of mechanical skill and
comfort.  The East Bothnian never builds such large
and fine villages as the Tavastlander and the Abo
peasants do, but in cases of necessity constructs good
solitary farmhouses.  At the time of our story the
smoke-huts were in use by nearly the whole Finnish
population; only peasants of Swedish origin used
fire-places and regular chimneys.  But even then one
could see in East Bothnia, close to the coast, some
buildings constructed in a more modern style, copied
from their Swedish neighbours.

The newly settled towns had attracted the country
people to the coast, and they had already begun to
be accustomed to greater comfort; and the wealthier
the peasant, the quicker his house and person
assumed a more civilised aspect.  It is true that the
luxury, against which the laws of the sixteenth
century so severely protested, was found only on the
estates of the nobility and among the wealthy Abo
burghers—but the home-brewed ale foamed over in
the tankards of the peasants, and the Holland spices
were produced from his cupboards for festive
occasions.

Since the fires of the Peasants' War had destroyed
the huts of Storkyro village, one could often see the
Swedish and Finnish styles of building side by side.
Bertila's farm was the largest and the richest in the
village, and was built in the new style, with steps
and a small verandah, and two small chambers beside
the large room; one for the master of the family and
one for his daughter.  The rest of the people on the
farm lived together in the large room, but in summertime
the younger ones slept out of doors in the sheds
and some in the lofts.

At this time one would not see the large clock,
with its red and blue painted cover, which to-day is
the chief ornament in every peasant's cottage.  The
long plain table with its high seat for the master,
stood surrounded by benches on the sides towards
the door.  It was close to dinner-time, and in the big
fire-place the porridge-kettle was boiling.  The room
was nearly empty, only a large cat purred on a bench,
and a girl of fourteen stirred the porridge; and Meri
was sitting by the fire with her work.  Poor Meri
had just recovered from her fainting attack, but she
was still very pale.  Her long golden hair fell down
over her almost bare shoulders; her eyes were often
shyly turned towards the door, as if she feared the
sudden entrance of her father.  She was knitting a
girdle of the most beautiful colours, and sang at the
same time an old Swedish song.

"This girdle with roses fair

Shall only my loved one wear,

When he from the perils of war

Returns to us from afar."

It has been said that Meri was no longer young.
The traces which suffering had left on her finely
formed features told of many a year of sorrow and
pain; but at this moment as she watched the girdle,
her face assumed an almost childish expression of
delight.  One could see that her work was a joy to
her, and that she sang of someone much beloved and
far away.

Her life with her severe father was full of hardship,
and when she looked at the girdle she semed to read
in its bright-coloured loops of a future full of joy
and peace.  In this girdle she lived, it was the same
to her as the thought of her only joy—her idolized son.

Again she sang:

"I weave in beads so fine

For this dear beloved of mine,

And no king upon his throne

Shall the like of this girdle own."

Just then Bertila, her father, entered, followed by
Larsson and all the rest of the working people.  Old
Bertila's looks were dark; he could not deny to
himself that Larsson's predictions were only too likely
to be true.  His son a nobleman.  This possibility
was in his eyes a disgrace, and up to this time had
not troubled his mind.

The last words of Meri's song had just died away.
At her father's entrance she quickly concealed the
girdle under her apron; but the suspicious eyes of
the old man fathomed her secret.

"You are again sitting with your dreams, lazy
thing, instead of serving out the porridge," he said in
a sharp tone.  "What have you underneath your
apron?  Out with it."

And Meri was obliged in the presence of them all
to reveal the unfinished girdle—her dearest secret.
Her father snatched it from her, looked at it for a
moment with contempt, then tore it in two, and threw
the pieces behind the oven.

"I have told you many a time," he said severely,
"that an honest peasant woman has nothing to do
with fancy work.  Let us say grace."

The old man then clasped his hands in the usual
way, and the rest followed suit.  But before the
prayer could be uttered, Larsson stepped to the
middle of the floor, his naturally good-humoured face
purple with rage.

"You ought to be ashamed of yourself, Bertila," he
said, "to insult your own daughter in front of all the
people!  She works like a slave night and day, more
than anyone of us, yet you call her a lazy thing!  I
tell you this straight in the face, that although you
are my master, and I eat your bread, and without
you I have nothing but the beggar's staff, that such
an unrighteous father does not deserve to have such
a good daughter; and rather than see this misery
day after day, I will beg my bread.  But you will
have to answer before the Almighty for your children.
And may you now say your grace, and let the food
taste well to you if you can.  Farewell, Bertila, I
cannot stand this life any longer."

"Cast out the rascal who dares to speak against
the master of the house," said Bertila with more than
usual violence.  No one moved.  For the first time
the peasant king saw his orders disobeyed.

"Dear master," began the oldest of the labourers,
"we all think the same——"

A terrible blow from the master struck the
speaker to the ground before he finished his remarks.
In vain Larsson offered to go of his own accord; in
vain Meri tried to mediate between the disputants.
So strong were the principles of right in these people,
that without consulting anything but their own
convictions, they arrayed themselves as one man against
the master's tyranny.  Fourteen muscular men stood
erect and resolute before the enraged Bertila, whose
tall figure stood threateningly in the midst of the
throng.  One more blow, and they would all have
left his service, and perhaps shut him up in his own
little chamber until his anger had subsided; for the
farther towards the north one goes, the more sensitive
is the Finnish peasant to blows.  Bertila, however,
knew his people, and saw as a wise man that his
anger had led him too far.  He sought a means of
getting out of the dilemma without too great a
humiliation.

"What is it you want?" he asked with regained
self-possession.

The workers looked at each other in silence for a
moment.

"You are wrong, master," said one of the boldest
at last.  "You have insulted Meri for nothing.  You
wished to turn Larsson out of the house, and struck
Simeon; you have done wrong."

"Meri, come here."

She did so.

"You are no longer a child, Meri.  If you cannot
endure to live with your aged father, then you are
at liberty to stay on my farm at Ilmola.  You are
free—go, my child."

Bertila knew his daughter.  These few words, "go,
my child," pronounced in a milder tone than she
was accustomed to hear, were sufficient to melt his
daughter's heart.

"Do not reject me, father," she said, "I will never
desert you."

These words made her defenders waver, and the
old man saw his opportunity.

"Bring hither the catechism," he said in a
commanding voice.

The fourteen-year-old Greta stepped forward as
was the custom on sacred days, and read aloud:

"Ye servants obey your temporal masters with fear
and trembling, in the simplicity of your hearts!  Ye
servants be submissive to your masters in all fear,
not only the mild and good, but also the unworthy!"

These words, thus uttered at the right time, did not
fail in their effect.

In these times the power and authority of father
and master were at their zenith, and were not only
by word, but in deed, a power by "God's mercy."  The
words of obedience heard from childhood, the
old man's commanding tone, and Meri's example of
ready submission to her father's authority, all
combined to tone down the hot tempers of the rebels.
They took their places at the table without another
word.  Only old Larsson stood sad and hesitating
with his hand on the door-latch.

Suddenly the door was opened, and a stranger
entered.

The new-comer was a soldier, in a broad-brimmed
hat, decorated with a gracefully fastened eagle's
plume.  He wore a waistcoat of yellow wool, short
top-boots, bore a cudgel in his hand, and a long sword
hung at his side.

"By St. Lucifer," he said joyfully, "I have come
at the right time.  God's peace, peasants, make room
at the table; I am as hungry as a monk during mass,
and I am not able to go to the vicarage on this
damned heath.  Have you any ale?"

The old man in the high seat, who had not yet
quite overcome his temper, although he appeared to
be calm, rose from his chair, but at once sat down
again.

"Sit down, countryman," said the old man softly;
"Aron Bertila has room at his table for self-invited
guests also."

"Very well," continued the new-comer, helping
himself freely to the food, which seemed to be a
familiar habit with him.  "You are Bertila, then.  I
am glad to hear it, comrade.  Confidence for
confidence, I will now tell you that I am Bengt
Kristerson, from Limingo, sergeant in his Majesty's brave
East Bothnians.  I am sent here to look after the
conscripts.  Some more ale in the tankard, peasants
... well, do not be afraid, girls, I will not bite you.
Bertila," added the soldier with his mouth full, "what
the deuce is this?  Are you Lieutenant Bertel's
father, peasant?"

"I do not know that name," replied the old man,
who was nettled by the soldier's impudent remarks.

"Are you mad, old man?  You do not know Gustaf
Bertel, who six months ago called himself Bertila?"

"My son! my son!" cried the old man in a voice
of anguish.  "I am an unfortunate father!  He is
ashamed of a peasant's name!"

"Peasant's name," said the soldier laughing, and
striking the table violently, so that the tankards and
dishes jumped.  "Do ye peasants also have names?
I think I will go without mine.  You are a fine
fellow, old man; tell me what the d——l you want
with a name?"

He then looked at his host with such an air of
naïve impudence, that the insulting words were
somewhat modified in effect.

Old Bertila, however, scarcely honoured him with
a glance.

"Fool that I was!  I sent out a beardless boy and
thought that I sent a man," he gloomily said to himself.

But the sergeant, who had indulged in many drinks
before, and had now seen the bottom of the jug, did
not seem inclined to drop the subject.

"Do not look so fierce, old boy," he said in the
same aggravating tone.  "You peasants associate so
much with oxen and sheep, that you become just
like them yourselves.  If you were a bit civil you
would send a pretty girl to fill my jug.  It is now
empty, you see; as empty as your cranium.  But you
turnip-peelers do not appreciate the honour which
is conferred upon you, of having a royal sergeant
for guest.  You see, old fellow, a soldier in these
times is everything; he has a name that rings
because he has a sword that rings.  But you, old
ploughshare, have nothing but porridge in your head
and a turnip in your breast; fill your mug, old fellow;
here's to Lieutenant Bertel's success!  So you refuse
to drink the health of an honest cavalier?  Out upon
you, peasant."

And the sergeant, in the consciousness of his
dignity, struck the table with his fist, so that the
wooden bowls jumped and seemed disposed to make
for the floor with all their contents.

The first effect of this martial joke was to induce
six or seven of the men to rise from their benches,
with the object of giving the uninvited guest a
salutary lesson in politeness.  But old Bertila stopped
them.  He rose composedly from his seat, approached
the rowdy sergeant with a firm step, and without
saying a word, grasped him by the neck with his
left hand, and with his right on his back, he lifted
the soldier from the bench, carried him to the
door and threw him out on a heap of chips outside
the steps.  The funny sergeant was so surprised at
this unexpected attack, that he did not move a
muscle to defend himself.  If he had, it was not
likely that the seventy-year-old man would have
gained the victory in the struggle.

"Go," cried Bertila after him, "and keep your
treatment as a remembrance of the peasants in
Storkyro."

Nothing impresses the multitude so much as
resolute courage combined with a strong arm.  When
the old man entered the room again he was
surrounded by his people, who now greatly admired
him; and this feat destroyed the difference which
had existed a few moments before between them.

The conflict between the sword and the plough is
as old as the world.  The Peasants' War was based
on this rivalry, and served to keep it fresh and alive
in the minds of all.  These independent peasants had
not been subjected to the tyranny of the landed
proprietors.  They witnessed with delight their honour
defended against the soldier's outrageous insults;
they forgot at the moment that they might shortly be
compelled themselves to don the soldier's jacket, and
fight for their country.  Even the old peasant chief,
elated at his exploit, had surmounted his bad temper.

For the first time in a long while they saw a smile
on his lips; and when the meal was over, he began
to relate to them some of his former adventures.

"Never shall I forget how we cudgelled the rascal
Abraham Melchiorson, the man who, here in Kyro,
seized our best peasants, and had them broken on
the wheel like malefactors.  With fifty men he had
gone up north.  It was winter time.  He was a fine
gentleman, muffled up from the cold, and rode so
grandly in a splendid wolf-skin cloak.  But when he
approached Karleby church we placed ourselves in
ambush, and rushing upon him like Jehu, beat
twenty-two of his men to death, and pommelled him black
and blue; but every time he expected a rap he drew
the wolf-skin cloak over his ears, so that no club could
disable the traitor.  'Wait,' said Hans Krank, from
Limingo, who led us on that wolf hunt, 'we will
whip him out of his skin yet'; with this he drubbed
Abraham so soundly that he was obliged to let go
of his fine fur.  Krank had nothing on but a jacket,
and it was cold enough, God knows; he thought the
fur cloak a good thing, and drew it unobserved over
his own shoulders.  But, as all this occurred in the
twilight, we others did not notice who was now in
the wolf-skin, and we kept on belabouring the cloak;
it is very certain that Krank had a very warm time
of it that evening.  But Abraham Melchiorson
became so light and nimble after getting rid of his
cloak, that he ran off to Huso farm; but there he was
taken by Saka Jacob from Karleby, and the rascal
was taken to Stockholm; but he did not get much
time to mourn over the loss of his cloak, for the
duke soon made him a head shorter."

"Yes," said Larsson, who always tried to defend
Fleming and his people, "that time you had the best
of it.  Eleven soldiers remained alive, but seeming
to be dead, you took all their clothes.  And at
midnight they crept half dead with cold to the vicarage,
and were there taken in; but in the morning you
wanted to put them in the water underneath the ice,
alive, as you had done in Lappfjard's River.  You
were wolves and not human beings.  The water was
so low in the river that you had to push the men
down with poles to keep them there; and when they
tried to get up, the women knocked them on their
heads with buckets."

"Keep quiet, Larsson, you do not know all that
Svidje Klas did," said Bertila angrily; "I say nothing
about all the men that he and his people have killed
and broken on the wheel.  Do you remember Severin
Sigfridson at Sorsankoski?  He surrounded the
peasants, and ordered his subaltern to behead them
one by one; but he was not able to kill more than
twenty-four, and asked the nobleman to finish the
rest himself.  The gentleman got angry, and ordered
the peasants to cut the subaltern into five parts, and
then do the same to each other as long as one
remained alive."

"But what did you do, you mad brutes, on Peter
Gumse's farm?  Your men destroyed the place, broke
the windows, slaughtered all the cattle, and set their
severed heads with wide open mouths in the windows
as a scare.  Then the beams of the house were cut
three parts through, so that when the folk came
home it would fall upon their heads; and when you
caught a horseman you used him as a target for your
arrows."

"It is not worth while, Larsson, to try to take
Svidje Klas' part.  Do you remember when Axel
Kurk's men came and killed a woman's children before
her eyes?  The poor mother could not stand this, she
and her half-grown daughter seized the brute by the
waist, hit him on the head with a pole, and pushed
him fainting in the water.  Svidje Klas then came
and had that same woman cut in two."

"Loose talk, which has never been proven," replied
Larsson gruffly.

"The dead keep silent like good children.  The
5,000 killed at Ilmola do not speak."

"Instead of molesting the sergeant, you should
have asked him for news about your son and mine,"
said Larsson, to get away from their usual
contentious subject—the fatal Peasant War.

"Yes, you are right.  I must hear more about the
boys and the war.  I am going to Vasa to-morrow."

"Will he soon return?" asked Meri in a shy voice.

"Gösta.  He will take his own time," said the father
angrily.  "He has now became a nobleman; he is
ashamed of his old father .... he blushes for a
peasant's name."

CHAPTER III.

THE SOUTHERN FLOWER COMES TO THE NORTH.

Some miles south of Vasa, on the sixty-third degree
of latitude, the Bay of Finland, which has hitherto
gone straight north and south, makes a perceptible
bend towards the north-east.  The great blue Baltic
following the same direction, narrows for a moment
in the "Qvark," widens again, and leans its bright
brow against Finland's breast.  Freer there than
anywhere else, the winds from the Arctic Ocean sweep
over these coasts and drive the waves with terrible
violence against the rocks.  In the midst of this
stormy sea, lie Gadden's bare flat ledges, with their
warning lighthouse and far projecting reefs.  When
the mountain winds shake their wings over these
breakers, then woe unto the vessel which, without a
sure rudder and lightly furled sails, ventures through
the narrow passage at "Understen"—its destruction
is certain.  But in the middle of summer it often
happens that a slightly northern wind is the most
welcome, and promises clear skies and fine weather.
Then fly many hundreds of sails from the coast out
towards "Qvark's" islands and reefs, to cast their
nets for shoals of herrings; and the restless,
murmuring sea dances like a loving mother, with her
daughters, the green islands, resting upon her bosom.

With the exception of Aland and Ekenäs there is
no part of Finland's coast so rich with luxuriant
vegetation as "Qvark" and its neighbouring east
shore.  These innumerable islets, of which the largest
are Wallgrund and Björkö, are here sprinkled about
like drops of green in the blue expanse, and formed
a parish by themselves called "Replotchapel,"
inhabited only by fishermen.  So numerous are these
groups, so infinitely varied the sounds, so intricate the
channels, that a strange vessel could not find its way
out without a native pilot at the helm.  Thirty
cruisers here would be insufficient to prevent
smuggling; there is only one means of putting a stop to
this inherited sin of the coast, and this method is a
light tariff with but few prohibitions; Finland during
later years has tried it with success and to her own
advantage.

At the same period as described in the preceding
chapter, therefore in the middle of August, 1632, the
waters of the Baltic were divided by the royal
man-of-war "Maria Eleonora," bound from Stockholm to
Vasa to transport the recruits for the German War.
It was a bright fine summer morning.  Over the wide
sea played an indescribable glitter, which was at the
same time grand and enchantingry beautiful.  A
boundless field of snow, illumined by the spring sun,
can rival it in splendour, but the snow is stillness and
death, the shimmering waves are motion and life.

A slumbering sea in its resplendency, is grandeur
clothed in the smile of delight; he is a sleeping giant,
who dreams of sunbeams and flowers.  Gently heaves
his breast; then the plank rocks underneath thy feet,
and thou tremblest not; he could swallow thee up
in his abyss, but he mildly spreads his golden carpet
under the keel, and he, the strong, bears the frail
bark like a child in his arms.

It was immediately after sunrise.  The monotonous
silence of sea-life prevailed on board the vessel during
the morning watch, as when no danger is feared.  Part
of the crew were still asleep below the deck, only
the mate, wrapped in a jacket of frieze, walked to
and fro on the aft deck.  The helmsman stood
motionless at the rudder, the man in the round top
peered ahead, and here and there on the fore deck
stood a sailor, fastening a loose rope end, carrying
wood to the caboose, or polishing the guns which
were to salute Korsholm when they entered that port.

The stern discipline of a modern man-of-war was
at that time almost unknown.  There were no
uniforms or steam whistles, nor any of the complex
signals and commands which are now carried to such
perfection.  Then a man-of-war scarcely differed from
a merchant vessel, excepting in size, armament, and
the number of officers and men she carried.  When
one remembers that at that time there was neither
whisky or coffee on board to protect against the chill
morning air—they had, however, already learned from
the Dutch to use an occasional quid of tobacco for
this purpose—then it is readily perceived that life on
the "Maria Eleonora" bore very little resemblance
to that on board one of our modern men-of-war.

By the green gunwale of the deck stood two female
figures, with wide travelling hoods of black wool on
their heads.  One of these passengers was small in
atature, and showed under her hood an old wrinkled
face, with a pair of peering grey eyes; she had
wrapped herself up in a thick wadded cloak of
Nurberg cloth.  The other figure was tall and slender,
and wore a tight-fitting capote of black velvet lined
with ermine.  Leaning against the gunwale, she
regarded with a gloomy air the fast receding waves
left in the vessel's wake.  Her features could not be
seen from the deck; but if one could have caught
her countenance from the mirroring waves, it would
have exhibited a classically beautiful pale face,
illuminated by two black eyes, which surpassed in
lustre the shining wave-mirrors themselves.

"Holy Mary!" cried the old woman in strongly
pronounced Low German, "when will this misery
come to an end, that the saints have imposed upon
us on account of our sins?  Tell me, my little lady,
in what part of the world we are now?  It appears
to me as if a whole year had passed since we sailed
from Stralsund; for since we left the heretic's
Stockholm I have not kept account of the days.  Every
morning when I rise, I say seven
aves
and seven
pater
nosters
, as the revered Father Hieronymus taught
us, as a protection against witchcraft and evil.  One
can never know; the world might end here, and we
have now come far away from the rule of the true
believing Church and Christian people.  This sea
has no end.  Oh, this horrible sea!  I now praise
the River Main, which flows so peacefully underneath
our turret windows in Würzburg.  Say, lady, what
if over there, on the horizon, the earth ends, and that
we are sailing straight into purgatory?"

The tall slender girl did not seem to listen to her
loquacious duenna.  Her dark brilliant eyes under
the black eyelashes were resting pensively on the
water, as if in the waves she could read an interpretation
of the dream of her heart.  And when at times
a long swell from former storms rolled forth under
the smaller waves, and the ship gently careened, so
that the gunwale dipped close to the water, and the
image in the sea approached the girl on board, then
a smile could be seen on her beautiful features, at
once proud and melancholy, and her lips moved
inaudibly, as if to confide her inmost thoughts to the
waves.

"It is only the great and majestic in life that
deserve to be loved."

Then she added, transported by this thought:

"Why should I not love a great man?"

And she whispered these words with unbounded
enthusiasm.  But instantly a shiver ran through her
delicate frame, a bright flash shot from her dark eyes,
and she said, almost trembling at the thought:

"It is only the great and majestic in life that
deserve to be hated!  Why should I not hate——?"

She did not finish the sentence.  She bent her
head towards the ground, the fire in her eyes
disappeared, and in its place a tear was seen.  Two
mighty opposing spirits fought with each other in
this passionate soul.  One said to her "Love!" the
other said to her "Hate!"  And her heart bled under
this terrible struggle between the angel and the
demon.

It is unnecessary to mention what the reader has
already divined, that the slender girl on board the
"Maria Eleonora" was no other than Lady Regina von
Emmeritz, the beautiful fanatical girl who tried to
convert King Gustaf Adolf to the Catholic faith at
Frankfurt-on-the-Main.  The king who knew the
human heart, considered with reason, that this religious
enthusiast was capable of anything if left a prey
to the Jesuit's influence.  It was, therefore, not from
revenge, which was unknown to this great heart, but,
on the contrary, from noble compassion for a young
and richly endowed nature, that he had sent her away
for a time to a far-off country, where the black monk's
influence could not reach her.  The reader will
remember that the king, on the night of the feast at
Frankfurt, ordered the Lady Regina to be sent by
Stralsund and Stockholm to the strict old lady Marta
at Korsholm.  The noble king did not know that
the dark power, from whom he was trying to save
his beautiful prisoner, followed her even to the far-off
coast of Finland.  Lady Regina had permission to
choose one of her maids to accompany her; accordingly
she selected the one in whom she had the
greatest confidence; unfortunately this was not the
bright and fair Ketchen—she had been sent back to
her relations in Bavaria—but old Dorthe, who had
been her nurse, and who was controlled by the Jesuit;
for a long time this old woman had nourished the
fanatical fire in the young girl's soul.  So the poor
unprotected maiden was still given up to the dark
powers that had warped her mind since childhood,
and perverted her rich, sensitive heart with their
terrible teachings.  And against this influence she
could only place a single but mighty feeling: her
admiration, her enthusiastic attachment to Gustaf
Adolf, whom she loved and hated at the same
time—whom she would have been able to kill, yet for
whom she would herself have suffered death.

The shrewd Dorthe seemed to guess her mistress'
thoughts; she leaned forward, and peering with her
small eyes, said in the familiar tone which a
subordinate in her position so easily assumes:

"Aye, aye....  Is that the way it stands; do they
come up again, the sinful thoughts about the heretic
king and all his followers?  Yes, yes, the devil is
cunning; he knows what he is about.  When he
wishes to catch a little frivolous girl of the usual
kind, he puts before her eyes a young handsome
cavalier, with long silken curls.  But when he wishes
to entangle a poor forsaken girl, with great proud
thoughts and noble aspirations, he brings forward a
great king, who gains castles and battles; and little
does the poor child care that the stately conqueror
is a sworn enemy to her Church and faith, and is
working for the ruin of both."

Regina turned her tearful and glistening eyes away
from the sea, and looked for a moment with
indescribable doubt at her old counsellor.

"Say," said she, almost vehemently, "is it possible
to be at once the greatest and the most hateful of
human beings?"

Regina looked again towards the sea.  The peaceful
tranquility of the mornine lay over the glittering
waters, and stilled the tempest within.  The young
girl remained silent.  Dorthe continued:

"By their fruits ye shall know them.  Just think,
what evil has not the godless king done to our Church
and us?  He has slain many thousands of our
warriors; he has plundered our cloisters and castles;
he has driven out our nuns and holy fathers from
their godly habitations, and the devout pater,
Hieronymus, has been frightfully abused by his people,
the heretic Finns; ourselves he has sent away to
the ends of the earth..."

Again Regina looked over at the islands and the
inlets bathed in the mild morning effulgence.  While
the dark demon whispered hatred in her ears, beaming
nature seemed to preach only love.  On her lips
hovered already the ravishing thought:

"What matters it if he has slain thousands; if
he has driven away monks and nuns; if he has
forced us into exile!  What matters all this,
if he is great as an individual, and acts according to
the dictates of his faith!"

But she kept silent from fear; she dared not break
from all her preceding life.  She caught up, instead,
one of Dorthe's words, as if to dispel the thunder-cloud
of hatred and malice, which enveloped her
heart in its dark mist, in the midst of this calm and
lovely scene.

"Do you know, Dorthe," she said, "that the Finns
whom you hate live on the coast of this sea?  Do you
see that strip of land over there in the east?  It is
Finland.  I have not yet seen its shores, and yet I
cannot detest a country which is bathed by so glorious
a sea.  I cannot think that evil people can grow up
in the heart of such a land."

"All saints protect us!" exclaimed the old woman,
and her lenn hand hastily made the sign of the cross.
"Is that Finland?  St. Patrick preserve us from ever
setting foot upon its cursed soil; my dear lady, you
have then never heard what is said of this land and
its heathen people?  There prevails an eternal night;
there the snow never melts; there the wild beasts
and the still wilder men lie together in dens and
caves.  The woods are so thick with hobgoblins and
imps, that when one of them is called by name, a
hundred monsters immediately come forth from the
leaves and branches.  And among themselves, these
people bewitch each other with all kinds of evils, so
that when anyone carries food to another person, he
changes his enemy into a wolf; and every word they
speak takes life, so that when they wish to make a
boat or an axe, they say it, and directly they have
what they wish."

"You are drawing a fine picture," said Regina,
smiling for the first time in a long period, for the
freshness of the sea had a good influence on her
dreamy soul.  "Happy is the land where the people
can create all they wish for with a word.  If I am
hungry, and desire a beautiful fruit, I have but to
say,
peach
, and right away I have it.  If I feel thirsty,
I say,
spring
, and instantly a spring gurgles at my
feet.  If I have sorrow in my heart, I say,
hope
, and
hope returns.  And if I long for a beloved friend, I
mention his name, and he stands by my side.  A
glorious land is Finland, were it such as you represent
it to me.  Even if we lived with wild beasts in a
cave under the eternal snows, we would look at each
other and say, Fatherland, and at the same moment
we would sit hand in hand on the banks of the Main,
beneath the shadows of the lindens, where we often
sat when I was a child, and the nightingales of our
native land would sing to us as before."

Dorthe turned angrily away.  The vessel steered
between the rocks and islands, and moved with gentle
speed past the outermost cliffs, many of which now
stand high above the surface of the water, but at
that time these were washed by the briny waves.

"What is the name of the long, richly wooded
stretch of land to the left?" asked Regina of the
helmsman standing near.

"Wolf's Island," answered the man.

"There you have it yourself, dear lady ... Wolf's
Island!  That is the first name we hear on Finland's
coast, and shows us what we have to expect."

The vessel now turned to the north, and sailed
between Langskär and Sundomland, again veered
towards the east, passed Brändö, went safely over
the shoals, which now exclude large vessels from
its waters, into Vasa's at that time superb harbour,
and then saluted with sixteen cannon the castle of
Korsholm.

CHAPTER IV.

THE PEASANT—THE BURGHERS—AND THE SOLDIER.

When the rich Aron Bertila seated himself in his
nice chaise to take a short journey to Vasa, it was
decided, as a pledge of the restored good feeling
between father and daughter, that Meri should take
the seat by his side, and purchase in town some salt
fish, hops, and certain spices, ginger and cinnamon,
which already began to be seen in the houses of the
wealthiest peasants.  Both father and daughter had
their private interests in the journey; but neither
would confess that it was news from Germany which
each sought.  Larsson had charge in the meantime
of the home work.

It was just when Gustaf Adolf and Wallenstein
stood opposed at Nürnberg.  Soldiers were badly
wanted, and Oxenstjerna wrote constantly from
Saxony to hasten the arrival of additional reinforcements.
The harvesting at its height, clashed with
the harvesting of war, also at its greatest altitude.  A
large number of conscripts were compelled to go down
to Vasa from the neighbouring villages, then they
were taken to Stockholm, and thence to the scene
of war in Germany.

At that epoch military drill was not nearly so
complicated as it is now; to stand fairly in the ranks,
rush straight at the enemy on command, to aim
well—as the East Bothnians had learned beforehand in
the seal-hunts—and to hew away manfully, these
were the chief things.  Thus one can understand
why many of these peasant boys, just taken from
the plough, were able to fall with honour by the
side of their king at Lützen.

The town of Vasa was then only twenty years old,
and much smaller than now, not merely on account
of its youth, but because all expansion was stopped
on the south side by the crown fields of Korsholm.
Around the old Mustasaari church, on the northern
side of "Kopmans" and "Stora" streets, were a few
rows of newly built one-storey houses, with six or
eight small shops.  Near the harbour stood
storehouses, and that neighbourhood was also filled with
fishermen's and sailors' huts in groups, for regular
streets were considered superfluous by the architects
of that time, and the closer the houses stood together,
the greater the mutual protection in stormy periods.

A borough, like Vasa, held one common family,
and the inhabitants looked with pride on the high
green battlements of Korsholm.

The long-credited story, confirmed by Messenius,
that Korsholm was built by Birger Jarl, and received
its name from a large wooden cross raised as a
symbol, refuge, and sign of victory, was founded on
the old tradition that the great "Jarl," on his
expedition to Finland, landed on this very coast.  Later
researches have thrown some doubt on this story of
Korsholm's origin; but it is certain that the fortress
is very old, so old that it is beyond calculation.  It
has never been besieged; its situation renders it of
no importance to Finland; and after Uleä and
Kajana castles were built, shortly before the time
of our story, it had ceased to be considered a military
position.  It now served as the residence of the
Governor of the Northern districts, to lodge other
crown officials, and serve as a prison; and its
so-called "dairy" yielded a nice income to the Governor.
The Stadtholder of Northern Finland, Johan
Mansson Ulfsparre of Tusenhult, lived only at
intervals at Korsholm, and it is said that his seventy-year-old
mother, Mistress Marta, ruled with a stern hand
over both castle and dairy in his absence.  Between
the peasants and burghers an unnatural and injurious
rivalry prevailed at that time, owing to the efforts
of the Government to suppress the country trade
for the benefit of the towns, and in a very ignorant
way to regulate the exchange of commodities.
Therefore, when the rich old peasant with his daughter
drove in through the country toll-gate on the Lillkyro
side, a few of the citizens, it is true, nodded a
greeting to the well-known old man for the sake of his
wealth; but the proudest amongst the merchants,
who feared his influence with the king, gazed on him
with hostile eyes, and gave vent to their ill-feelings
in sarcastic words, uttered loud enough to reach the
old man's ears.

"Here comes the peasant king of Storkyro!" they
said, "and Vasa has no triumphal arch!  He
considers himself too good to thrash in the barn; he
means to enter the army and become commander at
once.  Take care!  Do you not see how angry he
looks, the log-house king?  If he had his way, he
would plough up the whole town and make it into
a rye-field!"

The hot-tempered Bertila concealed his resentment,
and hurried up the horse, so as to arrive quickly
at the widow's house, where he generally resided
when in town.  He had not gone far, however, up
Kopman Street, which was not one of the widest,
before it was blocked by a crowd of drunken recruits,
who, in an ale-house near by, had inaugurated their
new comradeship and strengthened themselves for
the long journey ahead.  Two sub-officers had joined
the crowd as its self-appointed leaders, and rushed
with a bold "out of the way, peasant!" towards the
new-comer.

Bertila, already irritated and unable to control
himself, answered the summons with a cut of the whip,
which knocked off the foremost sub-officer's
broad-brimmed hat with an eagle's feather.  At once the
affray began.  The man struck rushed upon the
chaise, and the whole crowd followed him.

"Aha, old fellow!" exclaimed the jovial serjeant,
Bengt Kristerson, whom Bertila had so ignominiously
expelled from his house, "now we have got you, and
I will recompense you for your gracious treatment
yesterday.  Make way, boys; the old fellow is mine;
this fish I will scale myself."

Bertila was too old to rely upon the power of his
fists, and he looked around for a place of refuge.
Whip in hand, he leaped from the chaise, which had
stopped close to the entrance of a shop, and gave
the horse a lash, so that the latter, chaise and
daughter, rushed through the yielding crowd and
galloped up the street.  But before Bertila could find
a refuge in the shop, the door was slammed in his
face by the timorous owner.  The old champion, seeing
escape cut off, placed his back to the door, and
menaced the assailants with his long whip.

"Let us thrash the proud Storkyro peasant," cried
a young Laihela boy, who, by carrying a musket for
a week, had forgotten his peasant origin, but not his
rustic language.

"Your father was a better man, Matts Hindrickson,"
said Bertila contemptuously, "instead of assailing
his own people, he helped us, like an honest peasant,
to pommel Peder Gumse's cavalry in former days."

"Do you hear that, boys?" cried one of the
subalterns; "the dog boasts of thrashing brave
soldiers."

"We will not allow anyone to lord it over us!"

"The peasant shall dance to our tune!"

"And not we to his."

And five or six of the most excited, who had lately
worn the jacket of the peasants themselves, rushed
to drag Bertila down the steps.  The old man would
have got the worst of it, had not the aforesaid jolly
sergeant thrown himself between him and the
assailants.

"Hold on, boys!" cried Bengt Kristerson in a
stentorian voice.  "What the devil are you about?
Are you honest soldiers?  Do you not see that the old
man is seventy years old, and yet you go six to one at
him!  Blitz-donner-kreutz-Pappenheim (the sergeant
had learned this potent oath in the proper school, and
it never failed in its effect), is that warlike?  What
would the king say about it?  Out of the way, boys;
the old man is mine; I alone have the right to wash
him clean.  You should have seen how he threw me
down the steps yesterday like an old glove.  It was
a fine stroke, and now it has to be repaid."

Courage and magnanimity seldom fail.  The
nearest willingly gave way.  The sergeant advanced
to the steps.  Bertila could reach him with his whip,
but he did not strike.  He knew his people.

"Do you know what it means, peasant," cried the
sergeant with an authoritative air, which would have
become General Stälhandske himself, "to throw a
soldier of the great king down the steps?  Do you
know what it means to knock off the hat of a
defender of the evangelical faith, and a conqueror
who has gained fourteen battles and run his sword
through sixteen or seventeen living generals?  Do
you know, peasant, if I were in your place——?"

"If I stood in the place of a soldier of his Majesty,"
coolly answered Bertila, "I would respect an honest
man in his own house, and a grandsire's old age.
And if I stood in the shoes of Bengt Kristerson, and
had conquered the Roman Emperor, and run my
sword through seventeen living commanders, still I
would not forget that Bengt Kristerson's father,
Krister Nilsson, was a Limingo peasant, and fell on
Ilmola's ice like an honest fighter against Fleming's
tyranny."

The sergeant was abashed for a moment.  Then
he stepped close up to his opponent, and said in a
bragging manner:

"Do you know, peasant, that I could impale you
on this?" and so saying, he drew his long sword
half-way from its sheath.

Bertila looked calmly at him with folded arms.

"Are you not afraid, old man?" resumed the hero
of fourteen battles, evidently taken aback by the
peasant's firm attitude.

"Did you ever see an honest Finn afraid?" said
the old man, almost smiling.

The sergeant was not malicious.  He suddenly
felt much inclined to be generous; his fierce mien
changed into the blustering, jovial air which became
him so well.

"Do you know, boys," he said, with a look at his
companions, "that the old ox has got both horns and
hoofs?  He might have become something in the
world if he had been in good society.  Yesterday,
when they were fourteen to one—for you should
know, boys, that all fourteen of the hands helped to
lift me on the clodhopper's back, and then I gave
everyone of them a remembrance of it—yes, as I say,
yesterday I would have beaten the old fellow black
and blue, had it not been for the presence of ladies
at the table.  But to-day we are fifteen against one,
and so I propose that we let the old fellow go."

"He is as rich as Beelzebub," shouted some of the
conscripts; "he shall treat us to a cask of ale."

Bertila produced a little purse, and threw some
Carl IX. silver coins contemptuously among the
crowd.  This irritated the soldiers afresh; and again
the storm threatened to burst forth, when suddenly
cannon-shots were heard, and the whole crowd rushed
down to the harbour.  It was the Swedish man-of-war,
"Maria Eleonora," saluting Korsholm.

CHAPTER V.

LADY REGINA ARRIVES AT KORSHOLM.

All who had life and sound limbs in Vasa had gone
down to the shore, to see the uncommon sight of a
man-of-war.  Five or six hundred people lined the
shore—rowed out in boats, climbed the masts of the
vessels, or got on the roofs of the warehouses to get
a better view.

Two hundred recruits regarded with mixed feelings
the vessel which was perhaps destined to take
them from their Fatherland for ever.  Behind them
stood a large crowd of mothers, sisters, and
sweethearts, crying bitterly at the thought of the
approaching separation.

The Commissary-General, Ulfsparre, was away in
Sweden.  The next authority, Steward Peder Thun,
as well as the military commander, received the
new-comers; the recruits formed in ranks, and the captain
of the "Maria Eleonora" offered his arm courteously
to Lady Regina, to escort her to Korsholm.  But at
this moment the proud young girl felt that she was
a prisoner; she declined the officer's arm, and walked
alone with a royal bearing between the ranks of the
recruits and the gaping crowd.

Such a strange sight put the whole town in a great
commotion.  In a moment the strangest rumours
about her arose and spread.

"She is an Austrian princess," said some; "the
Emperor's daughter, taken prisoner during the war,
and sent here for safety."

Others pretended she was the Queen Maria
Eleonora; but why did she come to Korsholm?

"I will tell you," said one, whispering with an
important air to another.  "She is in league with her
German countrymen against the king, and therefore
she is to be confined in remote Korsholm."

"That is not true," rejoined another, who had
heard some vague stories of the conspiracies against
the king's life.  "It is," added he in a low voice, as
if fearing to be heard by the object of his remarks,
"a nun from Walskland, hired by the Jesuits to
make away with the king.  Six times she has given
him deadly poison, and six times he has been warned
in dreams not to drink.  When she offered him the
draught for the seventh time, the king drew his
sword and forced her to swallow her own poison."

"Then how can she be here alive?" said an old
lady very innocently.

"Alive!" repeated the story-teller, without being
put out in any degree; "oh, that is another matter.
These creatures can dissemble to such an extent...
Yes, indeed; do you remember the Hollanders last
year, how they bolted molten lead?  I do not wish
to say anything, but just look—the black-haired nun
is as pale as death!"

"Has she given the king poison?" cried a trembling
female voice close behind.

It was Meri, who with bated breath had listened
to every word.

"What rubbish!" said a sea-captain with a
mysterious knowing air.  "When I was at Stralsund,
last spring, I saw those eyes, which one cannot easily
forget.  The girl was then taken to Stockholm, and
one of the guards told me the entire story.  She is
a Spanish witch, who has sold herself to the evil
one, in order to be the most beautiful woman on
earth for seven years.  Look at her: do you not see
that the devil has kept his word?  Take care; in
those eyes there is something that charms and
bewitches.  When she became as beautiful as she is
now, she entered the Swedish camp, and gave the
king a love-potion, so that he could neither see or hear
anyone else but herself for seven whole weeks.  His
generals thought this a sin and shame, and the enemy
pressed them sorely; so one night they took her
secretly and sent her to spend the seven enchanted
years at Korsholm."

"Did the king love her?" asked Meri with emotion.

"Of course he did," answered the blunt sea-captain.

"Did she also love the king?"

"What is there more curious than a woman?  How
the deuce do you expect me to know all about it?  The
foul-fiend is wiser than other folks, that is certain.
She gave the king a copper ring..."

"With seven circles inside each other, and three
letters engraved on the plate..."

"What the devil do you know about that?  I
have heard of the seven circles, but not of the plate."

Meri took a deep breath.  "He wears it still!"
she said to herself with a great joy.

Meri was superstitious, like all the people of that
period.  She never doubted the existence of witches,
enchantments, and love potions; but this strange
dark girl, who loved the king and was beloved by
him in return ... was she really guilty of the
horrible things they said about her?  The poor
forgotten one was seized with the most violent wish to
approach this extraordinary being, who had been so
near the great monarch.  Each moment was precious.
In a few hours she must return to Storkyro.  She
took heart and followed the stranger to Korsholm.

The old residence inside the ramparts, in spite of
its fine outlook, was more sombre than magnificent.
Frequent changes of Stadtholders, who only lived
there a little while at a time, had given to the
double-storied granite building, with its side wings for
prisoners, a terribly deserted appearance.  It
certainly more resembled a jail than a great governor's
residence.  The dreariness was increased by its
present inhabitants, stern Fru Marta, with her aged
maid-servants, some invalid soldiers, and gruff jailors.
Had Gustaf Adolf recollected the condition of the
place, he would probably not have sent his young
prisoner to such a depressing abode.

Fru Marta expected her guest, who had been
described to her as a dangerous and depraved young
person, of superhuman cunning.  She had, therefore,
prepared a little dark chamber within her own for
Lady Regina and her attendant, and made up her
mind to keep the closest watch on the wild young
lady.  Fru Marta was a good, honest soul, but sharp
and severe like a lady of the old school, who
had brought up all her children with the rod.  It
never entered her mind that a lonely, defenceless, and
forsaken young girl, isolated in a strange land, needed
a comforting, sympathetic hand and motherly kindness;
Fru Marta felt that discipline ought to tame
a spoilt child, and then milder treatment could be
introduced.

When Lady Regina, accustomed to the freedom
of the sea, entered this gloomy dwelling, an involuntary
shudder passed through her slight frame.  This
feeling remained when she was received on the threshold
by the old lady, in a close linen cap and a long
dark woollen cloak.

No doubt Lady Regina's inclination of the head
was somewhat stiff, and her whole bearing somewhat
reserved, when she greeted Fru Marta on the castle
steps.  But Fru Marta was not intimidated by it.
She took the young girl by both hands, shook them
vigorously, and nodded a greeting, about half-way
between a welcome and a menace.  Then she surveyed
her guest from head to foot, and the result of
the examination was muttered aloud:

"Figure like a princess ... no harm; eyes black
as a gipsy's ... no evil; skin as white as milk
... no mischief; proud ... ah, ah, that is bad; we shall
be two about that, my young friend."

Regina impatiently made a motion to proceed,
but Fru Marta did not let go her hold.

"Wait a bit, my dear," said the stern dame, as she
endeavoured to recollect her ancient stock of German
words; "it takes time to go a long way.  One who
crosses my threshold must not be taller than the
door-post.  Better to bend in youth than creep in old age.
There ... that's the way for a young girl to greet
one who is older and wiser..."

And before Lady Regina knew it, the strong old
lady had put her right hand on her neck, her left
against her waist, and with a sudden pressure, forced
her proud guest to bow as deeply as one could desire.

Lady Regina's pale cheeks were covered with a
flush as red as the sunset sky before a storm.  More
erect and prouder than before rose the girl's slender
figure, and her dark eyes flashed fire.  She said
nothing, but old Dorthe was determined to give Fru
Marta a lesson in politeness on her mistress' behalf.
She advanced with lively southern gesticulations, and
screamed, beside herself with anger:

"Miserable Finnish witch, how dare you treat a
high-born lady in such a manner?  Do you know,
vile jailor, whom you have the honour of receiving
in your house?  You do not!  Then I will tell you.
This is the exalted Lady Regina von Emmeritz,
née

Princess of Emmeritz, Hohenloe, and Saalfield,
Countess of Wertheim and Bischoffshöhe, heiress of
Dettelsbach and Kissingen, &c.  Her father was the
Prince of Emmeritz, who owned more castles than
you, miserable wretch, have huts in your town.  Her
mother was Princess Würtemberg, related to the
Electoral House of Bavaria, and her still living uncle,
the Right Reverend Bishop of Würzburg, is lord
of Marienburg, and the town of Würzburg, with all
the lands belonging to it.  You take advantage of us
because your heretic king has taken our land and town,
and made us prisoners; but the day will come when
St. George and the Holy Virgin will descend and
destroy you, you heathen; and if you harm a hair of
our heads, this castle shall be levelled to the ground,
and you, miserable witch, and your whole town,
annihilated ..."

It is probable that old Dorthe's outpourings would
not have come to an end for some time, had not Fru
Marta made a sign to her servants, at which they
carried off the old woman without any ceremony, and
in spite of her strenuous resistance, to one of the
small rooms on the lower floor, where she was left
to herself to further reflect upon the high lineage
of her young lady.

But Fru Marta took the astonished Regina, half
by force, half voluntarily, by the arm, and led her to
the allotted room near her own, with a view over
the town.  Here the stern old lady left her for the
present, yet not without adding the following
admonitions at the door:

"I can tell you, my young friend, to obey is better
than to weep; the bird that sings too early in the
morning is in the claws of the hawk before evening.
Follow the laws of the country you are in.  It is now
seven o'clock.  At eight supper is served, at nine you
go to bed, and at four in the morning you get up, and
if you don't know how to card and spin, I will give
you some sewing, so that time shall not hang heavy
on your hands.  Then we will talk together, and
when your waiting woman learns to hold her tongue
you may have her back again.  Good night; don't
forget to say your prayers; a psalm Prayer Book
lies on the dressing-table."

With these words Fru Marta shut the door, and
Lady Regina was alone.  Solitary, imprisoned, in a
foreign land, left to the mercy of a hard keeper
... her thoughts were of the most depressing kind.  Lady
Regina fell on her knees, and prayed to the saints,
not from the heretic Prayer Book, but with the rosary
of rubies which her uncle, the bishop, had formerly
given her as sponsor.  What did she pray for?  Only
Heaven and the black walls of Korsholm know that;
but a sympathetic heart can imagine her petitions.
She prayed for the saints' assistance; for the victory
of her faith and the downfall of the heretics; she
prayed also that the saints might convert King
Gustaf Adolf to the only saving Church; that he,
another Saul, might become another Paul.  Finally
she prayed for freedom and protection ... the hours
fled; her supper was brought in, and still she
continued her supplications.

At last Lady Regina arose and looked out of the
little window.  There lay a landscape in the sunset
glow; it was not Franconia, with its luxuriant
vineyards; it was not the rushing Main; the town yonder
was not rich Würzburg, with its rows of cloisters
and high turret spires.  It was poor, pale Finland,
with an arm of its sea; it was young little Vasa, with
its church, Mustasaari, the oldest in East Bothnia;
one could plainly see the reflection of the sun on the
small Gothic windows, of stained glass belonging to
Catholic times, and it seemed to Regina as if she saw
the transfigured saints looking out from their former
temple.  And at this moment, had not the eye of the
setting sun itself such a beatific look, as it serenely
gazed down upon the world's strife!  All was silent
and still—the evening glow, the landscape's pretty
verdure, the newly mown fields with their rows of
sheaves, the small red houses with their shining
windows—all conduced to devotion and peace.

Suddenly, Lady Regina heard in the distance a
mild, plaintive song, simple and unaffected, as if
proceeding from nature's own heart, on a lonely evening,
with a setting sun on the shore of a silent sea, when
all sweet memories awaken in a longing breast.  At
first she did not listen, but it came nearer ... now
it was obstructed by a cottage wall, now by a group
of hanging birches; now it was heard again, high,
clear, and free; and finally one could distinguish the
words.

CHAPTER VI.

THE LOVE OF THE NORTH AND THE SOUTH.

When the lonely singer approached one could gradually
understand the import of the song.  It was a
gentle heart, which sang in uneven but impressive
numbers, its longings and its sorrows on the shore
in the glow of a beautiful August evening far off in
the north country.

"The sun shines bright and clear

O'er the waters far and near,

And the moon wanders in the night

Above in the heavenly sphere.

But never again will the sun supreme

Shine down on the forgotten troth,

And never again shall the gentle moon's beam

Illumine the brave knight's holy oath.

"The only one I loved so dear

Lives far away in a palace fine,

Surrounded by splendour he leaves me here

Alone with grief and sorrow mine.

He is served by many, I have but one knight,

He has castles, towns, and land.

I spread my pearls in the evening light

And sing to the waves on the strand.

"The bird flies to the south so fair,

Far away to the castle grand,

And sings on the tree a sorrowful air,

As I in my lonely land.

The brave knight listens to the song,

How strangely his heart doth beat,

And before one knows the evening long

Hath gone like the joys that never repeat."

The more Lady Regina listened to the simple
strains, which to her were foreign and strange, and
yet appealing through their deep melancholy, the
more she was affected by this sorrow so like her
own.  She wished to breathe the fresh evening air;
the little window, however, long resisted her attempts
to open it, but all Lady Marta's prudence could not
prevent the hinges from being old and rusty, and at
last they yielded to the young girl's persistent efforts.
She had only been a guest in this castle for a few
hours, and yet she inhaled the evening fragrance as
a prisoner for long years finally breathes the air of
his freedom.  Her heart expanded and her eyes
regained their fire; her mind became filled with a
dreamy ecstasy, and she sang softly, so as not to be
heard by her custodian, but clearly and melodiously.

REGINA'S SONG.

"Great as my sufferings are

Still to thee I will repair.

Holy Virgin, wilt thou bless

What to thee I now confess,

My soul's desire sincere

To die without fear.

"Amongst the kings of the earth

My loved one hath his birth,

Far flash his dread strokes

As the Almighty's lightnings rend the oaks.

But victor and conqueror tho' he be

Yet mild and merciful is he.

"I'll all forget, and firmly stand,

If you give me the dread command

To stop the hero's great career.

O holy Virgin, bright and dear,

God's mother, thou me hear,

Spare the noble heart that knows no fear.

"Make the heretic king his faults forswear,

And that he will our glorious faith declare.

Then my weary heart will gain its rest.

O Mary, grant me this request,

Spare his life, his throne,

Let me with my death for his crime atone."

The solitary figure which had sung the first song
now slowly approached the castle walls; it was a
woman of the people, with once beautiful features,
now pale and expressing a winning and sympathetic
heart.  She tried to listen to the strange girl's song,
but could not succeed on account of the foreign
language and suppressed tones.  She then seated
herself on a stone a short distance from the castle, and
fixed her mild gaze on the prisoner at the window.
In her turn, Regina also fastened her dark penetrating
eyes on the visitor.  One would think that they
perfectly understood each other, for the language
of songs needs no other lexicon than the heart.  Or
did a presentiment tell them, the girl of seventeen
and the woman of thirty-six, that their loves were
concentrated on the same object, and that both sang
their shipwrecked hopes on the lonely shore, but in
an infinitely differing way?

Up in the north the summer nights are clear until
the beginning of August, then a light veil spreads
itself over land and sea as soon as the sun goes
down.  By the middle of August this veil has already
become thicker, and casts a mild soft shade over the
summer leaves and grass.  When the moon rises upon
this world of vanishing green, then there is nothing
more sadly beautiful to be found in all nature than
one of these lovely evenings in August.  Then the
eye accustomed to three months unbroken day,
shrinks from the darkness and yet sees this darkness
in its loveliest aspect, like a mild sorrow softened
by a ray of heavenly glory.  This impression would
return every year even if one lived for centuries;
it is light and darkness which at the same moment
are struggling in the world and in the human heart.

The two lonely singers felt the power of this
impression; they both sat fixed and mute, quietly
regarding each other in the twilight; neither of them
spoke, and yet they understood each other's inmost
thoughts.

Then the pale woman suddenly rose and turned
her face towards the town.  She seemed to be listening
to a noise which disturbed the holy peace of the
evening.

Lady Regina followed every movement of the
stranger, and leaned out of the window so as to be
able to see better.  All nature was calm and silent,
only the strokes of oars were heard from the sea, or
the melancholy prolonged note from some shepherd's
horn.  This stillness increased by the first darkness
of the autumn, had something solemn and inviting
to worship about it, and made the noise which now
came from the distant town still more singular.  It
was not the surges of the sea, or the roar of the
fors,* or the crackling of a fire in the wood.
Although it resembled all these.  It was more like the
murmur of an enraged populace, at once actuated by
rage and want.  Directly afterwards the reflection
of a fire was seen afar off in the northern portion of
the town.

* Fors, a stream peculiar to the north, like rapids.

With the speed of the wind the lonely woman
outside the wall hurried away in the direction of the
sounds and light .... We will now precede her
for a moment.

The arrival of the man-of-war, which was destined
to transport the conscripts, had placed the latter in
a state of excitement much augmented by sorrow,
pride, and ale.  With their under officers at their
head, they had thronged around the ale-shops, and
at this time, when the soldier was all important, one
was often obliged to overlook his irregularities and
keep him in a good humour.  The superior officers
consequently pretended not to notice that 200 young
men, with the combative temperament of East
Bothnia, were in a state of intoxication more or less;
and it is possible that this policy might have been
the right one at the time, had not a special
circumstance detrimental to peace brought their
unrestrained passions into full play.

The brave sergeant, Bengt Kristerson, did not neglect
this opportunity to do himself every possible justice.
Filled with a sense of his own great importance, he
had jumped on a table and easily demonstrated
to the crowd of conscripts: first, that he especially
had conquered Germany; secondly, that long before
this he would have driven the Emperor Ferdinand
into the River Danube, had not the latter been in
league with Satan and bewitched the whole Swedish
army, and the king himself first of all; thirdly, that
Bengt, on the night of the Frankfurt ball, was on
guard outside the king's bed-chamber, and there he
had plainly seen Beelzebub in the form of a young
girl, who then made a terrible commotion; fourthly—this
thought naturally struck him during his
inspired address—that the weal or woe of the country,
yes, of the whole world, depended upon the witch,
who was a prisoner at Korsholm...

"You will see that the black-haired witch will bring
the plague to the town," observed thoughtfully a
Malax peasant, with very fair hair and shabby appearance.

"The wolf-cub!"

"The king's murderess!"

"Shall we allow her to sit in peace and destroy
both king and country with her witch-shots?" cried
a drunken clerk of assizes, who had just joined the
company.

"Let us duck her in the sea!" shrieked a Nerpes
peasant.

"Let us club her on the spot!" yelled a Lappo
cottager, with an eagle nose and dark bushy eyebrows.

"And if they do not give her into our hands, we
will set fire to Korsholm and burn the owl and the
nest at the same time," said a ferocious Laihela
peasant.

"Better that, than to have the kingdom ruined,"
remarked a grave-looking seal-hunter from Replot.

"Here, take brands!" shouted a Worä peasant.

"To Korsholm!" cried the whole crowd. And
stimulated as usual by their own clamour, they rushed
to the big open fire-place in the large room, and
pulled out all the brands from it.  But, unfortunately,
there was a lot of hemp hanging in bundles on the
wall in the room.  One of the conscripts in the
scramble swung his brand too high, and the hemp
caught fire; the strong draught from the open door
fanned the flame, and in a few minutes the ale-house
was in full blaze.

All inside rushed out, and no one had time to
realise how it happened.

"It is a witch-shot!" cried some of them.

"The witch at Korsholm will have to pay for all
this!" shouted the others.

And the whole raging mass rushed off at full speed
towards the old castle.

CHAPTER VII.

THE SIEGE OF KORSHOLM.

As soon as Meri—for she was the lonely
singer—understood the wild crowd's intention, she flew back
to Korsholm.  By the silver rays of the moonlight,
which shone over the landscape, she plainly
distinguished Regina's dark locks, which, blacker
than the night, stood in relief from the room
in the background, like a shadow in the midst of
the shade.  Under these locks shone two eyes,
dreamy, deep, like the glimmer of the stars in the
dusky mirror of a lake.  The words died on Meri's
lips; all the strange rumours rose like spectres in
her mind.  She who sat up there alone at the window,
was she not, after all, a southern witch, weeping
over her fate in being compelled to spend the seven
years of her wondrous beauty within these walls, and
then reassume her normal shape; a terrible monster,
half-woman and half-serpent?

Meri stood as if petrified at the foot of the wall.

But nearer and nearer was heard the murmur of
the wild crowd, and the light of the torches began to
be reflected on the castle.  Then the superstitious
countrywoman gathered courage, and raised her voice
to the window.

"Fly, your grace," she said rapidly in Swedish;
"fly, a great danger threatens you; the soldiers are
intoxicated and frantic; they say that you have tried
to kill the king, and they demand your life."

Regina saw the pale form in the moonlight, and
before her imagination rose all the stories she had
heard about this land of witchcraft.  During her ten
months' stay in Sweden she had in some degree
learned to understand the language; she did not
immediately comprehend the other's meaning, but a
single word sufficed to attract all her attention.

"The king?" she repeated in broken Swedish.
"Who are you, and what can you tell me about the
great Gustaf Adolf?"

"Lose not a moment, your grace," continued Meri,
ignoring Regina's question.  "They are already at
the gates, and Fru Marta, with six soldiers, will not
be able to protect you against two hundred.  Quick! don't
come out by the door, but tie together sheets
and shawls, and let yourself down through the
window; I will receive you."

Regina saw that a danger threatened, but far from
being terrified by it, she heard it with a secret joy.
Was she not a martyr to her faith, transported to this
wild land for her zeal in trying to convert the
mightiest enemy of her Church?  Perhaps the moment
was at hand when the saints would grant her a
martyr's-crown, richly earned by her devotion.  Was
it not the tempter himself, who in this pale woman's
form, tried to lure her from an imperishable glory?

And Regina answered:

"And Satan saith unto Him: 'Cast Thyself down:
for it is written, He shall give His angels charge
concerning Thee, that they may preserve Thee, so that
no harm may befall Thee...'"*

* Compare Matthew iv. 6, where the Lutheran text differs from the
Catholic.

At these words the moon appeared round a corner
of the wall and threw its pale beams on the beautiful
girl's face.  Her cheeks glowed, and her eyes burned
with an ecstatic fire.  Meri looked at her with wonder
and dread ... and again it seemed to her that it
was not well with a being, who possessed such a
singular appearance, and uttered such strange sounds
from her lips.  An overwhelming fear seized her, and
she fled, without knowing why, back to the town.

In the meantime Regina heard the murmur from
the castle yard up in her chamber.  The drunken
horde had been checked by a stout gate, and stood
clamouring outside, threatening to burn down the
fortress, unless the witch was immediately given up
to them.  But Fru Marta, just awakened from a sound
sleep, was not one easily scared.  She had been in
more than one siege in her younger days, and understood
like a wise commander, that a fortress does not
fall at big words.

"One who gains time, gains all," she thought, and
therefore began to negotiate about the capitulation,
wishing to know what the besiegers especially wanted,
and why they wanted it.  In the meantime six old
muskets were hunted up, with which the defenders
were armed; the soldiers were also provided with
clubs and pikes; the servant girls themselves received
orders to take the poles, with which more than one
of Fleming's horsemen received their doom during
the Club or Peasants' War.  Thus prepared, Fru
Marta thought that she could safely break off all
negotiations; she therefore advanced to the inside
of the gate, and began a tirade which meant action
and no play.

"Ye crazy boors!" shrieked the brave dame with
more energy than courtesy, "may the devil take you
all, drunken ale-bibbers!  Be off this instant, or, as
sure as my name is Marta Ulfsparre, you shall have
a taste of 'Master Hans' on the back, you villains,
sots, shameless knaves, and night loafers!"

"Master Hans" was a good-sized braided rattan,
which seldom left Fru Marta's hand, and for which
all the inmates of the castle entertained a profound
respect.  But whether the noisy crowd did not know
of "Master Hans'" fine qualities, or whether Fru
Marta's words were only imperfectly heard in the
uproar, the mob continued to press on with loud
cries, and the strong gate shook on its hinges.

"Out with the witch!" shouted the most excited,
and some threw lighted brands against the gate,
hoping to set it on fire.

Fru Marta had on the ramparts two old cannon
from Gustaf I.'s time, called "the hawk" and "the
dove."  Their functions were to respond to the salutes
of vessels arriving in the harbour, and to roar forth
the delight of the people on royal christening days
and nuptials.  It is true that the ramparts lay
outside the high fence with its iron spikes, which
constituted the only fortification of the castle, and were
thus easily accessible to the besiegers.  But Fru
Marta thought correctly, that a cannonade from the
ramparts would frighten the enemy, and serve as a
signal of distress, to summon assistance from the
man-of-war and the town.  She therefore ordered
two of her soldiers to steal out under cover of the
night, load "the hawk" and "the dove," and directly
after the blank charges were fired, to return quickly
to the castle.

The effect was instantaneous.  The uproar ceased
at once, and Fru Marta did not let the opportunity
slip from her grasp.

"Do you hear, you pack of thieves?" she screamed,
mounted on a ladder, so that her white night-cap was
seen in the moonlight just above the gate, "if you
don't take yourselves off this minute from his
Majesty's castle, I will make my cannon shatter you
into fragments, like cabbage stalks, you noisy, drunken
swine!  Angry dogs get torn skins; and the chicken
who sticks his neck in the jaws of the fox will have
to look around to see where his head is.  I will cut
you to pieces, you rowdy set," continued Fru Marta,
getting more and more excited.  "I will let them
make mince-meat of you, and throw you to the——"

Unhappily the brave commander was not allowed
to finish her heroic speech.  One of the crowd had
found a rotten turnip on the ground, and hurled it
with such good aim at the white night-cap, which
shone in the moonlight, that Fru Marta, struck right
on the brow, was obliged to retreat, and for the first
time in her life had her tongue silenced.  A huge
laugh now spread through the crowd, and with it
Fru Marta's supremacy was at an end.  The enemy
battered still more arrogantly against the gate, the
hinges bent, the boards gave way, and finally half
of the gate fell in with a great crash, and the whole
crowd rushed into the courtyard.

Now one would say that Fru Marta would have to
surrender.  But no, she quickly withdrew with all
her force to the interior of the castle, barred the
entrance, and placed her musketeers at the windows,
threatening to shoot down the first comers.  Such
determined courage ought to have succeeded, but
the infuriated mob neither heard or saw.  One of
the front men, who had found a crowbar, began
to batter the door...

Then confusion and outcries arose in the rear of
the crowd ... those in the middle turned round and
saw through the broken gate, as far as one could
discern in the moonlight, the whole way filled with
heads and muskets.  It was as if an army had sprung
from the earth in order to annihilate the besiegers.
Could it be the shades of all the dead champions of
Korsholm, who had risen from their graves to avenge
the violence offered against their old fortress?

In order to explain the unexpected sight which
now alarmed the crowd, one must remember that a
large portion of the country people from the adjacent
hamlets had flocked to the town to witness the
departure of the recruits.  It should also be mentioned
that the peasant king had remained all night in Vasa,
probably in the secret expectation of hearing some
news about Bertel from the crew of the "Maria
Eleonora."  The burning of the ale-house and the
march of the intoxicated crowd towards Korsholm had
set all Vasa in commotion, and when Meri arrived in
breathless haste, imploring her father to rescue the
imprisoned lady, she found everywhere willing ears.
The East Bothnian is soon ready for battle, and
when the peasants learned the insults put upon old
Bertila, their best man, the ancient animosity arose
within them against the soldiers.  They forgot that
many of their own sons and brothers were conscripts;
they could not neglect such a fine chance to give the
soldiers a thrashing, both in the name of humanity
and loyalty to the crown.  They marched therefore,
with Bertila at their head, about a hundred strong, to
the rescue of the castle, and what in the moonlight
appeared to be pikes and muskets, were mostly poles
and rails, which had been hastily snatched up, the
usual weapons employed in the battles of that region.

As soon as the soldiers saw that they were attacked
in the rear, they tried to conceal their alarm with loud
shouts and cries.  Uncertain of the enemy's strength,
some of them already wished to beat a dangerous
retreat over the spiked fence; others imagined that
they had to deal with an army of goblins, called up
by the incantations of the foreign witch.  They were
soon aroused from this delusion, however, by hearing
the sounds of Malax Swedish, and Lillkyro Finnish,
which could reasonably be thought to come from
human and not spectral lips.  At the moment the
outer enemy blocked the gate with his forces, a silence
arose on both sides, during which one could hear
two voices speaking, together: one from the castle
window, and the other from the ramparts.

"What did I tell you?" shrieked Fru Marta from
the window; "didn't I tell you, drunkards and
vagabonds, that you ought to think seven times before
putting your noses between the wedges of the tree,
and if the tail has once got into the fox-trap, there
is nothing left but to bite it off.  A large mouth
needs a broad back, and now hold yourself in
readiness to pay the fiddler."

With this outburst Fru Marta drew back; possibly
from fear of another rotten turnip.

The other voice was that of an old man, who, in
powerful tones, cried to the soldiers:

"Lay down your arms, and give up your leaders,
then the rest may go in peace.  If not, there will be
a dance, the like of which Korsholm has never seen,
and we will see to it that the bows are well rosined."

"May all the demons seize you, rascal peasant!"
answered a voice from the courtyard, which clearly
belonged to the jovial sergeant, Bengt Kristerson.
"If I had you down here I would, blitz-donner-kreutz-Pappenheim,
teach you to insult brave soldiers
with offers of surrender.  Go ahead, boys; clear the
gateway, and drive the crew back to their porridge
kettles!"

Fortunately none of the conscripts had muskets,
which had not yet been distributed, and very few
possessed swords.  Most of them had only
extinguished brands, fragments of broken carriages, and
faggots snatched from a wood-pile in the yard.  Thus
armed, the warriors bore down upon the entrance.

At the first onset the recruits were received with
such vigorous blows, that numbers had broken heads.
Soon the press at the gate became so dense that no
arm could be raised or blow dealt; those in front
struggled furiously to extricate themselves, whilst the
rest closed upon them and rendered all movement
impossible.  Strong arms and broad shoulders
exerted themselves fruitlessly to make a way through
the crowd.  At last the pressure from within became
so great, that the first ranks of the peasants were
broken, and about half of the soldiers cleared a way
towards the open plain outside the ramparts, whilst
the remainder were again penned up in the courtyard.

A regular battle began.  Poles, sticks, whips, and
fists were used.  Many a vigorous blow was delivered,
which would have been much better bestowed on
Isolani's Croats; many a fine exploit was performed,
more in place on the German battlefields.  The soldiers
were split in two parties by the gate, and although
the most numerous, soon had the worst of it.  The
youngest recruits took to flight, and ran towards the
town; some were overpowered and badly beaten;
others, including the old veterans, retired to the
ramparts, and with backs to the wall defended
themselves valiantly.

Victory now seemed on the side of the peasants,
when their opponents received new assistance.  The
peasants at the gate, who on account of the struggle
outside, forgot the enemy within, were surprised by
the penned-up soldiers, who now rushed out to help
their comrades.  The latter thus relieved, fell upon
the peasants with redoubled ardour; the affray
became more and more involved, and victory more
and more uncertain; both parties had defeats to
avenge, and the rage on both sides increased as their
strength became equal.

Over this scene of tumult, confusion, and wild
conflict, the silvery August moon beamed like a heavenly
eye.  All the inlets shone in the moonlight; and in
the tree-tops and the moist grass glittered millions
of dewdrops, like pearls on summer's green robe.  All
nature seemed at peace; a gentle breeze from the
west rippled the surface of the sea, and passed softly
over the land; the monotonous roll of the surf upon
the beach was heard in the distance, and the twinkling,
silent stars looked down into the dark waters.
When the yard was empty, Fru Marta and her men
ventured out again to behold the strife from the
ramparts.  The courageous old lady undoubtedly
wished to join in some way in the contest, for she
cried to the peasants in a loud voice:

"That's right, boys, go ahead; let the sticks fly;
many have danced to worse tunes!"

And to the soldiers she screamed:

"Good luck to you, my children; help yourselves
to a little supper; Korsholm offers what it can give.
Be at ease; your witch is in good keeping; Korsholm
has bolts and bars for you too, miscreants!"

But as if a capricious destiny wished to convict
the old lady of error and put her to the blush, a tall,
dark female figure now appeared on the top of the
ramparts, and was outlined against the clear night sky.

Fru Marta's words froze on her lips from dismay,
when she recognised the figure of her well-guarded
prisoner.  How Lady Regina had got through locked
doors and closed windows was an inexplicable
problem, and for a moment she was infected by the
common belief in the strange girl's alliance with the
powers of darkness.  She renounced all idea of
arresting the fugitive, and expected each moment to see
large black wings grow out of her shoulders, that she
might take flight like a monstrous raven, and soar
aloft to the starry heavens.

The reader, however, can easily discover a natural
solution of the difficulty.  The din of the conflict
and the cannon-shots had reached Regina's isolated
chamber.  Every moment she expected her room to be
invaded, and herself seized by executioners and
dragged to a certain death; and so glorious did this
martyrdom seem to her, that her impatience increased
to the highest point.  Then an hour passed, and whilst
the noise below continued, no footsteps approached
her door.  At last the thought took possession of her
fanatical soul that the Prince of Darkness envied her
so grand a fate, and that the strife was fomented by
him to ensure her a languishing life in captivity,
without profit to herself or the Holy Faith.  Then she
remembered the advice of the singing woman, to let
herself down through the open window by means of
sheets and shawls; she took a sudden resolve, and
in a few minutes stood on the ramparts in full view
of all the combatants.

As soon as the latter saw the tall form in the
moonlight, they were seized with the same
superstitious dread which had just paralyzed Fru Marta's
nimble tongue.  The conflict gradually subsided in
the vicinity, and continued only at the most remote
points; friend and foe were affected by a common
horror, and near the ramparts rose a silence so
profound, that one could hear in the distance the sea's
low murmur on the pebbly beach.

Lady Regina then spoke with a voice so strong
and clear, that if her terribly imperfect Swedish had
not stood in the way, she would have been understood
by all those within hearing.

"Ye children of Belial," she said in tones, trembling
at first, but soon calm and composed, "ye people
of the heretic faith, why do ye delay to take my
life?  I am defenceless, without human protection,
with the high heavens above me, and the earth and
sea at my feet, and say to you: Your Luther was a
false prophet; there is no salvation except in the
orthodox Catholic Church.  Be converted, therefore,
to the Holy Virgin and all the saints, acknowledge
the Pope to be Christ's vicegerent, as he truly is,
that you may avert St. George's sword from your
heads, which is already raised to destroy you.  But
you can kill me in order to seal the veracity of my
faith; here I stand; why do you hesitate?  I am
ready to die for my faith."

It was Lady Regina's good fortune that her speech
was not understood by the crowd, for so strong was
the power of Lutheranism at this fanatical time, when
nations and individuals sacrificed life and welfare for
their creed, that all were filled with flaming zeal, and a
blind hatred for the Pope and his followers—of which
our crabbed but pithy old psalm-books bear witness
to-day.  Had this crowd, whether peasants or soldiers,
heard Regina extol the Pope, and declare Luther a
false prophet, they would have certainly torn her to
pieces in their rage.  As it was, the young girl's
meaning escaped them; they saw her bold bearing,
and the respect which courage and misfortune
together always inspire, did not fail to have its effect
upon them; they now stood wavering, and at a loss
what to think or do.

Lady Regina again expected, in vain, to be dragged
to death.  She descended from the rampart, and
mingled with the irresolute crowd; they all saw that
she was quite unprotected, and yet not a hand was
put forth to seize her.

"She is not honest flesh and blood; she is a
shadow," said an old Worä peasant doubtingly.  "It
seems to me that I see the moon shine right through
her."

"We will soon prove that," exclaimed a rough
fellow from Ilmola, laying his coarse hand rather
heavily on Regina's shoulder.

It was a critical moment; the young girl turned
round and looked her molester right in the face
with such deep, shining eyes, that the latter seized
with a strange feeling, immediately drew back, and
stole away abashed.  Some of the nearest bystanders
followed him.  None could understand the power of
these dark eyes in the moonlight, but all felt their
wondrous influence.  In a few moments the space
near Regina was empty, and the strife had ceased.
A patrol, who now arrived, arrested the ringleaders.

Not long, however, did the rivalry engendered by
the Club War continue between the peasants and
the soldiers; between the peaceful
plough
, Finland's
pride, and the conquering sword, which at this time
was drawn to subdue the Roman Emperor himself.

Of Regina we need only say that she willingly
allowed herself, yet with a sigh over the martyr's-crown
she had missed, to be taken back to the dark,
solitary prison-chamber.  But Bertila returned with
his daughter to Storkyro; the old man with thoughts
of coming greatness, the young woman with the
memory of a past joy.  All this occurred during two
days in the summer of 1632, thus, before King Gustaf
Adolf's death.

Days and months elapsed, and human destinies
changed their forms, so that the swift word is obliged
to check its flight, and remain silent awhile in
expectation of the evenings which are to come.  For
the surgeon's stories, like a child's joy or sorrow,
lasted but a brief time—long enough for those who
with friendship listened to them, and perhaps
sufficiently long for the others.  But never was the
thread of the story clipped in the middle of its course
without both young and old anticipating more.  And
the surgeon had to promise this.  He had so much
still left to relate about the half-spun skein of two
family histories, that next time it will probably be
spun; longer—if not to the end, at least to the knot,
which says that the skein has reached its right length.

III.—FIRE AND WATER.

Six weeks passed before the surgeon and his circle
of listeners gathered again.  During that time an
accident had happened to old Bäck.  Most of us in
this world possess hobbies, and old bachelors in
particular.  Bäck had got it into his mind that he ought
to have a certain comfort in his old age; he had in
his garret a good-sized sack of feathers, which he
increased in spring and autumn by bird-shooting.  To
what use these feathers were to be put no one knew;
when he was asked about it, he said:

"I will do like Possen at the 'Wiborg explosion';
if Finland is in need, I will go up some tower and
shake my feathers into the air, then there will be as
many soldiers as the sack has feathers."

"You talk like a goose, my brother," replied
Captain Svanholm, the postmaster.  "In our days one
must have different stuff to make soldiers of.  By
my soul, I think you consider us warriors like
chickens!"

"Yes," added the surgeon, when the captain was
about to continue, "I know what you wish to say:
exactly like Fieandt at Karstula."

However, the fact was, that the surgeon had one
fine April day gone to the sea-shore on a shooting
expedition, with artificial decoy ducks.  He was
accompanied by an old one-eyed corporal called Ritsi
(Finnish for Fritz), who had been a pedlar in
his youth, and wandered over Germany with a pack
on his back; but he brought home nothing except
a change in his name.

The ice still remained in patches, with gaps
between; both the old men strolled along the edge,
and discharged a shot every now and then; but it
amounted to very little, as both of them had rather
poor eyesight.  It happened early one morning that
Bäck thought he saw a pair of fine ducks at the
further end of the ice, which could only be reached
by making a long circuit.  He set off, and sure enough
the ducks were there.  He crept as near as he dared,
aimed, and fired ... the ducks' feathers were slightly
agitated, but they did not stir from the spot.  "Those
creatures are pretty tough," thought Bäck; he
reloaded, and fired again at thirty paces.  The same
result followed.  Much astonished, Bäck went nearer,
and discovered for the first time that he had been
shooting at his own decoy ducks, which the wind
had imperceptibly driven from the inner to the outer
edge of the ice.

The old gentleman now thought about returning;
but this was easier said than done.  The wind had
separated the ice on which
he
stood, from the ice
which held Ritsi, and the loose block was drifting
out to sea.  The two old friends looked sadly at
each other; scarcely a dozen yards separated them,
and yet the corporal could not assist his companion,
for there was no boat.  Bäck was drifting slowly
and steadily out to sea.

"Good-bye, now, comrade," cried the surgeon,
whilst still within hearing.  "Tell Svenonius and
Svanholm that my will is locked up in the bureau-drawer
to the right.  Tell them to have the bells
rung for me next Sunday.  As for the funeral, you
need not give yourself any trouble; I will attend to
that myself."

"God have mercy!" yelled the corporal, putting
the wrong side of his jacket to his eyes, and returning
to the shore slowly and tranquilly, as if nothing
had happened.

For the honour of the good town, it must be said,
that the rest of the surgeon's friends were far from
taking the matter like the corporal.  The postmaster
cursed and swore; the schoolmaster marched out at
the head of his boys; and the old grandmother quietly
sent off a couple of able-bodied pilots in their boats
to cruise between the blocks of ice.  The greatest
excitement prevailed; confusion and running about
everywhere; and those who made the most fuss
accomplished the least.

Two days passed without any trace of the
surgeon; on the third the pilots came back from a
fruitless search.  All gave the surgeon up for lost.
There was sincere mourning in the town for such
an old institution as Bäck—everyone's friend, and
everybody's confidant—he was one of the little town's
house-spirits, without whom the community could
not get on.  But what could be done?  When the
third Sunday arrived, without any news of the
unfortunate bird-hunter, the bells were rung for his
soul, according to custom, and a fine eulogy composed
by Svenonius, was read in the church, and the city
magistrate appointed a day in the ensuing week for
taking an inventory of his effects.

I hope, however, that the reader, who has noticed
the title of this veracious story, will not be alarmed.
In reality it would be very hard if the surgeon should
be called away just now, when Regina sits imprisoned
at Korsholm, under Fru Marta's stern control, and
Bertel lies bleeding on the battlefield of Lützen.  And
what would become of the gentle Meri, of the peasant
king of Storkyro, and of so many other important
personages in this narrative?  Patience! the surgeon
had certainly gone through worse experiences in his
day ... he had not been born for nothing on the
same day as Napoleon!

Everything was arranged to take the inventory.
Astonishing order prevailed in Bäck's garret;
something unusual had happened there; the place was
swept and cleaned.  All his things were set out:
medicine chest dusted, stuffed birds placed in a row,
the collection of eggs exposed to view.  The
silver-headed Spanish cane stood in a corner; the old
peruke hung with a melancholy look on its hook;
the innermost mysteries of Bäck's bureau, the pale
locks of hair from former days, were drawn forth to
be valued in roubles and kopeks; probably not at
high amounts.  An alderman, with an official air, had
taken his place at the old oak table, where a large
sheet of official paper now occupied the space usually
reserved for the surgeon's carpenter's tools; a clerk
was sharpening his pencil opposite the alderman, and
the old grandmother as hostess, had presented herself
with moist eyes to deliver up Bäck's property, as the
old man had no relations.  One thing, however, was
still unopened: it was the old seal-skin trunk under
the surgeon's bed.  The official's eyes occasionally
wandered there with a pious thought of the profit
to be derived from the inheritance; but no one knew
what the trunk contained, and who was the rightful
and legal heir.

It was time to begin.  Svanholm and Svenonius
were called as appraisers.  The alderman coughed
once or twice, assumed a judicial air, and then said:

"Whereas it has come to the knowledge of the
worthy magistrate that the deceased surgeon of the
High Crown, Andreas Bäck, met his death on the
ice whilst engaged in bird-shooting; and although
not found in body, is in soul, rightfully and lawfully
killed..."

"I would most humbly beg to contradict that!"
suddenly interrupted a voice from the door.

The effect was truly marvellous.

The magistrate lost both his wits and official
bearing; he turned his eyes upwards, and his eloquent
tongue for the first time refused its office.  The
secretary sprang up like a rocket, and knocked over
the learned Svenonius, who, being somewhat deaf,
had not heard the cause of the sudden commotion.
The brave Svanholm was in a terrible plight; one
could have sworn that not even at Karstula had he
gone through such an ordeal.  He looked as white
as a ghost, and tried in vain to compel his left foot
to advance.  The old grandmother was the only one
who showed self-possession; she put on her
spectacles, went straight to the new-comer, and shook
her ancient head dubiously, as if to say that it was
very wrong of corpses to come to life again.

But old Bäck—for who else could it be?—was not
at all daunted.  His feelings had quite a different
character.  When he beheld his dear old garret so
altered, his precious effects on show, and the
magistrate in full activity with what Bäck thought none
of his business, he was seized, excusably enough, with
righteous anger, and took the myrmidons of the law
by the neck, one after the other, and threw them
without ceremony from the room.  Then came the
turn of brother Svenonius, who was not spared, and
finally Svanholm, before he could utter a word, found
himself rolling headlong down the stairs.  All this
happened in the twinkling of an eye.  Only the
grandmother remained.  When Bäck met her mild,
reproachful glance, he was ashamed, and came to
his senses.

"Well, well," said he, "you must not take it ill,
cousin; I shall teach brooms and dusters to disorder
my room ... be so kind as to take a seat.  It would
provoke a stone to see such actions.  See how these
wretches have scrubbed my room and dusted my
birds.  It is a positive crime!"

"Dear cousin," said the grandmother, at once
vexed and delighted, "I am the one to be blamed;
we thought you must be drowned."

"Drowned, indeed!" muttered the surgeon.  "I
tell you, cousin, that poor powder isn't so easily got
rid of.  It is true that I floated around on that
miserable ice-floe for three whole days and nights.
It wasn't exactly a warm bed and spread table, but
it served.  I shot a venturesome seal.  It was pretty
oily, I assure you, but 'better that than nothing.'  I
had a tinder-box and salt, too; so I made a fire of
my game bag, and fried a steak.  On the fourth day
I drifted to firm ice at West Bothnia, and marched
ashore.  'Now it's time to go home,' I thought.
Said and done; I sold my gun and hired a team.
And I tell you what, cousin, they would have been
spared from upsetting my room, and sticking their
noses into my affairs, had not the Swedes quadrupled
the rate, compared with old times.  My purse was
empty before I came to Haparanda.  Then I thought,
'let the Medical College go to the dogs!' and began
my old practice with the lancet and 'essentia dulcis,'
as I went along; and all the old women—God bless
you, I thought you were going to sneeze—and all the
old women were amazed to see former times revived.
In this manner I was able to reach home—a little
too late, but still in time to throw out my uninvited
guests."

The surgeon had great difficulty in pardoning his
friends for their invasion of his peaceful kingdom.
Had they taken his treasures, or slandered his good
name, he could have forgiven them, but to put his
room in order was more than he could stand!  Little
by little, however, the storm was allayed through
the old grandmother's wise diplomacy; and so the
day came when the reconciliation was celebrated with
a third tale.  It is true that some plain people still
looked upon the surgeon as a ghost; the magistrate
doubted his right to live when he had been legally
declared dead; the postmaster swore over his sore
back, which still bore the marks of the meeting with
brother Bäck; Svenonius sighed over a hole in his
twenty-year-old black coat, which he had worn in
honour of the solemn occasion.  But the old
grandmother smiled as usual; Anne Sophie was friendly
as ever; the little folks were as noisy; and—thus
it happened that the sunshine scattered the morning
mists, and the horizon was cleared for the captive
Regina.

* * * * *

"My dear friends," began the surgeon, "it may
puzzle you why I call this story 'Fire and
Water.'  You understand
The King's Ring
, and how
The
Sword and the Plough
came into conflict.  Perhaps
you think that I shall now treat you to natural
history.  That would be well and good.  But I entertain
the opinion that in a story, humanity is the great
thing.  If we look at pictures, we heartily admire a
fruit or a game painting, but I believe figure-painting,
with fine human forms, is nevertheless superior.
Therefore I do not intend to describe conflagrations
and deluges, but have chosen my title from the fact
that human temperaments correspond to the elements—some
to fire, some to air, others to water and earth.
I intend to tell you about four persons: two of whom
possessed a fiery nature, and two a watery.  All is not
said that could be said, for most titles have the fault
of only giving one aspect of many.  I thought of
calling this part 'The Coat of Arms,' when I realised
that it might also be called 'The Axe.'  I might
have alarmed you with the terrible title of 'The
Curse'; but when I came to think it over, I found
that it could just as well be styled 'The
Blessing.'  Therefore you will have to be contented with the
elements; I have now said all I wished, and I will
leave you to guess the rest."

CHAPTER I.

THE TREASURE FROM THE BATTLEFIELD.

The first thing to be borne in mind is, that the story
of the Sword and the Plough happened before the
Battle of Lützen.  On now going back to that
combat, on the 6th of November, 1632, we may forget for
a time that the "Sword and the Plough" ever existed,
and imagine that we still stand by the great hero's
dead body, as it lay embalmed in the village of
Meuchen.

It was a fine but terrible spectacle when the
Pappenheimers charged the Finns on the east of the
River Rippach.  These splendid cuirassiers rushed
upon Stälhandske; the tired Finns and their horses
reeled and gave way before this terrific onslaught.
But Stälhandske rallied them again, man to man,
horse to horse; they fought to the death; and friends
and foes were mixed together in one bleeding,
confused mass.  Here fell Pappenheim and his bravest
men; half of the Finnish cavalry were trampled
under the horses' hoofs, and yet the battle raged till
nightfall.

Bertel rode at Stalhandske's side, and here he
encountered Pappenheim.  The youth of twenty could
not cope with this arm of steel; the brave general
struck Bertel on the helmet with such tremendous
force, that he reeled and became unconscious.  But
in falling he mechanically grasped his horse by
the mane, and the faithful Lapp galloped away,
dragging his master with one foot in the stirrup.

When Bertel opened his eyes he was in utter
darkness.  He vaguely remembered the last incident of
the combat, and Pappenheim's uplifted sword.  He
thought he was now dead, and lay in his grave.  He
then put his hand to his heart; it was beating: he
bit his finger; it hurt him.  He realised that he was
still in existence, but how and where it was impossible
to guess.  He reached out his hand and picked up
some straw.  He felt the damp ground under him,
and the empty space above.  He tried to raise himself
up, but his head was too heavy.  It still suffered
from the blow of Pappenheim's sword.

Then he heard a voice not far from him,
half-complaining, half-mocking, saying in Swedish:

"Saints and fiends!  Not a drop of wine!  Those
rascally Wallachians have grabbed my flask; the
miserable hen-thieves!  Hollo, Turk, or Jew—it is
all one—here with a drop of wine!"

"Is it you, Larsson?" said Bertel in a faint voice,
for his tongue was also parched with a burning
thirst.

"What sort of a marmot is it whispering my
name?" replied the voice in the darkness.  "Hurrah,
boys, loose reins and a smart gallop!  Fire your
pistols, fling them to the devil, and slash away with
swords!  Cleave their skulls; peel them like turnips!
Grind them to powder!  The king has fallen
... Devils and heroism, what a king! ... to-day we
bleed.  To-day we shall die, but first revenge.  That's
the way, boys, hurrah ... pitch in, East Bothnians!"

"Larsson," repeated Bertel; but his comrade did
not heed him.  He continued in his delirium to lead
his Finns to the combat.

After a time a ray of the late autumn morning
shone through the window of the miserable hut upon
Bertel.  He could now distinguish the straw upon
the bare ground, and two men asleep.

Then the door opened, and a couple of uncouth,
bearded men entered, and thrust roughly at the
sleepers with the butts of their muskets.

"
Raus!
" they cried in Low German; "it is the
signal to start!"

And outside the hut was heard the well-known
trumpet-blast, which at that time was the usual signal
for breaking up the camp.

"May they spear me like a frog," said one of the
men in a bad humour, "if I can guess what the
reverend father wishes to do with these heretic dogs.
He should have given them a passport to the
arch-fiend, their lord and master."

"Fool!" replied the other; "do you not know that
the heretic king's death is going to be celebrated with
a great festival at Ingolstadt?  The reverend father
intends to hold a grand
auto-de-fé
in honour of the
happy event."

The two sleepers now stood up half-awake, and
Bertel could recognise by the faint morning light the
little, thick-set Larsson and his own faithful Pekka.
But there was no opportunity for explanations.  All
three were brought out, bound, and put into a cart,
and then the long caravan, composed of wagons for
the wounded and baggage, under the charge of the
Croats, began slowly to move.

Bertel knew that he and his companions were now
prisoners of the Imperialists.  He soon recovered his
memory, and learned from his countrymen in
captivity how it all happened.  When the faithful
Lapp felt the reins loose, he galloped with his
unconscious master back to camp.  But this was
being plundered by the wild Croats, and when they
saw a Swedish officer dragged along half dead by
his horse, they took him prisoner, in the hope of a
good ransom.  Pekka, who would not forsake his
master, was also taken prisoner.  Larsson, on the
other hand, had, at the Pappenheimers' attack,
charged too far amongst the enemy, and having
received a sabre thrust in the shoulder, and a wound
in the arm, was unable to extricate himself.  Who
had triumphed Larsson did not know with certainty.

It was now the third day after the battle; they
had marched for a day and night in a southerly
direction, and then stopped for a few hours in a
deserted village.

"Accursed crew!" exclaimed the little captain,
whose jovial disposition did not abandon him under
any circumstances; "if they had not stolen my flask,
we might now drink Finland's health together.  But
these Croats are thieves of the first water, compared
with whom our gipsies at home are innocent angels.
I should like to hang a couple of hundred of them
from the ramparts of Korsholm, as they hang petticoats
on the walls of a Finnish garret."

The march continued with brief halts for several
days, not without great suffering and discomfort to
the wounded, who, improperly bandaged, were prevented
by their fetters from helping each other.  At
the outset they travelled through a desolated country,
where provisions were obtained with great difficulty,
and whose population took to flight at the sight of
the dreaded Croats.  But they soon arrived in richer
parts, where the Catholic inhabitants assembled to
curse the heretics, and exult over their king's fall.
The whole Catholic world shared this rejoicing.  It
is stated that in Madrid brilliant performances took
place, in which Gustave Adolf, another dragon, was
conquered by Wallenstein as St. George.

After seven days' wearisome journeying, the cart
with the captive Finns drove late one evening over
a clattering drawbridge, and stopped in a small
courtyard.  The wounded prisoners were led out, and
conducted up two crumbling flights of stairs into a
turret room in the form of a semi-circle.  It seemed
to Bertel as if he had seen this place before, but
darkness and fatigue prevented him from making
sure.  The stars shone through the grated windows,
and the prisoners were revived with a cup of wine.
Larsson said with satisfaction:

"I will bet anything that the thieves have stolen
their wine from our cellars, while we lay in Würzburg,
for better stuff I have never tasted!"

"Würzburg!" said Bertel thoughtfully.  "Regina!"
added he, almost unconsciously.

"And the wine-cellar!" sighed Larsson, mocking
him.  "I will tell you something.

'The greatest fool upon the earth

Is he that believes in a girl's worth.

When love comes, the little dear,

Marry instead the cup of good cheer.'

"The black-eyed young Regina now sits and knits
stockings at Korsholm.  Yes, yes, Fru Marta is not
one of the folks who sit and weep in the moonlight.
Since we last met I have had news from Vasa
through the jolly sergeant, Bengt Kristerson.  He
said he had fought with your father.  You had better
believe that the old man is a trump; he carried
Bengt out at arm's-length and threw him down the
steps there at your home in Storkyro.  Bengt cursed
and swore, declaring that he would put the old man
and twelve of his hands into the windmill at once,
and grind them to groats; but Meri begged for
them.  Smart fellow, Bengt Kristerson! fights like
a dragon, and lies like a skipper.  Your health!"

"What else did you hear from East Bothnia?"
inquired Bertel, who with the bashfulness of youth,
blushed at the thought of revealing to his prosaic
friend the secret of his heart—his love for the
dark-eyed and unhappy Lady Regina von Emmeritz.

"Not much, except the bad harvests, immense
drain caused by the war, and heavy conscriptions.
The old men on the farm, your father and mine,
quarrel as usual, and make it up again.  Meri pines
for you and sings doleful songs.  Do you remember
that splendid girl, Katri? round as a turnip, red as
mountain-ash berries, and soft about the chin as a
lump of butter.  She has run away with a soldier.
Your health, my boy!"

"Nothing more?" said Bertel abstractedly.

"Nothing more!  What the devil do you want to
know, when you don't care for the prettiest girl in
the whole of Storkyro.  'Yes,
noch etivas
,' says
the German.  There has been a great affray at
Korsholm.  The conscripts got it into their heads
that Lady Regina had tried to kill the king with
'witch-shots,' and then they stormed Korsholm, and
burned the girl alive.  Cursedly jolly! here's to the
heretics!  We also know the art of holding
autos-da-fé
."

Bertel started up, forgetting his wounds; but pain
mastered him.  Without a cry he sank fainting into
Larsson's arms.

The honest captain was both troubled and angry.
While he bathed Bertel's temples with the remainder
of the noble fluid in the tankard, and presently
brought him to life once more, he gave vent to his
feelings in the following manner, crescendo from
piano to forte.

"There, there, Bertel ... what next?  What the
deuce, boy?  Are you in love with the girl?  Faint
like a lady's maid!  Courage! did I say that they
had burned her?  No, my lad, she was only a little
scorched, according to what Bengt Kristerson says,
and afterwards she tore Fru Marta's eyes out, and
climbed like a squirrel to the top of the castle.  Such
things happen every day in war ... Well, I declare,
you have got both your eyes open at last.  You are
still alive, you milk-baked wheat loaf ... are you
not ashamed to behave like a poltroon?  You are
a pretty soldier!  blitz-donnerwetter-kreutz-Pappenheim,
you are a pomade pot!  D—n it, now the
tankard is empty also!"

The stout little warrior would perhaps have
continued to vent his bad humour for some time longer,
especially as there was no consolation now left in
the cup, had not the door opened, and a female figure
then stepped over the threshold.  At this sight the
captain's pale and fluffy face brightened up.  Bertel
was laid aside, and Larsson leaned eagerly forward,
in order to see better, for the light of the single
lamp was very faint.  But the result of his
observation did not seem very satisfactory.

"A nun!  Ah, by Heaven ... to convert us!"

"Peace be with you," said a youthful voice from
underneath the veil.  "I am sent here by the worthy
prioress of the cloister of 'Our Lady' to bind your
wounds, and heal them, if it is the will of the saints."

"Upon my honour, charming friend, I am much
obliged; let us become better acquainted," said the
captain, as he stretched out his hand to lift the nun's
veil.  In a flash the latter retreated, and two soldiers
appeared at the door.

"The devil!" exclaimed Larsson, startled, "What
proud nuns they have here!  When I was at
Würzburg, I used to get a dozen kisses a day from the
young sisters at the convent; such sins always obtain
absolution.  Well," he continued, seeing the nun still
hesitating at the door, "your venerableness must not
take offence at a soldier's freedom of speech; an
honest soldier is a born gallant.  Although an
unbelieving heretic, I can talk Latin like a monk.
When we stayed at Munich I was very intimate with
a plump Bavarian nun, twenty-seven years old, with
brown eyes and a Roman nose."

"Hold your tongue!" impatiently whispered Bertel,
"you will drive the nun away."

"I haven't said a word.  Walk in; don't be frightened.
I will bet it is a long time since you saw
twenty-seven.
Posito
, says the Frenchman, that your
venerableness is an old woman."

The nun returned in silence, with two others, and
examined Bertel's wounded head.  A delicate white
hand drew out some scissors and cut his hair off
on each side of the wound.  In a short time Bertel's
wound was dressed by an experienced hand.  Bertel,
touched by this compassion, kissed the nun's hand.

"Upon my honour, charming matron," cried the
voluble captain, "I am jealous of my friend, who is
fifteen years younger than I.  Deign to stretch out
your gentle hand and plaster this brave arm, which
has conquered so many pious sisters' pity..."

The silent nun began to undo the bandages which
covered Larsson's wounds.  Her hand touched his.

"
Potz donnerwetter!
" burst out the captain in
surprise.  "What a fine and soft little hand!  I beg
your pardon, amiable Fru doctoress;
ex ungua
leonem
, says one of the fathers of the church
... that is to say in good Swedish: by the paw one
knows the lion.  I will wager ten bottles of old Rhine
against a cast-off stirrup, that this little white hand
would much rather caress a knight's cheek than
finger rosaries night and day."

The nun drew her hand away.  The gallant captain
feared the consequences of his gallantry.

"I will say no more; I am silent as a
karthäuser

monk.  But I will say that this hand is not an old
woman's ... well, well, your lovely venerableness
hears that I keep silent."

"
Tempus est consummatum, itur in missam
," said
a solemn voice at the door, and the nun hastened her
task.  In a few moments the prisoners were again
alone.

"I have heard that voice before," said Bertel
thoughtfully.  "We are surrounded by mysteries."

"Bah!" replied the captain, "it was a mangy and
jealous monk.  Bless me, what a dear little hand!"

CHAPTER II.

TWO OLD ACQUAINTANCES.

When the autumn sun on the following morning
spread its first rays into the turret room, Bertel arose
and looked out of the iron-barred window.  It was
a beautiful view that here met his eye.  Underneath
the turret wound a lovely river, and on the other
side of it lay a town with thirty spires, and beyond
were seen a number of still verdant vineyards.

Bertel at once recognised Würzburg.  The castle of
Marienburg, where the prisoners were confined, had
at the retreat of the Swedes fallen back into the
bishop's hands; but his grace, on account of the
insecurity of the times, did not return there himself,
but remained in Vienna.  The castle had suffered
much, from the last conquest, and the consequent
plundering; one tower had been destroyed, and the
moat was filled up in several places.  At present
there were only fifty men in the garrison, guarding
the sisters of charity from the cloisters in the town,
and many sick and wounded.

When Bertel had carefully examined his prison, he
thought he recognised Regina's room, the same in
which that beautiful young lady with her maids in
waiting had watched the battle, and where the image
of the Holy Virgin had been broken into fragments
by the splinters from the cannon-shot.*

* The surgeon forgets that this room was totally destroyed.—Author.

"Here," thought the dreaming young man, "she
slept the last night before the storm."

For Bertel this room was sacred; when he pressed
his lips against the cold walls, he thought he kissed
the marks of Regina's tears.

A wonderful thought struck him like lightning.  If
the nun that visited them yesterday was a princess
... if the white hand belonged to Regina!  It
would be a miracle, but ... love believes in miracles.
Bertel's heart beat fast.

His neglected wounds had greatly improved under
the gentle hands of his nurse.  He now felt much
stronger.  His unfortunate comrades were still asleep
after their terrible journey.  Then the door was
quietly opened, and the nun softly entered with a
drink for the wounded prisoners.  Bertel felt his
head swim.  Overcome by his violent emotions, he
fell on his knees before her.

"Your name, you kind angel, who remembers the
prisoners!" he cried.  "Tell me your name, let me
see your face ... Ah!  I should have known you
amongst thousands ... you are Regina, yourself!"

"You make a mistake," said the same kind voice
that Bertel had heard the day before.  It was not
Regina's voice, and still he knew the tones.  To
whom then did it belong?

Bertel rushed forward and pulled the veil from
the nun's head.  In front of him stood the beautiful
mild Ketchen with a smiling face.  The surprised
Bertel drew back.

"Imprudent one," she said, covering her face with
her hands.  "I wished to have you in my care, but
now you make me leave the place to another."

Ketchen disappeared.  On the evening of the same
day another nun entered the room.

Larsson addressed a long speech to her, and put
her hand to his lips, and impressed on it a loud kiss.
He then swore fearfully.

"Millions of devils!" he said, "that I should kiss
an old shrivelled hand like that.  The skin was like
a century-old parchment."

"Verily, my dear Bertel," continued the chagrined
captain with philosophical resignation, "there are
secrets in nature which will for ever remain concealed
from human sagacity.  This hand, for example—
manus
mana, manum
—hand, as the old Roman used to say:
this hand, my friend, would undoubtedly occupy a
shining place in the Greek poet Ovid's 'Metamorphoses,'
which we formerly studied in the Cathedral
School at Abo, the time my father wanted to make
me a priest.  Yesterday I could have sworn that it
was the beautiful white hand of a young girl, and
to-day I will be shaved as bare as a monk it it was
not a hand that belongs to a seventy-year-old
washerwoman.
Sic unde ubi apud unquam post
, as
the ancients used to say.  That is, so can a pretty
girl be changed into a witch before anyone knows it."

The prisoners' wounds healed rapidly under the
care of the nuns.  The fierce autumn storms whistled
around the castle turrets, and the heavy rain beat
against the small panes.  The verdure of the
vineyards faded, and a thick, heavy mist rose from the
Main, and obscured the view of the town.

"I cannot stand it any longer," growled Larsson.
"The wretches! they do not give us either wine or
dice.  And forgive me, Saint, the devil may kiss their
hands or lips, not I.  No.  I have a great respect for
old women.  I cannot stand this.  I will jump out
of the window."

"Do it," said Bertel, provoked.

"No, I will not jump out of the window," said the
captain.  "No, my dear friend—
micus ameus
, as we
learned people used to express ourselves—I will
instead honour our companion with a game."

And the inventive captain for the thirtieth time
summoned Pekka to a game of pitch and toss.  This
uninteresting game, which was his only diversion, was
played with a Carl IX. six-öre piece.

"Tell me what they are building over there on
the square of Würzburg, just opposite the bank of
the Main?" said Bertel.

"An ale-house," said Larsson.  "Crown!"

"It looks to me like a pyre."

"Tail!" repeated Larsson monotonously.  "Dash
it, what ill luck I have; this damned Limingo peasant
will win my horse, my saddle, and my stirrups."

"The first morning after we were taken prisoners,
I heard something about an
auto-de-fé
, to celebrate
the battle of Lützen.  What do you think of it?"

"I?  What should I care; they might burn a dozen
witches for our amusement."

"But if we are concerned in it?  If they are
waiting for the bishop's arrival?"

Larsson dilated his small grey eyes, and took hold
of his goatee.

"Blitz-donner-kreutz ... the wretched Jesuits!
They would cook us like turnips ... we ... the
conquerors of the Holy Roman Empire ... I mean,
my friend Bertel, that in such desperate straits, an
honest soldier would not be to blame if he tried
to escape in silence—for example, through the
window..."

"There is a fall of seventy feet to the Main
underneath."

"The door," said the thoughtful captain.

"Is guarded night and day by two armed men."

The captain fell into some melancholy reflections.
Time passed on; it was evening; it became night.
The nun with their suppers did not appear.

"The festival begins with a fast," muttered the
captain in a gloomy tone.  "I am shaped like a fish,
if I do not wring the head off our neglectful nun as
soon as she appears."

At this moment the door opened, and the nun
entered alone.  Larsson exchanged a glance with his
companions, suddenly approached the nun, caught her
round the neck, and held her against the wall.

"Be still, like a good child, highly honoured
abbess," mockingly said the captain; "if you make
a sound you are lost.  By right I ought to throw you
out of the window and let you have a swim in the
Main, to teach you
punctum preciosum
, that is, a
precise punctuality in your attendance.  But I will
give you grace for this night.  Tell me, you most
miserable of meal bringers, what is the meaning of
that fire which they are preparing on the square;
who is going to be roasted there?"

"For the sake of all the saints, speak low,"
whispered the nun.  "I am Ketchen, and have come to
save you.  A great danger threatens you.
To-morrow the bishop is expected, and Father Hieronymus,
the implacable enemy of all the Finns, has sworn
to burn you alive for the glory of the saints."

"My fine little soft hand!" cried Larsson delighted.
"Upon my honour, I am a fool not to recognise it
at once.  Well, my beautiful friend, for the glory or
St. Brita I will take a kiss on the spot..."

The captain kept his word.  But Ketchen freed
herself, and said quickly:

"If you do not behave yourself, young man, you
will afford fuel for the flames.  Hurry! bind me to
the bedpost, and tie a handkerchief over my mouth.

"Bind you..." replied the captain; "explain
yourself."

"Make haste! the guard are drunk and asleep, but
in twenty minutes they will be inspected by the pater
himself.  Seize their cloaks and hurry to get out.
The passwords are Petrus and Paulus."

"And yourself?" said the captain.

"They will find me bound.  I have been overpowered,
and my mouth stopped."

"Noble girl!  The crown of all Franconia's sisters
of charity; had I not sworn never to marry....
Very well, hasten, Bertel! hurry, Pekka, you lazy dog!
Farewell, little rogue! another kiss ... Good-bye!"

The three prisoners hastened out.  But scarcely
were they outside the door when they were seized
by iron fists, thrown down, and bound.

"Take the dogs down into the treasury," said a
well-known voice.  It was Father Hieronymus.

CHAPTER III.

THE TREASURY.

Bound hand and foot, the prisoners soon found
themselves in the deep, dark, damp vault, blasted
out of the rock, where the Bishop of Würzburg had
kept his treasures before the Swedes delivered him
from the trouble.  No ray of light penetrated the
gloom, and the moisture from the rocks trickled
through the crevices and dropped steadily on the
ground.

"Lightning and Croats! may all the devils take
you, cursed earless monk!" bawled the captain, as
soon as he felt firm ground beneath him.  "To shut
up officers of his Royal Highness and the Crown in
this rat-trap.
Diabolus infernalis multum plus
plurimum!
... Are you alive, Bertel?"

"Yes.  In order to be burned living to-morrow."

"Do you believe that, Bertel?" asked the captain
in a lugubrious tone.

"I know this treasury.  On three sides is the solid
rock, on the other a door of iron, and the man who
guards us here is harder than either rock or metal.
We shall never see Finland again!  Never shall I
see
her
more..."

"Listen to me, Bertel; you are a smart chap, but
that does not prevent you from talking like a
milksop occasionally.  You are in love with the
black-eyed lady; well, well, I will say nothing about that;
love is a bandit, as Ovidius so truly says.  But I
cannot stand whimpering.  If we live, there are other
girls to kiss; if we die, then good-bye to them all.
So you really fancy that they intend to roast us like
picked woodcocks?"

"That entirely depends upon you yourselves,"
answered a voice in the darkness.  All three prisoners
started from fright.

"The evil one is here in the midst of us!"
exclaimed Larsson.

Pekka began to say his prayers.  Then a clear ray
from a dark lantern shot through the darkness, and
they all saw the Jesuit Hieronymus standing alone
near them.

"It depends upon you," he repeated.  "To escape
is impossible.  Your king is dead; your army
defeated; the whole world acknowledges the power of
the Church and the Emperor.  The pile is ready, and
your bodies shall burn in honour of the saints.  But
the holy Church in its clemency wishes to save you,
and has sent me here to offer you mercy."

"Indeed!" exclaimed Larsson mockingly.  "Come,
worthy father, loosen my bonds and let me embrace
you.  I offer you my friendship, and of course you
believe me.  How, says Seneca,
homo homini lupus
,
we wolves are all brothers."

"I offer you mercy," continued the Jesuit coldly,
"on
three
conditions, which you will certainly accept.
The first is, that you abjure your heretic faith and
publicly join the only saving Church."

"Never!" exclaimed Bertel hastily.

"Be quiet!" said the captain.  "Well,
posito
that
we abjure the Lutheran faith?"

"Then," continued the Jesuit, "as prisoners of
war you shall be exchanged for the high-born Lady
and Princess Regina von Emmeritz, whom your king
tyrannically sent a prisoner to the north."

"It shall be done!" answered Bertel eagerly.

"Be still!" cried Larsson.  "Well, go on;
posito

that we accomplish the lady's deliverance?"

"Only a trifle remains.  I demand of Lieutenant
Bertel King Gustaf Adolf's ring."

"Your money or your life, like a highwayman!"
said Larsson derisively.

"You ask for that which I do not possess,"
answered Bertel.

The Jesuit gave him a suspicious glance.

"The king ordered Duke Bernhard to give you
the ring, and you must have received it."

"All this is quite unknown to me," said Bertel
with truth, but surprised and delighted at this
unexpected news.

The Jesuit resumed his smiling composure.

"If that is how it stands, my dear sons," said he, "let
us talk no more about the ring.  As far as your
conversion to the true believing Church is concerned..."

Bertel was just about to answer, but was interrupted
by the captain, who, a moment before, had made a
movement with the upper part of his body, which
the light did not reach.

"Yes, as far as that matter is concerned," Larsson
hastened to add; "you know, reverend father, that
there are two sides to it:
questio an
and
questio
quomodo
.  Now to speak of
questio an
first, my
sainted rector, Vincentius Flachsenius, used to say,
always place
negare
as
prima regula juris
.  Your
reverence undoubtedly finds it unexpected and agreeable
to hear a royal captain talk Latin like a cardinal.
Your reverence should know that we, in Abo Cathedral
School, studied Ciceronem, Senecam, and Ovidium,
also called Naso; for my part I have always
considered Cicero a great talker, and Seneca a
blockhead; but as for Ovid ..."

The Jesuit moved towards the door, and said dryly,

"Then you choose the stake?"

"Rather than the disgrace of an apostasy!"
exclaimed Bertel, who had not noticed Larsson's hints
and motions.

"My friend," the captain hastily added, "thinks
very sensibly and naturally that the worst part of the
matter is the public scandal.  Thus, worthy father,
let us confer about
questio quomodo
.
Posito
that we
become good Catholics, and enter the Emperor's
service ... but deign to come a little closer; my
friend Bertel is rather hard of hearing ever since he
had the pleasure of making the acquaintance of the
mighty Pappenheim."

The Jesuit cautiously advanced a little nearer,
after convincing himself with a glance that retreat
stood open.

"It is I who decide the conditions," said he
haughtily.  "Yes or no?"

"Yes, yes, of course," replied Larsson quickly, as
he continued to rub himself.  "Consequently we are
on sound grounds both with
questio an
and
questio
quomodo
.  Your reverence possesses a persuasive
tongue.  We will now come to
questio ubi
and
questio
quando
, for according to
logicam
and
meta-physicam

... Pardon me, worthy father, I don't say a word,
I consent to it all.  But," continued the captain, as
he lowered his voice, "deign to cast a glance at my
friend Bertel's right forefinger.  I can tell your
reverence my friend is a great rogue; I am very
much mistaken if he has not got the king's ring on
at this moment."

The Jesuit, carried away by his curiosity, came a
few steps nearer.  Swift as an eel Larsson rolled
himself to the door, for he was unable to rise on account
of his bonds; and when the monk wished to retreat,
the captain, who had cut through the ligatures which
held his right arm, against a sharp stone, suddenly
seized the Jesuit's legs and threw him down.  Father
Hieronymus made desperate efforts to free himself
from the captain's grasp; the lantern was broken
into fragments, the light extinguished, and a thick
darkness enveloped the wrestlers.  Bertel and
Pekka, both unable to get up and assist, rolled
themselves at random towards the spot, but without
reaching it.  Then the brave captain felt a sharp sensation
in his shoulder, and directly afterwards a warm stream
of blood.  With a mighty oath he wrenched the
dagger from his enemy's hand, and returned the stab.
The Jesuit now begged for mercy.

"With the greatest pleasure, my son," answered
the sarcastic captain.  "But only on three
conditions: the first, that you renounce Loyola, your
lord and master, and declare him to be an emissary
of the devil.  Do you agree to it?"

"I agree to everything," murmured the pater.

"The second: that you start off and hang yourself
to the first hook you find in the ceiling."

"Yes, yes, only let me go."

"The third: that you travel to Beelzebub, your
patron," ... and with these words Larsson flung
his enemy violently against the rocky wall, after
which there was a dead silence.

The dagger was now used to quickly sever the
prisoners' bonds, and then it only remained to find
the door.

When the three fugitives, after having secured the
treasury door from the outside, reached the dark and
narrow stairway, which led to the upper portion of
the castle, they stayed a moment to consult together.
Their situation even now was not enviable, for they
knew of old that the stairs led to the bishop's former
bed-chamber, from whence two or three rooms had
to be crossed before they came to the large armoury,
and through that to the courtyard, after which they
still had to pass the closed drawbridge and the guard.
All the rooms, except the bed-chamber, which the
Jesuit himself had taken possession of, had, two hours
before, when the prisoners were carried down, been
filled partly with soldiers, and partly with the sick
and their nurses.

"One thing grieves me," whispered Larsson, "and
that is, that I did not draw the fur off the fox when
I held him by the ears.  In the garments of piety
I could have gone scot-free through purgatory like
another
Saulus inter prophetas
.  But as it is, my
friend Bertel, I ask, in my simplicity, how shall we
get away from here?"

"We will cut our way out.  The garrison are
asleep; the darkness of the night favours us."

"I confess, my friend, that if anybody, even I,
Larsson himself, should call you a poltroon, I would
call that fellow a liar.  It is true that you once as
good as
solo
, alone,
alienus
, all by yourself, took this
fortress; but you had then at least a sword in your
hand, and a few thousands of brave boys in the rear.
Hush!  I heard a step on the stairs ... no, it was
nothing.  Let us push on cautiously.  Here it will
serve us to tread gingerly, like maidens; the heavy
peasant's boots sound as if we were a squadron of
cavalry."

The fugitives had ascended about thirty or forty
steps, and yet there seemed more, until a faint ray
of light glimmered at the top in the passage.  They
then came to a door; it stood ajar.  They stopped,
and held their breath; not a sound could be heard.
The brave captain now ventured to put in his head,
then his foot, and finally his whole stout person.

"We are on the right track," he whispered; "boots
off, the whole company must march in their stockinged
feet—
posito
that the company has stockings.
March!"

The bishop's bed-chamber, into which the three
now entered on tip-toe, was a large and magnificent
room.  A flickering lamp faintly illumined the
precious gobelin tapestry, the gilded images of the
saints, and the ebony bedstead, inlaid with pearls,
where the wealthy prelate used to fall asleep, with
his goblet of Rhenish wine beside him.  No living
creature was visible, but from one of the windows
which overlooked the courtyard they could see the
castle chapel opposite, brilliantly lighted and filled
with people.  Even the courtyard was occupied by
a crowd, visible owing to the reflection from the
windows, and many of whom carried lighted candles.

"I will let them salt and pickle me like a cucumber
if I understand what all these people are doing here
in the dead of night," muttered the enraged captain.
"You will find that they have assembled here to see
three honest Finnish soldiers roasted by a slow fire
like Aland herrings."

"We must look for weapons, and die like men,"
said Bertel, as he glanced through the room.

"Hurrah!" he exclaimed, "here are three swords,
just what we require."

"And three daggers," added Larsson, who, in a
large niche behind the image of a saint, found a little
arsenal of all kinds of weapons.  "The worthy fathers
have a certain weakness for daggers, as the East
Bothnians for 'punkkons,' or peasants' knives."

"I think," joined in the taciturn Pekka, as he
caught sight of a good-sized flask in a corner, "that
to-night being Xmas eve..."

"Brave boy!" interrupted the captain, inspired also
by this sight, "you have a wonderfully keen scent
where good liquor is concerned.  Pious Jesuit, you
have, anyhow, accomplished some good in the world!
Xmas eve, did you say?  Stupid, why didn't you
tell us at once?  It is clear as the day, that half of
Würzburg is streaming to the chapel to hear Father
Hieronymus say mass.  'Pon my honour, I fear that
he will keep them waiting for some time, the good
pater.  Here goes, my friend, I will drink to you;
an officer ought to always set his troops a good
example.  Your health, my boys ... damnation
... the miserable monk has basely cheated us.  I have
swallowed poison.  I am a dead man!"  And the
honest captain turned pale as a corpse.

Both Bertel and Pekka had hard work to restrain
their laughter, notwithstanding their critical
position, when they saw Larsson at once white from
fright and black from the fluid he had drank and
spat out again.

"Be more careful another time," said Bertel, "and
you will avoid drinking ink."

"Ink!  I might have known that the earless scrawler
would be up to some devilry.  Two things trouble me
to-night more than all the
autos-da-fé
: that the sweet
Ketchen, with the soft hands, deceived us, and that
I have swallowed the most useless stuff in the
world—ink, bah!"*

* Here Captain Svanholm trod on Cousin Svenonius' toes, and the
latter thoughtfully took a pinch of snuff.

"If we had nothing else to do I could show you
something that ink has done," rejoined Bertel, as he
hastily turned over a pile of papers on the writing-table.
"Here is a letter from the archbishop
... he is coming to-morrow ... we are to be solemnly
burned ... they will tempt us to abjure our faith,
and promise us grace ... but burn us, nevertheless!
Infamous!"

"Roman!" observed the captain phlegmatically.

In the meantime Larsson had drawn out three
monks' cloaks and hoods; they put them on, and
now ventured to proceed farther on their dangerous
enterprise.

The next two rooms were empty.  Two common
beds indicated that some menial monks had here
their abode, and were now gone to mass.

"Bravo," whispered Larsson, "they will take us
for sheep in wolves' clothing, and believe that we
are also going to attend mass.  Hist! didn't you hear
something?  A woman's voice.  Be still!"

They stopped, and heard in the darkness a young
female's voice, praying:

"Holy Virgin, forgive me this time, and save me
from death; I will to-morrow take the veil, and serve
you for ever."

"It is Ketchen's voice," said the captain.  "She may
be innocent, poor child!  Upon my honour, it would
be base of a cavalier not to deliver a sweet girl with
such a soft hand."

"Let us be off!" whispered Bertel in vexation.
But the captain had already discovered a little door,
bolted on the outside; inside was a cell, and in the
cell a trembling girl.  Her eyes, used to the darkness,
saw the monk's garb, and she threw herself at the
captain's feet, exclaiming,

"Grace, my father, grace!  I will confess all; I have
favoured the prisoners' flight; I have given wine to
the guard.  But spare my life, have mercy upon me,
I am so young.  I do not wish to die."

"Who the devil has said that you are to die, my
brave girl?" interrupted the captain's voice.  "No,
you shall live, with your soft hand, and your warm
lips, as true as I'm not a Jesuit, but Lars Larsson,
captain in his Royal Majesty's and the Crown's service,
and herewith take you ... as my wedded wife, for
better or for worse," continued the captain, no doubt
because he thought that the well-known formula
ought to be said to an end when he had once begun it.

"Away, away, with or without the girl, but away;
they are coming, and we still have to pass the large
armoury!"

"Allow me to tell you, my friend Bertel, that you
are the greatest fidget I know,
maximus fiescus
, as
the ancients so truly expressed themselves.  How is
it, my girl, you are not a nun ... only a novice?
Well, it makes no difference to me.  You shall be
my wedded wife ... in case I ever marry.  Here
is a cloak; there now, straighten yourself up and
look bold."

"It is no cloak, it is a mass-robe," whispered
Ketchen, who had scarcely time to recover from her
amazement.

"The deuce, a mass-robe!  Wait, you take my
cloak, and I will take the robe.  I shall chant in
their ears
dies irae
, so that all will be astonished."

The sound of several voices in the armoury outside
interrupted the captain in his priestly speculations.

"They have missed the Jesuit, they are looking
for him, and we are lost through your silly jabbering,"
whispered the exasperated Bertel.  "We must be
careful now not to betray ourselves.  Come along,
all of you."

"And Latin first!" exclaimed the captain.

All four went out.  In the armoury there were
about thirty sick beds, but only two sisters in
attendance.  This sight was reassuring, but much more
dangerous was the meeting with two monks, who
were in violent altercation in the doorway.  When
they saw Larsson in the mass-robe, and three figures
behind him in hooded cloaks, the pious fathers were
evidently startled.  The captain raised his arm to
bless them, uttered a solemn
pax vobiscum
, and was
then going to steal by with a grave step, when he
was checked by the foremost monk.

"Worthy father," said the latter, as he surveyed
the unknown prelate from head to foot, "what procures
our castle the honour at so unusual a time...?"

"
Pax vobiscum!
" repeated the captain devoutly.
"The pious Father Hieronymus orders you to say
mass with all your might ... his reverence is sick
... he has toothache."

"Let us go and wait upon him," said one of the
monks, entering the smaller room.  But the other
seized Larsson by the robe, and regarded him in a
way which much alarmed the brave captain.

"
Quis vus et quid eltis!
" said the captain in a
regular dilemma.  "
Qui quoe quod, meus tuus suus

... go to the devil, you bald-headed baboons!"
roared Larsson, unable to restrain himself any longer,
and pushing the obstinate monk into the chamber
he bolted the door.  Then all four hastened at full
speed down to the courtyard.  The alarm was
immediately given behind them; the monks shouting
at the top of their voices, and the nuns joining in,
until the crowd of people who thronged the
courtyard began to listen.

"We are lost!" whispered Ketchen, "if we do
not reach the drawbridge by the back way."

They hurried there ... the tumult increased
... they passed the guard at the large sally-port.

"Halt! who's there?"

"Petrus and Paulus," promptly answered Bertel.
They were allowed to pass.  Fortunately the
drawbridge was down.  But the whole castle was now
alarmed.

"We will jump into the river, the night is dark,
they will not see us!" cried Bertel.

"No," said Larsson, "I will not leave my girl, even
if it should cost me my head."

"Here stand three saddled horses, be quick and
mount."

"Up, you sweetest of all the nuns in Franconia, up
in the saddle!" and the captain hastily swung the
trembling Ketchen before him on the horse's back.
They all galloped away into the darkness.  But
behind them raged tumult and uproar, the alarm bells
sounding in all the turrets, and the whole of
Würzburg wondering greatly what could have happened
on Xmas eve itself.

CHAPTER IV.

DUKE BERNHARD AND BERTEL.

Three months after the events related in the
preceding chapter we find Lieutenant Bertel one day
in one of the rooms at the martial court, which Duke
Bernhard of Weimar kept sometimes at Kassel and
sometimes at Nassau, or wherever the duties of the
war compelled him to go.

It was a spring day in March, 1633.  Officers came
and departed, orderlies hastened in all directions;
Duke Bernhard had the greatest share of the south
and west of Germany to look after, and the times
were most anxious.

After having waited a good while, the young officer
was conducted to the duke.  The latter looked up
irritably from his maps and papers, and seemed to
wait to be spoken to; but Bertel remained silent.

"Who are you?" asked the duke in sharp, harsh
tones.

"Gustaf Bertel, Lieutenant in his Royal Majesty's
Finnish cavalry."

"What do you want?"

The young man coloured up and remained silent.
The duke noticed this and looked at him with a
discontented air.

"I understand," the latter said at last, "you have
as usual been fighting with the German officers about
the girls.  I will not allow this sort of thing.  A
soldier's sword should be reserved for his country's
enemies."

"I have not been fighting, your highness."

"All the worse.  You came to ask for a furlough
to go to Finland.  I refuse it to you.  I want all my
men here.  You will stay, Lieutenant.  Good-bye!"

"I do not come to ask for a furlough."

"Well, What the devil do you want?  Can you not
speak out?  Be short and quick!  Leave the clergy
to say prayers, and the girls to blush."

"Your highness has received from his Majesty, the
late king, a ring..."

"I cannot remember it."

"... which his Majesty asked your highness to
give to an officer in his life-guards."

The duke passed his hand over his high forehead.

"That officer is dead," he said.

"I am that officer, your highness.  I was wounded
at Lützen, and shortly after taken prisoner by the
Imperialists."

Duke Bernhard beckoned Bertel to come nearer,
and gave him a searching look; he seemed satisfied
with his examination.

"Close the door," he said, "and sit down by my side."

Bertel obeyed.  His cheeks were burning with
anxiety.

"Young man," said the duke, "you carry on your
forehead the marks of your origin, and I ask for no
further evidence.  Your mother is a peasant's
daughter of Storkyro, in Finland, and her name is
Emerentia Aronsdotter Bertila."

"No, your highness, the person you speak of is
my elder sister, born of my father's first marriage.  I
have never seen my mother."

The duke looked at him with surprise.

"Very well," said he doubtfully, as he looked
among some papers in his portfolio, "we will now
speak of this sister of yours, Emerentia Aronsdotter.
Her father had performed great services for Carl IX.,
and he was urged to ask a favour.  He asked
to be allowed to send his only daughter, then his
only child, to Stockholm, to be educated with the
young ladies of rank at the Court."

"I know very little about this."

"At thirteen years of age the peasant girl was sent
to Stockholm, where her father's vanity and wealth
procured her an abode, appearance, and education, far
above her station.  He was consumed with ambition,
and as he himself could not gain a noble crest, he
relied upon his daughter's high birth on her mother's
side.  Bertila's first wife was an orphan of the noble
family Stjernkors, deprived of her inheritance by the
war, and then rejected by her proud family on account
of her marriage with the rich peasant Bertila."

"This is all unknown to me."

"The young Emerentia suffered a great deal in
Stockholm from the envy and contempt of her
aristocratic companions; for many of them were poorer
than herself, and could not endure a plebeian at their
side as an equal.

"But her beauty was as extraordinary as her
wisdom and goodness.  Within two years she had
acquired the habits of the upper classes, whilst
preserving the rustic simplicity of her heart.  This
wonderful combination of mental and physical graces
reminded old persons of a lovely picture of their
youthful days—Karin Mansdotter."

As he said these words, the duke closely watched
the young officer; but Bertel did not betray any
agitation, and remained silent.  All this was
something new and incomprehensible to him.

"Very well," continued the duke after a pause.
"This beauty did not long remain unnoticed.  A very
young man of high birth soon fell in love with the
beautiful maiden, then only fifteen years old, and she
returned his affection with the whole devotion of a
first love.  This attachment soon became known to
those who surrounded the noble youth; state policy
was endangered, and the nobility were offended by the
distinction thus conferred on a girl of low birth.  They
resolved to marry the maiden to an officer of the same
origin as herself, who had distinguished himself in
the Danish War.  This intention came to the ears
of the young people.  Poor children! they were so
young; he seventeen, she fifteen, both inexperienced
and in love.  Shortly after, the youth was sent
to the war in Poland.  The young girl's marriage
came to nothing, and she was sent back by the
offended nobility in disgrace to her cabin in Finland.
Do you wish to hear any more, Lieutenant Bertel?"

"I do not understand, your highness, what this
account of my sister's life has to do with..."

"... the ring you ask for.  Patience.  When the
young man had a secret meeting with his beloved
for the last time, just before his departure, she gave
him a ring, whose earlier history I do not know, but
which was probably made by a Finnish sorcerer, and
had all the qualities of a talisman.  She conjured her
lover to always wear this ring on his finger, in war
and danger, as he would thus become invulnerable.
Twice this warning was forgotten, once at Dirschau..."

"Great God!"

"... the second time at Lützen."

Bertel's emotions were of such a violent nature that
all the blood left his cheeks, and he sat pale as a
marble statue.

"Young man, you now know part of what you
ought to know, but you do not know all.  We have
spoken of your sister.  We will now speak of yourself.
It was his Majesty's intention to offer you a
nobleman's coat of arms, and which you with your
good sword have so well deserved.  But old Aron
Bertila, actuated by his hatred for the nobility had asked
as a favour that the king would give you an
opportunity to gain any other distinction than that one.
The king could not refuse this request from a father,
and therefore you are still a commoner by name.
But I, who am not bound by any promise to your
father, will offer you, young man, that which has
hitherto been denied you: a knight's spur and coat
of arms."

"Your highness ... this favour makes me wonder
and mute; how have I deserved it?"

Duke Bernhard smiled with a strange expression.

"How, my friend? you have only half understood me."

Bertel remained silent.

"Well, with or without your knowledge and will,
my friend, I already regard you as a nobleman.  We
will speak more about it another time.  Your ring
... Ah!  I have forgotten it.  Do you remember
what it was like?"

The duke now searched zealously in his portfolio.
"They say that the king wore a copper ring, and
on the inside of it magic signs were engraved, and
the letters R.R.R."

"It is possible that I have mislaid it, for I cannot
find it.  And who the devil has time to think of such
childish things?  The ring must have been stolen
from my private casket.  If I find it again I will give
it to you, and if not, you know that which is worth
more.  Go, young man, and be worthy of my confidence
and the great king's memory.  No one is to
know what I have told you.  Farewell; we will see
each other again."

CHAPTER V.

LOVE AND HATE AGREE.

Again we fly from Germany's spring back to the
North's winter.  Before we go further on the bloody
path of the Thirty Years' War, we will pay a visit
to two of the chief personages of this narrative high
up in East Bothnia.

It was about Advent time, 1632.  A violent storm
with heavy snow beat against the old ramparts of
Korsholm, and drove the waves of the Baltic against
the ice-covered shores.  All navigation for the year
had ceased.  The newly conscripted soldiers had
gone to Stralsund by way of Stockholm, at the end
of July, and were impatiently waiting for news from
the war.  Then it happened in the middle of November
that a rumour was spread about the country of
the king's death.  Such reports fly through the air,
one does not know how or where they come from.
Great misfortunes are known at a distance as
presentiments, just as an earthquake far beyond its own
circle causes a qualm in the mind.  But this report
had more than once been spread and refuted.  The
people relied upon King Gustaf Adolf's good fortune,
and when corroboration did not arrive, the whole
matter was forgotten, all thinking it was a false story.

It is an ordinary fact in life that, as we hate those
to whom we have occasioned a wrong, so we feel well
disposed towards persons whom we have had the
opportunity of serving.  Lady Marta of Korsholm
was not a little proud of her brave defence against
the drunken soldiers, and did not hesitate to attribute
the preservation of the castle to the heroism she had
then displayed.  That she had saved Regina's life
gave the latter great importance in her eyes; and
neither could she refuse her admiration for the
courage and self-sacrifice which the young girl had
shown on the same occasion.  The high-born prisoner
was her pride; and she did not omit to watch her
steps like an Argus; but she gave Regina a larger
room, let her have old Dorthe again as a waiting
woman, and provided her with an abundance of good
food.  Regina also was less proud and cold, she would
sometimes answer Lady Marta with a word or a nod;
but of all the nice things that were offered her, the
choice meats, the strong beer, etc., she took little
or nothing; she had sunk apparently into a state of
indifference, told her beads devoutly, but in other
respects let one day pass as another.

Lady Marta held the deep conviction that her
prisoner, if not precisely the Roman Emperor's own
daughter, was, nevertheless, a princess of the highest
birth.  She therefore hit upon the unlucky idea of
trying to convert so distinguished a person from her
papistical heresy, on the supposition that she would
thereby accomplish something very remarkable when
the war was ended and Regina was exchanged.
Regina thus became exposed to the same proselytizing
attempts which she herself had undertaken with
the great Gustaf Adolf; but Lady Marta's were not
so delicate or refined in their application as her own.
She overwhelmed the poor girl with Lutheran
sermons, psalm-books, and tracts, also often made
long speeches interspersed with proverbs, and when
this was without avail, she sent the castle chaplain
to preach to the prisoner.  Of course all this occurred
to deaf ears.  Regina was sufficiently firm in her faith
to listen with patience, but she suffered from it; her
stay at Korsholm became more unbearable every day,
and who can blame her, if with secret longings she
sighed for the day when she could regain her freedom.

Dorthe, on the contrary, flamed up every time the
heretic preacher or the plucky old lady began their
sermons, and rattled through a whole string of prayers
and maledictions both in Latin and Low German, the
result generally being that she was shut up for two
or three days in the dungeon of the castle, until her
longing for her lady's company once more made her
tractable.

And so passed a half-year of Lady Regina's captivity.

A better product of Lady Marta's goodwill was,
that Regina was allowed to embroider, and fine
materials were ordered for her in the autumn from
Stockholm.  Thus it became possible for her to work
a large piece of silk with the Virgin Mary and the
infant Christ in silver and gold.  Lady Marta in her
innocence considered the work a sacrament cloth,
which Regina might present to Vasa church, as a
proof of her change of sentiments.  A warrior's eyes,
on the other hand, would have discerned in it an
intended flag, a Catholic banner, which the imprisoned
girl was quietly preparing in expectation of the day
when her work would wave at the head of the Catholic
hosts.

Still Lady Marta was not quite satisfied with the
Holy Virgin's image, which seemed to her surrounded
by too large a halo to be truly Lutheran.  She therefore
considered how she could procure her prisoner a
more suitable occupation.  It happened now and then
that the daughter of the Storkyro peasant king, Meri,
when she was in town, made an errand to Korsholm,
and in order to gain the favour of the lady of
the castle, presented her with several skeins of the
finest and silkiest linen floss, which no one in the
whole vicinity could spin as well as Meri.  Lady
Marta consequently got the idea one fine day to teach
her prisoner to spin, and to give her Meri as a teacher
in this art.  Meri on her part desired nothing better.
The near connection in which the imprisoned lady
had stood to the king, gave her an irresistible interest
in Meri's eyes.  She wished to hear something about
him—the hero, the king, the great, never-to-be-forgotten
man, who stood before her mind's eye with
more than earthly lustre.  She wished to know what
he had said, what he had done, what he had loved
and hated on earth; she wished for once to feel
herself transported by his glory, and then to die
herself—forgotten.  Poor Meri!

So Meri made her second acquaintance with Lady
Regina in the castle.  She was received at first with
coldness and indifference, and her spinning scarcely
pleased the proud young lady.  But gradually her
submissive mild demeanour won Regina's goodwill,
and a captive's natural desire to communicate with
beings outside the prison walls finally made Regina
more open.

They spun very little, it is true, but they talked
together like mistress and maid, especially during
the days when Dorthe was shut up on account of her
wicked tongue, and it was quite opportune that Meri
recollected some German from more brilliant days.
Meri knew how to constantly lead the conversation
on to the subject of the king, and she soon divined
Regina's enthusiastic love.  But Regina was very far
from having any idea of Meri's earlier experiences;
she ascribed her questions to the natural curiosity
which such high personages always excite in the
minds of the common people.  Sometimes she seemed
astonished at the delicacy and nobleness of the simple
peasant woman's expressions and views.  There were
moments when Meri's personality appeared to her as
an enigma full of contradictions, and then she asked
herself whether she ought not to consider this woman
as a spy.  But the next instant she repented this
thought; and when the spinner looked at her with her
clear, mild, penetrating gaze, then there was something
which said to Regina's heart, this woman does
not dissemble.

They were sitting one day in the beginning of
December, and Dorthe was again shut up for her
unseasonable remarks to the chaplain.  There was a
striking contrast between these two beings whom
fate had brought together from such opposite directions,
but who on one point shared the same interest.

The first, young, proud, dark, flashing, and beautiful,
a princess, even in captivity; the other of middle
age, blonde, pale, mild, humble, and free, and yet
very submissive.  Regina now seventeen, could be
considered twenty; Meri now thirty-six, had something
so childish and innocent in her whole appearance,
that at certain moments she might be taken
for seventeen.  She could have been Regina's mother,
and yet she who had suffered so much, seemed almost
like a child in comparison with the early matured
southerner at her side.  Lady Regina had been
spinning a little, and during the operation broken
many threads.  Provoked and impatient, she pushed
the distaff away and resumed her embroidery.  This
happened very often, and her instructress was
accustomed to it.

"That is a pretty image," said Meri, after a look
at the piece of silk.  "What does it represent?"

"God's Holy Mother, Sancta Maria," answered
Regina, as she made the sign of the cross, which she
was always in the habit of doing when mentioning
the name of the Holy Virgin.

"And what is it for?" asked Meri with a naïve
familiarity.

Regina looked at her.  Again a suspicion came
into her mind, but it immediately passed away.

"I am embroidering the banner of the Holy Faith
for Germany," replied Regina proudly.  "When it
one day waves, the heretics will flee before the wrath
of the mother of God."

"When I think of the mother of God," said Meri,
"I imagine her mild, good, and peaceful; I imagine
her as a mother alone with her love."  Meri said these
words with a peculiar tremor in her voice.

"The mother of God is Heaven's queen; she will
fight against the godless and destroy them."

"But when the mother of God takes to strife, King
Gustaf Adolf will meet her with uncovered head and
lowered sword, bend his knee to her, and say: 'Holy
Virgin, I am not fighting for thy glory, but for that
of thy son, our Saviour.'  'He that fights for my son
also fights for me,' she will reply, 'because I am a
mother.'"

"Your king is a heretic," excitedly answered
Regina.  Nothing irritated her more than opposition
to the Catholic faith, of which the doctrine of the
Holy Virgin as Heaven's ruler is a constituent.  "Your
king is a tyrant and unbeliever who deserves all the
anger of the saints on his head.  Do you know, Meri,
that I hate your king?"

"And I love him," said Meri in a scarcely audible
voice.

"Yes," continued Regina, "I hate him like sin,
death, and perdition.  If I were a man and had an
arm and sword, it would be the aim of my life to
destroy his hosts and his work.  You are happy,
Meri, you know nothing about the war, you do not
know what Gustaf Adolf has done to the poor
Catholics.  But I have seen it, and my faith and my
country cry out for revenge.  There are moments
when I could kill him."

"And when Lady Regina lifts her white hand with
the gleaming dagger over the king's head, then the
king will expose his breast where the great heart
beats; look at her little white hand with a glance of
sublime calmness and say, 'Thou delicate white hand,
which worketh the image of the mother of God, strike,
if thou canst, my heart is here, and it beats for the
freedom and enlightenment of the world;' then the
white hand will sink slowly down, and the dagger
will drop from it, unnoticed, and God's mother on
the cloth will smile again.  She knew well that it
would be so.  It would have been just the same with
herself.  For King Gustaf Adolf none can kill, and
none hate, because God's angel walks by his side and
turns human beings' hate to love."

Regina forgot her work, and regarded Meri with
her large, dark, moist eyes.  There was so much that
surprised and astonished her in these words, but she
kept silent.  Finally she said:

"The king wears an amulet."

"Yes," said Meri, "he wears a talisman, but it is
not the copper ring that the people speak of—it is
his exalted human heart which gives up everything
for what is good and noble on earth.  When he was
still very young, and had not yet acquired fame or
renown, he only possessed his blonde hair, his high
brow, and his mild blue eyes.  Then he wore no
amulet, and yet blessing and love and happiness
walked by his side.  All the angels in Heaven and
all human beings on earth loved him."

Regina's eyes glistened with tears.

"Did you see him when he was young?" she asked.

"Did I see him! yes."

"And you have loved him like all the others?"

"More than all the others, lady."

"And you love him still?"

"Yes, I love him much.  Like you; but you would
kill him and I would die for him."

Regina sprang up, burst out weeping, clasped Meri
in her arms and kissed her.

"Do not think that I would kill him.  Oh, Holy
Virgin, I would a thousand times give my life to save
his!  But you do not know, Meri.  It is an anguish
that you cannot understand, it is a fearful conflict
when one loves a man, a hero, the personification of the
highest and grandest in life, and yet is commanded
by a Holy Faith to hate this man, to kill him, to
persecute him to the grave.  You do not know, happy one,
who only needs to love and bless, what it means to
be tossed between love and hate, like a ship on the
mighty waves; to be obliged to curse one whom you
bless in your heart, to sit within the walls of a prison
a prey to the battling emotions which incessantly
struggle for mastery in your innermost soul.  Ah! that
was the night, when I tried to reconcile my love
with my faith, and bring him, the mighty one, to the
way of salvation.  If the saints had then allowed my
weak voice to convince him of his error ... Then
poor Regina would have followed him with joy as
his humblest servant through all his life, and received
in her own breast all the lances and balls that sought
his heart.  But the saints did not grant me—unworthy
being—so great an honour, and therefore I
now sit here a prisoner on account of my faith and
my love; and if an angel broke down the walls of
my prison and said to me, 'Fly, your country again
awaits you,' I would answer: 'It is his will, the
beloved; for his sake I suffer, for his sake I remain,' and
yet you believe that I wish to kill him."

Regina wept much and bitterly, with all the violence
of an intense passion which had been pent up for a
long time.  Meri with gentle hands removed the dark
locks from her brow, and looking mildly and kindly
into her tearful eyes, said with prophetic inspiration:

"Do not weep so, the day will arrive when you
will be able to love without being obliged to curse
him at the same time!"

"That day will never come, Meri."

"Yes, that day will come, when Gustaf Adolf is
dead."

"Oh, may it never come, then!  Rather would I
suffer all my life ... It is still for his sake."

"Yes, lady, that day will come, not because you
are younger and he is older.  But have you never
heard anyone say of a child which is brighter, kinder,
and better than others, 'that child will not live long;
it is too good for this world?'  So does it seem to me
about King Gustaf Adolf.  He is too great, too noble,
too good, to live long.  God's angels wish to have
him before his body withers and his soul grows weary.
Believe me, they will take him from us."

Regina looked at her with an alarmed air.

"Who are you that speaks such words?  How your
eyes shine! you are not what you seem! who are you
then?  Oh, Holy Virgin, protect me!"

And Regina started up with all the superstitious
terror that belonged to her time.  Probably she could
not account for her fear, but Meri's conversation had
all along seemed strange and unaccountable, coming
from the mouth of an uncultivated peasant woman in
this barbarous land.

"Who am I?" repeated Meri, with the same mild
look.  "I am a woman who loves.  That is all."

"And you say that the king will die?"

"God alone presides over human destinies, and the
greatest among mortals is still but a mortal."

At that moment someone opened the door, and
Lady Marta entered more solemnly than usual, and
also somewhat paler.  She now wore, instead of her
bright striped woollen jacket, a deep mourning attire,
and her whole appearance indicated something
unusual.  Regina and Meri both started at the sight.

Meri became pale as death, went straight to Lady
Marta, looked her fixedly in the face, and said
mechanically with a great effort,

"The king is dead."

"Do you know it already?" answered Lady Marta,
surprised.  "God preserve us, the bad news came an
hour ago, with a courier from Tornea."

Lady Regina sank down in a swoon.

Meri, with a broken heart, retained her
self-possession, and tried to recall Regina to life.

"The king has then fallen on the battlefield in
the midst of victory?" she asked.

"On the battlefield of Lützen, the 6th of November,
and in the midst of a glorious victory," replied Lady
Marta, more and more surprised at Meri's knowledge.

"Awake, gracious lady, he has lived and died like
a hero, worthy of the admiration of the whole world.
He has fallen in the hour of triumph, in the highest
lustre of his glory; his name will live in all times,
and his name we will both bless."

Regina opened her dreamy eyes and clasped her
hands in prayer.

"Oh, Holy Virgin," she said, "I thank thee that
thou hast let him go in his greatness from the world,
and thus taken away the curse which rested upon my
love!"

And Meri dropped down at her side in prayer.

But below in the castle yard stood a tall, white-haired
old man, with his stiff features distorted by
grief and despair.

"A curse upon my work!" he cried; "my plan is
frustrated beforehand, and the object for which I
have lived slips from my grasp.  Oh, fool that I was,
to count upon a human being's life, and trying to hope
that the king would acknowledge his son, and live
until the son of Aron Bertila's daughter had time to
win a brilliant fame in war, and walk abreast with
the heiress to the Swedish throne!  The king is dead,
and my descendant is only a boy in his minority,
who will soon be mixed with the multitude.  Now it
is only wanting for him to gain a nobleman's coat of
arms, and place himself amongst the vampires
between the only true powers of the state, the king
and the people.  Fool, fool that I was!  The king
is dead!  Go, old Bertila, into the grave to fraternize
with King John and the destroyer of aristocracy,
King Carl, and bury thy proud plans among the same
worms that have already consumed Prince Gustaf
and Karin Mansdotter!"

And the old man seized Meri, who just then came
out, violently by the hand, and said:

"Come, we have neither of us anything more to
do in the world!"

"Yes," said Meri with suppressed grief, "we both
still have a son!"

CHAPTER VI.

THE BATTLE OF NÖRDLINGEN.

Until now the Swedish lion, through the wisdom
and valour of Gustaf Adolf, and of the leaders and
men trained under him, had hastened from victory
to victory, and overthrown all his opponents.  At last
a day of misfortune dawned; in a great battle the
Swedish arms suffered a terrible defeat.

The brilliant Wallenstein had died the death of a
traitor at Eger; now Gallas, the destroyer, overran
central Germany, captured Regensburg, and advanced
against the free city of Nördlingen, in
Schwaben; Duke Bernhard and Gustaf Horn hurried
with the Swedish army to its rescue.  They had,
however, but 17,000 men, whilst Gallas had 33,000.

"We will attack," said the duke.

"Let us wait," said Horn.

They expected 5,000 men as a reinforcement, and
fourteen days passed.  Then Nördlingen came to sore
straits, and began to light beacon fires on the walls
at night.  Again the duke wished to attack; again
Horn preferred to entrench and assist the city
without battle.  Then they called this brave soul a
cowardly man; and, indignant, but with dark presentiments,
he resolved to fight.  Repeated victories had
made the Swedes over-confident, and they entered
the conflict assured of success beforehand.

The battle took place on the 26th of August, 1634.
Outside Nördlingen is a height called Arensberg, and
between it and the town a smaller one.  Upon the
last the Imperialists had raised three redoubts.

The Swedish army stood on Arensberg, Horn on
the right and the duke on the left wing.  The battle-cry
was the same as at Breitenfeld and Lützen: God
with us!

Early in the morning a heavy rain fell.  Once more
the wise Horn wished to wait, but the duke, who held
the supreme command, ordered an advance.  Horn
obeyed, and the right wing marched down the valley
between the two heights.  The impatience of the
cavalry hastened the conflict, which resulted
unfavourably even in the very beginning.  The cannon of the
Imperialists in the redoubts made great gaps in the
lines of the cavalry, and the enemy's superiority made
them hesitate.  Horn sent two brigades to storm the
middle redoubt.  They captured it and pursued the
enemy.  Piccolomini checked their course and drove
them back to the redoubt.  There the powder
happened to take fire.  With a terrific explosion the
earthwork flew into the air, and several hundreds of
Swedes and Finns with it.  This was the first
calamity.

Upon this position, however, depended the victory.
For a few moments the spot stood empty; Piccolomini's
soldiers, alarmed by the report and destruction,
could not be induced to advance and occupy it.  At
last they did so.  Horn asked for help in order to
expel them.  The duke sent the young Bohemian,
Thurn, with the yellow regiment.  He made a
mistake, attacked the wrong redoubt, and engaged with
a greatly superior force.  Seventeen times he charged
the enemy, and as often was he repulsed.  In vain
did Horn try to storm the height.  Thurn's error was
the second calamity.

On the left wing the duke had begun the conflict
against the artillery and cavalry.  At the first
encounter the Imperialists were hurled back, and the
duke's German cavalry broke their ranks and pursued
the enemy.  But Tilly's spirit seemed to-day to
give the Imperialists courage.  They advanced their
ordered and superior troops against the assailants,
checked them, and drove them back with loss.  The
duke tried to get reinforcements into Nördlingen, but
failed.  In vain did he drive Gallas before him.  New
masses of the enemy constantly opposed him, and in
his rear the Croats plundered his baggage-wagons.

It was about noon.  Horn's troops had been under
fire for eight consecutive hours, and were worn out
with fatigue.  With every hour their hopes of victory
grew less and less, but their unflinching, indomitable
courage remained the same.  They had observed the
disorder in the left wing.  They themselves were in
a desperate plight down in the valley, where Piccolomini's
bullets fell every moment into the underbush,
and sprinkled the fallen branches with blood.  Then
Horn proposed to withdraw to Arensberg, and the
duke at last consented.  He considered the matter,
however, for nearly two hours; but these two hours
he would afterwards have been glad to purchase with
half a lifetime.

It was three o'clock in the afternoon.  Horn made
the Finnish cavalry make a feigned attack, so as to
cover the retreat, and began like a prudent general to
withdraw in good order.  The Imperialists perceiving
his intention, pressed on with double force.  They
began to hope, what they had not dared to entertain
before, that even the Swedes might be conquered,
and Piccolomini's stumpy figure flew through the
ranks, urging his men to bear down with their
collected forces upon the Swedes' exposed flanks, and
totally crush them.

In the valley behind the Swedes and between the
two heights flowed a stream with high banks, and
swollen by the abundant rains.  At the little village
of Hirnheim, the stream was spanned by a single
bridge, and this point Horn had carefully guarded in
order to secure the retreat.  The artillery passed first
over the bridge, and were safe on Arensberg.  The
first lines of Horn's wing had also reached the village,
and the rest were only a short distance from it, when
a new calamity occurred, the third and the worst on
this most disastrous day.  Duke Bernhard had
undertaken to detain the enemy with his left wing until
Horn and his men had crossed the stream.  But he
soon discovered that he had consulted valour rather
than prudence.  The enemy concentrated their forces,
and increased their terrible attacks.  Three times De
Werth charged the duke's cavalry; three times was
he repulsed.  The fourth time, however, he broke
through the duke's lines.  In vain the latter sent a
squadron to take him in flank.  Mad with rage, the
duke snatched his gold-embroidered banner from an
ensign's hand, and followed by his bravest men,
rushed into the midst of the enemy.  It was all
useless.  His best men were slain, his horse shot under
him, and the banner wrenched from his hand;
wounded and overpowered he was nearly taken
prisoner, when a young officer at his side lent him
his horse, and he escaped with great difficulty.  His
infantry had already been routed, being unable to
support the attacks of the cavalry on the open plain;
and when the wounded leader galloped away, his
whole wing followed in the utmost disorder,
convinced that all was lost.

At that moment, Horn's infantry crossed the narrow
bridge.  Then confused and loud cries arose, that
the battle was lost, and the enemy close upon them.
First single horsemen, then whole troops of the duke's
cavalry rushed along the road to the bridge, and rode
amongst the infantry, trampling some under their
horses' hoofs, and throwing the rest into fearful
confusion.  The efforts of Horn and his nearest officers
to stay the frantic rout were fruitless.  On the narrow
bridge everything was mixed pell-mell—men, horses,
wagons, dead, and wounded; and finally the duke's
whole wing rushed to this fatal spot.  Like a
storm Piccolomini pressed upon the rear of the
fugitives; he sent some light guns up on the heights,
where they played with terrible effect on the retreating
mass; every ball cut long lanes through it.  Then
the Croats fell upon the rout, and as friend and foe
became mixed together, the artillery fire had to cease.
The long lances and swords of the Imperial cavalry
made great slaughter.  All the Swedes and Finns
seemed doomed to destruction.

Gustaf Horn, the wise and courageous Finnish
general, whom Gustaf Adolf called "his right
hand," was now the last to retain self-possession and
courage at this terrible crisis.  With the remains of
three regiments he had taken up a position by the
bridge, and the fugitives fled past him without
drawing his force into the current.  They implored him
to save himself; but his stubborn, Finnish will
refused to listen to these appeals, and he stayed where
he was.  For a time the pursuit was checked, the
only thing that Horn hoped to gain by his intrepid
resistance.  Gallas sent one of his best Spanish
brigades to oust him.  Horn drove them back with
loss.  The victorious De Werth fell upon him with
his dragoons.  The result was the same.  The enemy
now concentrated their forces, and Horn was attacked
on three sides at once.  They offered him his life if he
would surrender.  He replied with a sword-thrust,
and his men gave the same response.  Not one would
ask for quarter.  At last, when nearly all those near
him had fallen, he was overwhelmed by numbers and
taken prisoner.  Then the few surviving heroes
surrendered.

When the Swedish army in full flight rushed over
Arensberg, Duke Bernhard of Saxe-Weimar tore his
hair, and exclaimed that he was a fool, and Horn a
wise man.  Later on the duke consoled himself with
Elsas, but that day he had reason to repent of his
rashness.  Six thousand Swedes, Finns, and Germans
covered the blood-stained heights of Nordlingen;
6,000 were taken prisoners, and amongst them the
two Finns, Horn and Wittenberg, who were well
treated by the enemy.  Of the other 10,000, half were
wounded, and most of the remaining mercenaries
deserted.  The army had lost 4,000 baggage-wagons,
300 banners, and all their artillery.  A miserable
remnant made its way to Mentz, plundering and
pillaging as it fled, and suffering from extreme want.

More disastrous to Sweden than the loss of these
12,000 men was the damage to its prestige, and the
enemy's regained belief in victory.  The battle of
Nordlingen became the turning point in the Thirty
Years' War, and excited both joy and consternation.
throughout Europe, until Baner's genius and victories
restored their lost lustre to the Swedish arms once
more.

Amongst those who fought at Horn's side to the
last, was our old friend, Captain Larsson.  The sturdy
little captain had on this occasion no time to open
his talkative mouth; he perspired profusely from the
heat, and had fought since dawn; yet he had not
received the least scratch upon his fleshy person.  Let
it be said in his praise, that at Nordlingen he thought
of neither Rhine wine or Bavarian nuns, but honestly
plied his weapons as well as possible.  Nevertheless,
we will not assert that he then cut down thirty
Imperialists with his trusty sword, as he afterwards
declared in good faith.

He was taken prisoner with Horn; but it was not
his capture that most provoked the captain, but the
terrible vexation he experienced on seeing the Croats
afterwards empty at their leisure the Swedish stock
of wine which they had captured with the baggage-wagons.

Another of our friends, Lieutenant Bertel, fought
at the duke's side all day, and was the one who
offered him his horse.  We shall see, by-and-by, that
the duke did not forget this service.  Bertel, like
Larsson, was hotly engaged in the battle, but, less
fortunate than the latter, received several wounds,
and was finally borne along in the stream of fugitives
to Arensberg.  Almost without knowing how, he
found himself the next day far from the battlefield,
and proceeded with the remnant of the duke's army
to Mentz.

CHAPTER VII.

THE LOST SON.

It is Epiphany, in 1635, thus in mid-winter.  In Aron
Bertila's "stuga,"* at Storkyro, a large fire of pine
logs crackled on the spacious hearth, for at that time
heavy forests still grew around the fertile fields.
Outside rages a snow-storm, with a heavy blast; the
wolves howl on the ice of the stream; the famished
lynx prowls around to find shelter.  It is Twelfth-day
evening, an hour or two after twilight.  The Storkyro
peasant king sits in his high-backed chair, at a short
distance from the hearth, listening with scattered
thoughts to his daughter Meri, who by the firelight
reads aloud a chapter of Agricola's Finnish New
Testament, for at that period the whole Bible had not
been translated into the Finnish tongue.  Bertila has
grown very old since we last met him, then still
vigorous in his old age.  The great ideas that
constantly revolve in his bald head give him no peace,
and yet these plans are now completely shattered by
the king's death, like fragments from a shipwreck
floating around on the stormy billows of a dark sea.
Strong souls like his generally succumb only by
destroying themselves.  All the changes and misfortunes
of his turbulent life had not been able to break his
iron will; but grief over a ruined hope, the vain
attempt to reconstruct the vanished castles in the air,
and the sorrow of seeing his own children themselves
tear down his work, all this gnawed like a vulture
upon his inner life.  A single thought had made him
twenty years older in two years, and this idea was
presumptuous even to madness.

* A large room, filling the entire house space with the exception of
one or two small chambers.  Sleeping bunks are arranged round the
walls.  The later peasants' houses have more rooms.

"Why is not one of my own family at this moment
King of Sweden?"  Thus it ran.

At times Meri raises her mild blue eyes from the
Holy Book and regards her old father with anxious
looks.  She, too, looks older; the quiet sorrow lies
like the autumn over green groves; it neither breaks
or kills, but makes the fresh leaves wither on the tree
of life.  Meri's glance is full of peace and submission.
The thought that shines forth from her soul like a
sun at its setting, is none other than this:

"Beyond the grave I shall again meet the joy of my
heart, and then he will no longer wear an earthly
crown."

Near her, to the left, sits old Larsson, short and
stout like his jovial son.  His good-natured, hearty
face has for a time assumed a more solemn expression,
as he listens to the reading of the sacred book.  His
hands are folded as in prayer, and now and then he
stirs the fire a little, with friendly attention, so that
Meri can see better.

Behind him in a devotional attitude sit some of
the field hands; and this group, illuminated by the
reflection of the fire, is completed by a purring grey
cat, and a large shaggy watch-dog, curled up under
Meri's feet, to which he seems proud to serve as a
footstool.

When Meri in her reading came to the place in
Luke, where it speaks of the Prodigal Son, old
Bertila's eyes began to glitter with a sinister light.

"The reprobate!" he muttered to himself.  "To
waste one's inheritance, that is nothing!  But to
forget one's old father ... by God, that is shameful!"

Meri read until she came to the Prodigal Son's
repentance: "And he arose and came to his father.
But when he was yet a great way off, his father saw
him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his
neck, and kissed him."

"What a fool of a father!" again muttered Aron
Bertila to himself.  "He ought to have bound him
with cords, beaten him with rods, and then driven
him away from his house back to the riotous living
and the empty wine-cups!"

"Father!" whispered Meri reproachfully.  "Be
merciful, as our Heavenly Father is merciful, and
takes the lost children to His arms."

"And if your son ever returns..." began Larsson
in the same tone.  But Bertila stopped him.

"Hold your tongues, and don't trouble yourselves
about me.  I have no longer any son ... who falls
repentant at my feet," he added directly, when he
saw two large, clear pearls glistening in Meri's
eyelashes.

She continued: "And the son said unto him,
Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and in thy
sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy son."

"Stop reading that!" burst out the old man, in a
bad temper.  "See that my bed is in order, and let
the folks go to sleep; it is now late."

At this moment horses' hoofs were heard outside
on the creaking snow.  This unusual occurrence on
the evening of a sacred day made Larsson go to the
low window, and breathe on the frost-covered pane,
so as to look out into the storm.  A sleigh, drawn by
two horses, worked its way through the snow-drifts
and drove into the yard.  Two men in sheep-skin
cloaks jumped out.

Seized with a sudden intuition, Larsson hurried
out to meet the travellers, and quick as lightning
Meri followed him.  The door swung to behind them,
and there was a moment's delay before it opened
again.

But now a young man in a soldier's garb entered
with bowed head, threw aside his plumed hat, white
with snow, and going straight to old Bertila, knelt
down, and bent his beautiful curly head still lower,
as he said:

"Father, I am here, and ask your blessing!"

And behind him stood Meri and old Larsson, both
with clasped hands, and raising their pleading eyes
to the stern old man, with the same words:

"Father, here is thy son, give him thy blessing!"

For a brief moment Bertila struggled with himself,
his lips slightly trembled, and his hand was
unconsciously stretched out, as if to lift up the young
man at his feet.  But soon his bald head rose higher,
his hand drew back, his keen eyes flashed darker
than ever, and his lips trembled no more.

"Go!" said he, short and sharp; "go, you reprobate
boy, back to your brother noblemen, and your
sisters, the fine ladies.  What seek you in the plain
peasant's 'stuga,' which you despise?  Go!  I have
no longer a son!"

But the youth went not.

"Do not be angry, my father," he said, "if in my
youthful ambition I have at any time violated your
commands.  Who sent me out amongst the great and
illustrious ones of the earth, to win fame and honour?
Who bade me go to the war to ennoble my peasant
name with great deeds?  Who exposed me to the
temptation of all the brilliant examples which
surrounded the king?  You, and only you, my father;
and now you thrust away your son, who for your sake
twice refused a patent of nobility."

"You!" exclaimed the old man with foaming rage.
"You renounce a patent of nobility, you, who have
blushed for your peasant name and taken another
which would look more imposing?  No, on your
knees have you begged for a coat of arms.  What do
I know about its being offered you; what do I care.
I only know that since your earliest childhood I have
tried to implant in your soul, recreant, that there are
no other rightful powers than the king and people,
that all who place themselves between, whether they
bear the name of aristocrats, ecclesiastics, or what
not, are monstrosities, a ruin, a curse to State and
country ... all this have I tried to teach you, and
the fruit of my teachings has been that you have
smuggled yourself among this nobility, which I hate
and despise, that you have coveted its empty titles,
paraded with its extravagant display, imbibed its
prejudices, and now you stand here, in your father's
house, with a lie on your lips, and aristocratic vanity
in your heart.  Go, degenerate son!  Aron Bertila is
what he has always been—a peasant!  He curses and
rejects you, apostate!"

With these words the old man turned away, rose
and went with a firm step and a high head into the
little bed-chamber, leaving Bertel still on his knees in
the same place.

"Hear me, father, father!" cried Bertel after him,
as he quickly unbuttoned his coat and took out a
folded paper; "this paper I have intended to tear
to pieces at your feet!"

But the old father did not hear him; the paper fell
to the ground, and when Larsson, a moment later,
unfolded and read it, he saw it contained a diploma
from the Regency in Stockholm, conferring upon
Gustaf Bertel, captain of horse in the "life-guards,"
a patent of nobility, and a coat of arms with the name
of
Bertelsköld
* at Duke Bernhard of Weimar's
solicitation.

* Bertila is a Finnish peasant name.  Bertel is a burgher name.
Bertelsköld is a noble name, indicated
by the termination sköld, always
a sign of nobility in Sweden and Finland.

While all in the "stuga" were still perfectly
stupefied by old Bertila's conduct, three of Fru Marta's
soldiers from Korsholm entered in great haste.

"Hullo, boys!" they exclaimed to the hands,
"have you seen her?  Here is something that will
pay.  Two hundred silver thalers reward to him who
seizes and brings back, alive or dead, Lady Regina
von Emmeritz, state prisoner at Korsholm."

At the sound of this name Bertel was aroused from
his stupefying grief, sprang up, and seized the speaker
by the collar.

"Wretch, what did you say?" he exclaimed.

"Ho, ho, if you please!  Be a little more careful
when you speak to the people of the Royal Majesty
and the Crown.  I tell you that the German
traitress, the papistical sorceress, Lady von Emmeritz,
succeeded in escaping last night from Korsholm
castle, and that he who does not help to catch her is
a traitor and a..."

The man had no time to finish his speech, before
a blow from Bertel's strong arm stretched him at
full-length on the floor.

"Ha, my father, you have wished it!" cried the
young man, and in a flash was outside the door and
in his sleigh, which at the next moment was heard
driving off through the raging tempest.

CHAPTER VIII.

THE FUGITIVE LADY.

We will now see what has become of Lady Regina,
and what has induced her to exchange Fru Marta's
tender care for the desperate adventure of fleeing in
the middle of winter, through a strange country filled
with desolate tracts, where she was profoundly
ignorant of the roads and paths, and did not even
know how to make herself understood in the language
of the people.

We must not overlook the fact that our story is
laid in a period when Catholicism and Lutheranism
were in the sharpest conflict; when Lutheranism,
heated by the violent opposition, was as little inclined
to religious tolerance as Catholicism itself.  Fru
Marta had once for all been possessed by the idea
that she was in duty bound to convert Lady Regina
to the Lutheran faith, and from this well-meant but
futile enterprise, no one could dissuade her.  She
therefore persisted, in and out of season, to torment
the poor girl with her views; sometimes with books,
sometimes with exhortations, and at others with
persuasions and threats, or promises of freedom; and
when Regina refused to read the books, or listen to
the preaching, the zealous old lady had prayers read
in her prisoner's room every morning and evening,
as well as services on Sundays.  All these means were
thrown away on what Fru Marta considered Regina's
stubbornness.  The more the former exerted herself,
the calmer, colder, and more unyielding became her
captive.  Regina naturally looked upon herself as a
martyr for her faith, and suffered every humiliation
with apparent fortitude for the sake of the holy cause.

But within the young girl's veins fermented the
hot southern blood, and it was with great difficulty
that she could always appear calm on the surface.
There were times when Regina would have blown up
the whole of Korsholm, if it had been in her power.
But the old granite walls defied her silent rage, and
flight finally became her only method of escape from
the persecution.  Night and day she pondered over
it; and at last she discovered a means of eluding
Fru Marta's vigilance.

In Kajaneborg castle was then confined the
celebrated and unfortunate Johannes Messenius, who in
his youth had been educated by the Jesuits in
Braunsberg, and chosen by them to become the apostle
of Catholicism in Sweden.  Imprisoned for his
lampoons and conspiracies in the interest of Sigismund's
party, he had now for nineteen years, under hard
treatment, sat there like a mole in his hole, when the
report of his learning, his misfortunes, and his Popish
sentiments reached Lady Regina in her prison.  From
this moment some bold plans began to ferment in
the young girl's mind.

One day, about New Year's time, a wandering
German quack came to Korsholm with his medicine-chest
on his back, just like peddling Jews at a later
date.*  Such doctors and apothecaries combined in
one individual did a lucrative business at the expense
of the common people, and were frequently consulted
even by the upper classes, for in the whole country
there was not a single regular physician, and only
one apothecary in Abo; and even this one was not
well stocked.  No wonder, then, that our man found
enough to do, even at Korsholm, what with pains,
stomach-aches, and gout; nay, Fru Marta, who, every
time she had thrashed her male servants, complained
of colic and shortness of breath, received the foreign
doctor with very good will.  In a few days the latter
was quite at home, and thus it fell out that he was
called in to prescribe for Lady Regina, who was
suffering from a severe headache.

* It was peculiar that the surgeon always spoke of quacks with great
contempt, although he had himself travelled about with a medicine
chest on his back.

This time, Fru Marta's usual perspicacity deserted
her.  Two days afterwards the young lady, old
Dorthe, and the quack doctor were all missing.  A
grating which had been broken off from the outside,
and a rope ladder, made it certain that the quack had
been instrumental in procuring for the prisoner a free
passage over wall and ramparts.  Fru Marta forgot
both her colic and shortness of breath, from sheer
amazement and anger, stirred up the castle and the
town, and immediately dispatched her soldiers in all
directions to capture the fugitives.  It will soon be
seen how far she succeeded.

Let us now return for a moment to Bertel, whom
we find driving ahead in the stormy night, attended
by the faithful Pekka, and with a heart full of the
most conflicting feelings.  The faithful attendant
could not understand the enormous folly of leaving
a cheerful fireside and good wholesome porridge, for
snow-drifts and wolves in the wild woods, as soon
as they had arrived.  Neither did Bertel comprehend
it himself.  On returning to the north, by way of
Tornel, on a furlough from Germany, while the army
lay in winter quarters, he had hurried through
Storkyro to Vasa, which was his secret destination.
And now he had met in one place a father's anger,
and in the other the empty walls, where she had
been, but was no longer.  Regina had disappeared
without leaving a trace.

"Where shall I drive?" asked Pekka monotonously
and gruffly, when they entered the broad highway.

"Wherever you like," answered his master just as
testily.

Pekka turned his horses towards Vasa, about
twenty miles away.  Bertel noticed this.

"Ass!" he cried, "have I not ordered you to drive
north?"

"North!" repeated Pekka mechanically, and with
a heavy sigh turned his horses towards Ny-Karleby,
to which town it was quite forty miles.  At that time
they had no regular stations, with horses provided
for the accommodation of travellers.  But there were
farms at intervals, where all who travelled on Government
business could reckon on finding horses, while
other travellers were obliged to bargain as best they
could.

The parsonages were the usual stopping-places for
the night, and always had a room in order in an
out-building, where beds of straw and a table with cold
food stood hospitably prepared for travellers.

It was, therefore, quite natural that Pekka, with his
mind still full of the porridge-kettle, ventured to ask
as a further question whether they would spend the
night at Wort parsonage.

"Drive to Ylihärmä," answered the captain of horse,
provoked, and wrapping himself up in his long
sheepskin cloak, for the night wind was icy cold.

"The devil take me if I understand the pranks
of these noblemen!" murmured Pekka to himself, as
he turned off into the narrow village road, which from
Storkyro leads northward towards Lappo parish.

Here the snow had drifted several feet high
between the fences, and the travellers could only
advance step by step.  After an hour's efforts the
horses were completely worn out, and stopped every
few paces.

Bertel, absorbed in his thoughts, was scarcely
conscious of it.  They had left Kyro's wide plains
behind them, and were now in the midst of Lappo's
thick woods.  The silence of the wilderness,
interrupted by the wailing of the storm, surrounded the
travellers on all sides, and as far as the eye could
reach there were no traces of human habitations.

Pekka had for a time walked by the side of the
sleigh, and with his broad shoulders lifted it up again,
when it sank so deep in the snow that the horses'
strength was insufficient to move it from the spot.

Finally his sinewy arms also refused their services,
and the sleigh stopped right in the midst of a
mountain of snow.

"Well!" exclaimed Bertel impatiently, "what is
the matter?"

"Nothing," replied Pekka stolidly, "except that
we need neither priest nor undertaker to find us a
grave."

"How far is it from here to the nearest farm?"

"Between six and seven miles, I think."

"Do you not see something resembling a light, far
away there in the woods?"

"Yes, yes, it looks like it..."

"Unharness the horses and let us ride there."

"No, dear master, it is of no use; these woods have
been fearfully haunted, that I know of old, ever since
the peasants beat the bailiff to death during the Club
War, and burned his house and his innocent children."

"Nonsense!  I tell you that we will ride there."

"It is all the same to me."

In a few moments the horses were taken out of the
traces, and the two travellers pushed on in the
direction of the light, which sometimes disappeared and
then again shone between the snow-covered pines.

"But tell me, Pekka," resumed Bertel, "what is the
story about this wilderness?  I remember that I often
heard them speak of it in my childhood."

"Yes, yes, your mother was born here."

"There used to be quite a little colony in this
wood."

"Yes, indeed, it was many hundreds of acres in
extent.  The bailiffs had laid it all out for miles, as
far back as Gustaf Vasa's time; and here many
hundreds of tons of grain have been grown, so father
has told me; and the noble bailiff had built a fine
house here, and lived like a prince in the wilderness;
and then, as I told you, the peasants came and set
fire to the place in the night-time, destroying both
people and cattle, with the exception of the young
'Lady,' whom your father saved and afterwards took
for his wife.  It is very certain that he had a finger
in that pie."

"And so the farm was never built up again."

"You may depend upon it that the fields were a
fat slice, and so there were plenty of people ready
to move here and bid defiance to the devil.  But the
old Evil One was too artful for them; he began to
make such a rumpus here with supernatural performances
day and night, so that no one was sure of his
life, much less of his sinful soul.  If they sat in their
homes, the chairs were pulled from under them, and the
porridge-bowl rolled of its own accord down on the
floor; the stones were torn from the walls and were
showered around people's ears.  If they went out in
the woods they were no better off; they had to keep
a sharp look-out that the trees did not come crashing
down upon their heads, although the weather might
be perfectly quiet, and that the ground did not open
under their feet, and draw them down into a bottomless
pit.  And when I think that we are now travelling
through the same woods ... Oh, oh, I am sinking..."

"You fool, it is only the pure snow!—and then you
say people could not stand it any longer?"

"They all moved away, so that there was not even
a cat left, except an old cottager, but I suppose he
died long ago.  The whole settlement was again
deserted, the ditches filled up, the fields became
covered with moss, and the pine-woods spread over
the former grain lands.  It is now forty years since
that time..."

And Pekka, who was not in the habit of making
long speeches, seemed astonished at his own loquacity,
and came to a sudden stop as he reigned in his horse.

"What is it now?" asked Bertel impatiently.

"I don't see a glimpse of the light."

"Neither do I.  It is hidden by the trees."

"No, dear master, it is not concealed by the trees;
it has sunk into the earth after decoying us here into
the depths of the forest.  Did not I tell you that it
would be so?  We shall never get out of this alive."

"For the devil's sake ride on and do not stop, else
both man and beast will stiffen with the cold.  It
seems to me I see something like a hut over
there."

"Fine hut; it is nothing but a granite rock with
grey sides, from which the wind has blown away the
snow.  It is all over with us."

"Hold your tongue, and ride on!  Here we have
an open space with young woods; I caught a glimpse
of something there between the snow-drifts."

"All the saints be with us!  We are now on the
very spot where the house stood.  Do you not see the
old fire-place sticking out through the snow?  Not
a step farther, master!"

"I am not mistaken ... it is the hut."

Bertel and his companion found themselves on very
rough ground, where the horses stumbled at every
step over large stones, or sank into great hollows
covered with snow.  Deep snow-drifts and fallen
trees made it worse still, as if to obstruct the passage
to a dilapidated peasant's hut, which by design or
chance was hidden behind two spreading firs, with
branches hanging to the ground.  The only window
of the hut had a shutter, which was at one moment
blown open by the wind and then slammed to again,
thus causing the light within to show itself and
disappear by turns.

Bertel dismounted from his horse, tied it to a
branch of the fir, and approached the window to
throw a glance inside.  A secret hope gave wings
to his feet.  He took it for granted that unless the
fugitives had gone in a northerly direction, they could
not have followed the main highway, but had sought
to escape their pursuers on the side roads.  But in
this part of the plain of East Bothnia hundreds of
small roads crossed each other at that time, all leading
to the new settlements in the East.  Who told him
that the fugitives would select just this road?

Still his heart beat faster when he approached the
window.  Of the four small panes two were of horn,
which was formerly used in default of glass; one of
them was broken and stopped up with moss; only the
fourth was of glass, but so covered with ice and snow
that at first nothing could be seen.  Bertel breathed
on the glass, but found to his vexation that the frost
on the inside defied his curiosity.  Just then his horse
neighed.

It seemed ridiculous to Bertel to stand spying into
a poor peasant's hut.  He was already on the point
of knocking at the door, when at that instant a
shadow obscured the light, and the frost on the
inside of the glass was quickly melted by the breath
of a human being, as eager to look out as he was to
look in.  Bertel was soon able to discern a face with
burning eyes, which stared out close to the window,
to discover the cause of a horse's neighing so late
at night in the wilderness.

The sight of this face had the effect of an electric
shock upon the inquisitive captain.  With his thoughts
on the beautiful Regina, Bertel had expected a sight
not involving so great a contrast.  But instead he
beheld a corpse-like face surrounded by a black
tight-fitting, leather hood, and this dark frame made the
pale face seem still paler.

Bertel had seen these features before, and when
he searched his memory, the picture of a terrible
night in the Bavarian woods rose before his mental
vision.  Involuntarily he drew back, and hesitated for
a moment.  This motion was observed by Pekka,
who had remained on his horse so as to be ready to
fly.

"Quick, away from here!" he cried.  "I have told
you that nobody but the devil himself lives in these
woods."

"Yes, you are right," said Bertel, now smiling at
his own fears, and what he considered to be the
offspring of his heated fancy.  "If ever the Prince
of Darkness has assumed a human form, then he
resides in this hut.  But that is just the reason why
we will look the worthy gentleman in the face, and
force him to give us lodgings for the night.  Hullo,
there! open the door to some travellers."

These words were accompanied by some heavy
blows on the door.

CHAPTER IX.

DON QUIXOTE DE LA MANCHA.

After some time the door was opened, and an old
man, bent with age, and with snow-white hair,
disclosed himself.  Accustomed by the right of war to
take whatever was necessary, when it was not given
voluntarily, Bertel pushed the old man aside and
entered the miserable hut without ceremony.  To his
great astonishment he found it empty.  A half burnt
"perta,"* stuck in between the bricks of the fire-place,
threw a flickering light around this abode of poverty.
There was no door except the entrance; no living
being besides the old man and a large woolly dog,
which lay outstretched on the hearth, and showed
his teeth to the uninvited guest.

* A thin stick of pine-wood, a yard long and an inch thick, which
the peasants sometimes use instead of candles.

"Where is the man in the black leather hood, who
was here a moment ago?" asked Bertel sharply.

"God bless your grace," answered the old man
humbly and evasively, "who could be here but your
grace?"

"Out with the truth!  Somebody must be hidden
here.  Under the bed ... no.  Behind the oven
... no.  And yet you have just had a large fire kindled
in the fire-place.  What?  I believe it is put out with
water?  Answer."

"It is so cold, your grace, and the hut is full of
cracks..."

Bertel's aroused suspicions were not so easily
dispelled.  His eyes searched every part of the room,
and soon discovered a little object which had fallen
under a bench.  It was a fine and soft lady's glove,
lined with flannel.

"Will you now confess, old wretch?" burst out the
excited young man.

The old man seemed dismayed, but only for a
moment.  He suddenly changed his manner, nodded
slyly, and pointed to the corner nearest the oven.
Bertel followed the hint ... took a few steps
... and suddenly felt himself precipitated downwards.
He had fallen into the open hole of a cellar, whose
entrance had been hidden by the heavy shadow of
the fire-place.  Instantly a trap-door was closed over
the opening, and he heard the rattling of an iron
hook, which secured the trap and deprived him of
all chance of opening the door from below.

Bertel had fallen into one of those places under
the floor in which poor people keep roots and
home-brewed beer.  The cellar was not deep, nor his fall
dangerous, but, nevertheless, Bertel's anger was quite
natural.  The little glove had betrayed the whole
story.  She must be here; she, the beautiful, proud,
unfortunate princess, whom he had so long adored
in secret.  Perhaps she had fallen into the hands of
cruel robbers.  And just now, when he was near to
her after years of longing, and when, perhaps, she
most needed his help and protection, he had been
caught in a miserable trap; imprisoned in a rat-hole,
more miserable than the hut itself, of which the floor
this moment served him for a ceiling.  In vain did
he try to lift up the planks of the floor by the strength
of his shoulders; they were as inexorable as the fate
which had so long mocked his dearest hopes.

Then he heard the footsteps of several persons
passing over the floor overhead.  Then all was silent.

Pekka was now Bertel's only hope, but the former
had not dared to enter the hut.  Nothing was heard
of him, however, and three or four hours passed in
torturing suspense, increased by the prospect of
perishing from hunger and cold.  Then steps again
sounded overhead; the iron hook was unfastened,
and the trap-door raised.  Half-frozen, Bertel crawled
up from the damp hole, in the firm belief that Pekka
had at last spied out his prison.  He was met instead
by the old man with the snow-white hair, who,
humble and submissive as before, offered his hand
to help him up.

The enraged young warrior seized him by his bony
shoulders, and proceeded to catechise him in a
thorough manner.

"Wretch," he exclaimed, "are you tired of life, or
do you not know what you are doing, dotard?  What
hinders me from crushing your miserable carcase
against the walls of your own hut?"

The old man looked at him with an unchanging
countenance.

"Do so, Bertila's son," he replied; "kill your
mother's old faithful servant if you wish; why should
he live any longer?"

"My mother's old servant, do you say?"

"I am the last survivor of all those who formerly
inhabited this fertile region, which is now a
wilderness.  It was I who said to Aron Bertila, when my
master's house was destroyed in blood and ashes:
'Save my young mistress.'  And Bertila did it;
cursed is he and blessed at the same time!  He
carried my lovely young mistress out of the flames,
and she, a noble maiden, became the haughty
peasant's humble wife."

"But are you mad, old man?  If you are, as you
say, my mother's old servant, why did you shut me
up in that damned hole?  You must admit that your
friendship is of a strange kind."

"Kill me, sir.  I am ninety years of age.  Kill me,
I am a Catholic!"

"You!  Well, by my sword now I begin to understand you."

"I am the last Catholic in this country.  I belong
to King John's and King Sigismund's time.  I am
one of the four who buried the last nun in Nadendal's
cloister.  For twenty years I have not heard mass,
or been sprinkled with holy water.  But all the saints
be praised, an hour before your arrival, I had eaten
of the holy wafer."

"A monk has been in your hut?"

"Yes, sir, one of ours."

"And with him a young girl and her old waiting-maid?
Answer."

"Yes, sir, they were in his company."

"And on my arrival you concealed them..."

"In the garret.  Yes, your grace."

"Then you decoyed me into that miserable rat-hole,
while you allowed the women and the monk to
escape."

"I do not deny that it is so."

"And what do you think that your reward will be?"

"Anything—death, perhaps."

"I will spare your life on one condition: you shall
show me the way the fugitives have taken."

"My life; I told you that I was ninety years old."

"And you do not fear the torture?"

"The saints be praised, if I was worthy of so great
an honour."

"But if I burn you alive in your own hut?"

"The holy martyrs have been burnt at the stake."

"No, old man, I am not an executioner.  I have
learnt in the service of my king to revere
faithfulness."  And Bertel pressed the old man's hand with
emotion.

"But I will tell you one thing," he continued, "you
think that I have come to take the fugitives back to
their prison.  It is not so.  I give you my word of
honour, that I will defend Lady Regina's freedom
with my life's blood, and do all in my power to favour
her flight.  Will you now tell me which way she has
gone?"

"No, your grace," said the calm old man; "the
young lady is under the protection of the saints, and
a wise man's guidance.  You are hot-blooded and
young, and would bring them all to ruin.  Turn back,
you will not find any trace of the fugitives."

"Bull-head," muttered Bertel indignantly.  "Farewell,
I shall get along without your help."

"Remain here quietly until to-morrow, your grace.
To-night you are at liberty to walk, if you choose, six
miles through the high snow-drifts, to the nearest
farm.  To-morrow you can ride comfortably."

"Wretch! you have sent my horses away?"

"Yes, your grace ... you must be hungry.  Here
is a kettle with boiled turnips; may they be to your
taste."

"Ah!" thought Bertel to himself, as he impatiently
paced the floor, "I would not let Larsson see me
at this moment for ten bottles of Rhine wine.  He
would certainly compare me to the wandering knight
of La Mancha, who, on the way to his Dulcinea, fell
into the most peculiar adventures.  How shall I get
away from here through these terrible snow-drifts?"

"But," he added aloud, "I have an idea; I will
try if one of the greatest amusements of my youth
cannot serve me a good turn now.  Old man, where
do you keep your snow-shoes?"

"My snow-shoes?" replied the old man, confused.
"I have none."

"You have, I see it in your face.  No Finn in the
wilderness is without snow-shoes.  Out with them,
quick!"

And without heeding the old man, Bertel pushed
open the door which led to the garret, and drew out
a fine pair of snow-shoes.

"Well, old friend," exclaimed the young cavalier,
"what do you think of my horses? ... I call them
mine, for I will bet anything that you will sell them
to me for three hard silver thalers: swifter steeds
have seldom hurried over high snow-drifts.  If you
have any greeting for the monk or Lady Regina, I
will take it with pleasure."

"Do not go alone into the wilderness," said the
old man.  "There is neither track or path; the woods
extend for miles, and are filled with wolves.  It will
be certain death to you."

"You are wrong, my friend," replied Bertel.  "If
I am not mistaken, there are traces in two directions:
one from my horses, the other from the fugitives.
Tell me, did they go in a sleigh, or on horseback?"

"I think they went on horseback."

"Then I am certain they drove.  You are a finished
rogue.  But I forgive you for the sake of your
excellent snow-shoes.  Farewell, in a couple of hours
I will find those whom I seek."

With these words Bertel hurried out.

It was yet early in the morning, a short time before
sunrise.  But fortunately the storm had ceased, the
sky was clear, and the winter stars twinkled brightly
in the blue firmament.  The cold had increased, and
a sharp frost had covered all the branches and
snowdrifts with those ice diamonds, which at once dazzle
and charm the wanderer's eye.  The sight of woods
and snow on a starry winter morning gives the
Northerner a peculiar exhilarating feeling.  There
is in this scene a grandeur, a splendour, a purity, a
freshness, which carries him back to the impressions
of his childhood and the brilliant illusions of youth.
There is nothing to cramp the heart, or paralyze the
soaring imagination; all is there so vast, so solemn,
so free.  One might say that nature in this deep
silence of winter and night is dead, and yet she lives,
warm and rich, in the wanderer's heart.

It is as if she had in this little spot, this solitary
place in the wilderness, compressed all her throbbing
life, only to let it exist all the more beautifully in the
midst of silence, stillness, and the radiance of the
stars.

Bertel also experienced this feeling of freshness
and life.  He was still young and open to every
impression.  As he hastened along, light as the wind,
between the trees and snow-drifts, he felt like a
child.  It seemed to him that he was again the boy
who flew over the snow on Storkyro plains to spread
his snares for the black-cock in the woods.  It was
true that he was a little unsteady in the beginning
for lack of practice, and the snow-shoes slid merrily
down the icy slopes; occasionally he made false
pushes, and sometimes stumbled, but he soon regained
his former skill, and stood firm on the uneven
ground.

Now it was necessary to find the traces of the
fugitives, and this was not easy.  Bertel had
wandered about for more than an hour in the direction
of Ylihärmä, but had not discovered the slightest
sign.  The last outbreak of the storm had destroyed
all indications; one could only see the fresh track
of the wolf, where he had just trotted along, and now
and then a frightened bird flew between the branches
which were heavy with snow.  Want of sleep, hunger,
and fatigue, exhausted the young man's strength.
The cold increased as sunrise approached, and
covered his moustache and plumed hat with frost.

At last he saw on a wood-path, which the broad
pines had shielded from the blast, fresh traces of
runners and horses' feet.  Bertel followed these with
renewed energy; at times the tracks were lost in the
snow, and then reappeared where the road was
sheltered.  The sun rose deep red in the south-east
over the tops of the trees.  The day was cold and
clear.  In every direction nothing was to be seen
but trees and snow-drifts, but far away in the north
a little column of smoke rose towards the morning
sky.  Bertel aimed at this point.  The snow-shoes
regained their speed, the road seemed smoother, and
at last the weary adventurer reached a solitary
farmhouse by the side of the high road.

The first person he encountered was Pekka, who
was going to feed his horses.

"Scoundrel!" cried Bertel, with glad surprise,
"who sent you here?"

"Who?" repeated Pekka, equally delighted and
astonished.  "Well, I shall tell you that the devil
did it.  I waited and waited outside that accursed
old shanty in the woods until my eyes and feet
became heavy together, where I sat in the snow-drift.
After a little while I was aroused by the neighing
of horses.  And then I saw a sleigh just like ours
harnessed to two horses, dashing away along the
road.  It is either my master or the devil.  It is all
the same to me.  I will follow him, I said.  Then I
climbed up again on the horse's back.  I was so hungry
that it is a shame to speak of it; but I went after him.
Finally the horse became tired and I lost sight of
the sleigh; and thanked are both Lutheran and
Catholic saints that I came here to the farm and got
a good bowl of porridge.  For was it not at Lützen
and Nördlingen ... it is damned cold at Ylihärmä,
that is sure."

"Good," said Bertel, "they shall not escape us.
But do you know one thing, Pekka: there are
moments when hunger and want of sleep are even
stronger than love itself.  Come, let us go in."

Bertel entered, and drank a bowl of boiled milk,
and threw himself, overcome by fatigue, on a straw
bed in the "stuga."  Here we will leave our
wandering knight for a couple of hours in peace.

CHAPTER X.

KAJANEBORG.

Far away in the North roar the mighty waters of the
sea under vaults of ice; the
fors
never freezes, the
green of the pine never withers, and the grey rocks,
which confine the foaming floods in narrow ravines,
never shake.  Here the powers of nature have
pursued their incessant warfare for centuries without
rest, without reconciliation; the flood never tires
of battling with the rocks, and these persist in
resisting the stream; the hills never seem to grow old,
and the immense morasses defy cultivation; the
frosty transparent atmosphere quivers as of old in
the northern light, and the winter sky looks down
with its imperturbable, majestic calm upon the
scattered huts on the banks of the streams.

This is the home of night and terror; this is the
shadow of Finnish poetry's golden pictures.  Here
the light-shunning Black Art spins its webs around
human beliefs; here are the graves of heroes; here
the last giants spent their rude strength in the
mountain wilderness; here stood Hüsis ancient fortress,
of which the steps were each six feet in height; here
the spirit of the middle ages brooded over its darkest
thoughts; here it receded, step by step, before the
light of a newer time, and here it has bled in its
impotent rage; heathenism, fallen from its greatness,
steals outlawed from place to place, in the sheep's
clothing of Christendom, going restlessly around the
country, and performing its miserable mummeries in
churchyards at night.

Before the great northern waters, irritated by their
battles in hundreds of
forssar
* go to seek a brief
repose in Uleä Sea, they once more pour out their
anger into the two mighty waterfalls of Koivukoski
and Ämmä, near the little Kajana.  Like two
immense surfs the torrents throw themselves headlong
down the narrow pass, and so violent is their fall that
human daring, accustomed to struggle with nature
and conquer in the end, has here stopped with dismay
and acknowledged its powerlessness.  Up to the
latest times the boats which have steered down the

forssar
in their course towards Uleäborg, have
always been obliged to land here and be drawn by
horses through the streets of Kajana.**

* Plural of fors.

** After the surgeon's time, a lock was completed here at each fall,
and the boats now continue on their way without much delay.

In the stream, right between the two falls,
Koivukoski and Ämmä, lies a flat rock, to which bridges
are attached from both sides.  Here stand the grey
walls of an ancient fortress, now in ruins, and
constantly bathed by the waves of the flood.  This
fortress of Kajaneborg was founded in 1607, during
Carl IX.'s time, as a protection against Russian
invasion.  Perhaps the time may come in our stories
when we shall speak more of it.

It is now 1635, and the castle stands in its original
strength.  Its form resembles an arrow with the point
turned towards the stream.  Unless famine occurs, or
the enemy can bring heavy artillery to the heights,
it is considered impregnable.  But how can a hostile
army find any road to Kajaneborg?  In the immense
wilderness all around there is not a single road where
a wheel can run.  In summer the traveller follows
the narrow paths, and in winter the Laplander, with
his reindeer and sleigh, drives over the frozen lakes.

It is winter; a thick crust of ice on the shores and
over the walls of the castle shows that the cold has
been severe, though it has not been able to bind the

fors
in its rapid course.

Some soldiers, clad in sheep-skin jackets, with the
fur side turned inwards, are busy drawing home wood
from the adjacent forest.  There is peace in the land,
the drawbridge is down, and horses' feet thunder
over the bridge.  Then a violent squabble arises in
the castle yard.  An old woman, tall in stature, with
rather disagreeable features, has taken possession of
one of the loads of wood, and pushed away the
soldiers, while she picks up as many pieces as she is
able to carry, and commands another younger woman
to do likewise.

The soldiers utter coarse oaths, but the woman
with the keen eyes does not deign to reply.

A sub-officer, drawn there by the noise, informs
himself of the cause, then addresses the woman with hard
words, and orders her to return the wood she has
taken.  The woman refuses to obey; the sub-officer
endeavours to use force; the woman plants herself
back to the wall, raises a small log of wood in the
air, and threatens to break the head of the first man
who approaches her.  The soldiers swear and laugh;
the sub-officer hesitates; the old woman's courage
holds them all in check.

Then an elderly man appears on the steps, to
whom all give way with reverence.  It is Governor
Wernstedt.  As soon as the old woman sees him, she
leaves her hostile attitude, and relates with a torrent
of words all the injustice she has suffered.

"Yes, gracious Excellency," she said, "that is the
way they dare to treat a man who is the pride and
ornament of Sweden.  It is not sufficient to shut him
up in this miserable out-of-the-way hole, but they
let him freeze to death in the bargain.  What wood
have they given us?  Great God! nothing but green
and rotten chunks, which fill the room with smoke,
and do not give out heat enough to thaw the ink on
his table.  But I tell you, Excellency, that I, Lucia
Grothusen, do not intend to be imposed upon any
longer.  This wood is good, and I take it, as you see,
Excellency, right before the face of these vagabonds,
who deserve to all hang upon the highest pine in the
Paldamo forest.  Pack yourselves off, you lazy,
good-for-nothing rascals, and look out how you act before
me and the Governor.  The wood is mine, and that
is all to be said about it."

The Governor smiled.

"Let her keep the wood," he said to the soldiers,
"or else there will be no peace in the castle.  And you,
Lucia, I warn you to hold your wicked tongue, which
has already done so much mischief; otherwise it may
happen that I shall again put you and your husband
in that basement you know of, where Erik Hare kept
you, and where the stream rolls right under the floor.
Is this the thanks I get for the mild treatment I have
bestowed upon you, that you are eternally exciting
quarrels in the castle?  The day before yesterday
you gave rein to your tongue, because you did not
receive enough soap for your washing; yesterday you
took a leg of mutton by force from my kitchen, and
to-day you make a noise about the wood.  Take care,
Lucia; my patience may be exhausted."

The woman looked the Governor right in the face.

"Your patience!" she repeated.  "How long do
you think that mine will last.  I have stayed
now nearly nineteen years in this owl's nest.
For nineteen long years has it cast a stain upon
Sweden that its greatest man is confined here like
a criminal! ... Mark what I say: Sweden's greatest
man; for the day will arrive when you, and I, and
all these souls of lard, all these wandering ale-jugs,
will be food for worms, and no more thought of than
the hogs you killed to-day; but the glorious name
of Johannes Messenius will shine for all time.  Your
patience!  Have I, then, had none—I who in these
long weary years have been fighting with you for
a bit of bread, for firewood, for a pillow for this great
man, whom you abuse?  I, the only one who has
kept his frail body alive, and strengthened his soul
for the great work which he has now accomplished?
Do you realise what it means to suffer as I have; to
be snatched away from one's children, to go about
with despair in the heart, and a smile on the lips, so
as to seem to have a hope when none remains? ... Do
you know, your Excellency, what all this means?
And you stand there and talk about your patience!"

The soldiers' loud laughter all at once interrupted
the voluble old woman.  She now perceived for the
first time that the Governor had chosen the wisest
course, and gone his way.  It was not the first time
that Lucia Grothusen had put the commander of a
fortress to flight.  She felt able to drive a whole
garrison to the woods.  But it vexed her that she
could not fully relieve her heart.  She threw a stick
of wood at the nearest and worst of her mockers,
and then hurried with the wood in her arms, to reach
a low back door.  The soldier, struck in the leg,
seized the stick with an oath, and flung it in his turn
after the old woman.  Lucia, hit in the heel, uttered
a cry of pain and anger ... and then she disappeared
through the door, followed by the soldiers'
loud laughter.

During this scene of self-sacrifice on one side, and
rudeness on the other, a group of strangers had
arrived over the left castle bridge, and asked to be
conducted to the Governor.

The soldiers regarded them with curiosity.  They
wore the common garb of peasants, but their whole
appearance betrayed their foreign origin.  An old
man, with dark squinting eyes and sallow
complexion, came first; his face partly hidden under a
woolly cap of dog-skin, which with its ear-flaps covered
the greater portion of the head.  After him followed
a young woman in a striped home-spun skirt, and a
tight-fitting jacket of new and fine white sheep-skin.
Her face, also, is almost entirely concealed under a
hood of coarse felt, bordered with squirrel-skin, the
fine fur of which is covered with frost.  One only
saw a pair of beautiful dark eyes of unusual
brilliancy, which peeped forth from the hood.  The
third of the company was a little old woman, so
wrapped up in furs that her short figure had widened
out into the shape of a well-stuffed cushion.

All these persons were conducted to the Governor.
The man in the dog-skin cap showed a passport,
according to which, Albertus Simonis, in his royal
Majesty's service, was appointed army physician to
the troops which were to go to Germany the following
spring, and was now, with his wife and daughter,
on a journey from Dantzig to Stockholm, by way of
the north road through Wiborg and Kajana.  The
Governor closely examined both the document and
the man, and seemed to find a satisfactory conclusion
to his survey.  Then he sent the travellers to a room
in the east wing of the castle, and gave orders
for them to be provided with the necessary refreshments
after such a long journey in the severe cold.

CHAPTER XI.

THE PRISONER OF STATE.

The room which we now enter is situated in the
south tower of the castle, and is not very inviting.
It is large and dark.  Although with a sunny aspect,
the narrow window, with its thick iron gratings, only
admits a few of the winter's day sunbeams.  A large
open fire-place, with a granite hearth, occupies one
corner of the room; a rough unpainted bed, a couple
of benches, two chairs, a clothes-chest, a large table
under the window, and a high cupboard next to it,
make up the furniture of the room.  All these things
have a new appearance, which to some degree
reconciles the eye to their coarseness.

But the room is a curious combination of kitchen
and study.  Learning has established its abode at
the upper end nearest the window.  The table is
adorned with ink spots, and covered with old
yellow manuscripts and large folios of parchments.
The door of the cupboard is open, and shows its use
as a library.  The lower part of the room, near the
fire-place, has a different appearance.  Here stands
a wash-tub by a sack of flour; a kettle is waiting
to receive some dried pike and bits of salt pork, and
leaves room for a bucket of water, and a shelf filled
with coarse stone dishes.

Such was the habitation which Governor Wernstedt
had assigned to the state prisoner, Johannes Messenius,
his wife, and servant, instead of the horrible place
where Messenius' tormentor, old Erik Hare, for so
many years confined these unfortunate beings.  The
room was at least high and dry above the ground,
and its furniture was likewise a friendly gift from the
Governor.  Messenius occupied the upper part, and
the women of his household the lower.

By the large ink-spotted table sat a grey-haired
man, with his body wrapped in furs, his feet clad
with reindeer boots, and his head covered with a thick
woollen cap.  One who had seen this man in the days
of his prosperity, when he occupied the rostrum in
Upsala "Consistorium," or proud as a king on his
throne, exercising sole control over all the historical
treasures of the Swedish state archives, would scarcely
now recognise in this withered form, bent by age
and misfortune, the man with the arrogant mind, the
opponent of Rudbeck and Tegel, the learned, gifted,
haughty, Jesuit conspirator, Johannes Messenius.

But if one looked deep into those keen, restless
eyes, which seemed constantly trying to penetrate
the future as they had done the past, and read the
words which his shaking hand had just penned—words
full of egotism even to presumption—then one
could divine that within this decayed tenement toiled
a soul unbroken by time and events, proud as it had
always been, ambitious as it could never cease to be.

The old man's gaze was fixed upon the paper long
after he had laid down his pen.

"Yes," he said thoughtfully and reflectively, "so
shall it be.  During my lifetime they have trampled
me like a worm in the dust; once I am dead they will
know upon whom they have trodden.
Gloria, gloria
in excelsis!
The day will arrive, even if it be a
century hence, when the miserable prisoner who, now
forgotten by the whole world, pines away in the
wilderness, shall with admiration and respect be
called the father of Swedish history....

"Then," he continued with a bitter smile, "they
can do nothing more for me.  Then I shall be dead
... Ah, it is strange! the dead man, whose bones
have long mouldered in the grave, lives in his works;
his spirit goes quickening and ennobling through the
ages.  All that he has endured while he lived, all
the ignominy, all the persecutions, all the prison
gratings are forgotten; they exist no longer, provided
his name still shines like a star through the night of
time, and posterity, with its short memory and its
ingratitude, says, with thoughtless admiration, he was
a great man!"

During this soliloquy the old woman, whose
acquaintance we made in the castle yard, entered the
room.  She carefully opened the door, and walked
on tip-toe, as if afraid of waking a sleeping babe.
Then she carefully put down the wood she carried
in her arms.  A little noise, however, was unavoidable;
the old man at the table, startled from his
thoughts, began to upbraid the intruder:

"Woman!" he said, "how dare you disturb me!
Have I not told you
iterum iterumque
, that you shall
take away your
penates procul a parnasso
?  Do you
understand it ...
lupa
?"

"Dear Messenius, I am only bringing you a little
wood.  You have been so cold all these days.  Do
not be angry now.  I shall make the room nice and
warm for you; it is excellent wood..."

"
Quid miki tecum
.  Go to the dogs.  You vex
me, woman.  You are, as the late King Gustaf
always said,
Messenü mala herba
; my wormwood,
my nettle."

Lucia Grothusen was an extremely quick-tempered
woman, angry and quarrelsome with the whole world;
but this time she kept quite still.  How strangely
her domestic position had altered!  She had always
idolized her husband, but as long as he was in the
full strength of his manhood and prosperity, she had
bent his unquiet, vacillating spirit like a reed under
her will.  All that time the feared and learned
Messenius was held in complete subjection.  Now
the
rôles
were changed.  As his physical strength
declined, indicating more and more that he approached
the end of his life, his wife's idolatrous love
came into conflict with her masterful disposition, and
finally produced the extraordinary result of reducing
this character to humble submission.  She nursed
him as a mother nurses her sick child, for fear of
losing him.  She bore everything patiently, and never
had an angry word in reply to his querulous remarks.
Even on this occasion, only a slight trembling of the
lips gave evidence of the effort it cost her to check
her anger.

"Never mind," she said kindly, as she went a few
steps nearer, "do not feel angry about it, my dear,
because it injures your health.  I will not do it
again; next time I will lay a mat under the wood,
so that it will not disturb you.  Now I will cook you
a splendid leg of mutton for supper ... Believe me,
I had trouble enough to get it.  I almost had to take
it by force from the Governor's kitchen."

"What, woman! have you dared to beg
beneficia

from tyrants?  By Jupiter, do you think me a dog,
that I should eat the crumbs from their tables?  And
then you limp.  Why do you do that?  Answer me;
why do you limp?  I suppose you have been running
around like a gossiping old woman, and tripped on
the stairs."

"Do I limp?" repeated Lucia, with a forced smile.
"I really believe I have hurt my foot ... Ungrateful!"
added she silently to herself; "it is for your
sake that I suffer."

"Go your way, and let me finish my epitaph."

But Lucia did not go; she came closer to him.
Her eyes filled with tears, and she folded both her
arms around the old man's neck.

"Your epitaph!" she repeated in a voice so mild
that one would never have expected it from those
withered lips, used so very often for hard words and
invective only.

"Oh, my God!" she continued in a low tone, "shall,
then, all that is great and glorious on earth finally
become dust?  But that day is still far distant, my
friend; yes, it must be so.  Let me see the epitaph
of the great Johannes Messenius!"

"Certainly," said the old man, consoled by her
sincere flattery, "you are decidedly the true
persona
executrix
who ought to read my
epitaphium
, as you
are also the one who will have to engrave it on my
tombstone.  Look, my dear; what do you think of
this?

"Here lie the bones of Doctoris Johannes Messenii.
His soul is in God's kingdom, but his fame is all over
the world!"

"Never," said Lucia, weeping, "have truer words
been placed over a great man's grave.  But let us
say no more about it.  Let us speak of your great
work, your
Scondia
.  Do you know I have a feeling
that its glory will in a short time prepare freedom for
you..."

"Freedom!" repeated Messenius, in a melancholy
tone.  "Yes, you are right; the freedom of the grave
to decay wherever one chooses."

"No," replied Lucia with eagerness and enthusiasm,
"you shall yet receive the honour that is due to you.
They will read your great
Scondia illustrata
, they
will have it printed ... with your name in gilded
letters on the title-page ... the whole world will
say, full of admiration: 'never has his equal existed
in the North'!"

"And never will exist again!" added Messenius,
with confidence.  "Oh! who will restore me my
freedom—freedom that I may behold my work and
triumph over my enemies.  Hear me, Lord, I stretch
out my hands before Thy face.  Save me from misery,
for Thou hast said: 'I will prostrate thine enemies,
to be trampled under thy feet.'  Who will give me
freedom—freedom and ten years of life to witness
the fruits of my labour?"

"I," answered a muffled voice at the lower end of
the room.

At the sound of this voice both Messenius and
his wife looked around with superstitious terror.  The
loneliness of the prison, and the associations of this
wild country, which in all ages has been the fruitful
soil of superstition, had in both increased the belief
in superhuman things to a perfect conviction.  More
than once had Messenius' brooding spirit been on
the point of plunging into the enticing labyrinth of
the Kabala and practical Magic; but his zealous
labours and his wife's religious exhortations had held
him back.  Now came an unexpected answer to his
question ... from Heaven or the abyss, no matter
which, but an answer, nevertheless—a straw for his
drowning hopes.

The short winter day had drawn to a close, and
twilight already spread its shadows over that part
of the room which lay nearest the door.  From this
obscurity advanced a man, in whose sallow features
one recognised the same person who two hours before
had gained an entrance to the castle, under the name
of Albertus Simonis.  He had probably, in his
capacity of physician, obtained permission to see the
prisoner, for the whole medical faculty of the castle
consisted of a barber, who practised chirurgery, and
an old soldier's widow, whose skill in curing internal
diseases was highly commended, especially when it
was assisted by
luvut
, or incantations, which,
although forbidden by the Church, were still used in
the vapour-baths as powerful magical aids.

"
Pax vobiscum!
" said the stranger with a certain
solemnity, and coming nearer the window.

"May the Lord be with you also!" answered
Messenius, in the same tone, and with curiosity
mingled with inquietude.

"May the woman's tongue be far from the
consultation!" continued the stranger also in Latin.

Lucia, in whose youth the daughters of learned
men knew Latin better than those of the nineteenth
century read French, did not wait for a further
reminder, and left the room with an inquisitive glance
at the mysterious stranger.

Messenius made a sign to his visitor to take a seat
near him.  The whole conversation was conducted in
Latin.

"Receive my greeting, great man, whom misfortune
has only been able to elevate!" began the stranger,
with artful discrimination attacking Messenius'
weakest point.

"Be welcome, you who do not disdain to visit the
forsaken!" replied Messenius with unusual courtesy.

"Do you recognise me, Johannes Messenius?" said
the stranger, as he let the light fall on his pale face.

"It seems to me that I have seen your face before,"
replied the prisoner hesitatingly; "but it must have
been a long time ago."

"Do you remember a boy in Braunsberg, some
years younger than yourself, who was educated with
you in the school of the holy fathers, and afterwards
in your company visited Rome and Ingolstadt?"

"Yes, I remember ... a boy who gave great
promise of one day becoming a pillar of the church
... Hieronymus Mathiæ."

"I am Hieronymus Mathiæ."

Messenius felt a shudder run through his frame.
Time, the experiences of life, and the soul destroying
doctrines of the Jesuits, had completely changed the
features of the once blooming boy.  Pater Hieronymus
observed this impression, and hastened to add:

"Yes, my revered friend, thirty-five years' struggle
for the welfare of the only saving Church has caused
the roses in these cheeks to fade for ever.  I have
laboured and suffered in these evil times.  Like you,
great man, but with much lesser genius, I have dug
in the vineyard, without any reward for my toil but
the prospect of the holy martyr's crown in Paradise.
You were very kind to me in my youth; now I will
repay it so far as it lies in my power.  I will restore
you to freedom and life."

"Ah, reverend father," replied the old man, with a
deep sigh, "I am not worthy of this; you, the son
of the holy Church, extending your hand to me, a
poor apostate?  You do not know, then, that I have
renounced our faith; that I, with my own hand and
mouth, have embraced the accursed Lutheran religion,
which I abhor in my heart; nay, even in my time
persecuted your holy order with several godless
libels."

"Why should I not know all this, my honoured
friend; have not the great Messenius' work and deeds
flown on the wings of fame throughout Germany?
But what you have done, has been done as a blind,
so as to work in secret for the highest good of our
holy Roman Church.  Do not the Scriptures teach
us to meet craft with craft in these godless times?
'Ye shall be as wily as serpents.'  The Holy Virgin
will give you her absolution as soon as you have
worked for her sake.  Yes, esteemed man, even had
you seven times abjured your faith, and seven times
seventy sinned against all the saints and the dogmas
of the Church, it shall all be accounted to you for
reward, and not for condemnation, provided you have
done it with a mental reservation, and with the design
of thereby serving the good cause.  Even if your
tongue has lied, and your hand killed, it shall be
deemed a pious and holy work, when it was for the
purpose of bringing back the stray sheep.  Courage,
great man, I absolve you in the name of the Church."

"Yes, good father, these teachings which the worthy
Jesuit fathers, in Braunsberg so eloquently instilled
into my young mind, I have faithfully followed in
my life.  But now, in my old age, it sometimes seems
to me as if my conscience raised some opposition
in the matter..."

"Temptations of the devil! nothing else.  Drive
them away!"

"That may well be, pious father!  Yes, to calm
my conscience, I have written a formal confession,
in which I openly declare my profession of the
Lutheran faith a hypocritical act, and as openly
proclaim my adherence to the Catholic Church."

"Hide this confession, show it not to any mortal
eye!" interrupted the Jesuit quickly.  "Its time
will yet come."

"I do not understand your reasons, pious father."

"Listen attentively to what I have to say!  Do
you think, old man, that I, without important reasons,
have ventured up here in the wilderness, daily
exposed to hunger, cold, wild beasts, and the still wilder
people in this country, who would burn me alive if
they knew who I was, and what I was about?  Do
you think I would have left the wide field in my
native land, had I not hoped to accomplish more
here?  Well, then, I will briefly explain to you my
point ... Can anyone hear us?  Perhaps there are
private passages in these walls."

"Be sure no mortal can hear us."

"Know, then," continued the Jesuit in a low voice,
"that we have again before us the never-abandoned
plan of bringing heretic Sweden back to the bosom
of the Roman Church.  There are only two powers
which can any longer resist us, and the saints be
praised, these powers are becoming day by day more
harmless.  The House of Stuart, in England, is
surrounded by our nets, and in secret does everything
for our cause.  Sweden still lies stunned by the
terrible blow at Nördlingen, and cannot, without fresh
miracles, retain its dominant position in Germany.
The time has come when our plans are fully matured;
we must avail ourselves of our enemies' powerlessness.
In a few years England will fall into our hands like
a ripe fruit.  Sweden, still proud of former victories,
shall be forced to do the same.  The means to this
end will be a change of dynasty."

"Christina, King Gustaf's daughter..."

"Is a nine-year-old child, and besides a girl!  We
are not without allies in Sweden, who still remember
the expelled royal family.  The weak Sigismund is
dead; Uladislaus, his son, stretches out his hands,
with all the impatience of youth, for the crown of
his forefathers.  It shall be his."

CHAPTER XII.

THE TEMPTER.

"Uladislaus on the Swedish throne?  I doubt
whether we shall ever live to see that day," said
Messenius incredulously.

"Hear me to the end," continued the Jesuit,
engrossed by the stupendous plan his scheming head
had concocted.  "You, Messenius, are the only one
who can perform this miracle."

"I ... a miserable prisoner!  Impossible."

"To the saints and genius nothing is impossible.
The Swede is now well disposed towards royalty.
The example of his kings leads him to good or evil.
He has especially a great reverence for old King
Gustaf Vasa.  If it could now be proved that the
said king on his death-bed, with repentance, declared
the Lutheran doctrine to be heterodox, that he had
abjured and cursed the Reformation, and that he had
charged his youngest son, the papistical Johan, to
atone for his great errors..."

"What do you dare to say?" burst out Messenius,
with undisguised surprise.  "Such an obvious lie
is in direct opposition to Gustaf Vasa's last words
at death, all of whose utterances have been so
faithfully recorded..."

"Calm yourself, revered friend," interrupted the
Jesuit coldly.  "Supposing it could be further
demonstrated that the second founder of Lutheranism,
Carolus IX., likewise on his death-bed declared the
Reformation to be a blasphemy and a misfortune...?"

Messenius regarded the Jesuit with dismay.

"And if it can finally be proven that even Gustaf
Adolf, before giving up the ghost at Lützen, was
struck by a sudden inspiration, and died a heretic's
death, under the greatest torment and anguish of
soul...?"

Messenius' pale cheeks were covered with a flush.

"Then," continued the Jesuit, with the same
composed daring, "there remains of the Vasa dynasty
only the demented Erik XIV., the admitted papist,
Johan III., and the professed Catholic, Sigismund,
with all of whom we need not trouble ourselves in
the least.  Once convinced that all of their greatest
kings either have been papistical, or have become so
in their last moments, the scales will fall from the
eyes of the Swedish people; they will penitently
confess their guilt, and at last fall back into the
bosom of the only saving Roman Catholic Church.

"But how will you, revered father, in the face of
all the facts, convince the Swedes of the apostasy
of their kings?"

"I have already told you," replied the Jesuit
flatteringly, "that such a great and meritorious mission
can only be accomplished by the gifted Johannes
Messenius.  All know that you are Sweden's most
learned man and greatest historian.  They know that
you possess and hold in your care more historical
documents and secrets than anyone else in the whole
kingdom.  Use these advantages skilfully and
judiciously; compile documents that never existed;
describe events that never happened..."

"What do you dare to say?" exclaimed Messenius
with burning cheeks.

The Jesuit misunderstood his excitement.

"Yes," continued the Jesuit, "the undertaking is a
bold one, but far from impossible.  A hasty flight to
Poland will secure your safety."

"And it is to me ... to me that you make this
proposal?"

"Yes," added the monk, in the same tone.  "I
realise that Gustaf Adolf will cause you the most
trouble, and therefore I will be responsible for him.
You will have therefore Gustaf I. and Carl IX. as
your share, to present in such a light as will best
serve the cause of the holy Church."

"
Abi a me, male spiritus!
" burst out Messenius in
a fit of rage, which the Jesuit with all his sagacity
was far from expecting.  "You arch-villain! you
liar! you infamous traitor, to lay your hand on the
holiest; do you think that I, Johannes Messenius,
have worked for long years to become Sweden's
greatest historian, to all of a sudden, in such an
infamous way, violate the historical truth which I have
re-established with such long and continuous efforts?
Be off this moment, quick ... away, to
Gehenna
!"
... and with these words the old scholar, wild with
rage, flung everything that he could get hold of at
the Jesuit's head—books, papers, inkstand,
sand-box—with such violence that the monk started.  The
latter's face became still paler ... then he took a
few steps backwards, rose to his full height, and
opened the plaited Spanish doublet which covered
his breast.  A crucifix of flashing diamonds,
surmounted by a crown of thorns set with rubies, glittered
suddenly in the gathering twilight.

This sight seemed to have a magical effect upon
Messenius.  His excited voice was suddenly hushed
... his rage changed immediately to fear ... his
knees trembled; he staggered, and was on the point
of falling, but supported himself with difficulty against
the chair at the table.  The Jesuit again advanced
slowly, and looked steadily at the prisoner with his
piercing eyes, which were like those of the rattlesnake.

"Have you forgotten, old man," he said, in a
measured and commanding tone, whilst every word
was followed by a pause to increase its effect, "the
penalty which the Church and the laws of our holy
order inflict for sins like yours?  For apostasy:
death ... and you have seven times apostatized!
... For blasphemy: death ... and you have seven
times blasphemed! ... For disobedience: death
... and you have seven times disobeyed! ... For
sin against the Holy Ghost: damnation ... and who
has sinned like you? ... For heresy: the stake
... and who has merited it like you? ... For
offence and disrespect against the holy ones of the
Lord: the eternal fire ... and who has given offence
like you?"

"Grace, holy father, grace!" exclaimed Messenius,
while he writhed like a worm under the Jesuit's
terrible threats.

But Father Hieronymus continued:

"The celebrated Nicolaus Pragensis went over to
Calvin's false doctrines, and dared to defy the Head
of our order.  He fled to the farthest corner of
Bohemia, but our revenge found him.  The dogs tore
his body to pieces, and the spirits of hell obtained
his soul..."

"Grace! mercy!" sighed the prisoner, completely
crushed.

"Well, then," added the Jesuit in a haughty tone or
superiority, "I have given you the choice between
glory and perdition; I will once more place it before
you, although you are undeserving.  Do you imagine,
miserable apostate, that I, the head of the German
and Northern Jesuits, who do not acknowledge any
superior except the Holy Father at Rome—do you
believe that I, who have braved myriads of dangers
to seek you here in your miserable corner, will allow
you to stop me, the invisible ruler of the whole North,
with your disobedience and irresolution?  I ask you
once more, in the name of our holy order, if you,
Johannes Messenius, will be faithful to the oath you
swore in your youth, and implicitly obey the behests
and commands which I, your superior and judge,
enjoin upon you?"

"Yes, holy father," answered the trembling captive;
"yes, I will."

"Hear, then, the penalty I impose.  You say that
for your whole life you have striven for a single aim;
that of gaining the name of the greatest historian in
the North, and you think that you have at last
attained your desire?"

"Yes, holy father, that has been my object, and I
have obtained it."

"Your aim is evil!" exclaimed the Jesuit in stern
tones, "and it is that of the devil, for you have worked
for your own glory, and not for that of the holy
Church, as you have sworn.  Therefore, I command
you to destroy, with your own hands, the idol of your
life—your great fame with posterity—by perverting
history and writing it, not as it is, but as it ought
to be.  I order you to cast away fame, to serve the
cause of the Roman Church in the North.  You shall
write the history of Gustaf I. and Carl IX. in such
a manner that all they have done for the Reformation
may redound as a ruin and curse both to them and
their kingdom.  And I will that you base this new
history on such reliable documents, that in the eyes
of the people they will be above suspicion
... documents which do not exist, but which you shall
manufacture ... documents of which the falsity may
possibly be discovered in a future generation, but
which will at present produce the desired effect."

"And thus," said Messenius, in a voice trembling
with the most varied emotions—fear, anger, and
humiliation—"I shall stand before posterity as a base
falsifier, an infamous perverter of historical truth."

"Yes, and what then?" continued the Jesuit with
a sardonic smile; "what matters it, if you, miserable
tool, sacrifice your name, provided the Church gains
its great victory?  Of what advantage is the praise
of men, if your soul burns in the eternal fires of hell;
and what matters humanity's contempt, if you,
through this sacrifice, gain the martyr's crown in
Heaven?"

"But the cause of truth ... the inflexible
judgment of posterity."

"Bah! what is historical truth?  Well, is it the
obedient slave who follows at the heels of human
errors ... the parrot which thoughtlessly repeats all
their folly?  Or is it not rather truth, such as it
ought
to be
, purified from error, freed from crime and folly
... God's kingdom on earth, as wise as it is almighty,
as good as it is holy and wise?"

"But is it then we who dictate to God what is
good and right?  Has He not Himself told us that
truth,
such as it is
?"

"Ha! vacillating apostate, you still dare to argue
with your superior about right and wrong.  Choose,
obey or disobey!  Choose on one side temporal and
eternal death, and on the other the joys of Paradise
and the glory of the saints.  Yet a word, and upon
this depends your weal or woe.  Will you obey my
commands?"

"Yes, I will obey," answered the crushed and
terrified prisoner.  And the Jesuit went away silent
and cold, with a ruler's nod that the slave had his
good grace.

CHAPTER XIII.

AVAUNT, EVIL SPIRIT.

About a week had passed since the private
conversation to which we last listened.  The Jesuit
during this time had not left the prisoner to himself.
He was seen to enter Messenius' room every day,
under the pretext of medical attendance, and spent
some hours with him.  He was too acute to rely
upon the prisoner's promise.  No one in the castle
knew what they did together, and the Governor was
unsuspicious.  The remote situation of Kajajneborg,
far from the rest of the world, had lulled Wernstedt
into security; he rather found pleasure in the society
of the learned and experienced foreign doctor.

There was one, however, who with a constant and
vigilant eye followed every motion of the stranger,
and this was Lucia Grothusen, Messenius' wife.  A
Catholic by education and conviction, she had always
strengthened her husband in his faith; the Jesuit
well knew this, and therefore felt sure of her
co-operation, although he carefully avoided confiding his
plans to the mercy of female gossip.  But the most
artful plans are often frustrated by those hidden
springs and motives in the human heart, especially
in a woman's heart, which work in quite a different
direction from that of cold reason.  The Jesuit, in
spite of his astuteness, was mistaken in our Lucia.
He did not know that when the fanaticism in her
mind shouted, push on! love cried still louder in her
heart, hold back! and love in women always gets
the upper hand.

Lucia was a very penetrating person; she had
looked through the Jesuit before he knew it.  She
saw the ruinous inward strife which raged in
Messenius; a struggle for life and death between
fanaticism on the one hand, which bade him sacrifice
fame and posterity for the victory of the Church,
and ambition on the other, which continually pleaded
to him not to sacrifice with his own hand his whole
life's work?  "Will you," it said, "blindly desecrate
the sanctuary of history?  Will you expose to
contempt the brilliant name, which in the night of
captivity still constitutes your wealth and pride?"

Lucia saw all this with the discernment of love;
she saw that the man for whom she lived an entire
life of self-denial and restraint, would sink under
this terrible internal battle, and she resolved to save
him with a bold and decisive stroke.

Late one evening the lamp still burned on
Messenius' writing-table, where he and the Jesuit
had been working together ever since the morning.
Lucia had received permission to retire to her bed,
which stood at the other end of the room near the
door, and pretended to be asleep.  The two men had
finished their work, and were conversing together
with low voices, in Latin, which Lucia well understood.

"I am satisfied with you, my friend," said the
Jesuit approvingly.  "These documents, which bear
the stamp of truth, will be sufficient to prove the
conversion of King Gustaf Vasa and King Carl, and
this preface, signed by you, will further confirm their
veracity.  I will now return to Germany through
Sweden, and have these prayers printed, through our
adherents in Stockholm, or if that is impossible, in
Lübeck or Leyden."

Messenius involuntarily stretched out his hand, as
if to snatch back a precious treasure from a robber's
hands.

"Holy father," he exclaimed with visible consternation,
"is there no reprieve?  My name ... my
reputation ... have mercy upon me, holy father,
and give me back my name!"

The Jesuit smiled.

"Do I not give you a name," he said, "far greater
and more abiding than the one you lose—a name
in the chronicles of our holy order; a name among
the martyrs and benefactors of the Church; a name
which may one day be counted amongst the saints?"

"But, in spite of all this, a name without honour,
a liar's, a forger's name!" burst out Messenius, with
the despair of a condemned man, who is shown the
glory of Heaven obscured by the scaffold.

"Weak, vain man, you do not know that great
aims are never won by the fear or praise of
humanity!" said the Jesuit in a contemptuous tone.
"You might have taken back your word and forfeited
your claims to the gratitude of all Christendom.  But
happily it is now impossible.  These documents"—and
he extended his hand triumphantly with the
papers—"are now in a hand which will know how
to keep them, and, against your will, use them for
the glory of the Church, the victory of the faith, and
your soul's eternal welfare."

Father Hieronymus had hardly uttered these words
when a hand behind him swiftly and suddenly seized
the papers, which he had so elatedly waved, crumpled
them together, tore them in a hundred pieces, and
strewed the bits over the floor.  This move was so
unlooked for, and the Jesuit was so far from divining
anything of the kind, that he lost his usual presence
of mind for a moment, and thus gave the daring hand
time to complete its work of destruction.  When the
fragments lying around convinced him of the reality
of his loss, he bit his lips with rage, raised his arms
aloft, and with the ferocity of a wild beast, fell upon
the presumptuous being who had dared to extinguish
his plans at the very moment of consummation.

Lucia—for she owned the intruding hand—met
the monk's outbreak of fury with the great courage
which distinguishes a woman when she struggles for
the holiest she possesses.  In her youth she had been
one of those who could take a man by the collar;
and this more than womanly strength of arm had
gained practice during her constant squabbles with
the rude soldiers of the castle.  She hastily clasped
her sinewy fingers around the monk's outstretched
arms, and held them fast as in a vice.

"Well," she said in a mocking tone, "three paces
from death, sir; what do you wish?"

"Mad woman!" screamed the Jesuit, foaming with
rage, "you do not know what you have done!
Miserable thief, you have stolen a kingdom from
your Church, and Paradise from your husband."

"And from you I have stolen your booty; his
secure prey from the wolf; is it not so?" replied
Lucia, whose voice began to glow with the fire of
her hasty temper.  "Monk," she added, violently
shaking the eminent Jesuit, who in vain tried to escape,
"I know a vile thief, who, in the sheep's clothing of
the Church, comes to steal the fame of a great man;
also the history of a nation; and from a poor,
forsaken woman, her sole pride; her husband's peace,
honour, and life.  Tell me, holy and pious monk,
what punishment such a thief deserves?  Would not
Ämmä fall be shallow enough for his body, and the
eternal fires cool enough for his soul?"

The Jesuit looked out of the window with a hasty
movement towards the mighty torrent which
descended with a terrible roar in the winter's night.

"Ha!" exclaimed Lucia with a bitter smile, "you
fear me, you, the powerful one, who rules kingdoms
and consciences.  You fear lest I conceal a man's
arm under my grey frock, which could hurl you into
the cataract's abyss.  Be reassured.  I am only a
woman, and fight with a woman's arms.  You see
... I do not throw you out of the window ... I will be
content with chaining up the wild beast.  Tremble,
monk, I know you!  Lucia Grothusen has followed
your steps; you are betrayed, and she has done
this."

"Betrayed!" echoed the Jesuit; he well realised
what this statement meant.  At a time so full of hate,
when two great religions fought for worldly and
spiritual supremacy, when the plots of the Jesuits
irritated the Swedes to the highest extent, a member
of this order, discovered in disguise, in the kingdom,
was lost beyond redemption.  But the dire peril
restored the equilibrium of this powerful character.

"My daughter, betrayed by you," he said once
more, as his arms relaxed, and his features assumed
an expression of doubt and mild grief.  "That is
impossible."

Lucia regarded him with hate and suspicion.

"I your daughter!" she exclaimed, as she pushed
the monk from her with repulsion.  "Falsehood is
your daughter, and deceit your mother.  These are
thy relatives."

"Lucia Grothusen," said the Jesuit with much
suavity, "when you were a child, and followed your
father, Arnold Grothusen, who was expelled with
King Sigismund, you came one day as an exile in
need, and surrounded by enemies, to a peasant's hut.
They refused you a refuge, and threatened to deliver
you up.  Then your youthful eyes discovered an
image of the Virgin in a corner of the hut, a relic
from former times, and now profaned as a plaything
for children.  You took the image and kissed it;
you held it up before the harsh inmates of the hut,
and said to them, 'See, the Virgin Mary is here, she
will succour us!'"

"Well, what then?" said Lucia reluctantly in a
softer voice.

"Your childish trust ... no, what do I say?  The
Holy Virgin moved the stern peasants, they gave
you shelter, and placed you all in security.  Still
more, they gave you the image, which you have carefully
preserved as your guardian angel, and there it
hangs on your wall.  What you formerly said, you
still say: 'The Virgin Mary is here, she will protect me!'"

Lucia tried in vain to struggle against her emotions.
She bit her lip and made no reply.

"You are right," continued the astute monk.  "I
am a Catholic like you; persecuted like you; if they
penetrated my disguise they would kill me.  My life
is in your hands; denounce me; I flee not; I die
for my faith, and I forgive you my death."

"Fly from here," said Lucia, half vanquished; "I
give you till to-morrow, but only on condition that
you do not see my husband again."

"Well, then," said the Jesuit sadly, "I fly and leave
behind my beautiful dream of a glorious future.  Ah,
I had imagined that the great Messenius and his
noble wife would reinstate the Catholic Church in
the North; I saw the time when millions of people
would say: we were in darkness and blindness, until
the historical light of the great Messenius revealed
to us the falseness of the Reformation."

"If it could be done without injury to the truth,"
exclaimed Lucia, whose ardent spirit was more and
more elevated by the future, which the Jesuit so
skilfully placed before her in perspective.

"The truth!" repeated the Jesuit persuasively.
"Oh, my friend, truth is our faith, falseness is the
heretic's faith.  If you are convinced that I ask only
the truth itself from your husband, will you assist
instead of trying to destroy your Church?"

"Yes, I will!" answered Lucia warmly and earnestly.

"Then listen..." added the Jesuit, but was just
then interrupted by Messenius, who, hitherto stunned
and crestfallen, now seemed to awaken from a horrible
dream.

"
Abi, male spiritus!
" he frantically exclaimed, as
if he feared that the Jesuit's serpent tongue would
once more triumph.  "
Abi, Abi!
you are not a human
being, you are the prince of lies himself, you are the
tempter in Paradise!  Get ye gone, ye foul spirit, to
the eternal fire, your abiding place, to the kingdom
of lies, your realm!" he said in Latin.  And with
this he pushed the Jesuit towards the door, without
Lucia's making the least attempt to prevent it.

"
Insanit miser!
" ("the miserable raver") muttered
the Jesuit as he disappeared.

"Thanks, my dear!" said Lucia, with a lightened
heart, as if freed from a dangerous spell.

"Thanks, Lucia!" replied Messenius, with a milder
manner than he had for a long time assumed towards
his wife.

CHAPTER XIV.

THE JUDGMENT OF THE SAINTS.

Early the next morning Father Hieronymus entered
the room that was occupied by Lady Regina von
Emmeritz and old Dorthe.  Pale from watching
and suffering, the beautiful young girl sat by the
bedside of her faithful servant.  When the Jesuit
entered, Regina rose quickly.

"Save Dorthe, my father!" she impetuously
exclaimed ... "I have looked for you everywhere,
and you have abandoned me!"

"Hush!" said the Jesuit whispering.  "Speak low,
the walls have ears.  So ... actually? ... Dorthe
is sick?  Poor old woman, it is too bad, but I cannot
help her.  They have penetrated our disguise.  They
suspect us.  We must fly this day—this moment."

"Not before you have made Dorthe well again.
I beseech you, my father; you are wise, you know
all the remedies; give her an immediate restorative,
and we will follow you wherever you choose.

"Impossible, we have not a moment to lose.  Come!"

"Not without Dorthe, my father!  Holy Virgin,
how could I abandon her, my nurse, my motherly
friend?"

The Jesuit went to the bed, took the old woman's
hand, touched her forehead, and pointed to it in
silence, with an air which Regina understood but
too well.

"She is dead!" cried the young girl with dismay.

"Yes, what then?" replied the Jesuit, a marked
sinister smile on his lips fighting with the air of
regret he tried to assume.

"You see, my child," he added, "that the saints
have wished to spare our faithful old friend a toilsome
journey, and have taken her instead to heavenly
glory.  There is nothing more to be done here.
Come!"

But Regina had perceived the malignant smile
through her tears, and it struck her with an indescribable
horror.  She seemed to detect a dark secret.

"Come!" he repeated hastily.  "I will give
Messenius' wife, who is a Catholic, the charge of
burying our friend."

Regina's dark eyes looked on the monk with fear
and aversion.

"At seven o'clock yesterday evening," she said,
"Dorthe was in good health.  Then she drank the
beverage of strengthening herbs which you have
prepared for her every evening.  At eight o'clock she
was taken ill ... ten hours afterwards she has
ceased to live."

"The fatigue of the long journey ... a cold, an

inflammation
... nothing more is wanted.  Come!"
said the monk uneasily.

But Regina did not move.

"Monk," she said in a voice trembling with disgust
and horror, "you have poisoned her."

"My child, my daughter, what are you saying?
Grief has clouded your reason; come, I forgive you."

"She was a burden to you ... I saw your
impatience on our journey here.  And now you wish me
to place myself in your power without protection.
Holy Virgin, save me!  I will not go with you!"

The Jesuit's mobile features instantly changed
their expression, and assumed that commanding air
which had made Messenius yield.

"Child," he said, "do not draw upon yourself the
anger of the saints by listening to the voice of the
tempter.  Remember
where
you are, unfortunate, and

who
you are.  A moment's delay, and I leave you
here a prey to want, captivity, and death; a target
for the heretic's scorn, a lost sheep abandoned by the
Holy Virgin.  Here perdition and misery ... there
in your Fatherland the favour of the saints.  Choose
quickly, for the sleigh stands waiting; the morning
dawns, and day must not find us in this nest of
heretics."

Regina hesitated.

"Swear," she said, "that you are innocent of
Dorthe's death!"

"I swear it!" exclaimed the Jesuit, "by the cross
and by the holy Loyola's bones.  May the firm
ground open under my feet, and the abyss swallow
me alive, if I have ever given this woman any drink
but what was healthful and medicinal."

"Well, then," said Regina, "the saints have heard
your oath, and written it down in the book of
judgment.  Farewell, my mother, my friend!  Come, let
us go!"

Both hurried out.

It was still dark.  A pale ray of light appeared
over the dark firs on the edge of Koivukoski fall.
The horses stood harnessed.  The sleepy guard at
the castle gate gave a free passage to the physician,
who was well known to all.

The Jesuit already thought himself in safety, when
a sleigh from the mainland met the fugitives on the
narrow bridge, and drove close up to them in the
darkness.  The monk's sleigh turned on the edge,
and was only hindered by the half-rotten railing from
upsetting into the depths.

Regina gave a cry of terror.

At the sound of this cry a man sprang from the
other sleigh and approached the fugitives.

"Regina!" cried a well-known voice, which
trembled from surprise.

"You are mistaken, my friend," the Jesuit hastened
to say in a disguised voice.  "Give way to Doctor
Albertus Simonis, army physician in the service of
his Royal Majesty."

"Ha! it is you, accursed Jesuit!" cried the stranger.
"Guard, to arms!  To arms! and seize the greatest
villain on earth."  And so saying, he grasped the
monk by his fur cloak.

For an instant Hieronymus tried to disengage the
sleigh and escape through the speed of the horses.
But when he found that this was impossible, he left
his fur cloak behind him, wriggled from his enemy's
grasp, and, throwing himself quickly over the railing
of the bridge, jumped down on the ice, which, in the
terrible cold, had formed between the castle island
and the mainland.  He soon vanished in the dim
morning light.

Alarmed by the cry, the castle gate guard
discharged his musket after the fugitive, but without
effect.  Some of the soldiers seemed inclined to
pursue him on the ice.

"Do not do that, boys!" cried a bearded sergeant,
"it has thawed during the night, and the stream has
cut the ice underneath; I think it will break up
to-day."

"But the fellow jumped down there!" cried some.

"The devil will get him," replied the sergeant,
calmly lighting his morning pipe.  "I guess by this
time he is not far from Ämmä."

"What did you say?" cried the driver of the sleigh
in alarm.

"I say that the old woman* has got her breakfast
to-day," answered the sergeant with perfect composure.
"Just listen, she barks like a chained dog;
now she is satisfied."

* The Finnish word ämmä means old woman.

All listened, appalled, to the din of the waters.  It
seemed to them as if the mighty fall roared more
wildly, more terribly than before, in the dreary winter
dawn.  The sergeant was right, it was like the howl
of an angry dog, when they have thrown him his prey.

CHAPTER XV.

BERTEL AND REGINA.

We left our wandering knight of La Mancha asleep
in a peasant's house at Ylihärmä.  We found him
again just now at Kajaneborg castle, vainly trying
to secure the feared and hated Jesuit, whom he had
seen through the window-pane of the wretched
hut.  Bertel's circuitous course during the days
between can be perhaps imagined.  Led on a false
scent in his chase after the fugitives, he had scoured
all the roads in East Bothnia, and even went as far
up as Uleiborg, and only when he had lost every
sign of them did he resolve as a last resource to seek
the runaways in the far-off Kajana desert.  Why the
young cavalier pursued them with such unconquerable
perseverance will soon be manifest.

Some hours after the scene on the bridge we find
Bertel in the apartment which the Governor had
assigned to Lady Regina, under the protection of
one of his female relatives.  More than three years
have passed since they last met in Frankfurt-on-the-Main,
in the presence of the great king.

Bertel was then an inexperienced youth of twenty,
and Regina an equally untrained girl of sixteen.
Both had gone through many trials since then; in
each case the burning enthusiasm of youth had been
cooled by struggles and sufferings.

The distance between the prince's daughter and
the lieutenant had been lessened by Bertel's military
fame and lately acquired coat of arms; nay, at this
moment, she, the abandoned prisoner, might consider
herself honoured by a knight's attentions.  But the
distance between their convictions, their sympathies,
their hearts—had it been diminished by these trials,
which generally steel a conviction instead of destroying it?

Bertel approached the young girl with all the
perfect courtesy which the etiquette of his time had
retained as an inheritance from the chivalry of past
centuries.

"My lady," he said in a slightly tremulous voice,
"since my hope of finding you at Korsholm failed, I
have pursued you through forest and wilderness, as
one pursues a criminal.  Perhaps you divine the cause
that prompted me to do so."

Regina's long black eyelashes were slowly lifted,
and she looked inquiringly at Bertel.

"Chevalier," she replied, "whatever has animated
you, I am convinced that your reasons were noble
and chivalrous.  You cannot have meant to take an
unhappy young maiden back to prison; you have
only wished to snatch her from a man whom the
poor deceived one has ever since childhood regarded
as a holy and pious person, and whose deeply
concealed wickedness she has now, for the first time,
learned to know and abhor."

"You are mistaken," said Bertel warmly.  "It is
true I shuddered when I found that you were under
the escort of this villain, whose real character I knew
before you, and I then redoubled my efforts to deliver
you from his hands.  But before I imagined any
danger from that quarter, I flew to find you with the
glad tidings of a justice ... late, but I hope not
too late."

"A justice, you say?" repeated Regina, with an
emotion which sent the blood to her cheeks.

"Yes, my lady," continued Bertel, as he regarded
her dazzling beauty with delight; "at last, after
several years of fruitless efforts, I have succeeded in
undoing this undeserved penalty.  You are free! you
can now return to your Fatherland under the
protection of the Swedish arms, and here"—with these
words Bertel bent one knee and handed Regina a
paper with the regency's seal attached—"is the
document which ensures your freedom."

Regina had controlled her first emotion, and
received the precious paper with almost haughty
dignity.

"Herr chevalier," she said in short measured tones,
"I know that you do not desire my thanks for having
acted like a man of honour before any of your
compatriots."

Bertel arose, confused by this pride, which he,
however, ought to have expected.

"What I have done," he said, with a touch of
coldness, "I have done to efface a wrong which might
have thrown a shadow upon the memory of a great
king.  Each and all of my countrymen would have
done the same as I, had not the exigencies of war
made them forget the reparation you had a right
to demand.  First of all would the noble King Gustaf
Adolf himself have hastened to repair a moment's
indiscretion, had not Providence so suddenly cut short
his career.  But," said Bertel, breaking off, "I forget
that the king I love and admire, you, my lady, hate!"

At these words the bright and beautiful colour
again rose to Regina's cheeks.  Bertel had unknowingly
touched one of the most sensitive chords in
this ardent heart.  A new discovery, a wonderful
resemblance in figure, voice, gesture, nay, in
thought—a likeness which she had never before observed,
and which these three years had developed in Bertel's
whole personality, made an indescribable impression
upon the young Southerner's soul.  It seemed to her
as if she saw him himself, the greatest among mortals,
the pride of her dreams, her life's delight and misery;
he, the beloved and feared, her country's, her faith's,
and her heart's conqueror ... and as if he himself
had said to her in the well-remembered tones:
"Regina, you hate me!"

This impression came so swiftly, so strongly, and
with such a surprising power, that Regina suddenly
grew pale, staggered, and was compelled to lean on
Bertel's outstretched arm.

"Holy Virgin!" she whispered, bewildered, and
not knowing what she uttered, "should I hate you
... you, whom I lo ...?"

Bertel caught this half incomprehensible word, so
full of meaning, with a surprise as sudden and
unexpected as Regina's.  Beside himself with amazement,
fear, and hope, he was still too chivalrous to
avail himself of an involuntary confession.  Mute
and respectful, he led the young girl to her
protectress, in whose care she soon recovered from her
sudden prostration, an effect of long-suppressed
emotions, which sought vent.

Bertel had obtained permission to escort Lady
Regina to Stockholm, from whence she could return
to her Fatherland, at the first open waters.  He was,
therefore, at liberty to remain at Kajaneborg until
she was ready for the journey, and this was again
delayed through lack of a fitting female companion
for the high-born prisoner.

Weeks passed in waiting, and during this time
entirely new relations were formed, which one could
hardly have predicted after Regina's proud coldness
towards her deliverer.  Ah! this coldness was the
ice over a glowing volcano; every day it grew
thinner and melted away; every day the foundations
of Regina's pride gradually became weaker, and
finally only one barrier remained, the strongest one
of all, it is true, namely, that of religious convictions.
Vain wall!  It, too, finally crumbled before the fire
of a southern passion, and before these weeks were
ended, the girl of nineteen, and the young man of
twenty-three, had forgotten the great differences of
faith and rank, and sworn each other fidelity for life.

Did Bertel know that he had to thank the memory
of Gustaf Adolf for his beautiful, proud, black-eyed
bride?

A singular destiny wished to seal this union in an
unexpected and wonderful manner.  With a secret
apprehension for his future happiness, Bertel had
tried in vain to discover the Jesuit's fate.

Since the morning when he leaped over the railing
of the bridge, no one had heard or seen anything of
him, until, three weeks afterwards, a peasant reported
that on opening a hole in the ice, a little below
Ämmä fall, they had discovered the body of a man
without ears, clothed in a foreign garb, which the
peasant brought with him, and which were recognised
as those of Father Hieronymus.  In addition, the
honest Paldamo peasant produced a small copper
ring, which had been found hanging by a cord on the
dead man's neck.

Bertel looked at this ring with astonishment and
delight.

"At last I have you!" he exclaimed, "the ring I
have so long sought ... and with you the certainty
of this terrible man's death."

"The judgment of the saints on the perjurer!"
exclaimed Regina, awe-struck.

"The judgment of the saints, which confirms our
happiness!" rejoined Bertel, and he placed on
Regina's finger the
King's Ring
.

CHAPTER XVI.

THE KING'S RING—THE SWORD AND THE

PLOUGH—FIRE AND WATER.

Again we return to Storkyro, to Bertila's farm, and
the old peasant king.

It is a March day, in the year 1635.  The spring
sun is already melting the snow, and the roofs drip
on the sunny side; the icy crust bears one's weight on
the north side of the hill, but breaks on the south.
Aron Bertila has just come home from church with
all his folks, his grey head is bent, and he leans on
Meri's arm.  At his side walk two sturdy, thick-set
figures—old Larsson, and his newly arrived son, the
brave and learned captain, the faithful image of his
father, except in age.  On the captain's arm is his
young, light-hearted, and pretty little wife, whose
features we recognise.  It is no other than Ketchen,
the courageous and merry girl, whose soft hand once
made the gallant captain lose his wits.  Since that
day he has sworn by all the Greek and Roman
authors, whom he formerly read in Abo Cathedral
School, that the soft-handed novice among the
Würzburg sisters of charity should some day become
his.  And when the vicissitudes of war again brought
them together, when Ketchen was without protection,
and besides, had nothing against an honest, jovial
soldier, this cheerful pair were formally wedded in
the autumn at Stralsund, and then went to visit their
kind-hearted father in Storkyro, where they were
warmly welcomed, and received like children in the
house.

It must be added that Larsson had obtained his
discharge from the service after much trouble, and
without having a rise in rank.  It is to be regretted
that he had not gathered a farthing from the booty
in Germany, like many of his comrades.  All that he
had earned—and if we can believe him, it must have
amounted to millions—had taken wings; but where?
At Nördlingen, he says.  By no means.  But in
revels and sprees with jolly fellows like himself.  Now
he meant to be as regular and steady as a gate-post;
to succeed his father as inspector of Bertila's large
farms; to plough, sow, harvest, and
pro modulo
virium prolen copiosam in lucem proferre
, as those
in olden times so truly said.

Old Bertila treats him with apparent favour.
Significant words have escaped the old man, and he
has just given his will into the hands of the
judge.

As for Meri, she has withered like a flower without
roots, and clings to life only by one heart-thread:
the banished, rejected Gustaf Bertel, now ennobled
to Bertelskold.

This domestic circle, composed of such differing
elements, both light and shadows, are now gathered
in the large "stuga," surrounded by the numerous
field hands, and old Larsson now tries, in secret
alliance with Meri, to bring the stern peasant king
to a better state of mind towards Bertel.  But all
their prayers and reasons break against the old man's
unyielding firmness ... Larsson turns angrily away,
and Meri conceals her tears in the darkest corner of
the room.

Then sleigh-bells are again heard outside, as on
Twelfth-day evening; a large sleigh stops in the
yard, and two persons alight from it, an officer in his
ample cloak, and a young and classically beautiful
woman in a magnificent mantle of black velvet, lined
with precious fur.  Meri and old Larsson turn pale
at this sight; Larsson tries to hasten out, but it is
too late.  Bertel and Regina enter the "stuga."

Both the Larssons and Meri surround Bertel with
warm and apparently embarrassed greetings.  Ketchen
flies and throws herself, without thinking of the
difference between her burgher dress and the costly velvet
cloak, into Regina's arms, who, with emotion, clasps
her faithful friend to her heart.

Bertel gently frees himself from Meri's embrace,
and goes straight up to old Bertila with a firm step,
who, cold and silent in his high chair at the end of
the table, does not honour him with a word or glance.

All present await with dismayed looks the result
of this decisive meeting.  The young officer has
taken off his cloak and hat, his long fair hair falls
in beautiful waves around his open brow, his cheeks
are very pale, but the expressive blue eyes regard
the grey-haired man's iron face with a firm and
steadfast look.

Bertel now, as before, bends a knee, and says in
a voice at once humble and confident:

"My father!"

"Who are you?  I know you not; I have no son!"
said the old man in chilling tones.

"My father!" continued Bertel, without allowing
himself to be checked, "I come here once more, and
for the last time, to ask your forgiveness and blessing.
Thrust me not from you!  I am going to leave my
Fatherland, to fight and perhaps die on German soil.
It depends upon you whether I ever return.  Remember,
my father, that your blessing gives you back
a son; that your curse drives him into exile for ever."

The features of the old man did not change their
expression, but the tones of his voice indicated an
internal struggle.

"My answer is short," he said.  "I had a son; he
became unworthy of me and all the principles which
have governed my life.  He abandoned the cause of
the people to pay homage to the pernicious power
which I hate and detest.  I have no longer a son.
I have to-day disinherited him."

The faces of all the hearers turn pale at these
words.  But Bertel colours slightly, and says:

"My father, I do not ask for your property.  Give
it to the one you consider more worthy than I.  I
only ask your forgiveness ... your blessing, my
father."

All around the old man, except Regina, fell on
their knees and exclaimed:

"Grace for Bertel!  Grace for your son!"

"And if I had a son, do you believe he would for
my sake give up his desire for the false distinctions
of nobility?  Do you think he would become a
peasant like me, a man of the people, ready to live
and die for their cause?  Do you fancy that he would
plough the earth with his fine-gloved hands and
choose a wife from my station, a simple plain woman,
befitting the spouse of a husbandman?"

"My father," replied Bertel, in a voice more
tremulous than before, "what you ask is impossible
on account of the education you have yourself
bestowed on me.  I honour and respect your station,
but I have grown accustomed to the career of a
soldier, which I neither can nor will abandon.  To
choose a wife to your mind is equally impossible.
Here is my wife; she is a prince's daughter, but she
has chosen a peasant's son for her husband; this is
a proof that she will not blush to call you father."

At these words Regina humbly approached the
old man as if to kiss his hand, and all rose except
Bertel and his father.  But the peasant king's former
fiery temper now burst forth.

"Did I not say so!" he shouted.  "There stands
the renegade who was born a peasant, and became
the servant of lords.  Ha! by God!  I have in my
day seen much strife and defiance between the sword
and the plough, but a scene like this I have never
beheld.  The boy who calls himself my son dares to
bring before my eyes his high-born harlot and call
her his wife."

Bertel sprang up and supported Regina, who nearly
sank to the floor at these words.

"Old man," he said in a voice full of anger, "thank
your name of father and your grey head that you
have been allowed to utter what no one else should
have uttered and live an hour afterwards.  Here is
the ring I placed on the hand of my lawfully wedded
wife"—with this he took the king's ring from
Regina's finger—"and I swear that her hand is as
pure and worthy as that of any other mortal to wear
this ring, which has for so many years been worn
by the greatest of kings."

Meri's eyes stared at the ring, her pale cheeks
coloured with a deep flush, and she had a violent
internal struggle.  Finally she stepped nearer, took
and pressed the ring with ecstasy to her lips, and
said in a broken voice and with an emotion so strong
that it dried her tears:

"My ring which
he
has worn ... my ring which
has protected
him
... you are innocent of his death;
he gave you away, and then came the bullets and
death.  Do you know, Gustaf Bertel, and you, his
wife, the power of this ring?  In my youth I one day
went into the wilderness, and there found a dying
man, who was languishing from thirst.  I gave him
a drink from the spring, and cooled his tongue with
the juice of berries.  He thanked me and said: 'My
friend, I die, and have no other recompense to give
you than this ring.  I found it in former days on
an image of the Holy Virgin, which alone lay
uninjured in the midst of the broken fragments of
Popery in Storkyro Church; and when I took the
ring from its finger the image fell to dust.  The ring
has both the power of the saints and that of magic,
for with me the greatness of the ancient occult
knowledge goes into the silence.  He who wears this ring
is secure against fire, water, steel, and all kinds of
dangers, on the sole condition that he never swears
a false oath, for that destroys the power of the ring;
with this ring goes happiness in peace, and victory
in war; love, honour, and wealth; and when it is
worn by three successive generations, from father to
son, then from that family shall come brilliant
statesmen and generals...'"

Here Meri paused; all listened with intense
expectation.

"But," she added, "if the ring is worn by six
generations one after the other, then a mighty royal
house will spring from that family.  'But,' said the
old man to me, 'you ought to know that great
dangers accompany great gifts.  False oaths and
family enmity will constantly tempt the owner of the
ring, and thus endeavour to neutralise its power; pride
and inordinate ambition will constantly work within
him to prepare his fall, and a great steadfastness in
the right path will be necessary, joined with a meek
and humble heart, to vanquish these temptations.
He who wears this ring will enjoy all the prosperity
of the world, and only have to conquer himself; but
he will also be the most formidable enemy of his own
happiness.  All this is signified: by the letters, R.R.R.,
which are engraved on the inside of the ring, and
interpreted thus:
Rex Regi Rebellis
—the king
rebellious against the king; the happiest, the
mightiest among men, has to fear the greatest danger
within himself.'"

"And this ring, O Regina, is ours!" exclaimed
Bertel, with both fear and joy.  "What a wealth and
what a responsibility goes with this ring."

"Power!  Honour!  Immortality!" caed Regina
with transport.

"Beware, my daughter!" said Meri sadly.  "Behind
these words lie the greatest dangers."

Old Bertila looked at the ring and the young
people with a contemptuous smile.

"False gold!" he said.  "Vanity!  Useless ornament!
False ambition!  This is a worthy gift to go
in inheritance from generation to generation among
the nobility.  Come, Larsson the younger, you, who
are also of peasant origin, and who wish to return to
your station, although you too have been a soldier.  I
will give you something which is neither gold or
a useless ornament, but which will bring you more
blessings than all the kings' rings in the world.
Take my old axe with the oak handle from the wall
there; yes, fear not, there is no magic in that; my
father forged it with his own hand, in Gustaf Vasa's
time.  With it father and I have felled many a heavy
tree in the forests, and cleared many a field.  May
it pass in inheritance within your family, and I
promise you that he who possesses my axe shall be
blessed with happiness and contentment of mind in
his honest labour."

"Thanks, thanks, Father Bertila," answered the
captain joyfully, and, with an air of importance, tried
the edge of the old man's axe.  "If we took a fancy
to engrave any inscription on it, I should propose
R.R.R.,
Ruris Rusticus Robustus
, which is to say
briefly: 'The deuce, what a big, bulky chopper! a
very beautiful and intellectual saying among those in
olden times."

Larsson the elder now considered the opportunity
at hand to give the bitter contest a more amicable
turn.  He stepped up to old Bertila, leading by the
hands the two newly married pairs, and said:

"Dear old friend, let us not meddle in the Lord's
business.  Your boy and mine are a couple of great
rascals, that is granted; but are they to blame that
our Lord created one of them of fire and the other
of water?  Bertel is like a flame—burning hot,
ambitious, high-reaching, brilliant, ephemeral, and I
will bet anything that his little wife is of the same
sort.  My boy, here, is of the purest water."

"Stop!" cried the captain.  "Water has never
been my weak side!"

"Hold your tongue!  My boy is the clear water
... flowing and unstable, contentedly keeping itself
to the ground, and created especially to put out the
other youngster's poetical blaze with its prosaic
philosophy.  As for his wife, she is of the same stuff.
Do you not see, Bertila, that our Lord has intended
the boys for friends? ... the fire to warm the water,
and the water to quench the fire ... and you would
make them enemies by taking from one and giving
to the other.  No, Bertila, do not do it, this is my
advice; give your son what belongs to him; my son
will not starve for want of it."

Bertila remained silent for a moment.  Then he
said vehemently:

"Do not teach me the meaning of the Lord.  Can
you believe that he, the fresh-baked nobleman, whom
you compare with the fire, could be induced to give
away the ring and take the axe in its place?"

"Never!" excitedly exclaimed Bertel.

Meri seized his hand, and looked beseechingly at
him.

"Give away the ring," she said.  "You know some
of its dangers, but there is still one which I, from
anguish, have not mentioned.  All who wear this
ring will die a violent death."

"What then!" exclaimed Bertel.  "The death of
the soldier on the battlefield is grand, and full of
honour.  I do not ask a better one."

"Just listen to him," said Bertila bitterly.  "I knew
it; he runs after fame even to the grave.  A peaceful
death or a peaceful life is an abomination to him;
but you, Larsson, tell me: have you a desire to give
away the axe and take the ring?"

"H'm!" thoughtfully replied the captain; "if the
ring were of gold, I might sell it in town and get a
good cask of ale for the money.  But as it is only
of copper ... pshaw!  I send it to the deuce, and
keep the axe, which is at least useful for cutting
wood."

"Well done!" said Bertila; "you are sprinkling
water on fire, as your father said.  It is not I who
have made fire and water eternally hostile to each
other.  Come, Larsson, you, the sound, common-sense,
practical man, be my son, and one day take
my farms when I am no longer here.  My blessing
on you and your descendants.  May they multiply,
and work like ants on the land, and may there be
eternal hostility between them and the nobility, the
people with the fiery temperament.  May there be
war and not peace between them and you until the
useless glitter disappears from humanity.  May the
axe and the ring live in open feud until both are
melted in the same heat.  When this happens after
a century or more, then it will be time to say, class
distinctions have seen their last days, and a man's
merit is his only coat of arms."

"But, my father," exclaimed Bertel in an entreating
voice, "have you then no blessing to give me,
and my posterity, at the moment when we separate
for ever?"

"You!" repeated the old man, in still angry tones.
"Go, you lost, vain, worm-eaten branch of the
people's great trunk; go in your pitiful parade to
certain ruin.  Until the day when, as I said, the axe
and the ring, the false gold and the true steel melt
together ... until then I give you my curse as an
inheritance, even unto the tenth generation, and with
it shall follow dissension, hatred, war, and finally a
despicable fall."

"Hold there, Father Bertila," cried Larsson the
younger.  "Grace for Bertel!"

"No grace for nobility," replied the peasant king.

"Beware, unnatural father!" cried Larsson the
elder.  "The doom may fall on your own head."

"I no longer ask any grace," said Bertel, pale, but
apparently calm.  "Farewell, my former father!
Farewell, my Fatherland!  I go never to see you
again!"

"One moment," interrupted Meri, who with a
violent effort placed herself in his way.  "You
go! yes, go ... my heart's darling, my hope, my life,
my all ... go, I shall no longer stand in your way.
But before you leave me, you shall take with you
the secret which has been both my life's highest joy
and its greatest agony..."

"Hear her not!" cried old Bertila in a changed
and alarmed tone.  "Listen not to what she says;
madness speaks through her! ... Think of your
honour and mine," he sternly whispered in his pale
daughter's ear.

"What do I care for your or my honour!" burst
out Meri with an impetuosity never before witnessed.
"Do you not see that he goes ... my life's joy
leaves me, to return no more?  He goes, and you,
hard, in-human parent, wish me to let him depart with
a curse to foreign lands.  But it shall not be.  For
every curse you throw upon his head, I will give him
a hundred blessings, and we shall see which will
avail the most before the throne of the Supreme
Being—your hatred or my love—the grandfather's
curse or the mother's blessing..."

"My mother!" exclaimed Bertel beside himself
with astonishment.  Duke Bernhard's obscure hints
now suddenly became clear.

"Believe her not; she knows not—she knows not
what she says!" cried Bertila, with a vain attempt
to appear calm.

Meri had sunk into Bertel's arms.

"It is now said," she whispered in a weak voice.
"Gustaf ... my son.  Ah! it is so new and so sweet
to call you so.  Now you know my life's secret ...
and I have not long to blush over it.  Do you love
me? ... Yes, yes!  Now I go from life rejoicing
... the veil is lifted ... light comes ... My father,
... I forgive you ... that you have hated and
cursed your daughter's son ... Forgive me ... that
I ... love ... bless ... my son!..."

"My mother!" exclaimed Bertel, "hear me, my
mother!  I thank you ... I love you! ... You
shall go with me, and I will never desert you.  But
you do not hear me.  You are so pale ... Great
God ... she is dead!"

"My daughter! my only child!" exclaimed the old
hard-hearted peasant king, completely crushed.

"Judge not, lest ye be judged!" said old Larsson
with clasped hands.  "And you, our children, go put
into life with reconciled hearts.  Curse and blessing
struggle for your future, and not only for yours, but
for that of your posterity, unto the tenth generation.
Pray to Heaven that blessing may conquer."

"Amen!" said Larsson the younger and Ketchen.

"So be it!" said Bertel and Regina.

END OF THE FIRST CYCLE.

Jarrold and Sons, The Empire Press, Norwich and London.

SELECTIONS FROM

LIST OF FICTION

Maurus Jókai's Famous Novels.

Black Diamonds.

By MAURUS JÓKAI, Author of "The Green Book,"
"Poor Plutocrats," etc.  Translated by Frances
Gerard.  With Special Preface by the Author.

The Green Book.  (FREEDOM UNDER THE SNOW.)

By MAURUS JÓKAI.  Translated by Mrs. Waugh.
With a finely engraved Portrait of Dr. Jókai.

Pretty Michal.

By MAURUS JÖKAI.  Translated by R. Nisbet Bain.
With a specially engraved Photogravure Portrait of
Dr. Jókai.

A Hungarian Nabob.

By MAURUS JÖKAI.  Translated by R. Nisbet Bain.
With a fine Photogravure Portrait of Dr. Jókai.

The Poor Plutocrats.  (AS WE GROW OLD.)

By MAURUS JÖKAI.  Translated by R. Nisbet Bain.
With a fine Photogravure Portrait of Dr. Jókai.

The Day of Wrath.

By MAURUS JÖKAI.  Translated from the Hungarian
by R. Nisbet Bain.  With a Photogravure
Portrait of Dr. Jókai.

Dr. Dumany's Wife.

By MAURUS JÖKAI.  Translated by F. Steinitz
(under the author's personal supervision).  With
specially engraved Photogravure Portrait of Dr. Jókai.

The Nameless Castle.

By MAURUS JÖKAI.  Translated by S. E. Boggs
(under the author's personal supervision).  With a
Photogravure Portrait of Dr. Jókai.

Debts of Honor.

By MAURUS JÖKAI.  Translated by A. B. Yolland.
With a charming Photogravure Portrait of Dr. and
Madame Jókai.

'Midst the Wild Carpathians.

By MAURUS JÖKAI.  Translated by R. Nisbet Bain.
With a specially engraved Portrait of Dr. Jokai.

The Lion of Janina.

By MAURUS JÓKAI.  Translated by R. Nisbet Bain.
With a special Photogravure Portrait of Dr. Jókai.

Eyes Like the Sea.

By MAURUS JÓKAI.  Translated by R. Nisbet Bain.
With a fine Photogravure Portrait of Dr. Jókai.

Halil the Pedlar; THE WHITE ROSE.

By MAURUS JÓKAI.  Translated by R. Nisbet Bain.
With a Photogravure Portrait of Dr. Jókai.

Carpathia Knox.

By CURTIS YORKE, Author of "Hush," "That Little
Girl," "A Romance of Modern London," etc.  With a
charming Photogravure Portrait of the Author.

Jocelyn Erroll.

By CURTIS YORKE, Author of "Once," "Dudley,"
"The Wild Ruthvens," etc.  With a fine Photogravure
Portrait of the Author.

Valentine: A STORY OF IDEALS.

By CURTIS YORKE, Author of "The Medlicotts,"
"His Heart to Win," "Because of the Child," etc.

In Tight Places.

By MAJOR ARTHUR GRIFFITHS, Author of
"Forbidden by Law," etc.

St. Peter's Umbrella.

By KÁLMÁN MIKSZÁTH, Author of "The Good
People of Palvez."  Translated from the original
Hungarian by W. B. Worswick.  With Introduction
by R. Nisbet Bain.  A charming Photogravure
Portrait of the Author and three illustrations.

The Adventures of Cyrano de Bergerac.
Captain Satan.

From the French of Louis Gallet.  With specially
engraved Portrait of Cyrano de Bergerac.

A Woman's Burden,

By FERGUS HUME, Author of "The Mystery of a
Hansom Cab," "The Lone Inn," etc.

Vivian of Virginia.

Being the Memoirs of Our First Rebellion, by John
Vivian, of Middle Plantation, Virginia.  By Hulbert
Fuller, Author of "God's Rebel."  With ten charming
Illustrations by Frank T. Merrill.

Anima Vilis.

A tale of the Great Siberian Steppe.  By MARYA
RODZIEWICZ.  Translated from the Polish by Count
S. C. de Soissons.  With a fine Photogravure Portrait
of the Author.

The Tone King.

A Romance of the Life of Mozart.  By Heribert
Rau.  Translated by J. E. S. Rae.  With specially
engraved Portrait of Mozart.

The Golden Dog (LE CHIEN D'OR).

A Romance of the days of Louis Quinze in Quebec.
By WILLIAM KIRBY, F.R.S.C.

Memory Street.

By MARTHA BAKER DUNN, Author of "Sleeping
Beauty," "Lias' Wife," etc.

God's Rebel.

By HULBERT FULLER, Author of "Vivian of
Virginia."

The Rejuvenation of Miss Semaphore.

A Farcical Novel.  By HAL GODFREY (Miss C.
O'Conor Eccles).

The Man Who Forgot.

By JOHN MACKIE, Author of the "Prodigal's
Brother," "Sinners Twain," etc.  With a special
Photogravure Portrait of the Author.

Jarrold & Sons'

New Six-Shilling Fiction

By MAURUS JOKAI.

Haiti the Pedlar.

(The White Rose).

By COUNT LEO TOLSTOI.

Tales Prom Tolstoi.

Translated from the Russian by R. NISBET-BAIN,

and with Biography of the Author.

By the Author of "ANIMA VILIS."

Distaff.

By MARYA RODZIEWICZ.

Translated from the Polish by COUNT STANISLAUS

C. DE SOISSONS.

By RENÉ BAZIM.

Autumn Glory.

Translated by MRS. ELLEN WAUGH.

By the Author of

"DUKE RODNEY'S SECRET."

Ivy Cardew.

By PERRINGTON PRIMM.

By HULBERT FULLER.

God's Rebel.

By MARTHA BAKER DUNN.

Memory Street.

London:

JARROLD & SONS,

Publishers,

10 & 11, Warwick Lane,

E.C.

End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The King's Ring, by Zacharias Topelius

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE KING'S RING ***

***** This file should be named 58838-h.htm or 58838-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/8/8/3/58838/

Produced by Al Haines
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.