The Project Gutenberg EBook of Kate Aylesford, by Charles J. Peterson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Kate Aylesford
A Story of the Refugees

Author: Charles J. Peterson

Release Date: February 9, 2019 [EBook #58846]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KATE AYLESFORD ***

Produced by Dennis Hyer

KATE AYLESFORD

A STORY OF THE REFUGEES

BY CHARLES J. PETERSON

“Breathes there a man with soul so dead,

Who never to himself hath said

This is my own, my native land.”

—Lay of the Last Minstrel.

Philadelphia:

T. B. PETERSON, NO. 102 CHESTNUT STREET.

BOSTON: PHILLIPS, SAMPSON & CO.

NEW YORK: J. C. DERBY.

Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1855, by

A. H. SIMMONS & CO.,

In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the United States, in and for the

Eastern District of Pennsylvania.

CONTENTS

I. THE NIGHT AT SEA

II. KATE AYLESFORD

III. THE SHIPWRECK

IV. MORNING

V. THE COUNTRY TAVERN

VI. MAJOR GORDON

VII. THE ABORTIVE ATTEMPT

VIII. THE RESCUE

IX. SWEETWATER

X. ARAB

XI. THE RIDE

XII. UNCLE LAWRENCE

XIII. KATE

XIV. THE MARCH ON TRENTON

XV. THE FIRE IN THE WOODS

XVI. THE MISUNDERSTANDING

XVII. JEALOUSY

XVIII. THE COUNTRY CHURCH

XIX. THE MEETING

XX. THE INTERRUPTION

XXI. AYLESFORD AND MRS. WARREN

XXII. AYLESFORD AND KATE

XXIII. THE REFUGEE'S HUT

XXIV. THE PLOT

XXV. TREACHERY

XXVI. POMP'S ADVENTURE

XXVII. THE ABDUCTION

XXVIII. THE VOLUNTEERS

XXIX. CHESTNUT NECK

XXX. THE PURSUIT

XXXI. THE REFUGEE REVEL

XXXII. THE ATTACK

XXXIII. THE SACK OF CHESTNUT NECK

XXXIV. THE REPULSE

XXXV. THE DEATH-BED

XXXVI. THE ESCAPE

XXXVII. INTERCEPTED

XXXVIII. THE FLIGHT

XXXIX. THE BLOODHOUND

XL. POMP AGAIN

XLI. THE PRISONERS

XLII. THE RELEASE

XLIII. PULASKI

XLIV. THE PURSUIT

XLV. THE DEATH-SHOT

XLVI. SWEETWATER AGAIN

XLVII. THE ORPHAN CHILD

XLVIII. THE AYLESFORD MANSION

XLIX. MAGGY

L. A WEDDING IN 1780

LI. FAREWELL

CHAPTER I.

THE NIGHT AT SEA

“Beautiful!

I linger yet with nature, for the night

Hath been to me a more familiar face

Than that of man.” — Byron.

“The silver light, with quivering glance,

Play’d on the water’s still expanse.” — Scott.

It was out on the
broad Atlantic. The sun had just set, red and colossal, behind a bank
of clouds, leaving the whole firmament around him in a blaze of
glory. Far along the western horizon, where the hollow dome of the
sky cut the level plain of waters, a streak of vivid gold was seen,
which grew less and less luminous, however, as it curved around to
north and south, until finally it faded off, at either extremity,
into the misty shadows of approaching night. Above this were piled,
in gorgeous confusion, purple and crimson clouds, the warmer colors
becoming fainter as they ascended, until a gold apple green
prevailed. This itself subsided, towards the zenith, into a pure,
transparent blue, in whose fathomless depths appeared a solitary
silver star, that shone there like the altar light, which twinkles
alone in the profound obscurity of some vast and silent cathedral.

Two persons, on the
quarter-deck of an armed merchant man, were gazing at this scene. One
was an elderly lady, precise in dress and look, the very type of a
conventional and somewhat pompous old dowager. Her companion was a
young girl just budding into womanhood, and of a beauty as peculiar
as it was dazzling. The attitude in which she stood, though assumed
without a thought, was just that which an artist would have chosen
for her. The tiny left foot, with its high instep and slender ankle,
peeped from beneath her petticoat as she leaned on her right arm to
watch the sunset; the round shoulder, white as milk, yet with a warm
tint like rich Carrara marble, was slightly elevated; while the
shapely set of the swan-like neck, the trim waist, and the undulating
outline of her whole person were more than ordinarily conspicuous. As
she stood, her head was partially turned, so that one could see that
her complexion was brilliantly clear; that she had a small, red and
pouting mouth; that her eyes were so darkly blue as to seem almost
purple; and that her hair, which swept in rippling masses from her
forehead, as in a Greek statue, was of that rare color, which, though
brown in shadow, flashes into fleeting gold whenever a sunbeam
strikes it.

“How beautiful!”
she said, after a long silence, drawing a deep breath that seemed
almost a sigh.

The words, though
rather a soliloquy than a remark intended for her companion,
nevertheless drew a reply from the latter.

“Yes! niece,”
answered the dame, briskly, “I wish our cousin, Lord Danville,
could see this sunset. He won’t believe that we have skies, in
America, equal to those of Italy.”

“We must be near
the coast,” said the niece, after another long pause. “We don’t
find such sunsets up on the Banks.”

“In about two days
we shall be at New York, the captain says.”

There was a third
silence. The clouds in the west had now lost most of their gorgeous
tints. They were generally of a deep purple, almost approaching to
black, with only their edges tinged here and there with gold or
crimson. Instead of lying, in fleecy piles, or hanging like thick
curtains drawn partially aside, as they had awhile before, they were
broken up into all sorts of fantastic shapes: castles and
battlements, mountains and deep valleys, towers and spires, vast
elephantine forms and figures, gigantic and weird as the Brocken:
airy dissolving views that were every moment changing.

One mass of these
clouds the two persons we have introduced continued to watch for some
time. At first it had attracted their attention by its striking
similarity to Gibraltar, as it stretched darkly along the horizon,
like a colossal sleeping lion. Gradually the vapors spread
horizontally, and became almost shapeless. Then, suddenly, they
assumed form again, and there, plain to even the most unimaginative,
was an old woman in a short-gown, with one foot angrily uplifted, a
pipe in her mouth, and the most grotesque of all caps upon her head.

A light, silvery
laugh broke from the young girl, and clapping her hands, gleefully,
she cried,

“Aunt, aunt, see!”

Even the stately
dame smiled, but only for a moment, when she looked more prim than
ever, as if fearing she had lowered her dignity.

“The moon will
rise directly,” she said, crossing to the opposite side of the
ship, whither her niece soon followed her.

In the eastern sky,
the clouds were now of the richest amber, while under them the ocean
was suffused with a delicate rosy hue. These tints slowly faded from
both the firmament and sea, and darkness began to accumulate upon the
prospect. In the course of a quarter of an hour, night had settled
down. And now there appeared above a bank of cloud, that lay like a
range of dark hills on the seaboard, the upper edge of the moon’s
disc. Instantaneously a bit of moonlight glimmered on the waters
close under the side of the ship. As the planet gradually rose from
behind the cloud, like some huge burnished ball of copper, the line
of light extended itself to the eastern horizon, a tremulous bridge
of silver.

It was but a little
while, however, that the bright orb shone unclouded. The whole
firmament, indeed, was fast becoming flecked by vapory masses: and
one of these soon floated between the moon and the spectators. In a
few moments the planet was entirely concealed. But far away, almost
on the utmost verge of the horizon, her light, still shining from
behind the cloud, lay on the waters beneath, like a silver lake on a
blue and solitary plain. Gradually this began to contract, lessening
and lessening until it seemed a mere thread of light along the
seaboard; and then a low, white sand-bank: after which it vanished
altogether. Simultaneously the upper edge of the obscuring cloud
showed a faint pearly lining, which the instant after brightened into
silver. Soon the tip of the moon’s disc appeared; and once more the
waves beneath the spectators began to glitter with the planet’s
wake, which directly bridged the undulating deep again; the crests of
the dark waves, and even their higher sides, sparkling and shining as
if discharging electricity.

“It is like a
scene in the Arabian Nights,” enthusiastically exclaimed the
younger female. “But see,” she added, shortly after, “see
again!” The animated speaker caught her aunt’s arm, as she spoke,
while she pointed to a new variation in the brilliant scene before
them.

Another cloud was
now approaching the moon, and in such a way, that its shadow fell
like a bridge of ebony, right across her wake. In a few minutes, the
planet had vanished a second time; a second time the lake of silver
shone on the far-off plain of blue; the white coast-line followed;
the momentary darkness recurred again; and the moon again emerging,
walked up the firmament, in cloudless majesty, like some majestic,
white-robed virgin.

For nearly an hour
the two females remained watching the changes of this lovely night.
Not the least beautiful spectacle were the moonbeams shining on the
snowy sails, which rose above the beholders, cloud on cloud, until
the upper ones almost seemed lost in the sky. The single star still
twinkled over head, swinging backwards and forwards past the
mainmast, as the ship careened and rose in the freshening breeze.

Few words were
spoken. The younger of the two passengers, absorbed completely in the
loveliness of the night, had lost herself in a succession of those
bewitching dreams which haunt the imagination in youth. The dim
obscurity of the scene, when the moon was hidden for any considerable
period, affected her with a sense as of the presence of eternity; and
when her relative, complaining that the air grew cool, proposed an
adjournment to the cabin, she was astonished to see her niece’s
eyes full of tears.

“I think it will
rain,” said the aunt, scarcely knowing what to say, yet wishing to
dissipate what she supposed must be sad thoughts of the past.

“The wind sighs
mournfully,” answered her companion, vacantly, as if pursuing some
secret train of thought, “mournfully as a lost child, alone on a
moor, calling for its mother.”

Again the dame
looked at her. But there were often thoughts and feelings in the
imaginative niece, which the good prosaic lady could not comprehend;
and so she wisely made no reply, but called the captain, who stood
not far off.

“Will we continue
to have clear weather, captain?” she said. “It would be a pity,
after so fine a voyage, to meet a storm at the end.”

“A night like this
is no sign of the morrow, ma’am,” was the reply. “I shouldn’t
be a bit surprised if it was to blow great guns before morning. The
wind has a treacherous feel about it.”

“Dear me, you
frighten us,” exclaimed the good lady, with a slight scream, and
visibly turning paler.

“Your niece does
not look scared, at any rate, Mrs. Warren,” said the captain,
laughingly, as the young girl raised herself, proud and
self-collected, at her aunt’s remark. “I confess that I almost
regret we have had no storm,” he added, “for I would like to see
Miss Aylesford’s courage put to the test. She looks as if nothing
would make her afraid.”

“Oh! she’ll be
the death of me yet,” replied the aunt, “she’s so reckless.
You’d tremble to see her ride, captain, leaping fences and
galloping like a wild huntsman. She’ll get thrown and killed yet:
she has, all the time, such fractious horses; I never had a minute’s
peace in England, and I’m sure I shan’t have any here either.”

“Never fear,
aunty,” said the niece, affectionately, putting her arm around the
other’s waist, and yet with something of the manner with which one
would soothe a timorous child. “I’ll not be so lucky as to be
thrown romantically from my horse, like heroines in novels, and
rescued by some handsome cavalier—”

“Nonsense, child.”

“Whom I shall
marry, of course—”

“How foolish you
talk.”

“Even if I run
away with him—”

“Pshaw!” said
the aunt, quite vexed, not noticing the laughing glance which her
niece directed towards the captain.

“Well, come then,
I was wrong,” said the gay girl, kissing her, “I won’t keep you
out in this chill night air. See, I’ll wrap your shawl close about
you. Captain Powell will take good care of us even if it does storm.”

With these words,
they bade the captain good night and descended to their cabin. The
skipper continued walking the deck, for some time, listening to the
rising wind, and occasionally looking up to the clouds that now began
to scud swiftly across the sky.

“I was foolish to
say even a word to alarm the good old soul,” he remarked at last,
as if conversing to himself. “I’ve seen worse nights than this
turn into a clear morning. Besides, we have a stout ship and a good
offing.”

So speaking, he
dismissed all idea of possible danger.

CHAPTER II.

KATE AYLESFORD

“I love that dear old house! my mother lived there

Her first sweet marriage years. * * * *

The sunlight there seems to me brighter far

Than wheresoever else. I know the forms

Of every tree and mountain, hill and dell:

Its waters jingle like a tongue I know:

It is my home.” —Mrs. Frances K. Butler.

Kate Aylesford was
an only child and an orphan. It had been her misfortune to lose her
mother, at so early a period of life, that she retained no distinct
remembrance of her, and could only recall a mild, sweet face, which,
as in a dream, seemed to have looked down on her, far away in the
past, like a Madonna in a picture.

Eighty years ago,
when our story opens, the facilities for female education were small
anywhere, for it was a generation when Hannah More was considered a
prodigy and when to be able to write grammatically was regarded as
all-sufficient, even for a gentlewoman. There were few good schools
for girls in England, and none at all in America. Mr. Aylesford, the
father of Kate, held a different, and as would be said in this day, a
worthier estimate of woman, from that which was popular among his
generation. He looked back with regret to the time when ladies
studied Greek and read Virgil in the original. The story told of Lady
Jane Grey, that she preferred to stay with her tutor, Ascham, and
read Plato, rather than join the chase, was one of his favorites. He
early resolved, accordingly, that his daughter should be educated in
a better manner than was the fashion of the day. He declared she
should be capable, as he phrased it, of being a companion for a
husband, instead of a mere plaything: that is, he added, with the
reverent piety which, without being Pharisaical, formed a main
ingredient of his character, “if God willed she should be so
blessed.” For, among his other old-fashioned notions, Mr. Aylesford
held that a woman is never so fortunate as when a happy wife and
mother.

Hence it was, that
though he desired his daughter’s intellect to be cultivated, he
took care that her moral qualities, using that word in its widest
sense, should not run to waste. In order to have her properly
educated, he had determined that she should go to England; but
unwilling to trust her to a public school, he had sent out with her
his sister, an elderly widow lady, the relict of an officer in the
army. It was a hard trial for him to separate from his only child,
and one so winning as Kate; for not only the fond father, but every
one who knew her, declared her to be the life of the house. To the
sweetness of her mother’s disposition, she added the gay heart
which had distinguished her surviving parent when young. Fearless by
nature, the life which she necessarily led, in a then comparatively
wild district of the province of New Jersey, had given to her a
courage and self-reliance above her sex and years: for not only at an
age when girls generally are still in the nursery, had she learned to
ride, so as to often accompany her father, but frequently, with no
attendant but one or two stag-hounds, she galloped for half a morning
through the woods. It was, perhaps, to her having spent her early
years in this manner, that she owed her present blooming health and
elastic step. Beauty is oftener the result of fresh air and exercise
than of cosmetics.

Three years after
her arrival in England, Mr. Aylesford died, leaving Kate one of the
richest heiresses in the colonies. In part, her property consisted of
houses and stores in the city of Philadelphia, and in part of vast
tracts of land in the middle counties of West Jersey. The war between
the colonies and mother country soon after broke out, and, for a
while, it seemed as if the heiress was destined never to see her
native land again. Her guardians were averse to her return to a
country distracted by war, and her aunt, who, in spite of being an
officer’s widow, was timorous to the last degree, seconded them.
But Kate inherited the resolute spirit of her father, and had early
resolved to return, as soon as she became mistress of herself. Her
fixed determination at last influenced her guardians, so that, after
she had left school and been presented at court, a favorable
opportunity offering, they had consented to her wish. They were the
more willing to concede the point, because, at that time, the royal
arms seemed about to triumph; New York was in undisturbed possession
of Sir Henry Clinton; and the portion of New Jersey, where her
estates lay, was, according to the current reports in London, free
from the presence of the enemy. We need not add that these guardians,
as well as her aunt, were warm friends of the king. It was on this
return voyage, after a successful run of thirty days, and when, as
the captain calculated, forty-eight hours would bring them within
sight of Neversink, that we have introduced Miss Aylesford to the
reader.

A long time elapsed,
even after she had retired to her berth, before Kate could sleep. A
vague presentiment seemed to oppress her. In vain she closed her
eyes. The gradually increasing wind, and the rush of the waters
alongside, prevented slumber. Once or twice she forgot herself in a
doze, but a louder shriek of the rising gale, or a sudden dash of
some huge billow against the timbers at her head, roused her with a
start. Still, as there was nothing of fear in her nature, these
things did not agitate her. She never even thought that anything
serious impended, for she had heard such sounds often before during
the voyage. Finally, long after her aunt was lost in slumber, she
fell asleep.

She was roused
suddenly, some hours after, by the noise of her relative.

“Wake up, my
child, wake, wake,” cried the good lady in accents of terror. “We
are all going to the bottom. Oh! what shall we do?”

Kate sat up in bed
and looked around. She and her aunt occupied the after cabin of the
ship, which had been engaged exclusively for them; and this apartment
was now lighted by a swinging lamp, which threw a faint yellowish hue
on the surrounding objects. The floor of the cabin, rising almost
perpendicularly, and then sinking again, showed that the ship pitched
and rolled with unusual severity. Kate had never seen anything like
it. Her aunt was dressing as rapidly as a person could, who had
always to hold on to something with one hand, and often with two.

On deck, the
hurrying of feet, the rattling of blocks, the creaking of yards, the
sharp whistling of wind through the cordage, the quick, loud word of
command, and other noisy and tumultuous sounds, betokened some
important crisis. The roar of the sea had become almost deafening. It
was, however, occasionally exceeded by the thunder of the gale, which
now dying partially away, swelled again into a volume that
overpowered everything else. At rare intervals, when other noises
partially subsided, Kate fancied she could distinguish the rushing
sound of rain.

The terror of her
aunt called up all the courage of Miss Aylesford. Hastily attiring
herself, she staggered across the cabin floor to her relative, and
began to assist the latter’s shaking hands.

“They have
fastened us down here, too, I suppose,” cried Mrs. Warren, in a
tremulous voice. “We shall be drowned, without having a chance to
get on deck.”

Kate herself knew
not but that, in another moment, the ship might sink. Certainly, all
she had ever read, or imagined, of a storm at sea, was nothing to
this. She felt that if there was something tangible to meet, if she
could only get on deck and see what was going on, she would be better
able to face the peril.

“We are in God’s
hands, you know, aunt. If you are not afraid of being left alone, I
will try to reach the deck, and learn what is the matter—”

“Don’t, for
mercy’s sake, leave me,” cried Mrs. Warren, clinging to her
niece. “What shall I do down here alone?” But a tremendous surge,
almost heaving the ship on her beam ends, a new terror overcame the
dread of being left for a moment, and she cried, suddenly, “Yes,
yes, go, go, and see what is the matter. Tell the captain we are in
no hurry. Perhaps it’s his carrying so much sail, as he calls it,
that makes the ship lean over so. Dear me, if I once get on dry land,
I’ll never trust myself at sea again.”

Kate did not wait
for a second permission. She crept along towards the forward cabin,
which served for the dining room, reached the stairs, and clambered
up with difficulty. A moment after she stood upon the deck.

The night was now
pitch dark. A cold, heavy rain was falling, hissing and dancing as it
struck the deck, and occasionally driving wildly past in an almost
horizontal direction. But Kate did not for a while even know that it
rained. Her entire energies were demanded to keep her feet, for
between the violent motion of the ship, and the fury of the wind, she
was nearly prostrated. When at last she had gained a slightly
sheltered position, and found something to hold on by, she looked
anxiously around.

The wide expanse of
waters was black as ink, except where, here and there, the white caps
flashed up. Miss Aylesford, in that first impressive moment, forgot
all thought of possible peril, so overpowered was she by the dread
majesty of the scene before her. She could liken it to nothing but
the abyss of woe, surging its black waters from depths that no
plummet could ever sound, impiously against heaven, which frowned in
awful anger back; and the illusion was sustained by the white and
ghastly objects which flitted across the vision, like spectres cast
up from the profound below, and driven remorselessly past by
inexorable fates.

But this feeling of
awe and admiration lasted only for a moment. She remembered her
terror-struck aunt below, and looked around to see if there was any
person of whom she could inquire. But everybody seemed engaged in a
struggle for life or death. A dim figure, in which she fancied she
recognized the captain, stood at the helm, with a speaking trumpet at
its mouth; while two stalwart forms grasped the spokes of the wheel;
and other vague shapes hurried hither and thither across the deck
through the darkness and storm. There was a wild confusion of orders,
given so rapidly that she could distinguish no words, and of noises
compounded of the wind and sea, so that she was almost stunned.

This rapid survey
consumed but a moment. Looking down the sloping deck, she saw close
under the lee of the ship what seemed a vortex of foaming water; and
now, for the first time, she recognized a dull, sullen roar, which
she knew to be that of breakers. At once the whole peril of their
situation flashed upon her. Instead of being a hundred miles at sea,
as Captain Powell had supposed, they were close upon the coast; and
these superhuman exertions, which she saw master and crew making,
were designed to get an offing for the vessel.

Suddenly a loud
report was heard, like the discharge of a cannon in the air, and
looking up, Kate saw what seemed a white cloud flying down to
leeward.

“God have mercy on
us,” she heard a voice cry, its sharp tone of agony rising over all
the roar of wind and waters, “the main-topsail is gone. Look out,
she strikes!”

At the same instant,
Kate felt a shock, which precipitated her on her face, and
instantaneously what appeared an ocean of water rushed over and
submerged her.

CHAPTER III.

THE SHIPWRECK

“To hear

The roaring of the raging elements,

To know all human skill, all human strength,

Avail not; to look around, and only see

The mountain wave incumbent with its weight,

Of bursting waters o’er the reeling bark,—

Oh! God, this is indeed a dreadful thing.” —Southey.

“In breeze, or gale, or storm,

Icing the pole, or in the torrid clime

Dark-heaving; boundless, endless and sublime.

Each zone

Obeys thee, thou goest forth, dread, fathomless, alone.” —Byron.

In a moment,
however, the brave girl struggled to her feet. Her first thought was
of her aunt. She was about groping her way down to the cabin, for the
purpose of seeking Mrs. Warren, when the latter’s voice was heard,
faint with terror, calling on her name.

“Here I am, aunt,”
answered Kate, as cheerfully as she could. She held out her hand,
which Mrs. Warren eagerly caught.

At any other time
Kate’s sense of the ludicrous would have overcome her at the figure
of her aunt. The good lady had only had time to huddle on the most
necessary garments, and some of these were even awry; while the
elegancies of the toilet, about which the stately dame was so
particular, were totally neglected for once. It was the fashion in
those days, for elderly matrons, to wear a cushion on the top of the
head, over which to comb the hair; but this was now wholly wanting to
Mrs. Warren, and her hair, usually so precisely arranged, and so
carefully powdered, hung in tangled elf-locks about her face. The
whole of her person and dress, moreover, was dripping, like that of
some Triton just risen from the sea. Could the excellent old creature
have seen her image reflected in a glass, she would have fainted
outright from shame and outraged propriety. But mortal fear had now
so conquered every other sensation, that when she rushed into her
niece’s arms, it was with the paramount feeling that in Kate’s
heroic character was the only hope at this frightful juncture.

“Hold fast under
the lee of this bulwark,” said the niece. “It’s the safest
place I can find.”

Her aunt
mechanically obeyed, without reply, for her increasing fear had now
deprived her of the power of speech.

The tremendous shock
with which the ship struck, had snapped off the masts as if they had
been pipe-stems, and Kate’s next thought, after having temporarily
provided for the safety of her aunt, was what was to be done with the
wreck of spars and rigging, which, beating against the vessel’s
sides, threatened to crush them like egg-shells. Suddenly, through
the gloom, she saw a figure, armed with an axe, creep along by the
larboard bulwarks, until it had attained a favorable position, when
it began cutting away with rapid strokes at the hamper. In this
person she had no difficulty in recognizing the captain, who
continued skillfully and rapidly dealing his blows, though often half
submerged in water, until the confused mass began to give way, and
rushing into the boiling vortex, was swept down to leeward. Other
strokes from other axes were heard simultaneously, and a moment after
the remaining masts, with their complicated yards and canvass, went
off also into the wild maelstrom.

While some of the
officers and men had been thus engaged in freeing the wreck, others
had turned their attention to giving warning of their situation, in
case assistance was near. Accordingly, the masts had scarcely been
whirled away by the tumultous surge, when a bright jet of flame shot
out from the starboard side of the ship; and the solemn boom of a
signal gun went forth across the night. Discharge followed discharge,
at regular periods, the crew listening eagerly, during the interval,
to detect an answering sound, if any should be made. The profound
darkness in which the vessel was enveloped was dissipated, for an
instant, at each discharge; and the anxious faces of the crew, the
desolate decks, and the vexed ocean, stood out, as if revealed by a
lightning-flash; but the sudden gleam passed as quickly as it came, a
darkness followed, apparently the deeper from the blaze of light; and
horror, gloom, and dread fell again on all.

For a considerable
time the signal-guns continued to be fired, but when the sailors
found that no answer came, a recklessness seized them, the offspring
of despair acting on brutal, animal natures. They first began to
murmur in undertones; then to refuse doing duty; and finally they
left the gun in a body, swearing that there was no use in further
efforts. In vain the captain, rushing among them, endeavored to bring
them back to discipline; they either sullenly slunk away or openly
defied him; and he soon found that he could not even count on his
mates, but would probably be murdered if he persisted in his
endeavor. In a little while everything was in confusion. The crew,
breaking into the spirit-room, speedily became intoxicated, and all
semblance even of order was now lost.

While some of the
seamen were still lingering in the spirit-room, a cry arose that the
ship was breaking up; and immediately a rush was made for the boats
by the intoxicated crew. Here again the captain attempted to
interpose his authority; but he was knocked down, trampled on, and
indeed came near losing his life. It was soon found that but one boat
remained fit to use, the others having been stove. Into this the
rebellious crew tumbled pell-mell, the mates following; and such was
the hurry of the affrighted fugitives, that they forgot to secure
either water or provisions.

The whole of these
events, from the ceasing to fire signal-guns up to the present
period, had followed each other in the quickest succession. Indeed
they appeared to have consumed less time than we have taken to
describe them.

The boat had been
filled and manned, but just as it was pushing off, a voice cried—

“Captain Powell,
you may come aboard, if you like”

“No,” was the
prompt answer; “I’ll stick by the ship, you mutinous rascals.”

“As you please,”
answered the speaker. “But there are the passengers. Ladies, will

you
come aboard? Make up your minds quick.”

At this the captain
rushed to where Kate was standing.

“Don’t go,” he
cried, eagerly. “They’ll all be drowned. No boat can live five
minutes.”

Kate hesitated. She
was inexperienced, and knew not what to do. On the one hand it seemed
inconceivable that so many persons would rush to what they ought to
be aware would be certain destruction. On the other, the tone of
absolute conviction in which the captain spoke, added to the high
opinion she had formed of his seamanship and good judgment, inclined
her to follow the advice.

“Quick!” cried
the speaker from the boat, while other voices murmured impatiently.

She still hesitated,
though her aunt pulled her arm, as if to go. Any further decision,
however, was not permitted to her, for, the next instant, another
voice from the boat cried, sharply—

“We can’t wait
all night; push off, push off.”

Other voices, almost
simultaneously, seconded this impatient cry, and the boat, on the
instant, sunk away from the side of the ship, to be seen, the moment
after, rising on a wave a good pistol-shot distant.

“Madmen!”
muttered the captain between his teeth.

He had scarcely
spoken, when a gigantic roller overtook the boat, still dimly visible
as she floated broadside on, for in the haste and confusion of
putting off all the men had not yet got out their oars, and
consequently her head had not been pulled around.

A cry from the
captain, and a stifled shriek from Kate burst forth, for the wave,
rising like a moving hill, was now seen overtopping the boat for one
brief moment, while a crowd of horror-struck countenances, whose
looks Kate never forgot to her dying day, gazed up at it from below;
and then, with a roar as of a hungry lion descending upon its prey,
the enormous billow plunged headlong upon the miserable wretches. In
that roar were mingled shrieks such as made the blood of the
listeners curdle, the last wild cries, and the agonizing prayers of
dying men. A whirlpool of foam was all that could be seen at first,
after the boat had disappeared, out soon an oar floated to the
surface, then a hat, then a struggling figure or two, and then faces
upturned wildly in the death-struggle. But the next surge that swept
over the spot carried them under again, or bore them out of sight
into the gloom ahead.

A solemn silence
prevailed for a while, broken at last by the captain, who said—

“God pity them!”
And after a while, he added. “It is strange that men will be so
foolhardy! But when presence of mind is lost, even the bravest become
crazed.”

“Is there any hope
even for us!” said Kate, after a pause. “Where are we?”

The captain looked
down on her with admiration, at the firm tone in which she spoke.

“While there is
life there is hope,” he answered. “If these old timbers last till
morning, we’ll be able to see where we are; and, if near the coast,
perhaps help may be had.”

“You are ignorant,
then, exactly where we’ve struck?”

“Yes. My reckoning
must have been false. I thought myself more than a day’s sail from
the coast, and was thunderstruck when the lookout cried, in the
middle of the night, that there were breakers ahead.”

“You were on
deck?”

“I never go below,
when near the end of a voyage, even if I think everything safe. As
soon as he spoke, I leaped into the rigging, and there sure enough, I
saw the white water flashing near at hand. I hauled the ship close on
a wind at once, and began to crowd the canvass upon her.”

“It was the hurry
and noise of making more sail that woke us.”

“It was of no use,
however,” continued the captain, acknowledging the interruption by
an affirmative nod. “Do all we could, we could just hold our own;
and very soon the main-topsail, on which I had placed my chief
reliance, split and went to leeward. She fell off instantly, striking
with force enough, one would have thought, to shiver her into atoms.
The masts went overboard, and you know the rest. Poor thing!” he
added, mournfully, apostrophizing the vessel, “she’s carried me
across the Atlantic, this is now the tenth time, but she’ll never
do it again. Ah!” he continued, with natural emotion, “I little
fancied we’d part so.”

“It was just as
the sail went to ribbons,” said Kate, after a pause, for she
respected the feelings of the master too much to proceed at once,
“that I came on deck. You said that, when day broke, succor perhaps
might be found. But we may be some distance from land; for, if I
recollect—I was born in New Jersey—there are bars far out at
sea.”

“You are right,”
answered the captain. “The shore, too, is but a sand-bank, all
along that coast; and one separated, by miles of shallow lagoons,
from the fast land. If we’ve struck anywhere below Squam, we’ll
not be likely to get aid, even if the high tide has carried us over
the outer bars and landed us right on the shore. Few, or none of the
beaches, if I’ve heard rightly, are inhabited. But let us hope
we’re nigher the Hook, for, in that case, we must be close in, and
there are farmhouses and fishing-cabins there, in sight of the sea.”

He did not add,
that, even if this should prove to be the case, it was extremely
problematical whether assistance could be rendered to them, while the
waves ran so high. His secret opinion was, that the chance of escape
was the very slightest, for he had no faith in the ship’s timbers
holding together till the gale subsided, even if they did till
morning. But, brave as Kate was, he shrank from acquainting one so
young, and who had every prospect of a happy life before her, that a
speedy death was almost inevitable. Besides, he noticed the extreme
terror of her aunt, who could, indeed, scarcely hold to her support,
so unnerved was she by the peril of their situation.

For, even during
this conversation, both the speakers had occasionally been almost
carried from their feet. Nearly every surge swept more or less over
the ship. Twice the master had to interpose to save Kate from being
prostrated; and still more frequently his services were required in
behalf of her aunt. Occupying a position between the two women, he
was fortunately able to afford instant aid to either. Meantime, the
storm showed no symptoms of subsiding. The rain still fell in sheets,
often stinging the bare hands of the victims like hail. The wind
shrieked as if the sea had temporarily given up its wicked dead, who
gibbered as they rushed past in the gloom.

The seas also seemed
to run still higher. They came trooping on, fast and thick as hungry
wolves; rushed by with a howl that fairly appalled the listeners; or
leaped and snarled about the ship, as if eager for their prey, and
grudging every moment of delay. Now and then a roller, more colossal
than its predecessors, would sweep the whole length of the deck,
making a breach completely over the vessel, whose every timber
quivered as if she was about to part.

The darkness, all
this time, was palpable. Often it seemed as if the low sky and the
upheaved waves were about to commingle above the doomed ship; and
always, in looking seaward, the boundary line between the two was
lost in a chaos of obscurity scarcely a hundred feet off.

CHAPTER IV.

MORNING

Environ’d with a wilderness of sea;

Who marks the waxing tide grow wave by wave,

Expecting ever when some envious surge

Will in his brinish bowels swallow him. —Shakespeare.

It is, methinks, a morning full of fate!

It riseth slowly, as her sullen car,

Had all the weight of sleep and death hung at it!

She is not rosy-fingered, but swollen black. —Jonson.

“We shall be more
sheltered,” continued the captain, “if we change our places. The
waves, I see, don’t sweep the deck further aft on the starboard
side. Shall we try to get there? I doubt if you could hold out till
morning here. Certainly your aunt could not. She is already more dead
than alive.”

Kate saw, at once,
the wisdom of the suggestion. The ship, before going on the bar, had
been running nearly parallel to the breakers, her head being slightly
inclined seaward; but when the main-topsail went, she had whirled
around, and struck bard on, heeling to larboard: consequently she now
lay almost at right angles with the surf. Along the inclined deck the
waves continually washed. The stern, however, protected the after
portion, especially the higher side; for the waters, even when they
made a clean breach over the ship, parted right and left around this
sheltered spot.

“But can we get
there?” said Kate, in a whisper, glancing at her aunt, who, through
fear and wet, was now almost incapable of moving.

“I think I can
manage her,” was the reply, in the same low tone, “if you can
hold on here till I return.”

“We will go,
then?”

Captain Powell did
not lose a moment. Putting one stalwart arm around Mrs. Warren, and
holding on by the other, he watched his opportunity, and started on
his perilous enterprise. Kate gazed upon them breathlessly. Once she
feared that they would lose their footing, for a large billow,
rushing in over the lower side, swept the decks through their whole
length; but the captain fortunately had seen it coming, and had
hurriedly told his companion to hold on with all her strength. When,
therefore, the waters had subsided, Kate saw that the captain was
already advancing again across the slippery decks; and the moment
after she had the satisfaction of beholding him safely deposit his
companion in the sheltered nook, under the high stern.

Kate had never
intended that the captain should return for her, because she knew how
much her aunt’s terror would be increased by being left alone; but
she had said nothing of this purpose, in order to spare
remonstrances. As it would not do to wait, she set out at once.

When Captain Powell,
therefore, having arranged a seat for Mrs. Warren, turned to go for
Kate, he saw the brave girl already more than half way on her route.
He shouted to her to stop till he could come up, especially as he saw
a roller advancing; but she paid no heed to his words; and the next
moment, as he had feared, she was hurried from sight under the huge
wave as it swept the deck.

Striking the ship a
little to the larboard of where he stood, this mass of dark water,
that glistened like solid glass, went rushing up the sloping deck, in
front of him, till it struck the bulwarks on the higher side, when
dashing to pieces, a part flew crackling over in shattered fragments
and clouds of spray, while the remaining portion, now churned to a
milk-white color, rushed forward with irresistible force, carrying
everything before it, till it precipitated itself in cataracts over
the bow, or found escape by spouting from the hawse-holes, as if
driven through them by a force-pump.

Under this enormous
volume of water Kate disappeared entirely from sight. Captain Powell
feared that she had not seen the approaching peril, and that, having
no firm hold, she had been swept from her feet. Mrs. Warren, even in
her half exhausted state, uttered a faint scream, and would have
rushed forward, if she could have broken away. The captain looked
eagerly to see Kate’s white garments amid the foam, as the wave
swept onward. It seemed, meantime, as if the waters would never
subside from the deck. What was in reality not more than a few
seconds, appeared to him interminable.

At last, the sight
so eagerly desired greeted his eyes; and Kate was seen comparatively
unharmed. Pausing only to recover breath, and watch that no more such
surges were coming in, she darted forward with the swiftness of a
deer, and reached his side, panting so that she could not, for a
moment, answer his eager inquiries.

“Did I see it
rolling in?” she said, at last. “Yes, and took a firm hold; but I
thought it would never pass over me; I seemed to be an age beneath
the water.”

“It was fortunate
it was no worse. I would not have taken one to a thousand pounds on
your escape.”

“Oh! you don’t
know what a sailor I can be,” answered Kate, cheerfully. “Thank
you,” she said, as Captain Powell arranged a seat for her. “We
shall get along nicely till morning now. How fortunate it’s not
winter, isn’t it, aunt?”

Seating herself at
these words, she put her arm around her aunt, and drawing the head of
the latter to her shoulder, began affectionately stroking the water
from her aged relative’s head. The poor creature could only answer
this caress by tears, which flowed heavily down her cheeks, and by
grateful looks.

“Are you cold,
aunt? You shake your head. Yet you must be chilly, wet through as you
are.”

“If you please,
Miss Aylesford,” said the captain, “I think I can make my way
into the cabin, and bring up some cloaks and shawls for you and your
aunt.” And without waiting for a reply, he left them.

In a few minutes he
returned. The warmth of the dry over garments, gradually revived Mrs.
Warren. But even when she regained the command of words, she could
only deplore their situation, and repeat, again and again, that she
knew they never would reach the shore alive.

Kate, in the
meanwhile, did all she could to reassure her aunt, though far from
feeling confident herself. Much of the time, when they were silent,
she spent in inward prayer. And surely, if ever petitions could avert
evil, those of that pure-minded, brave girl ought.

Slowly the night
wore on. To those lonely watchers for the morning, the hours appeared
almost an eternity. A hundred times they turned their longing eyes
seaward, in hopes to see the horizon lighting up. Sometimes they were
deceived into thinking the dawn at hand, by a temporary lifting of
the clouds in the east; but the darkness soon closed in as profound
as ever; and the disappointment was then all the more poignant from
that momentary gleam of hope.

Low and wild the
clouds continued to drift past; but the rain had now slackened. On
the other hand, the waves ran higher than ever, so that the captain’s
fear that the ship would break up before morning, increased
momentarily. Already the wreck was badly logged, as even Kate could
see; and at any instant the hull might be expected to part into two
pieces, under the blow of some new roller, as powerful as the one
which had so nearly carried her off.

“She holds
together bravely,” said the captain, when several hours had passed.
“The good craft is as tough as old junk. I begin to feel now that
she’ll not go to pieces till next tide, at any rate. Have you
noticed, Miss Aylesford, that the water is falling?”

“I had not,”
answered Kate. “How can you tell in the darkness and storm?”

“Leave an old salt
alone for that,” was the reply, with something of that professional
pride which even peril cannot entirely subdue. “You see, Miss, the
gale’s as high as ever, and the waves run as wild, yet the decks
are not swept as often, or as deep, as they were. We haven’t had a
surge to reach us since we changed our places. The ship heels over
also more, which she would naturally do as the tide went out.”

“I understand,”
said Kate. “But look,” she cried, suddenly, “isn’t that
morning? Surely, we cannot be mistaken this time.”

She pointed to the
east as she spoke, where indeed no streak of light was to be seen, as
on ordinary dawns, but where a thinning away of the heavy vapors was
quite perceptible. Overhead all was yet blank, and the forms of the
clouds were undistinguishable; but in the eastern seaboard, the sky
had a fleecy look, as when mists begin to break away on a mountain
side.

“You are right,”
answered Captain Powell; “it is morning, God be praised.”

“Didn’t I tell
you so, aunt?” said Kate, cheerfully, turning to her relative. “You
hear what the captain says. It is really daybreak. We shall soon be
able to see the shore, and no doubt be succored.”

Oh! the blessed
dawn! It comes to the weary invalid, and gives new life to his veins.
It comes to the watchers by the bed of death, and inspires them with
momentary hope. But never comes it more welcome than to those, who,
like our shipwrecked group, expect it as their only reliance. It made
even Mrs. Warren feel strong, almost gay again.

Gradually the
darkness vanished. It was not by any sudden influx of light, but by
an imperceptible growth, which could only be noticed by the changes
which long intervals produced. The black curtains of gloom, which had
hung like a pall close around, slowly receded, the light diffusing
itself, as it were, reluctantly and warily.

All eyes were turned
in the direction of the land, long before it was possible to
distinguish objects, at a distance, with certainty. At first, nothing
but a waste of white waters, of billows racing after each other into
a boundless space ahead, could be discerned. But finally, what seemed
a long, low sand-bank, was made out, a short cable’s length off. It
was a mere bar, elevated a few feet above the ocean, which, in many
places, appeared to be actually making breaches over it. Not a house,
nor even tree was distinguishable, on this barren and inhospitable
shore; but here and there a few bushes, around which the drifting
sand had collected, offered some slight opposition to the advancing
waters.

For some time no one
spoke. Kate’s heart swelled within her, and she could not frame
words; once or twice she attempted it, and choked. She saw that the
ship had struck on one of those uninhabited beaches, which the
captain had described in the night; and that there was no longer any
hope, for probably not a farmhouse, or human being existed within
miles. As for Mrs. Warren, she gazed from the captain to her niece in
speechless horror, wringing her hands, for she read in the face of
each the despair that had succeeded to the momentary exhilaration
produced by the dawn.

At last the master
spoke. He had waited until the prospect brightened sufficiently
landward to observe objects at some distance. But when he found that
nothing was discernible, for miles on miles in that direction,
through the drizzling mist—except salt marshes, against which even
the partially protected waters inside the beach dashed fiercely, and
over which the leaden-colored clouds swiftly drove,—he turned to
Kate, and said, in a hoarse whisper.

“God help us, for
there is none in man!”

Then, his thoughts
reverting to his family, he ejaculated, “my poor wife!” and,
completely unmanned, covered his face with his hands.

CHAPTER V.

THE COUNTRY TAVERN

The night drav’ on wi’ songs and clatter,

But aye the ale was growing better. —Burns.

We must now go back
a few hours in our story, and introduce the reader to a different
scene and personages.

The southern half of
New Jersey is almost a dead level, covered with pine and oak forests,
growing on a sandy soil. A slightly elevated ridge, however, runs in
a southwesterly direction between Delaware Bay and the Atlantic,
though much nearer the former than the latter, and divides the waters
that flow westward from those that run toward the east.

One of the most
considerable of the rivers, descending from this water-shed toward
the Atlantic, empties into a wide, deep bay, almost shut in from the
ocean by low beaches in its front. Notoriously the best anchoring
ground between Sandy Hook and Cape May, it is a place of constant
resort for coasters. At the time of which we write, it was, for
similar reasons, a rendezvous for American privateers; and, in fact,
their prizes usually discharged their cargoes on the neck of land
where the river first swelled into the bay. Others, ascending higher
up the stream, unloaded at the head of navigation, from which point
the goods were carried across the country to Philadelphia by teams,
the blockade of the Delaware, by the British fleet, preventing access
often in a more direct way. It was not uncommon to find a dozen or
two armed vessels lying in this river, waiting for a chance to sail.

Five and seventy
years ago, when our story commences, this bay was even more shut out
from the Atlantic than it is at present; for while now there is an
inlet directly in its front, at that period the entrance was further
to the south. Where, at present, vessels of considerable draught pass
under full sail, was then a beach, elevated some distance above the
water.

On an arm of this
bay, or to speak more accurately, on an inconsiderable stream jutting
into an arm of the bay, there stood, at the time of which we write, a
small settlement, which, though its first beginnings dated back
scarcely more than ten or fifteen years, already gave promise of
becoming a thriving place. In the rude tavern of this incipient
village, on the evening preceding the events detailed in the last
chapter, quite a number of persons were gathered.

Most of the company
appeared to belong to the various privateers then lying in the bay,
and were merely boisterous tars; but there was one individual, whose
bearing, not less than his dress, bespoke him of a higher rank. He
was a man apparently about eight-and-twenty years of age, handsome in
person, and with a face which, though by no means homely, was
principally remarkable for the indications it gave of frankness,
decision, a good heart, and a superior intellect. It was impossible,
indeed, to look on that countenance, without feeling that, while its
possessor was born to rule in public affairs, his destiny was to be
equally fortunate in winning esteem and affection in private life. He
wore the buff and blue of the American army. Sitting in one corner,
where he was busily engaged in writing, he seemed to be entirely
unconscious of what was going on around him, except when he
occasionally intermitted the busy motion of his pen, and leaning his
head on one hand, gazed with an abstracted smile on the sports of the
crowd.

For, night having
closed in, and the seamen being ashore on leave till morning, a black
fiddler had been procured, and a dance begun. It is true there were
none of the fairer sex present to participate in the amusement, but
this, so far from checking the merriment, only gave it more freedom
and boisterousness. Several countrymen, from small farms in the
interior, who had come down with produce in the afternoon, and whom
the exhilarating sounds of the violin had tempted to linger behind,
when their sturdy dames were expecting them at home, joined heartily
in the fun. Utterly heedless of the black looks awaiting them, when,
repentant on the morrow, they should slink into the chimney corner,
they laughed, and joked, and danced, and drank whiskey with Jack Tar,
as if there had been, and never would be, a “gudewife” angry at
neglect, and “nursing her wrath to keep it warm.”

As the hours wore
on, and the wind outside began to rise, the mirth waxed louder and
more contagious. Perhaps the landlord’s old whiskey contributed its
mite also; but be this as it may, long before midnight the uproar was
terrible. The floor shook under the feet of the performers; the
rafters of the ceiling trembled with the shouts and laughter: and the
shrill notes of the Cremona rose over all. The few tallow candles,
which, from tin sconces, threw at best but a faint yellow radiance
around, were almost obscured by the dust that rose from the floor and
the smoke that ascended from innumerable pipes. The landlord, with a
boy for an assistant, stood within the quadrant shaped bar, that
occupied one corner of the apartment, looking out, from between the
upright rails, with a well-pleased smile, for he knew that the louder
the merriment, the greater would be his profits. Indeed, he had
little leisure even to look, so frequent were the calls from his
thirsty customers.

It may seem strange
that the officer should select this apartment for the purpose of
writing, or that he could abstract himself sufficiently to write at
all in such a din. But, in truth, the inn afforded no place whither
he might retreat. In the primitive fashion of that age and district,
it had but one huge room, unless the loft overhead, where the guests
slept in rows, could be dignified by that name. It was a matter of
necessity for him, therefore, to turn this apartment, which
alternately served for ball-room, bar-room, dining-saloon and
town-hall, into a library. Fortunately, circumstances had early
taught him that valuable discipline of mind, which enables the
possessor to concentrate his thoughts on the subject before him,
regardless of the confusion and noise around.

Toward midnight rain
began to fall. Occasionally, in pauses of the merriment, the storm
would be heard beating wildly against the window panes, while now and
then, when the door was temporarily opened, the wind would dash the
cold drops into the faces of those near the entrance. The trees,
which overshadowed the house, moaned in the gale. Down the village
street the tempest went howling wildly, till in the distance it sank
to a low wail. The water in the neighboring bay, driven fiercely
against the meadows, roared with an ever-increasing sound, as if
threatening to inundate the low tongue of land whereon the hamlet was
built.

But little cared the
crowd of guests for the storm. A spirited contest was going on
between two dancers, who, after having often been engaged in
temporary trials of skill during the evening, had now apparently
entered on a decisive struggle. One was a short, square-built sailor,
in a pair of canvass trowsers thickly besprinkled with tar. He wore a
tarpaulin on his head, and sported, in the fashion of the day, an
immense queue behind, which, as he danced, worked up and down on his
back like an iron pump-handle. His antagonist was a tall, lank
countryman, with a body disproportionately small, legs that looked
like a pair of stilts, and arms that, swinging in tune to his
double-shuffle, resembled those of a windmill revolving without their
sails. His yellow hair hung down lank all around his face. He had
thrown off his coat, and now stood in his original shirtsleeves, with
a deep waistcoat that reached almost to his knees. A pair of
pinch-beck seals, attached to an enormous watch that was his especial
pride, being almost the only one in his neighborhood, bobbed heavily
up and down against his baggy breeches; while a few copper farthings
jingled ostentatiously in his pockets, as he went vigorously through
the figures of that time-honored dance, which is known to the
initiated as a “Jersey Four.”

“Keep it up,
Jack,” shouted the friends of the tar, and “Go it, Lively!”
answered the backers of the other party; while the spectators
laughed, clapped their hands, and kept time to the music; the fiddler
nodded his head in sympathy with the motion; and the two rivals did
their best to satisfy their patrons and win the laurels they coveted.
The sailor danced away as stoutly as if worked by machinery, his
feet, hands, limbs and portly paunch moving neither faster nor
slower: it seemed for a while, as if he could continue to dance in
the same impassive way forever, if necessary. The countryman,
however, was less phlegmatic. Occasionally, the vigor of his
saltatory action would fall perceptibly off, but becoming aware of
this by some observation from the crowd, or through his own
consciousness, he would suddenly give himself a jerk, as if his whole
body had been moved, all at once, by pulling a string; and then away
he would go, in and out, around and back, dancing to his partner as
if life and death depended on his agility, his arms swinging, his
legs going, and the perspiration rolling from his face.

“Jack’s got
enough; he’s giving out,” cried one of the landsmen, triumphantly
calling attention to the tar, after the countryman had, with another
jerk, started off apparently as fresh as ever. “He’s blowing like
a porpoise. Hoe it down right smart, Jim, and you have him. Hurrah
for
Jarsey
!”

It was plain that
the pursy seaman was beginning to be exhausted at last. He still
danced away as imperturbably as ever; but there was a perceptible
anxiety in his countenance; and at last, after fresh attempts, on the
part of his comrades, to encourage him, had failed, he gave in,
completely exhausted.

“You’re too much
for me, shipmate,” he said, panting, good-humoredly addressing the
victor. “I’ve seen the day, though,” he added, turning to the
crowd, “when I could dance anybody down, but Portsmouth Peggy. But
this chap, I own up, is my match. Give us your hand, my hearty, I
bear no ill will.”

The countryman, on
seeing his antagonist retire, had uttered a shrill cry of exultation,
and cut a pigeon-wing, which latter he had just concluded, as the
seaman tendered his hand. He clutched this between his horny palms,
returning the good-fellowship with hearty accord.

“Let’s liquor,”
he said, magnanimously, throwing his arms around his late adversary,
and pulling him, nothing loath, towards the bar. “It’s my treat.
Bring up your shipmates. I’m as dry as if my mouth was gunpowder.
Hillo, Major,” he said, turning to the officer, “won’t yon
drink? You’d rather not! No offence, I hope; for I meant none.
Here’s to ‘Old Jarsey: small but spunky.’”

The toast was drank
with all the honors, and then nothing would satisfy the exhilarated
victor, but that the fiddler should also partake of a libation.
Accordingly the sable performer was summoned to “stop that infernal
caterwauling,” as his tuning up was elegantly termed by the
speaker, and “walk up like a gentleman, to drink with the landlord
and him.”

For a moment, after
these words were spoken, and while the negro was grinning as the
landlord handed out his glass, there was one of those moments of
temporary silence which will happen even at the noisiest
entertainments. Simultaneously there came a lull in the driving rain
and howling wind without.

Suddenly, in this
unexpected hush, there was heard what seemed a gun fired out at sea.
The officer had just ceased writing, and was putting away his
implements, when his attention was attracted by the sound. Few, if
any others, heard it; and the merriment was beginning again, when he
raised his hand and cried, in an authoritative voice, “Hark!”

His gesture, tone,
and look, silenced every voice immediately. On the instant the sound
was repeated. It was a low, sullen, stifled roar, apparently miles
away.

“It’s a ship in
distress,” said one of the group, whose dress bespoke him a
waterman native to the region. “Hark: there it is again!”

“You must be
mistaken, Mullen,” interposed the landlord, who saw that the words
threw a damp over the company. “You couldn’t hear a gun so far
off.”

“What else can it
be, I’d like to know?” answered the man who had been called
Mullen. “It’s a cannon, isn’t it, Major Gordon?”

“It’s a gun,
certainly, and must be fired out at sea—a signal of distress.
Recollect, the wind is favorable for bringing the sound this way.
Listen, there it is again!”

There could be no
mistaking it. As if to gratify the anxiety of the now excited group,
the tempest had lulled almost entirely for the time, and the deep
boom of a cannon, fired at intervals of about a minute, was heard
distinctly. A sudden solemnity fell upon the listeners. The fiddler
mechanically began replacing his instrument in its green bag; the
landlord looked ruefully towards his assistant, as much as to say
that he might close the bar, for there would be no more drinking that
night; while the sailors, and indeed most of the company, crowded to
the door, where they stood eagerly waiting for the reports, in spite
of the rain that dripped from the roof just overhead, or drove
occasionally into their faces when a gust of wind swept by.

“We must do
something for them,” said Major Gordon, breaking the silence.

“It’s impossible
to do anything tonight,” answered Mullen. “But I’ll go off with
you at dawn, as far as the beach, anyhow. I’ve a good boat, and we
can easily get volunteers. You’ll go, Newell, and you, Muncy,” he
said, turning to various young men, all acquaintances, whom he saw
standing around, “and you, and you, and you.”

“We’ll follow
the Major, and yon,” said the one he had called Newell, “wherever
you may lead.” “Thanks, my lads,” answered the officer, “and
now to rest, so that we may be all the fresher in the morning, when
God grant that we may not be too late.”

The suggestion was
followed. In a few minutes, those who had been so fortunate as to
obtain beds, had retired to the loft above; while the remainder
stretched themselves indiscriminately on the floor, and were soon
buried in profound repose.

By this time the
tempest had increased again, so that the signal guns could not be
distinguished. But Major Gordon, who had never heard similar sounds
before, was long haunted in his sleep by the report of cannon booming
solemnly across the night.

CHAPTER VI.

MAJOR GORDON

The morning comes, but brings no sun.

The sky with clouds is overrun. —T. Buchanan Read.

A piteous fearful sight,

A noble vessel laboring with the storm. —Maturin.

It is time that we
should say something of the young officer, who, as the reader has
suspected, is destined to play no inconsiderable part in our story.

Major Gordon had
been left an orphan at an early age, with but a small competence,
most of which had been exhausted on his education, so that, on his
attaining his majority, his whole property consisted of little more
than sufficient to purchase a library and support himself for a
couple of years. By assiduity in his profession, however, which was
that of the law, assisted by a natural gift of eloquence, he rapidly
rose to ease and distinction; and was fast taking rank, indeed, among
the eminent advocates of whom Philadelphia boasted then, as now, when
the war of Independence broke out. Like most other generous and
heroic spirits, he threw himself with ardor into the patriotic cause.
Abandoning his practice and the tempting offers it held out, he
joined the troops raised by the colony of Pennsylvania, in which he
speedily attained the rank of Major. Subsequently he had been
attached to the staff of General Wayne, and afterwards had been
employed on several delicate missions, where judgment and discretion
were required as well as courage. It was one of these latter tasks
which had brought him to the coast now. A cargo of powder was
expected to be landed in the river, and as it was much wanted at
camp, he had been despatched to receive and forward it to
head-quarters.

There were as yet no
signs of daybreak, when Major Gordon, who had slept but
indifferently, awoke and looked at his watch. By the dim light of the
solitary candle, he saw that morning would dawn by the time they
could get their craft ready; and accordingly, picking his way between
the rows of beds, he descended into the lower apartment, and
proceeded to arouse Mullen. The latter individual was awoke with some
difficulty.

“Morning, is it,
Major?” he said, sitting up and rubbing his eyes. “Why the
night’s as black as a wolf’s mouth yet. Look at the window and
see for yourself.”

“But it will be
daylight before we are ready. I’d trust my watch sooner than my
eyes, especially on a morning like this.”

“Well, I’m your
man,” said Mullen, who, being now thoroughly awake, sprang up with
alacrity and proceeded to arouse his comrades, one by one; carefully
avoiding, however, disturbing the other sleepers, who all slumbered
heavily after their debauch.

In a short while the
little band came forth and took their way, by the light of a lantern,
to the spot where Mullen’s craft was moored.

“What a storm it
has been,” said Major Gordon. “I heard the rain beating, the wind
roaring, and the waters dashing, all through the night. Sometimes I
also fancied I distinguished signal-guns; but that, I began to fear,
was only a dream, since there’s no sign of them now.”

“It’s sartain
none have been fired since we came out,” answered Mullen, “for
we’d have been sure to hear ‘em. The wind has lulled, but the
gale’s not over. There’ll maybe not much more rain fall; but I
shouldn’t be surprised to hear it blow great guns the better part
of the day.”

“I suppose the
schooner would not be apt to come in, on such a morning,” said
Major Gordon, alluding to the vessel whose arrival he was expecting.

“No, she’d keep
an offing, while she has it. Her skipper is a good sailor, and he’ll
turn up, right and tight, though not till the gale’s over.”

“Unless he’s
been captured,” said the Major. “He should have been here two
days ago, and his delay makes me think, sometimes, that he has been
taken by the British.”

“Give yourself no
consarn on that p’int, Major,” retorted Mullen. “The schooner’s
a clipper of a craft; none of your scows, made by the cord and cut
off in lengths to suit customers; but a ra’al beauty, sharp as a
nor’wester on a winter mornin’, and that can go into the wind’s
eye like a duck. The skipper, too, knows every inlet on the coast,
and all the shallows, so that if a cruiser was to follow him, he’d
lead the fellow aground in no time, and then giving him a shot, to
make fun of him like, set everything drawing on the opposite tack,
and leave him to get off as he could.”

By this time they
had reached their craft, which was a half-decked boat, with a single
mast, of a description still frequent in those waters. There was some
delay in getting her ready for a start, and still more in tracking
her out of the small creek where she lay; but at last the adventurers
succeeded in gaining open water just as the gloom of night was giving
way to the dim, stormy day. The high wind compelled the crew to
close-reef their mainsail, and even with this mere shred of canvass,
the boat staggered along like a drunken man, laboring heavily in the
rough, cross sea.

“Heaven grant we
may be in time,” said Major Gordon. “But this long silence of the
alarm guns, and this fierce wind, are ominous of disaster.”

“It’s four
chances to one that we’re goin’ on a fool’s errand,” answered
Mullen. “First, the ship’s probably gone down before this; and
second, if she hasn’t, her people are most likely drowned; for, if
neither of these had happened, we would have heard her guns off and
on through the night. Third, if she’s struck, it’s probably on
the outer bar, a mile from shore, where nobody can get at her.
Fourth, if even she’s in the very breakers, she’ll probably go to
pieces before we can do anything to help ‘em.”

“Surely,” said
Major Gordon, “if she’s in the breakers, we can save her people
in some way.”

“There’s small
chance of that,” was the answer. “You don’t know this coast
like I do, Major, or you’d hardly have insisted on coming out. No
boat could live a moment in the surf that must now be beating on the
shore. I’ve seen many a poor fellow hang in the shrouds, in my
time, for a matter of twenty-four hours or so; and that, too, with a
dozen or more looking at him all the while—yet he’s been forced
to drop into the sea at last, because no one could get to him. It was
only last January, that one of King George’s transports struck and
bilged in a snow-storm, on the beach right ahead of us; and not a
soul was saved. The coast was strewed, for miles, with dead bodies,
some of officers in uniforms, and others of common soldiers; and
there were women, too, among ‘em. I wasn’t on the beach myself,
but from all accounts it was dreadful to see. Once, howsomever, I
knew three men to cling to the cross-trees of a sloop, which had sunk
in some twelve feet water, and there they held fast, like dying men
will, for two days and a night. I could hear their cries all the
while, for the wind blew strong on shore; but they got weaker and
faint-like, ‘specially towards the first night; and on the second
morning there was only one could be heard.”

He paused, moved by
the mere recollection, and then proceeded.

“His voice, too,
as the day went on, got weaker, till about an hour before sunset, and
when at last the surf was beginning to go down, he dropped quietly
into the sea. The others had died hours before. So I doubt if we can
do any good, even if we find a wreck. It’s a bad thing, too, Major,
to see poor creatures in mortal agony, yet not be able to help ‘em.
You’ll wish you’d never come. But as you say go, go we do.”

“Thank you,”
answered Major Gordon, with a husky voice, deeply moved by the sad
narratives of the speaker, and almost convinced that he was only
conducting them to the threshold of another drama of the same
character. “But I could never again rest in my bed, if I didn’t
make an effort, at least, to see if there’s a wreck, and try what
can be done. I should be always hearing the boom of the alarm gun in
my dreams.”

The rain had now
ceased, but a drizzling mist had set in, through whose folds the
dreary landscape looked more desolate than ever. The slate-colored
clouds, flying just overhead, drifted rapidly in from the sea, and
sweeping past, like the wings of gigantic birds seen in the dusk of
night, disappeared in the vague haze inland. As the boat beat across
the bay, the water flew crackling over her forecastle, often even
wetting Major Gordon and Mullen in the stern; while the parted waves,
bubbling and hissing by, whirled off behind in creamy eddies.

After awhile the
southern edge of the open water was attained, when the craft entered
a labyrinth of comparatively narrow channels, winding between
salt-marshes. The black, saline mud of these marshes emitted a
pungent smell, as the waves washed along the banks; while the long
grass, which thickly covered their surface, whistled or rattled in
the gale. Occasionally, a gull was seen, screaming aloft, in spite of
the storm, now swept swiftly down the wind, and now slowly battling
his way up against the tempest.

“There it is,”
suddenly cried one of the crew, and, as he spoke, he pointed across
the beach, along whose inner side the boat was now coasting.

They were opposite
where, at its narrowest part, sea. and bay approached within a few
hundred yards of each other; and, following the direction of the
man’s finger, Major Gordon saw a large ship, lying some distance
from the shore, with her masts gone and apparently deserted.

She lay, careened
towards the south, at a right angle to the coast, so that nearly
every wave swept her for the entire length of her decks. At first, as
we have said, she seemed deserted. But, looking more closely, Major
Gordon discovered, under the lee of her weather side, and sheltered
by the high stern, two female figures, attended by a solitary
companion of the other sex.

“Luff, luff,” he
cried to Mullen, who was steering. “She’ll lay close alongside
the bank, won’t she? Let go everything with a run.”

In a moment the
craft rasped against the steep mud bank, and in another Major Gordon
had leaped ashore, and was moving towards the surf, leaving the
others to follow more at leisure.

CHAPTER VII.

THE ABORTIVE ATTEMPT

Shout to them in the pauses of the storm,

And tell them there is hope.

* * * It is too late;

No help of human hand can reach them there;

One hour will hush their cries. —Maturin.

All sat mute,

Pondering the danger with deep thoughts. —Milton.

At this sight, the
three persons on the wreck, who, when first seen, had seemed as
inanimate as stone, started up, and while the females clasped their
hands, their companion began to wave a handkerchief as a signal.

In a lull of the
gale, Major Gordon shouted to them, making an impromptu
speaking-trumpet of his hands. Only a faint sound, however, came
back, proving that the strangers had replied; its purport was
undistinguishable.

“They can’t hear
a word you say,” remarked Mullen, coming up. “But they saw you
were speaking to them, by your actions. If we can’t hear them,”
he pertinently added, “with the wind towards us, how can they hear
us?”

“Hark!” answered
Major Gordon, “I thought I made out a word or two then. Didn’t he
say that all on board were lost except themselves?”

“Likely enough.
But see, he’s got a speaking-trumpet.”

As he spoke, Captain
Powell raised that instrument to his mouth, and shouted, in broken
intervals, that all on board had been lost except three; that they
had no boats, nor anybody to man them if they had; and that the
ladies could never reach shore alive, if they jumped overboard, even
lashed to a spar. He concluded by saying—

“Haven’t you a
whale-boat?”

Again Major Gordon
attempted to make himself audible. But though he shouted again and
again, and with a Stentor’s voice, it was evident that his accents
were not heard on the wreck. Two or three of the others made a
similar essay, but with no better success.

“We can’t hear a
word,” shouted Captain Powell. “The ship won’t hold together
much longer. Get a whale-boat, for the love of God, or we are lost.”

“Alas!” said
Major Gordon, turning to Mullen, “there’s no such thing within
ten miles—is there?” “No,” interrupted Mullen, shaking his
head.

“But something
must be done. I think a strong man might swim out to the wreck with a
rope.” “Swim out with a rope!”

“Yes!”

“What good would
that do?”

“If,” replied
the Major, “we had a line out to the ship, it might be used to draw
a cable from her ashore; and if there was a cable hauled taut, I’m
sure I could rig a sort of sliding hammock, by which to land the
ladies: for the hammock could be made to travel to and fro by lines
attached to either end.”

Mullen regarded the
speaker in mute admiration for a full minute before he spoke.

“I always said,”
he replied, at last, “that it was everything to be a scollard. Now
I might have puzzled over this matter for a week, yet never have
thought of such a way as that. It would do, sartainly, if we only had
the line out.”

“If I had a mortar
here, and tools, I could fix it so as to throw a line over the wreck
at once.”

“A musket wouldn’t
do,” said Mullen, musingly; “even one with so big a bore as a
‘Queen Anne.’ I’ve a capital one in the boat.”

“It couldn’t
throw a line strong enough. The strain of the cable, when the latter
came to be dragged through the water, would snap it immediately.”

“More’s the
pity,” answered Mullen, as if reluctantly abandoning a scheme,
which he would have liked to have seen tried for its novelty, at
least, “for I see we’ll have to give the thing up.”

“Give it up!”
cried the Major.

“Yes!”

“Can’t a man
swim off, as I proposed?”

Mullen shook his
head.

“I’m not so
sure,” stoutly said Major Gordon.

“It would be
tempting death.”

The men had been
eagerly listening to this conversation. The scheme of Major Gordon,
to judge by the expression of their faces, had filled them with not
less admiration than it had Mullen. The Major now turned to each
countenance in succession, to see if any listener thought more
favorably than Mullen of the feasibility of swimming off with a line.
But the scrutiny was in vain.

“Think of the
women,” he said, addressing the group, and hoping yet to move some
one. “Have you no wives or daughters? Have none of you mothers?
There is one lady there whose gray hairs ought to remind you of a
mother. Would you stand idly here if your own was in such extremity?
Have none of you sisters? That young, delicate-looking creature there
should appeal to your hearts.”

As he spoke, he
pointed vehemently to the wreck; but no one moved. Suddenly, he began
to disencumber himself of his superfluous clothing.

“I, at least,”
he said, “will not see them perish without an effort to save them.
A strong man, I am sure, might swim out, by taking advantage of the
breakers. He can’t run any great risk, either; for, if he fails, he
can be drawn ashore again by the rope. Run, some one, to the boat,
and bring the halyards. I will tie one end about my waist; the other
can be held fast here; if we splice it, we can make it long enough.”
By this time he had thrown off his coat and waistcoat, and was
proceeding to disencumber himself of his boots, when suddenly one of
the men spoke up. It was Newell, the one whom Mullen had asked to
volunteer. He was a youth about nineteen, powerfully built, and
deep-chested like a bull, who had been watching his leader and
listening to his words, with a face whose agitated working showed the
tumult in his heart. His honest nature could now endure it no longer.

“Stop that,” he
cried, stepping forward, and laying his hand on Major Gordon’s arm.
“You’re not agoing. I say, you’re not agoing, sir,” he added,
determinedly, “for I’m going myself.” And he began doggedly to
strip at the words. “I’m the best swimmer here, and therefore the
properest man to undertake the job. I can do it, when you’d drown.”

“But—” began
Major Gordon.

“Look here,
Major,” interposed the youth, fiercely. “Don’t you think other
men’s got feelings as well as you? Don’t you ‘spose I can pity
‘em,” and he jerked his finger over his shoulder in the direction
of the wreck, “as much as some others? I only waited till I saw you
were in real earnest; for it’s more than an even chance the man
drowns that tries it, and that’s enough to make any one hold back a
bit; but since you’re fixed to go, I’ll go instead.”

“I have a right to
throw away my own life, but not to ask you to throw away yours,”
said Major Gordon, putting his hand on the youth, as if to stop his
further disrobing. “No, I shall go.”

The youth looked
fiercely on the speaker, as if he would have liked to knock him down,
provided their relations in life had been more equal; but he
contented himself with shaking off the Major’s hand, and
continuing, with rude directness—

“My life’s my
own, and yours is your country’s. If I drown, there’s no one to
cry over it, not even my poor old mother; for she died last winter,
God pity her, after the refugees robbed her.” And he brushed a tear
hastily from his eye.

“Let him go,
Major,” said Mullen, “for he will go, now that he’s said it;
and he’s the most fitting, too, by odds. Charley Newell can, after
all, swim like a duck, and knows these breakers from a child; I doubt
if the porpoises can tumble about as safely in them as he can. I had
forgotten him, or I wouldn’t have said it was so mad a thing to try
to swim off. He’ll do it, if man can do it. Here come the ropes
from the boat. At the worst we won’t let him drown. We can haul him
in, hand over hand, at the first sign of his giving out.”

The youth had, by
this time, stripped himself of every article of clothing not
absolutely necessary, and now stood before the group the model of a
modern Hercules. Major Gordon, as he looked at the brawny arms, and
the volume of muscle knotted on the ample chest, could not but
acknowledge that his opponent, even without his greater skill in the
surf, would be able to contend twice as long in the waters as
himself, from sheer superiority of muscle. He, therefore, ceased to
object to the substitution. What would have been duty, if no other
person had volunteered, became foolhardiness when a more suitable one
offered.

“Go, then,” he
said, fervently clasping the youth’s hand, “and God be with you.
I shall not forget your heroism.”

“I’ll do it, if
it’s in the sinoos of a man,” said he, returning the grasp, till
the Major’s fingers crunched as if in a vice. And measuring the
distance between the beach and the wreck with his eye, he continued—
“Many’s the time I’ve swum ten times as far for fun, and though
never in quite such a surf, yet often in one a’most as bad.”

By this time his
comrades were engaged in fixing one end of the rope around his waist.
He felt of it, to see that it held firm, and hitching himself up, he
said, with an attempt at jocularity not unusual at such times with
men of his class—

“It’s rather a
long tail for a man to go to sea with, and beat’s a Chinaman’s
dead hollow; but I guess a fellow can manage it. So here goes.”

As he spoke, he ran
gayly down into the undertow. For an instant, his comrades looked
upon him in silence, but when he turned, on the very edge of the
surf, to wave a last farewell, they broke simultaneously into a
cheer.

The youth did not
wait till the huzza subsided, but, watching his opportunity, plunged
into a wave that was just then about to break, and while the tons of
water, overwhelming him, rushed roaring and churning up the sands,
vanished from sight.

For what seemed an
age, the spectators watched and waited, in vain, for his
reappearance.

“He is gone
already,” said Major Gordon, drawing a deep breath, after this
interval. “No, there he is. He comes up buoyant as a cork. See how
he takes that second roller!”

It would have
excited even the most phlegmatic had they witnessed the gallant
manner in which the youth battled his way against that terrible sea.
For, during a time, he actually seemed to be about effecting his
purpose. It is true that, when forced by temporary exhaustion to ride
the incoming billows, he was often swept almost ashore again: but by
a few skillful plunges he would regain the ground which he had lost,
and even more. Now an intervening billow, towering far towards the
sky, would hide him completely from the gaze of his anxious comrades;
and often his disappearance would be so prolonged, that the
spectators would tremble again for his safety. Now, just when all
gave him up for lost, he would shoot into sight once more, rising on
the side of another approaching billow, and shaking, as he rose, the
water from his hair, like a Newfoundland emerging after a dive. One
moment his form would be seen, standing out in bold relief against
the polished side of a wave, and the next it would be half concealed
amid a whirlwind of foam that rushed over the crest of the breaker.

At one time nearly
half the distance between the shore and wreck had been conquered. The
worst was apparently over.

“He’ll do it,”
cried Mullen, excitedly. “What a brave fellow he is! I never could
have believed it, if I hadn’t seen it with my own eyes.”

“Ah!” suddenly
interrupted Major Gordon, as a tremendous billow was seen approaching
the swimmer, and forgetting that his warning could not be heard, and
would have been useless if it could, he shouted— “Look out, look
out!”

For one instant it
came on, heaping its mass of waters up continually higher, towering
and towering until the spectators fairly ran cold with horror. Then,
curling majestically over, away up against the sky, it poured
downwards like some huge cataract in one vast mountain of foam, a
pistol shot out beyond where the waves usually broke. The swimmer had
seen it coming, and had plunged through it with steadfast courage,
but apparently in vain; for the shattered waters rolled past him, yet
he remained still invisible. Another gigantic wave was seen rising
close in the wake of its predecessor, yet he did not emerge. The
minutes appeared hours. Then the second wave broke and came on,
racing after the other, covering the sea with its whitened fragments.

“It’s the rope
that’s dragging him down,” cried Mullen.

“He could have
done it alone, but the weight of the line, and the strain on it
shorewards, are too much for him. He’ll drown, if we don’t pull
him in, and that at once.”

“Hold,” cried
Major Gordon, authoritatively, as several sprang to aid Mullen with
the rope. “There he comes again. Don’t you see him? He’s alive
and safe. But he’s lost way terribly,” he added, “in those two
surges.”

“He’s alive,
sir,” replied Mullen, “but his strength’s gone. You can see
that by the way he swims. He’ll never do it now, sir. The seas are
coming in, too, as if they knew what he’s after, and were not going
to lose their prey out yonder. What monsters! Every one of ‘em
rollers, and chasing each other as if they were wild Indians. The
very beach shakes as they break. He swims bravely, but it’s no use.
I can see he blows hard. Ha! he goes under; his arms fly up over his
head. Pull now, my lads,” he shouted quickly, “pull away, or your
comrade will be dead before you get him in.”

Mullen had not
exaggerated the peril. It was apparent that the prisoner had
struggled long after every rational prospect of success was gone; and
that he had succumbed at last only by overtasked nature giving way
all at once. Major Gordon, who had watched the struggle for the last
five minutes, as if his own life depended on the issue, cheered the
men by his example, and taking his station in the very midst of the
breakers, stood there, hauling in on the line, and watching for the
first indication of the exhausted swimmer.

It required but
little more time than we have taken to describe all this, when the
apparently lifeless form of Newell made its appearance. Major Gordon
grasped it eagerly, but being prostrated at that moment by a breaker,
would have been drowned himself, if the two had not been dragged
ashore together by those on the beach. He recovered his feet even
then with difficulty, and quite breathless; but the swimmer was
seemingly dead.

“Turn him over on
his face,” cried Mullen, quickly. “Lift up his feet. Now rub him
with sand. Every moment is precious.”

But these, as well
as the other restorative measures usually adopted on such occasions,
utterly failed. The spirit seemed to have fled forever from the
bruised and beaten body.

“It can’t be,”
said Major Gordon, kneeling in an agony by the prostrate form. “But
for me, too, he had not died. Charley! Charley! look up!”

Whether the mortal
anguish with which these words were spoken had power to stop the
spirit when about to wing its flight, or whether nature was already
resuscitating, the eyes opened faintly, at this crisis, with a
shudder, closed, opened again, and then steadily regarded the
kneeling officer, while a faint smile stole over his face.

“He’s coming
to,” said Mullen, in a voice tremulous with joyful emotion. “You
know us, Charley, don’t you? There’s no fear, Major; he’ll do
well enough now.”

In five minutes,
indeed, he was able to sit up on the sand, though still too weak to
speak, except a word or two at a time.

“He’s worth a
dozen dead men,” said Mullen, gayly, at this, the spirits of the
party recovering with a rebound.

“It most fotched
you that time,” said a negro, who was among the volunteers, as he
paused from rubbing. “I thought you a gone coon, Charley, when I
saw you rolled over and over, like a kitten that’s got a dab from
its mammy’s paw. But you dodged the devil; them that’s born to be
hanged can’t be drowned. Ha! ha!” and as the recovered mariner
made a weak, playful attempt to strike him, the dapper little fellow
fell over in the sand, in convulsions of laughter at what he thought
his wit.

CHAPTER VIII.

THE RESCUE

I saw him beat the surges under him,

And ride upon their backs —Shakespeare.

With head upraised, and look intent,

And eye and ear attentive bent,

And locks flung back, and lips apart. —Scott.

During the period
that Newell had been in such imminent peril, the persons on the wreck
had been wholly forgotten. Major Gordon was the first to remember the
sufferers. Looking up, he saw that the companion of the ladies had
left their side, and was slowly working his way out on the bowsprit,
which impended far over the boiling surge. At the same moment, Mullen
also raised his eyes.

“Does he mean to
leave the wimmen?” he said, indignantly.

“I think not,”
answered Major Gordon. “He could scarcely be such a craven.”

“And yet,”
musingly returned Mullen, “it’s only throwing away another life
if he stays. He can’t save the wimmen; yet,” he added, dubiously,
“perhaps he might save himself.”

Major Gordon,
however, could not thus excuse the desertion. He made no reply,
therefore, to Mullen.

“The ship seems to
be breaking up,” remarked Mullen, “which, I take it, is the
reason of that fellow’s hurry. The wind, since the vessel came
ashore, has hauled towards sou’east, and the waves, as you see,
instead of striking her plump aft, rush quartering over her sides.
They begin to reach the place where the wimmen have sheltered
themselves, and will wash it, every other surge, before long. No
timber can stand such tremendous racking, and you’ll see the craft
split in two directly. But what can’t be cured,” he added, with
homely philosophy, “must be endured. I feared this, when you wanted
to come, for I don’t like to see such sights; but we can’t do ‘em
any good; and they’re not the first, you know, that have died in
this way. If your plan could have been carried out, we might have got
‘em off safely; and it’s a pity, for it was a good notion, that
of yourn.”

To much of this,
however, Major Gordon had not even listened. He had been intently
watching the proceedings of Captain Powell.

“Ha!” cried the
Major, now, “I thought the man could not be such a villain. He’ll
try to swim ashore with a rope. He has taken the hint from us.”

As Major Gordon
said, Captain Powell, divining the plan of those on shore, had
resolved to attempt reaching shore with a line, when he saw Newell’s
failure. Accordingly he had crept forward to the bow of the ship,
where hastily fastening a light rope to a cable, and arranging both
so that they would run out freely, he dropped himself into the sea,
from the end of the bowsprit, just as the Major spoke his last words.
“Well, he’s a ten-spot anyhow,” said Mullen, taking a figure
from his favorite game of cards. “See, he comes to the surface. He
strikes out bravely. As you say, Major, he’ll maybe do it, for he
has the current to help him. But if he fails, there’ll not be a bit
of hope left for those behind. Look how they watch him. The young one
has actually clambered up the starboard bulwark, and is looking over
to see him, and the old one’s praying.”

Kate, as the speaker
said, was leaning over the side of the ship, at no little peril to
herself, in order to watch the progress of Captain Powell. She it was
who had first unriddled what seemed to the captain the unaccountable
movements of those on shore, her fertile intellect having suggested
the possibility of the proposed mode of rescue, and mentioned it to
her companions. It may be supposed that she watched with intense
interest the gallant effort of the young swimmer to reach them. When
that attempt failed, she had resigned herself to death, until Captain
Powell declared his intention of making an endeavor to carry a line
ashore himself.

“It’s our only
chance. Without people on land to help afterwards, it would be of no
use; and it’s an even chance whether it succeeds now. All that I
have in my favor is the current, and that may prove treacherous. You
are both lashed fast, and can’t be well washed overboard. But, in
any event, this suspense won’t last much longer; for the ship must
soon go to pieces. God grant that I may not be too late, even if I
reach the shore.”

“She’s a brave
girl, whoever she is,” the Major answered to Mullen. “Most of her
sex, at such times, I’m told, lose all presence of mind, and I
don’t wonder at it. But she seems as courageous as Joan of Arc.”

“Jane Arc,” said
Mullen, innocently. “I don’t know her. Some soldier girl in the
army, Major, like Captain Molly, at Monmouth battle?”

Major Gordon did not
reply; in fact he did not hear the remark, for his faculties were
absorbed in watching the crisis of Captain Powell’s fate. Now the
swimmer would be hurried on, a hundred feet or more, by a single
wave. Now he would be caught by a counter current and drifted
obliquely out to sea again. Here a roller would submerge him. There
he would succeed in riding an enormous wave, which the spectators had
feared would carry him under. For awhile he appeared neither to gain
nor to lose. At last, a fortunate billow, exactly such another as had
frustrated Newell going in an opposite direction, caught the swimmer,
and hurried him towards the beach, like a stone sent from a sling.

Instantaneously
everybody rushed to the edge of the breaker.

“Join hands! form
a line!” cried Mullen; “we must catch him as he comes in, or the
undertow may carry him off again. And even if it don’t,” he
added, “the breakers will pummel the life out of him directly.”
Mullen himself took the advanced post, thrusting Major Gordon behind,
saying, “I’m more used to it!” and the rest placed themselves
as accident permitted. A few moments of eager expectation followed.
Then the form of the now senseless mariner was seen rushing towards
them, on the crest of a breaker; the waters descended; the two
leaders of the line seized the body; and then all went under
together, most of them being struck flat on the strand.

It was only for a
second, however. Still holding fast to each other, they struggled to
their feet, and when the wave receded, stood there triumphantly,
Mullen and the Major having the Captain in their arms, and the rest
of the party already seizing the line which communicated with the
ship.

Captain Powell,
though temporarily stunned, revived almost as soon as they bore him
out of the water. But his accents were broken and faint. He trembled
also like a child. He had wound up his entire energies to his late
terrible struggle, and the revulsion left him, nervously as well as
muscularly, as helpless as an infant.

“Haul on the
line!” he said, feebly. “I made it fast to a stout cable. Thank
God! Thank God!”

Never did men pull
on a rope more lustily than his hearers. Mullen himself timed them,
with a “Yo, heave o’, merrily, lads, merrily,” so that in a
little while, the cable had reached half way to the shore. All at
once, however, it refused to advance. In vain they pulled; not an
inch would it give; and at last Mullen ordered them to desist lest
they should break the rope.

Ever since Captain
Powell had been brought so successfully to land, the spirits of the
party had risen to the highest pitch, for they regarded the
deliverance of the ladies as now certain. But at this check their
feelings underwent a change. Whatever it was that stopped the cable,
all hope of succoring those on the wreck must be abandoned, unless a
way could be found to remove the impediment.

“The line won’t
hold out long, either,” said Mullen; “for the force of the waves,
with the dead weight of the cable attached to it, will snap it in
two.”

“It must have
caught on the ship,” added Major Gordon. Then suddenly, he
continued in excited tones, “That brave girl sees it. She leaves
her companion. She is coming forward, clinging to the starboard
bulwarks. Heavens! the wave will reach her. No, it dashes to her
feet, and then recedes, as if awed by her high courage. She has
gained the bow. She stoops to examine the cable. She waves her hand
to us. Pull away. It yields. It comes. Merrily in with it, lads.”

The excitement of
this scene had not been confined to Major Gordon. The spectators
followed every movement of Kate, with an absorption of feeling it
would be impossible to describe; and when finally the cable began to
move again, they burst simultaneously into a huzza. Even the two
swimmers, exhausted as they were, and still unable to stand, had
raised themselves on their elbows to watch the progress of Kate, and
now joined feebly in the shouts at her success.

The cable was hauled
in without further obstruction. Once secured, and made taut, the men
proceeded, under the directions of Major Gordon, to rig the traveling
hammock. Two of the mainsail hoops were first taken from the mast of
the boat, however, and passed over the cable. The hammock was then
soon rigged. A long line was attached to one end of this hammock, in
order to be used for the ship, while a similar one was fastened to
the other end.

Two of the most
agile of the party were now selected to go off to the vessel. This
they effected by traversing the cable, which they did with an agility
that only sailors possess. It would have made any other description
of person giddy to have crossed that awful abyss on a support so
slender and vibratory.

We will not detain
the reader by a tiresome recital of the rest of that eventful
history. For, after the impromptu apparatus had been once securely
rigged, the deliverance of Kate and her aunt was merely an affair of
time.

Kate insisted on
being left till the last. There was some difficulty in getting her
still terrified aunt to the bow of the ship, and more in placing her
safely in the hammock; but as her assistants had the precaution to
lash her tightly in, so that she should not, in a moment of frenzied
panic, leap from her frail couch, she reached the land without
further hindrance. Kate followed. With unmoved nerve she stepped into
the frail car, disposed herself so as to preserve its equilibrium,
and holding firmly to it, was borne ashore with a rapidity that
seemed almost like flying.

The two watermen now
lost no time in abandoning the vessel. It was wise that they made
such haste, for, in less than half an hour, and before the party had
been able to prepare their boat for making sail again, the stout old
craft, succumbing at last to the angry surges, parted in the middle,
and rapidly broke into fragments.

CHAPTER IX.

SWEETWATER

Sweet Auburn! loveliest village of the plain,

Where health and plenty cheered the laboring swain,

Where smiling Spring its earliest visit paid,

And parting Summer’s lingering blooms delay’d,

Dear, lovely bowers of innocence and ease,

Seats of my youth, where every sport could please. —Goldsmith.

Near one of the
affluents of the river, off whose mouth occurred the transactions
recorded in the preceding chapters, stands the village, or rather
hamlet, of Sweetwater. It is one of those quiet, solitary spots,
nestled by lake and wood, which makes visitors from cities so
passionately in love with the country. Situated about half way
between the Delaware and the Atlantic, and surrounded for miles on
miles by an almost unbroken forest, it is effectually shut out from
the roar and tumult of the great world. The very atmosphere breathes
of peace and happiness. The stars seem to shine there more gently
than anywhere else. A dreamy languor pervades the place, as if amid
the drowsy hum of bees and the low gurgle of cool waters, life would
pass like one long, delicious, summer afternoon.

The few dwellings
which Sweetwater boasts—and more would destroy the magical quiet of
the place—are ranged around one end of the pond, which forms the
chief beauty of the location. An open space, something like a village
green, lies between them and the water, only here, instead of being
covered with sward, it is of the whitest and purest sand; and no one,
who has not visited it, can imagine the fine effect of this snowy bit
of landscape, relieved on one side by the translucent lake, and on
the other by the dark pine woods.

At the northern end
of the hamlet stands an old mill, whose waste-gate is raised for most
of the year, so that, look over the little bridge when you will, the
water will be seen gliding darkly underneath, as it shoots roaring
and flashing to meet the stream below. Full many a time, when we were
a boy, have we leaned over the wooden rail which formed the parapet,
and watched by the hour the white foam go whirling off down the
creek, leaving a thousand glistening eddies under the gravelly banks.
Beautiful Sweetwater! shall we ever again in this world experience
the sweet calm which used to descend, dove-like, upon our spirit, as
we sat musing by thee, listening to the pine-woods sigh in the
evening breeze, while the moon walked up the heavens, or the stars
twinkled in thy mirrored depths?

After passing the
hamlet and bridge, the road winds in front of a picturesque white
mansion, situated in the rear of a garden built out into the pond.
From the back of the edifice a flight of steps leads down into the
water, where, when we knew the place, a light pinnace always lay,
like a Venitian gondola. Embowered in green trees, and surrounded on
three sides by the lake, that white mansion seems, with but little
stretch of the imagination, like a swan nestling among green rushes.

A few hundred rods
further on, the road gains the head of the lake. Looking back from
this point, the scene is one of rare loveliness. Before you stretches
the pond, still, glassy, quiet, dream-like. Half way down its eastern
side the mansion rises amid its shrubbery, as if on a fairy island
about to float off into the lake. On the other side the tall pines
cast their sombre shadows into the water. In the distance whole
fields of white water-lilies cover the surface of the pond. Still
further off, and at the very extremity of the vista in that
direction, two or three blasted trees raise their tall, bleached
skeletons, like grim sentinels guarding the pathless swamp in their
rear, where, if tradition errs not, more than one wayfarer has lost
his path and perished.

Close by the head of
the pond, in the centre of a grove of oaks thinned out from the
original forest, is a white church edifice. Here, every Sunday,
assemble the few inhabitants of Sweetwater, as well as those of a
neighboring village, where, in the days of which we write, a foundry
existed, at which cannon balls were cast for the patriot army. Beside
the church is a grave-yard, surrounded by a rude fence, and shaded by
oak trees. The birds build their nests undisturbed here, and the
grass and wild flowers bloom and fade in peace.

A few paces in the
rear of the church runs a deep but narrow stream. This creek, flowing
from a cedar-swamp near at hand, pours its rich, chocolate-colored
waters between tortuous wooded banks; now slumbering in the deep
shadows of some gigantic tree, whose half-bared roots stretch forth,
talon-like, as if to grasp the ebbing tide; and now whirling around
an abrupt corner, its polished surface glistening like burnished gold
as it shoots into the sunshine. Here the long branch of some bush
sways to and fro in the tide, and there the old trees arch greenly
overhead. A delicious coolness hangs ever about that stream. On the
hottest of summer days one may sit on the old gnarled root, at the
end of the path leading down to the water, and listening to the
purling of the quiet current, almost fancy himself far off among the
gardens and fountains of Damascus.

In the summer parlor
of the mansion at Sweetwater, about a fortnight after the events
narrated in the preceding chapters, sat Kate and her aunt. The
windows were up, admitting the cool breeze from the water, and
presenting an uninterrupted view of the pond in the direction of the
little church, whose white walls, gleaming out from behind the trees,
afforded a pleasant repose for the eye in the distance. Mrs. Warren
sat, so far as dress could make her, in all the dignity and state of
a dowager. Not a ruffle could be seen in her stomacher. Every hair in
her powdered toupee was in its exact place, as firm and stiff as the
clipped box trees in the garden. Her robe was spread majestically
around her; and her hands lay crossed in her lap, on top of an open
book, as if she had just ceased reading. Truth compels us to add that
the good lady was drowsy, a condition not a little assisted by the
hum of insects without, and by the almost inaudible plash of the
water, as the faint breeze gently dashed it against the garden wall.
Yet, even in this crisis, Mrs. Warren was not unmindful of what might
be expected from her. Bravely did she struggle against the weakness
of the flesh, waking up continually and looking fiercely around, as
if to show that she was not sleepy in the least. But soon the lulling
sounds would prove too much for her; her eyes would close languidly;
her mouth would gradually open; and perhaps a sacrilegious snore
would be heard, to Kate’s infinite amusement. Then, all at once,
her head would pitch forward, when, waking up with a start, she would
renew her defiant glance, but only to subside again into a doze
immediately.

All this while Kate
sat sewing, by a little table, on which stood a bouquet of fresh
flowers, the choicest the season could afford. She wore a pretty
morning dress of white cambric, which, fitting close to the bust, as
was the mode, yet opening in front, revealed a stomacher of illusion,
and then swept off in full and ample folds below the waist, parting
on each side before the elaborately worked petticoat. In the changes
of fashion, an approximation has been made to the same style in our
own day. Kate also wore a short sleeve, reaching to the elbow, with a
fall of deep lace around it. One little foot peeped out from beneath
her skirt, just revealing the silk stocking and the daintily-made
high-heeled shoe. Her rich masses of hair fell curling over her
shoulders in a style still to be seen in some of Sir Joshua Reynolds’
pictures: for, with natural taste, she generally eschewed powder. Her
brilliant complexion contrasting with this simple white dress, made
her look like a fresh white rose-bud—one of those which has a blush
in the heart, while all the rest is of snowy whiteness. The very room
seemed to be more fragrant for her being there.

It is needless to
say that she never looked lovelier. But this was not entirely owing
to her attire, but was partly the consequence of her employment,
which always throws such an atmosphere of home around a highbred
woman. He is a hopeless bachelor, indeed, who can watch a graceful
girl, engaged on some pretty piece of needle-work, without thinking
how beautiful she would look as his wife, plying that small gold
thimble with those delicate fingers, by the same fireside with him,
on a cold, wintry night, chatting gayly as she nimbly worked, and
continually looking up at him with the sweet, dear smile of
confidence and love. Ah! miserable man, whoever you are, whose life
is spent in hotels; who know nothing of the quiet overflowing bliss
of domestic happiness; and whose only knowledge of women is obtained
from belles at balls, or flirts at watering places;—we wish you
could have seen Kate then. In our time, alas! the needle is almost
obsolete, so that you have small chance of being conquered. Young
ladies would scream now-a-days, if caught sewing, whose grandmothers
won scores of hearts by this bewitching feminine art. The world is
thought to be improving in every respect, but we are old-fashioned
enough to think that the grandmothers understood our sex the best,
and that they slew thousands with their pretty household graces,
while their fair descendants, with all their Italian music, slay but
tens.

Those good old times
have gone forever. It is the cant of the present day to abuse them as
stiff and formal. But when again shall we behold such highbred
courtesy among men, such a sense of personal dignity, or such
chivalrous deference to the fair? Our
gentlemen
—where are
they? And the change is almost as much the fault of women as it is of
her companion sex. In that day, ladies were known by their domestic
virtues, quite as much as by their erect carriage, their swan-like
movements, their robes of rich brocade, or their stomachers of lace.
But now, while we have silly girls, or heartless coquettes, or artful
establishment-hunters, or rampant woman’s rights agitators, we have
few
ladies
like our grandmothers, highbred both in parlor and
in kitchen. Men have lost reverence for women, because woman ceases
to be true to herself. Lovers no longer count themselves in heaven if
they are allowed to kiss the tips of their charmer’s fingers, or
sue on bended knees, like Sir Charles Grandison, for the sweet
affirmative; but thinking themselves very condescending to have the
dear creatures at all, solicit them in a nonchalant manner, as much
as to say, “It’s a bore anyhow, and I’d quite as lief you’d
decline.” Young America has more sentiment for a fast trotter than
for a fine woman. We have seen enthusiasm in bargaining for a
“two-forty,” but never heard of it in asking a lady for her
heart. “Oh!” cried Mrs. Warren, waking up with a little scream at
the noise made by her book slipping to the floor, “I haven’t been
asleep—have I?” And she got up and rubbed her eyes.

“About half an
hour, this last time,” said Kate, laughing.

“This last time!”
indignantly exclaimed her aunt. “I wasn’t asleep at all, but
merely forgot myself for a moment, and only this once.”

Kate pulled out her
watch.

“It’s just an
hour and a half since we came in, and you’ve been nodding for more
than an hour of that time. But hark! Didn’t the knocker sound?”
And, as she spoke, a charming blush suffused her cheek and even neck.

“Yes; it’s some
visitor. Who can it be? Dear me, it must be Major Gordon, for he
hasn’t been here yet, though we’ve been expecting him every day;
and there’s no one else to call. It’s considerate of him, I must
say,” continued Mrs. Warren, sitting down, smoothing her dress, and
otherwise putting herself into company trim, “to have deferred his
visit till we had time to get up something of a wardrobe. What would
our cousin, Lord Danville, have said, if he had known in what
dishabille we’ve had to dine. Such shocking creatures as we’ve
been till within a day never did exist, I suppose.”

“I don’t think
Major Gordon judges people by their dress merely,” said Kate,
softly, with another blush.

“Tut, child, what
do you know about it? You’ve scarcely exchanged a dozen words with
him. He’s a gentleman, however, and can make allowances; what a
pity he’s a rebel.”

“Hush, aunt,”
said Kate, raising her finger, her heart beating so that her boddice
visibly throbbed, for the firm tread, which she fancied she
recognized, was heard approaching the parlor.

Almost at the same
instant the door flew open, and a servant announced Major Gordon.

CHAPTER X.

ARAB

Oh! spirits gay and kindly heart,

Precious the blessings ye impart. —Joanna Baillie.

There’s little of the melancholy element in her, my lord:

for she is never sad, but when she sleeps;

and not over sad then; for I have heard my daughter say

she hath often dreamed of unhappiness, and waked herself

with laughing. —Shakespeare.

It would be
difficult to explain the cause of Kate’s flutter of spirits at this
visit. Certainly, she could not have analyzed her own feelings, even
if she had tried. Her agitation both surprised and annoyed her. Never
before had she been thus affected on any similar occasion, and she
mentally pronounced it a bit of weakness unworthy of her.

It is true that
Major Gordon had occupied no inconsiderable portion of her thoughts
during the last fortnight. Nor is this surprising. His almost
exclusive agency in the rescue of herself and aunt could not be
concealed from her, in spite of the modesty on his part which would
have represented it as a deed equally shared by many others. Indeed,
the deportment of Major Gordon in reference to the affair, heightened
the estimate which Kate had been predisposed to form of him. Though
the words he had exchanged with our heroine had been few, she still
seemed to hear the mellow tones of his rich, manly voice. Not that
Kate was what is called a romantic girl. She was very far from
supposing that, because a handsome young officer had been
instrumental in saving her life, she must fall in love with him,
irrespective of other and higher claims to her notice. Imaginative as
she was, she had too much strong sense to be so weak. She had often
detected herself speculating at the causes which kept Major Gordon
from visiting them, as he had been formally solicited to do by her
aunt, and by herself more reservedly, though not less earnestly; but
she had not felt it as a personal slight, like an ordinary heroine of
romance would have been expected to do, under similar circumstances.

The emotion of Kate,
from whatever cause it sprung, was but temporary. Before the door was
fairly opened, much less before she was called on to return Major
Gordon’s bow, she had schooled her face and manner into that
highbred ease, which, in combination with the natural force of her
character, made her so bewitching as a woman.

Major Gordon,
attired carefully in the full uniform of his rank, had a striking
personal appearance. He looked every inch a gentleman, even as
gentlemen were in those, their palmy days. Bowing gracefully, with a
calm, self-collected air, first to Mrs. Warren and then to Kate, he
took the seat offered to him by the servant, and glided gracefully
into conversation.

“We have been
expecting you before, Major,” said Mrs. Warren. “Especially since
we heard you were stationed at the Forks, which is so nigh to
Sweetwater.”

“I have been
delayed by important public business,” was the answer. “The
powder, for which I was on the lookout, having arrived, I had
personally to see to its safety and subsequent transmission to
head-quarters. I made daily inquiries after your health and that of
Miss Aylesford, however,” he continued, “and had the pleasure of
hearing that you were slowly but surely recovering from your
fatigues.”

“We have been
told,” said Mrs. Warren, still taking the lead in the conversation,
“that you have been appointed to the command at the Forks, which
has been created a military post.”

“It is so. There
is so much valuable merchandize there, that it has been thought best
to station a few soldiers at the place. Allow me, ladies,” he
politely continued, “to tender you their protection, though I trust
no occasion may arise for claiming it.”

“And you really
will assist,” said Kate, archly, “such horrible tories as
ourselves.”

“Not such
inveterate ones, I hope,” answered Major Gordon, in the same gay
spirit, “as you would have me suppose. Had that been so, you would
not have remained at Sweetwater, but have gone to New York; for
General Washington is always ready to give ladies a pass, especially
frightened ones.”

“Oh! I could never
think of deserting Sweetwater, my beautiful Sweetwater, which I have
not seen for so many years.”

As she spoke, she
involuntarily glanced out of the window, in the direction of the
church. The Major followed her eyes.

“I do not wonder
at your love for it,” he said, with undisguised admiration. “It
is certainly the most charming spot in all West Jersey. You live
here,” he added, “like a queen; for England, in all her breadth,
has not a park as boundless as those vast woods: I am told the tract
embraces a hundred thousand acres.”

“All which,”
continued Kate, in the same gay tone, “makes me seriously think of
turning whig; for if your General Washington wins at last, some
greedy patriot might have my estate confiscated. Aunt is to remain a
tory, red-hot for King George, tea and stamp-duties, so that, if you
rebels—that’s the word for her, you know—get the ascendency,
she can keep the property for me in her name. I believe it was in
some such fashion—wasn’t it?— that the rebels in Mother England
used to keep the lands in a family. Isn’t his grace of Hamilton
only a younger branch of the exiled peer!”

Mrs. Warren, who
could never understand a jest, had vainly tried to interrupt Kate, as
the latter thus rattled on. Now, raising her hands, she cried—

“Niece, niece, how
you talk. Major Gordon,” she continued, turning in real distress to
the American officer, “you mustn’t mind what the silly child
says. I know you are too much of a gentleman to take advantage of
such wild talk. We are two inoffensive ladies, who wish to have no
part in the unhappy controversy which is now distracting this land,
except to render what assistance we can to those who suffer, and to
disburse our hospitalities to all who may visit the neighborhood.”

Major Gordon could
not but acknowledge this last pointed reference to himself with a
profound bow, but it was with difficulty he refrained from a smile,
especially when, glancing at Kate, he saw the suppressed mirth which
laughed in her eyes.

“Well, aunt,”
demurely said the niece, “Major Gordon will be so good, I hope, as
to consider what I said to be unsaid—”

“Certainly,”
gravely replied the Major.

“Nevertheless, I
may say,” continued Kate, in the same tone, “that he won’t
misinterpret me, when I add that I, at least, am not a bit afraid.
Our family has been so long in this part of the country, and has
labored so sincerely for the good of the people,” she added, more
seriously, “that no one but an outlaw, and a villain of the worst
kind at that, would harm us.”

“You must not be
too sure, Miss Aylesford,” answered their guest. “These refugees,
or pine robbers, as we call them in Monmouth county, are becoming
very daring over the whole extent of territory, from this and even
further east and north, to Maurice river and the Delaware. It was
principally to guard the stores at the Forks from their attacks, that
my little detachment has been stationed there.”

“So I tell this
willful girl,” interposed Mrs. Warren. “I say to her continually,
say I, that it isn’t safe for her to ride out alone, as she used to
do, and wishes to do now.”

“You are fond of
riding?” said the Major, his eye lighting up as he turned to Kate;
for he thought a woman never looked more beautiful than in the
saddle.

“Passionately,”
answered Kate. Then, coloring at her enthusiasm, she continued—
“That is, I like it, when I have a good horse.”

“An article in
which, I presume, you must be deficient at present, not having
expected, as I understand, to reside here, but in New York.”

“I always designed
living here, if it was practicable,” replied Kate. “And as for a
horse, I am not so unprovided as might be thought; for the stables
were kept up, in some degree at least, notwithstanding our absence;
and I find a six-year old here, which I am sure I could ride.”

“Has he been
broken?”

“By the
stable-boys.”

“Is he wild?”

“Only gay.”

“Has he blood?”

“As Mr. Herman
says, ‘where’s the horse without it?’” answered Kate,
laughingly. “But, to reply in the language of the turf, he is a
lineal descendant of Flying Childers.”

“Ah! I scarcely
imagined there was such a one in America,” said the Major, with
increased interest.

“My father was
very choice in his stock, and imported several highbred racers
himself. There are excellent stables in Virginia also, and he
purchased a good deal there. Mr. Herman says that Arab could be
ridden easier by a lady than by a gentleman; I suppose it’s
because, like all well-born cavaliers, he is chivalrous to the weaker
sex.”

“Pray,” said the
Major, smiling, and turning to Mrs. Warren, “who is the Mr. Herman
that your niece has mentioned thus twice in the space of five
minutes? I suppose,” he continued, glancing at Kate, “I dare not
ask herself.”

“Mr. Herman?”
replied the aunt, slowly. “O! that’s the old farmer who was such
a friend of my late brother. An excellent man, Major Gordon, though
not blessed with many of this world’s goods.”

“He’s a dear
love of a man,” said Kate, with a pretty pout, for somehow, she
would have liked to have mystified her guest, “If I ever marry, it
will be him—”

“Niece!” As she
spoke, Mrs. Warren uplifted her hands in horror. “Why, Mr. Herman
is married, and has children as old as yourself.”

“But I expect him
to become a widower,” wickedly continued Kate. Then, with a serious
air, she resumed, addressing Major Gordon. “I must really introduce
you to Mr. Herman. He’s the best man we have in the county, and
quite a philosopher in his way. He’s of the old Swedish stock,
which, as you know, is famous for sterling honesty, straight-forward
common sense, and a just estimate of life. When I wish to hear
wisdom, I go over to his little clearing. But, if you are fond of
horses, as most officers are, would you look at Arab, and give me
your opinion?”

“Do, Major,”
anxiously said Mrs. Warren, “and tell her that the horse will kill
her, if she attempts to ride him.” “I should like to see Arab
very much,” answered Major Gordon.

“James,” said
Kate, summoning a servant, “have Arab brought out in front of the
house. We will accompany you as far as the porch, Major,” she said,
addressing her guest, and bowing for him to lead the way.

Arab deserved the
enthusiasm which Kate evidently felt for him. He was a dark chestnut
horse, about fifteen hands high, with a head, neck and shoulder that
were perfection. He came dancing up to the gate, with elevated crest
and arched neck, the very beau-ideal of high breeding. As he turned
his head toward the porch, on hearing voices, the expression of his
large, dark eye, showed that he recognized Kate, who had already, by
feeding him from her hand, established an intimacy with him.

She could not resist
the mute appeal, but impulsively running toward him, patted him on
the neck and face, while he turned his head, as gently as a child, to
lay it caressingly in her small palm.

“Mr. Herman is
right,” said the Major, turning to Mrs. Warren. “Miss Aylesford
could ride Arab when nobody else could.”

“Do you really
think so? You take a load from my mind by saying it. But, indeed, the
dear child is so rash.”

“Your niece
appears to have excellent judgment; and courage is not rashness.”

Then observing that
Kate was looking his way, as she held one arm affectionately around
her horse’s neck, he moved towards the gate, saying.

“I think Miss
Aylesford would like me to try Arab.”

“Will you canter
him for a few minutes?” Kate whispered. “Aunt is really too
timorous. Perhaps she’d have more confidence if she could see how
gently Arab will go, when ridden properly.”

A saddle was placed
on Arab’s back, when the Major, vaulting into the seat, cantered as
far as the church and back, Arab going to the admiration alike of
Kate and of her aunt, his fine action pleasing the one, and the
readiness with which he obeyed his rider gratifying the other.

“He moves
beautifully,” said the Major. “If I may presume, Miss Aylesford,
will you ride with me to-morrow? I can assure you, Mrs. Warren,” he
said, turning to her aunt, “there is no danger.”

Kate assented with
secret pleasure, and directly after wards Major Gordon took his
leave.

CHAPTER XI.

THE RIDE

I wish I were as I have been,

Hunting the hart in forest green.

With bended bow and bloodhound free,

For that’s the life is meet for me. —Scott.

Gather the rose-buds while you may,

Old Time is still a-flying. —Herrick.

If Major Gordon had
thought Kate charming, in her simple morning dress, he considered her
transcendently beautiful on horseback. The easy, graceful seat; the
light bridle hand; the erect figure; and the animation which the
pastime kindled in eye and cheek, rendered her doubly lovely to his
mind. She seemed to fulfill every requirement for that beau-ideal
which he had long sighed after as unattainable, and which should
unite in one person a Rosalind, an Imogen, and a Portia.

The day was sultry,
so, after proceeding a short distance, Kate said—

“I think I can
find a cooler road, if you will permit me to be the guide. There used
to be an old one, somewhere near here, which had become quite
deserted before I went to Europe; it was grass-grown in many places,
and must now present an unbroken sward, which will be a relief to the
horses after toiling through these hot sands. For half a mile or
more, the way leads through a cedar-swamp, where what we call a
corduroy road had been laid down. We shall find it deliciously cool.
Here is the very place.”

So saying, she
turned her horse into an opening between the trees, where, in spite
of the obliterated wheel-tracks, it was apparent a road had once run.
Tall pines rose on either hand, stretching far away in a vista that
seemed interminable, like pillars in a gothic colonnade. The air was
full of the sweet aroma they shed. Their fallen tassels, faded to a
rich brown color, carpeted the road.

“What a bit of
ground for a canter,” said the Major, who was eager to test Kate’s
horsemanship. “Shall we give our steeds a brush?”

“Willingly,”
said Kate; and away they went.

It was a beautiful
sight to see the two spirited animals cantering side by side, so that
a blanket would have covered both. Arab was full of play, and turned
continually to snap at his companion, which Kate laughingly permitted
him to do occasionally, while at other times she wheeled him off with
a dexterous turn of her wrist, which elicited the open admiration of
Major Gordon.

Very soon, the
natural emulation between the two mettled steeds began to tell on
their pace, which gradually increased from a canter to a gallop. They
went snorting along now, their necks arching at the strain upon the
bit; their hoofs crackling the pine splinters that strewed the road;
the foam flecking their glossy coats as they tossed their heads; and
now one, and then another, momentarily succeeding in passing his
antagonist, only however to be passed in turn.

“They are
determined to try each other’s mettle,” said Kate, laughingly.
“It’s as much as I can do to keep Arab in. Suppose we let them
out and have a race in earnest.”

“Agreed,” said
the Major, entering into the spirit of the thing as fully as his fair
companion.

“You see yonder
thunder-riven pine,” said Kate, pointing with her riding-whip. “It
is probably half a mile off. The best one gets there first. Are you
ready?”

“Ready,”
answered the Major.

“Go,” cried
Kate, giving her horse his head.

Away they went, like
twin arrows from a bow: the riders laughing in the very abandon of
fun; the horses, with outstretched necks, straining every nerve. The
Major’s steed, though a superior one, was somewhat too heavily
built, and this quickly began to affect his speed. Arab, on the
contrary, was in his element. With his neck extended almost in a
straight line, his nostrils expanded, and his fine eyes a-blaze, he
soon sprang far ahead of his adversary. Kate, as she left the Major’s
side, merrily looked over her shoulder, waving her hand in triumph.
In a few moments she drew in at the blasted pine, walking Arab slowly
until Major Gordon came up.

“Your horse runs
like a deer,” said that gentleman. “Yet, from his looks, I should
think a child might ride him, when he’s at full speed; he doesn’t
seem to move his body at all; it is only his limbs; but they are
drawn up as beautifully as a greyhound’s.”

“He’s a
darling,” said Kate, enthusiastically, leaning over and patting his
neck; at which Arab looked around gratified. “I wouldn’t exchange
him for half of England.”

Major Gordon smiled
a little at this enthusiasm, though he could not but think that it
became Kate charmingly.

“Poor Selim,”
said the Major, patting his horse in turn, “you did not win, and
it’s not often you’re beaten. But never mind, old fellow, you can
carry your master in battle, if need be, as gallantly as the best.”

“To confess the
truth,” answered Kate, “I had no idea Selim could run so well.
He’s a noble fellow,” she continued, leaning over and patting him
also. “Ha! you like it, do you, my brave Selim? But I declare if
Arab isn’t jealous. See, he is ready to bite both you and your
horse, Major. I must draw him off,” she added, laughingly, as she
turned his head, striking him at the same time with her heel, so that
he sprang to one side. “Fie, fie, Arab!” and she patted him anew,
“you should be ashamed of yourself, sir. You are first in the heart
of your mistress, and might allow her at least to be civil to
others.”

By this time they
had reached the edge of the cedar-swamp, which Kate had described.
The road was much decayed, so that it would have been necessary to
walk the horses, even if there had been no race. Kate was in high
spirits, and rattled on gayly. To the Major, unaccustomed for several
years to female society, except at rare intervals, her conversation
was perfectly bewitching; and indeed it would not have been without
its spell even to the most ennuied
habitue
of the choicest
circles; for it exhibited that rare union of refinement and wit,
intellect and sentiment, which, when combined in woman, renders her
so irresistible.

“Ah! here we are
at the spring,” she said, at last, drawing up Arab at the side of
the road, where a pool of dark, amber-colored water, limpid as flint
glass, lay slumbering under the mossy roots of an enormous red cedar.
Slowly the rich, aromatic water welled out from the impenetrable
recesses of the swamp, into this natural basin, ebbing away from it,
at the other side, as imperceptibly, and flowing off over
silver-white sand, till it lost itself beneath the rude bridge
crossing the road. Gigantic trees, laden with dark foliage, fairly
met overhead, obscuring the sunshine, and filling the air around with
spicy odors. To add to the fairy-like charm of the spot, the
atmosphere was as cool as that of a cave.

“This is
delicious,” said the Major, lifting his hat from his heated brow.
“It is Greenland at our very doors. The water looks so tempting
that I must have a drink,” he continued, dismounting. “Will you
permit me, Miss Aylesford, to be your cup-bearer?”

“I haven’t the
heart to refuse,” said Kate, fanning herself, with her broad-leafed
hat, “for the water is the best in the whole region. Besides, to be
frank, I’m half dead with thirst. But will your horse stand?”
“Like a lamb, generally, but as he is also thirsty, and might
drink, I’ll fasten him thus,” and with these words the Major
threw the bridle over the limb of a tree.

“Yonder you’ll
find a leaf large enough for an impromptu cup,” said Kate,
observing that he was looking about as if for one. “I used to come
here frequently, before I went abroad, and always knew where to find
materials for a woodland goblet.” And she directed him with a wave
of her hat, still fanning herself.

The Major was not
long in profiting by the hint, and skillfully arranging the leaf,
filled it with water, and bore it to his lovely companion in triumph.

“Handsomely done,”
said Kate. “Yon must once have been the wood-nymphs’ Ganymede, if
the doctrine of transmigration of souls be true. Ah!” she
continued, with a sigh, “what a world of poetry went out with the
Greeks, who peopled every object in the landscape with life, so that
a wood, or a tree, was an actual dryad or hamadryad. How I drank in
those pages of Tasso, when I was still quite a child, where the
Christian knight hews down the tree, which, a beautiful nymph, bleeds
at every stroke. I cried over the poor lady, imprisoned in the cruel
bark, as if my heart would break.”

“It’s the most
alluring feature of the old Pantheism, that beautiful fiction of
tutelary spirits of the woods and streams,” said Major Gordon, as
he took the emptied cup; and filling it, in the spirit of the thought
he poured the water out again, saying, “A pious Greek would have
propitiated, in this way, the deities of the place by a libation.”

“They don’t seem
to be in an especially good humor now, at any rate,” said Kate, who
happened to glance up at the sky at that moment. “As well as I can
see, through the leaves overhead, a thunder storm is coming up. We
have been so long in the cool forest aisle, that we have noticed
neither the increasing darkness, nor the fall in the temperature. The
day has been sultry enough for a tempest, and, if we don’t make
haste, we may get drenched through.

Major Gordon was in
the saddle before she had ceased speaking. Cantering a short space
ahead, where the verdant vault parted partially above, he confirmed
Kate’s opinion. In a moment she was at his side.

“Hadn’t we
better return?” he said, surprised to see her following him.

“We should be too
late to escape the storm,” she replied. “Mr. Herman’s farm is
the nearest place of shelter I remember; it is only a mile off; but
we can reach it before the rain comes on, if we lose no time. Follow
me.”

As she spoke, she
gave Arab his head again, and dashed forwards. She did not, however,
permit him to distance Selim, as he might easily have done; but held
him back sufficiently to allow Major Gordon to keep at her side.

In a couple of
minutes the riders emerged from the swamp, on a comparatively clear
space, where the forest had just been cut away: and here the grandeur
of the approaching storm broke upon them in all its terrific majesty.
Colossal clouds, as black as ink, were rolling up from the west,
piling one on top of the other, and making the lately azure heaven as
dark as the day of doom. The trees moaned ominously. All at once a
dead calm fell upon everything. Nature seemed panting for breath.
Then, suddenly, a hurricane arose, which rushed through the woods,
stripping off the leaves, and tore along the now sandy road, driving
before it huge columns of lurid dust.

Kate wheeled her
horse, at this crisis, into a by-road at full speed, merely looking
around at Major Gordon as a signal for him to follow.

A few strides
carried them within the shelter of the forest again. A few more, and
they emerged on a small clearing. Major Gordon had only time to
observe that it contained about fifty or sixty acres, and boasted a
thriving apple-orchard, when they dashed up to a comfortable looking,
though primitive dwelling, constructed of hewn logs, a story and a
half high.

The house stood a
few rods back from the road, and was approached by a lane guarded by
a gate. This entrance was now closed, and Major Gordon was about to
press forward, in order to open it, when Kate, rushing her horse at
it, and skillfully lifting him, gallantly cleared it. The Major had
just time to raise Selim for the leap, when Kate reached the door of
the house, throwing Arab back nearly on his haunches, as she reined
him suddenly in.

A patriarchal old
man was standing in the open entrance, with two lads at his side. As
Kate sprang nimbly to the ground, he advanced, and, seizing her hand,
drew her in, for the big drops were now beginning to descend, heavy
as miniature bullets.

At the same time he
said, as Major Gordon alighted,

“Lads, take the
horses, quick, and put them in the barn. Be lively now, or the
saddles will get wet. But walk in, walk in, Miss Katie; and welcome
to the old man’s hearth again; it’s been many a year since you
were here.”

With these words he
fairly pushed her in, signing for Major Gordon to follow.

CHAPTER XII.

UNCLE LAWRENCE

A wit’s a feather, and a chief a rod,

An honest man’s the noblest work of God. —Pove.

Along the cool, sequestered vale of life,

They kept the noiseless tenor of their way. —Gray.

The rank is but the guinea stamp,

A man’s a man for a’ that. —Burns.

The room into which
Mr. Herman ushered his guests apparently occupied about half of the
lower floor, and was employed indiscriminately for a kitchen,
sitting-room and parlor. A huge fire-place, with a high-backed settle
inside, occupied a considerable portion of one side of the apartment,
the rest of the space being filled up with a cupboard to the right
and a staircase to the left. There was no carpet on the floor, but
the boards were scrubbed to a snowy whiteness; and a pine
dough-trough which stood under one of the windows, was also as white
as rubbing could make it. The whole aspect of the place indicated, in
fact, the most scrupulous neatness. The good wife herself was a
pattern of tidiness. Although it was not yet noon, and her day’s
work, therefore, was but half over, she advanced to receive her
visitors in a clean apron and cap, which, in the single minute left
her for preparation, she had managed to snatch from their repose in
one of her lavender-scented drawers. A cheerful, motherly face was
that of Mrs. Herman, such a one as made a visitor feel at home
immediately.

Her husband was of
medium height and strongly built, but looked smaller than he really
was, in consequence of a slight stoop which he had contracted. In
sitting, however, this partial deformity added to the habitual
thoughtfulness of his aspect. The head, covered with thin,
patriarchal gray hair, in which a few threads of a darker color still
remained, was large and squarely shaped, with a jaw indicative of a
great decision of character, and expanding above into a square, solid
brow, in which the reflective faculties were largely developed. It
was not without meaning, so Major Gordon thought, that Kate had
called him a natural-born philosopher. His face in repose looked
severe to sternness, especially as age had begun to wrinkle it; but
when he spoke, his blue eye brightened, and a pleasant cheerfulness,
which yet rarely amounted to a smile, diffused itself over his
countenance. His manner, in acknowledging his introduction to the
Major, partook something of shyness. But before the interview was
over, his guest decided that, though a man of reserved habits, he was
nevertheless quick to observe and reflect, and that a warm heart beat
within his bosom, full of genial benevolence to his race, and glowing
with sweet domestic affections.

“I declare,”
said his good dame, dusting a split-bottomed chair, which Major
Gordon thought already clean to a miracle, and looking apologetically
towards Kate, while she tendered it to the handsome officer, “if I
had known anybody had been coming, I’d a had things more in sorts.”

“There, mother,”
said the husband, quizzically, “Miss Katie knows you well enough
not to need an apology. It’s true,” he continued, with dry humor,
glancing about the scrupulously neat apartment, “if we had a shovel
here, we might pitch some of the dirt out; but since that can’t be
done, our friends will make the best of things, I hope, and not be
too severe on us.”

“Father will
talk,” said the dame, apologetically, a little disconcerted; “he’s
no better, Miss Katie, than when yon left, you see.”

“No, I really come
into my own house sometimes,” rejoined Mr. Herman, his eye
twinkling with laughter, though still good-humoredly, “without
taking off my shoes. I’d like to see the boys do it, however,” he
added, with a pleasant laugh.

“Mrs. Herman makes
me always ashamed of our housekeeping at Sweetwater,” said Kate,
with tact.

“Don’t say that
now,” replied the gratified housekeeper, whose whole face glowed
with delight at the compliment, than which Kate knew no other could
possibly have been more agreeable.

The conversation now
became more general. After awhile, Kate said, addressing Mr. Herman
by the familiar name she had been accustomed to use when a child—

“How are the deer
now, Uncle Lawrence? I think I remember something of having heard,
when in England, that a very severe winter had destroyed large
numbers. Mr. Herman,” she continued, turning to the Major, “is
the best hunter we have in all West Jersey.”

“They are getting
pretty plenty again,” answered her host. “That is, for one who
knows where to look for ‘em. But for others, they’re as scarce as
ever. I took several loads of venison to town last winter, and got
good prices—the war don’t seem to make much difference,” he
added, slyly, “to the nabobs.”

“You farm this
place also?” said Major Gordon, interrogatively.

“Yes! we farm a
little. Enough for our own use, raising a bit of rye, a few potatoes,
and some corn. The boys do most of it, though, to give them justice.
We don’t want much, we simple folk,” he continued, “so that we
easily manage to live on what I bring from the woods and what the
boys raise. Mother there keeps us pretty well supplied with
linsey-wolsey. Whenever I go to town with venison, I bring back a few
nice things for her in return; and I shouldn’t wonder now, if we
could look into some dark corner of her closet, if we wouldn’t find
even some tea, whigs as we all are. How is it, mother? Is the tea
there? And did I buy it for you, or did it come from this saucy tory,
Katie.

“We get along,
too, as well as the rest, so far as I can see,” continued Mr.
Herman; “At least I often think so when I’m in Philadelphy. We
haven’t as much money, to be sure; but then we’ve no vessels at
sea, like Mr. Morris and others there I know, and can sleep soundly,
in spite of storms and British frigates. Then we’ve fresher air
than they can have, let them build as big houses as they will. I
never cross the ferry but I don’t for awhile think the air’s
pisened, for what with the vegetables rotting in the market, and the
sewers that empty on the river front, the whole place smells
dreadfully, leastways to a man from the woods. Before the war broke
out, some of my acquaintances there, rich men, you know, used to come
down here to hunt awhile, once a year. It was a sight to see ‘em
eat,” he continued, with a low, chuckling laugh. “I’ve known
‘em, after a tramp in the woods all day, when there’s been no
luck, sit down to a piece of cold pork, that they wouldn’t look on
at home, and eat it as if it had been the best saddle that was ever
sarved up. Then, to see ‘em drink our water! When they’ve had a
hot run in the woods, they’d kneel right down by the side of the
road, and lap up like a dog the water running from a cedar-swamp; and
they’ve told me they never drank Madeery, not Port, that was half
as good.”

“Yours is the true
philosophy,” said Major Gordon, “and the world would be all the
better if there were more who followed it. I confess,” he
continued, turning to Kate, “that there is an independence and
content about it, which strongly tempts a soldier.”

“Yet yours is a
grand profession,” said Uncle Lawrence, “at least in times like
these. The trade of a soldier is the meanest alive; think of the
Hessians coming over to murder at so much a day; but when a man takes
up arms for his country, and to drive out an invader, he’s doing a
brave deed.” And the old man’s eye gleamed. “I was out in the
Trenton campaign myself, for that was a time when even age couldn’t
excuse staying at home, unless to them as were tired of liberty. I’ve
one son now in the army, and another will ‘list as soon as he’s
big enough, if it’s the Lord’s will,” and he looked up
reverently, “that the war should last that long.”

In similar
conversation nearly an hour passed, by which time the rain ceased,
and the sun shone out again brightly: and Kate now rose to go. As she
stood at the door, while the horses were being brought around, the
birds sang merrily in the orchard, and the rain-drops sparkled in the
grass.

“That’s a music
I never get tired of,” said Uncle Lawrence. “It beats the best
playing I ever heerd on the spinet, even Katie’s here,” and his
face relaxed as he looked at her. “Then those spangles in the grass
are handsomer than any diamonds. I’ve heerd that, after one of them
grand parties in town, where the music plays and jewels sparkle, that
people go home worn out and often ill-humored; but I thank God that I
never listen to the birds, or see the rain-drops shine in this way,
without feeling glad.”

When Major Gordon,
having placed Kate in the saddle, offered his hand to the old man,
preparatory to mounting, Uncle Lawrence said—

“If you stay in
our parts long, Major, and would like to hunt, I’ll go out with you
a’most any time. I think we may be certain of a fine doe, or even a
buck, if you’d rather.”

Thanking his host
heartily for the offer, which was evidently a sincere one, Major
Gordon bowed to the good dame, and cantered after Kate.

“What a grand
specimen of an honest, simple-hearted old Nestor that is,” he said,
addressing his companion, as soon as they were out of hearing.

“I knew you would
like him,” answered Kate, highly pleased. “And he has taken a
fancy to you, or he wouldn’t have asked you to hunt with him.
Father always said, in any difficulty, ‘I wonder what Uncle
Lawrence thinks,’ for though he has read few books, except his
Bible, he has ten times the wisdom of many a lettered man. I don’t
know what the neighborhood would do without Uncle Lawrence. He is the
general peace-maker; yet no man can be firmer, when a great principle
is at stake.”

“He has the air of
one who could become a martyr, if need were, even to dying at the
stake.”

“And he would,”
said Kate, her fine eyes glistening with enthusiasm, for in this her
own character sympathized with that of the old man. “He told you he
was out in the Trenton campaign, but he was too modest to add that he
walked to head-quarters in little more than twenty-four hours. There
are few men over sixty years of age, who could or would have done
that.”

The conversation
continued till they parted at Sweetwater, for Major Gordon had to
return to the Forks to dinner, and could not accept Mrs. Warren’s
invitation to alight.

CHAPTER XIII.

KATE

With thee conversing, I forget all time;

All seasons and their change. —Milton.

This was the
beginning of an acquaintance between Major Gordon and the heiress of
Sweetwater, which soon ripened into intimacy. Of the dangers of such
a friendship, to the gentleman at least, he was in part ignorantly,
in part willfully blind. Bewitched by the grace, wit and beauty of
Kate, not less than by the sweetness of her disposition as displayed
in a thousand home ways, Major Gordon abandoned himself to the
pleasure of her society, forgetting the barrier which fortune had
placed between them, in making him poor and a patriot, but Kate an
heiress and a royalist. Yet, to do him full justice, he did not think
of the passion that was overmastering him, or the probabilities of
its success. Love was a new thing to him. The law first, and the camp
afterwards, had been his mistress hitherto. He little suspected,
therefore, how necessary Kate was becoming to his happiness. He did
not know he was in love. But an irresistible fascination drew him to
Sweetwater, at first almost daily, and finally punctually every
morning. Often, indeed, he left the Forks, intending to ride
elsewhere; but invariably he found himself in Kate’s presence; and
at last he ceased even to invent excuses, such as bringing her a
bunch of wild-flowers, a book, or a bit of news, as originally had
been his custom. When away from her he felt a void, which only her
presence satisfied. He rode, walked, boated on the lake, chatted or
read with her, accordingly, as the weather permitted, or
circumstances allowed.

Mrs. Warren was
almost invariably present when these interviews took place at
Sweetwater. She generally sat knitting, in a corner, occasionally
joining in the conversation, and always managing on such occasions,
to bring in her cousin, Lord Danville. Her connexion with that
nobleman was a source of pride indescribable to her. It elevated her
and the whole Aylesford family, in her opinion, into an entirely
different sphere from that of the provincials about her. She felt
annoyed, therefore, at the frequency of Major Gordon’s visits,
which promised an intimacy that, some day, she thought might become
troublesome. He was very pleasant as a temporary acquaintance, she
reasoned, but having no peer for a cousin, quite too plebeian for a
friend. Her manner accordingly grew less cordial daily to their
visitor, though it never ceased to be civil; nor did the good dame
neglect to attire herself in all her state—she “owed it to her
family,” she said, “even when not to her guests.” Meantime,
also, she studiously avoided making a parade of her royalist
sympathies, professing, as at the first interview, to be entirely
neutral, and little dreaming that her guest saw through her poorly
acted part, and amused himself secretly at her weakness and
self-confidence.

Kate, all this
while, was as gay, as frank, and as bewitching as ever. Sometimes she
was so full of spirits, that serious conversation was impossible. On
such occasions, she made a jest of everything, especially of love;
for often, in reading the poets with her guest, that fertile theme
came up. As merry and willful girls will, she delighted to play at
fence with this mysterious passion, which she secretly felt would
some day be her master. How she made sport of the meekness of
Desdemona; of the fainting of Rosalind; of poor, deserted Imogen’s
melancholy. “She would never break her heart for a man, not she,”
she would say, glancing roguishly at her guest. “There must be a
latent weakness in the women who had furnished the types of these
characters to Shakespeare; for she supposed some women were so
foolish, as everybody said Shakespeare never violated nature.” As
for Amelia, the heroine of the novel she was reading, and about which
she and Major Gordon had daily battles, “never was there such a
silly little thing.” “Why,” she said, “that good for nothing
husband wasn’t worth a single one of poor Amelia’s tears. Booth
was a brute; and if men were like him, she wondered women didn’t—”
But here she stopped with a blush, on seeing her guest’s wondering
look; and, with a pretty little laugh, added, “Heigho! wasn’t it
ridiculous, anyhow, for her to be talking of love, of which she knew
nothing, and never cared to.”

At other times she
would be quite serious. On these occasions Major Gordon would
secretly admire the sound sense of her father’s views on female
education. For Kate could converse on subjects of which few women, at
that day, knew anything: and many an animated discussion took place
between her and her guest. In truth, her visitor liked to engage her
in debate, for he loved, at such times, to watch the animation of her
eye, the heightened color of her cheek, and the dexterity with which
she defended her cause, often forcing him to a positive capitulation.

Kate’s real
opinion as to the war remained, all this time, a puzzle to Major
Gordon. Her face, indeed, glowed with enthusiasm, whenever a gallant
deed was mentioned, whether the actors were Americans or royalists;
but she never expressed any sympathy for the cause for which he had
drawn his sword, except sometimes in jest, when she wished to tease
her aunt. In the pride of birth, which so eminently distinguished
Mrs. Warren, Kate confessed that she shared. “Let philosophers say
what they will about the rights of man,” were her words, “I feel
that it is something to be descended from heroes who fought with
Richard at Askalon, and withstood the chivalry of France at
Agincourt.”

Yet, in her demeanor
to those more lowly born, there was nothing of the hauteur which
might have been supposed to accompany such opinions. There was an old
negro woman who had once been a slave in the family, and who, in that
capacity, had often assisted to take care of Kate when an infant. To
this poor creature, who now lived alone in a small cabin about a mile
from Sweetwater, our heroine was as affable and kind as if she had
been her own flesh and blood.

“Yonder is Aunt
Chloe’s cabin,” said Kate, one day, when riding with Major
Gordon, “and I must stop awhile. The poor thing will fancy I have
grown proud, since I went abroad, if I don’t draw rein and ask her
how she does. She was at the house the other day, and would have
amused you, I am sure. The paper-hangings on the drawing-room seemed
to strike her fancy particularly. She had never before seen wall
paper, for when she lived with us the rooms were painted. But where
can she be?”

As Kate spoke, they
drew up in front of a small clearing, about two acres in extent, with
a log hut in front. A few cabbages, a bean-vine or two, a mock
orange, and half a dozen gaudy sun-flowers, constituted the garden.
As no signs of the occupant appeared, Kate nimbly jumped to the
ground, and throwing her bridle over one of the gate-posts, entered,
beckoning to her companion to follow.

The door stood wide
open, and on reaching it, the aged dame was seen inside, holding her
dog in her hands, intently occupied in alternately dipping his paw
into a bucket of some kind of colored dye and making marks with it in
regular order, on the white-washed wall of square-trimmed logs.

We have said that
the crone, already nearly deaf with age, did not hear the guests.
Kate watched her with a puzzled look, for a while, and then going
close up to her, she put her light-gloved hand on the old woman’s
shoulder, and said, in her musical voice, but with something of
astonishment—

“What are you
doing, aunty? Have you lost your wits?”

The dame, thus
apostrophized, turned, and, after disdainfully regarding her visitors
as if scorning their ignorance, answered tartly, turning to her work,

“Chile, I’se
paperin’ de wall. Dis makes a fus-rate lion’s claw. Don’t yer
see? Dar!”

And, giving a
finishing touch to her work, she stepped back admiringly, as a
Landseer may be supposed to do, when he has completed a masterpiece.

The first instinct
of Kate was to laugh heartily. But regard for the feelings of her
poor old nurse, who would have been mortified inexpressibly, induced
her to restrain herself, though her eyes literally ran over with
suppressed glee, as she glanced at her companion, who, in turn, could
scarcely keep his merriment under control. The visit, after a few
kind inquiries from Kate, terminated by our heroine slipping a dollar
into the hands of the crone, a gratuity which Major Gordon secretly
doubled as the fair girl rode off ahead.

When the cabin was
fairly out of hearing, however, the woods rung with the silvery
laughter of Kate. At last, her merriment subsided, and she said—

“It’s hardly
fair to laugh at poor old Chloe. She only does what all the world’s
doing. Her poke-berry juice and dog’s paw are but an humbler way of
aping the luxuries of the great.”

Major Gordon made no
answer, but said to himself— “Her heart is right, even where her
education is wrong.”

CHAPTER XIV.

THE MARCH ON TRENTON

The old Continentals

In their ragged regimentals. —Knickerbocker.

That Spartan step without their flutes. —Brainard.

Another day, the
conversation, when Uncle Lawrence was present, happened to turn on
the battle of Trenton, and the famous winter campaign of Washington
in the Jerseys. The veteran had brought some rye to mill, and while
it was being ground, stepped over to the “big house,” as it was
called, where Kate, obeying the hospitable custom of the day, had him
immediately into the parlor, to drink a glass of wine. Mrs. Warren
was absent in the kitchen, scolding the cook.

Never before had
Major Gordon heard our heroine exhibit so much interest in behalf of
the Americans as on this occasion. Her eyes sparkled, her cheeks
glowed, and she really seemed at last to sympathize with the
patriots.

“Do you know,”
she said, turning to Uncle Lawrence, “that the great Frederic has
declared that battle to be one of the most brilliant strokes of the
century?”

“Did he, indeed?”
said Uncle Lawrence, his face glowing with gratification. “Did the
great King of Prussia, the hero of Rosbach, really say that?”

A century ago,
Frederic the Great, it must be remembered, filled something of the
same place in military history which Napoleon does now. He was
especially the idol of the English and Americans; quoted, strange to
say, as the “Protestant Champion;” and considered a marvellous
captain, as indeed he was, at least in many respects. Thus even Uncle
Lawrence, little as he knew of the doings of the great world across
the water, was familiar with the exploits of the Prussian monarch.

“Did the great
Frederic,” repeated the old man, putting down his glass only half
drained, his whole countenance irradiated with pleasure, “really
say that?” And he looked from Kate to Major Gordon, as if half
doubting whether the latter, whom he secretly considered a better
authority on military matters, would confirm the assertion.

“He is said to
have used substantially those words,” said the Major, thus appealed
to. “I have no doubt of the truth of the report either, for the
movement on Trenton was certainly masterly. The results show that. In
ten days, the enemy, though twenty-five thousand strong, and though
holding all the principal posts in this state, from the Raritan to
the Delaware inclusive, were forced back on New Brunswick, and the
whole region rescued from their hands. It is one of my greatest
griefs as a soldier that I could not participate in that campaign,
being at that time still ill of a wound I had received at Long
Island.”

Kate, who heard of
this circumstance for the first time, looked with interest at the
speaker; for a woman, even if an enemy, regards a soldier who has
suffered with something of tender pity.

“You not at
Trenton!” exclaimed Uncle Lawrence; and he shook his head, as he
added, “Ah, I can understand your grief!”

He paused a moment,
and then said, as the memory of that day rose more vividly before
him,

“I’ve heerd
better men than I can ever hope to be say that we saved the country
then; and if so be it turns out to be true, I shall be prouder to
have my children say their father fought at Trenton, than if King
George had made me a lord.”

Major Gordon
instinctively looked at Kate, whose countenance was lighted up with
enthusiasm at the words and aspect of the speaker; at least our hero
thought so.

“You are right in
asserting that the victory at Trenton saved the country,” he
replied, with animation. “Miss Aylesford will excuse me, if I speak
too boldly. But I know she honors bravery wherever it may be found.”
And he bowed respectfully to her.

“Don’t let me be
a check on you,” she replied, blushing. “I know that both you and
Uncle Lawrence are conscientious in your opinions”.

“Well, then,”
resumed the Major, his blood quickening at this acknowledgement, “if
our cause triumphs, it will be because Trenton was the turning point
in the struggle. Up to that time, with the exception of the
evacuation of Boston, everything had gone against us. This was
especially true of the period immediately preceding it; I mean the
period following the defeat at Long Island. The terms for which most
of the soldiers had enlisted were expiring; and but few were willing
to renew their engagements. Meantime new recruits came in slowly. The
force of Washington, the only one at that time left,” he continued,
addressing Kate, “was reduced by loss in battle, by the capture at
Fort Washington, and by the expiration of enlistments, to but little
over two thousand men. A general panic seized all except the most
resolute patriots. The Congress was preparing to fly, for there was
no barrier between the capital where it met, and the victorious
enemy, but the comparatively feeble one of the Delaware; and the
British, twenty thousand strong, were rapidly advancing on that
river. Lord Howe considered the revolution virtually at an end, and
issued his proclamation, offering pardon to all who, within sixty
days, would lay down their arms and take the oath of allegiance. You
do not know, Miss Aylesford, you could not, living in England, as you
then did, the temptations and terrors which beset men in that awful
crisis, especially those who had families. The axe and scaffold, I
should rather say the gallows-tree, loomed up before the eyes of
every patriot. Many gave way. This was especially true of those who
had property. Crowds took the required oath of allegiance. The
liberties of the country, the future of mankind, quivered in the
balance.”

He paused for a
moment for breath, for he had spoken rapidly and impetuously. Uncle
Lawrence nodded assent approvingly. Kate, with downcast eyes, but
heightened color, sat, playing with a rose, which she had just taken
from a vase beside her.

More composedly, the
Major resumed—

“In that crisis,
if Washington had given way, all would have been lost. But he was
like Atlas, who upheld our world. Firm as a rock, when night,
tempest, and angry surges combine against it, he stood up, not only
unshaken, but unappalled. ‘If we are driven from Philadelphia,’
said he, ‘we will retire beyond the Alleghanies.’ Never, even for
an instant, did he think of surrender. And then it was,” added
Major Gordon, kindling again, “that he conceived that daring night
attack, to strike at all the posts of the enemy on the Delaware, from
Trenton to Burlington, which, even though it but partially succeeded,
resulted in throwing the royal forces back on Brunswick, and
recovering, in ten days, all which the foe had gained during the
entire autumn.”

“Only partially
succeeded?” interposed Kate, with real surprise. “Why I thought
it was a complete victory. It was so considered in private circles in
England.”

“The intention was
to cross below, as well as at Trenton, and so cut off the whole
series of posts,” replied the Major; “but the driving ice
prevented Cadwallader, at Bristol, from achieving his part of the
task. Above Trenton, however, Washington succeeded in crossing, and
carried all before him, as you say.”

Uncle Lawrence,
while the Major was speaking, would have been a study for an
unconcerned spectator. His usual calmness of manner had given place
to intense, but suppressed excitement; and now, as the Major’s last
words recalled the whole scene of that eventful night, he could
control himself no longer. The color rose in his aged cheeks, and his
eye flashed with youthful fire. In general, he was the last person to
speak of events in which he had been himself engaged. But now he
seemed to lose his own personality in the magnitude of the
transaction he described.

“Such a night as
that was,” he said. “The weather had been warm afore, for the
season—kind o’ spring-like—but all at once it set in cold, and
when we reached the place where we had to cross, the river was full
of ice, driving like mad in the dark. At first I thought all was up,
for with the great cakes grinding together, it seemed to me as if
we’d never get over, leastways with the cannon—we had twenty
small brass pieces, you know. Along shore, in many places, the ice
was piled ten feet high, where it had jammed, and one bit slid up
over another. Often, in the middle of the river, whole fields would
come together, so that, for a while, you’d think you might walk
across. Then, with a low growl, like thunder miles away, it would
split apart, and the whole begin to move agin. The Gin’ral,
howsomever, determined to try; the boats were filled, and we set off.
It was a hard fight to push ‘em through, a’most as hard as the
battle in the morning; and more than once I said, said I, ‘we’ll
have to give it up.’ Sometimes a boat would be carried a mile away
from the one it started with, in spite of all the rowers could do to
make it keep its place. Once our batteau was crushed by getting where
several fields of ice met. If we pushed her off from one she ran agin
a second; and soon they began to slide over each other; all the time
moaning as if in pain, like the great leviathin that we read of in
Scriptur’. At last we had to give up, and just wait what the Lord
would send, but expecting every minute to be ground to powder. All
this time there were twenty others, some with horses on board, as bad
off as ourselves; the horses snortin’ and plungin’, frightened
mad, poor things! The wind was cutting cold. Our hands got ‘numb,
and the water froze on us.

“Howsomever,”
continued the old man, “we made the shore at last, but not till
four o’clock in the morning, when we ought to have got over by the
middle of the night. Washington had crossed among the first, and
there he sat, for hours, on a bee-hive, on the shore, watching the
rest of us. You may guess how he must have felt! We had nine miles to
go, and every minute was precious; for there wasn’t much time
wasted, after the cannon was landed. But now the weather, which had
been threatening-like all day, set in stormy, snow and sleet mixed
together, and the wind sharper than ever. The hail stung our faces;
the cold went to the marrow, and some of us were thin enough dressed.
Many a poor fellow, who had no shoes, marked the road with his blood.
Not a soul met us, to bid us God speed! But I’ve often thought
since, that people, asleep in the farmhouses, must have heard us as
we went by; but they but half woke up, perhaps, and saying to
themselves it was only the Storm, dozed again, little knowing that
the fate of America was being decided.

“Well,”
continued the veteran, “it was nigh eight o’clock afore we
reached Trenton. Long afore, when they told Washington that the wet
would spoil our powder, he had said that ‘then we must fight with
the baggonet;’ so we all knew that it was to be for life or death.
Two of our men had dropped out of the ranks and died; but that only
made the rest of us more eager. Not a fife was heard, nor a drum
beat, as we marched along; the rumble of the cannon, and the tread of
our men was the only sound; but the roar of the gale through the
woods was often louder. At last, as I’ve said, we reached Trenton,
just as daylight began to break. Washington rode down our line, and
pointing with his sword ahead, said, ‘Now or never, my lads!’ He
may have said more, but that was all I heerd; and that was enough;
for I felt, after it, as if I could fight like a dozen men. I shall
never forget how he looked. He seemed as big as a giant through the
sleet and fog; and his face, oh! such a face, it said a thousand
things.”

Uncle Lawrence
paused for a moment, as if compelled by emotion. His listeners hung
eagerly on his words, Kate quite as interested as Major Gordon.
Directly the old man resumed.

“The Gin’ral had
hardly got out of sight, when there was a flash ahead, and patter,
patter, came the sound of musket-shots. It was the picket, at the end
of the town, which had just found out that an enemy was upon ‘em.
We dashed forward, the cannon jolting and leaping past us, the horses
at full gallop. Of what came after, I don’t remember much. The
fight didn’t seem to me to last five minutes, though I’m told it
was five times that at least. I s’pose a hound, when he’s been
long held in, and is at last let loose on a deer, feels something
like I did, after marching all night to get at the Hessians, and
fearing often that we’d come up too late.

“You both know how
we whipped ‘em,” said the veteran, resuming in a less excited
tone. “They were dancing, and feasting, and drinking, just like
Belshazzar, when the Lord sent the Persians agin him; and Col. Rohl,
who was killed, was act’lly playing cards, we were told, when we
rushed into the town. They wouldn’t believe it in Philadelphy,
though, till we marched the Hessians through the streets,”
concluded Uncle Lawrence, with a chuckle.

CHAPTER XV.

THE FIRE IN THE WOODS

Here flying loosely as the mane

Of a young war-horse in the blast;

There, roll’d in masses dark and swelling,

As proud to be the thunder’s dwelling. —Moore.

I’ll read you matter deep and dangerous.

As full of peril and adventurous spirit,

As to o’erwalk a current, roaring loud,

On the unsteadfast footing of a spear. —Shakespeare.

“What! mounted
already?” said Major Gordon, as he rode up to the gate of
Sweetwater, and saw Kate in the saddle. “I had no idea even that
you intended to ride today. I thought, in fact, that we were to read
Milton.”

It had come to be as
much of a habit for the Major to appear at Sweetwater every morning,
as it was for his men to report themselves to him at roll-call. Kate,
moreover, always had a smile for him, even if Mrs. Warren had not;
and often, before he left, the manner in which the next morning
should be spent, whether in riding, reading, or otherwise, was
determined.

“Haven’t you
heard!” answered Kate, as she arranged her dress, giving a brief
nod, her whole demeanor full of excitement.

“I have heard
nothing.”

“Not heard it? The
woods are on fire. See!”

As she spoke, she
pointed with her riding-whip in the opposite direction to that from
which her guest had come.

The Major, looking
where she indicated, observed, far off, hovering over the distant
swamp, a thick, black cloud, which, if the day had been more sultry,
he would have supposed to be an approaching thunder storm.

“But why should
you go?” he said.

“It is my duty,”
was the reply. “The population is thin at best in this wild
district, but thinner than ever since the war broke out. But few men
can turn out, and I thought”—she hesitated, and then added,
frankly, “that my presence, perhaps, would stimulate them to
exertion. For, you know,” she added, changing her tone suddenly to
a light and jesting one, “that my poor wealth is in timber almost
entirely, as that of the patriarchs was in herds and camels; and one
doesn’t like to have whole acres burned up, even though caring for
riches as little as your humble servant.”

“But you ought not
to have thought of going alone. You should have waited for me,”
said Major Gordon, impulsively. “It may be fraught with danger.”

“Thank you!”
saucily replied Kate, bowing with mock gravity. “You must excuse
the curtsey,” she added, “for you see I am on horseback. Oh!
don’t explain. I say again, I’m a thousand times obliged to you,
for thinking I’m not able to manage myself, or look after my own
property; but am just like the hundred and one silly, weak creatures,
whom you men would keep in glass cases, as a pretty toy for the
mantel-piece.”

“Indeed, Miss
Aylesford,” began the Major. “I beg you—”

“Nay, not another
word, as you would be restored to favor,” she said, playfully
lifting her right hand, from the wrist of which her whip dangled by a
silken cord. “Or rather be put on trial for good behaviour. The
truth, sir, always comes first. I see now what all your pretty
compliments mean. Nay! not a word.” And she shook her head, a pout
on her lip, but her eyes dancing with merriment; for the Major was
looking quite disconcerted. “You and aunt both agree in having the
most sovereign contempt for my capacity for taking care of myself; I
will not add the most supreme confidence in your own powers of
advice, if not guardianship.”

“I cry your
mercy,” said Major Gordon, when, after this wild rattle, she
suddenly gave her horse his head; and as he spoke, he cantered on
beside her. “I haven’t a word to say for myself. But, as I have
never seen a fire in the woods, you’ll be, I hope, my cavalier, so
that I may gratify my curiosity.” His tone, as he uttered these
words, was demureness itself.

The gay creature he
was attending laughed outright. It was a light, silvery laugh, and
with all its abandon, lady-like. It was a laugh running over with
happiness and glee. She turned her head over her left shoulder, and
looked the Major frankly in the face.

“Well done,” was
her reply. “You have beat me at my own weapons. But enough of such
nonsense.” And in a tone of real seriousness, she asked, “Have
you, indeed, never seen a fire in the woods?” “Never. Are they
not dangerous sometimes?”

“Often. If the
wind shifts, the flames come roaring down on the workmen, frequently
faster than a man can run. These pines, in a dry season, burn like
tinder. It is a common thing for the conflagration to rage till a
heavy rain extinguishes it. Sometimes miles of forest are devastated
before the fire goes out.”

All this time, the
Major and his fair companion had been pressing forward, at a hand
gallop. Before long, the smell of the burning woods, as well as the
increasing clouds of smoke, betokened their near approach to the
scene of the conflagration; and in a few minutes, turning an angle of
the road, they came in full sight of it, and checked their horses.

Directly in front of
the equestrians, appeared a space from which the trees had been cut
off by the charcoal-burners employed in providing fuel for the
neighboring iron-furnace. Here and there about this clearing, which
was nearly a mile long and a half a mile deep, stood various smoking,
semi-circular mounds, like huge black ovens; while scattered around,
were to be seen cubical piles of pine-wood, some partially covered
with earth, and some as yet entirely bare. Though Major Gordon had
never seen the process of charcoal making before, its different
stages, as thus revealed, explained the whole to him. A log-hut, the
rudest in construction he had ever seen, located in the midst of this
desolate tract, showed that the charcoal burners temporarily resided
here. But, at present, no signs of human life were visible about the
cabin. Indeed, the eye of the Major did not rest on it, or on the
smoking mounds, for more than a second, the spectacle beyond being
such as to fix his attention immediately.

Back of the
charcoal-clearing stretched the pine forest, like a wall of enormous
reeds, sombre and gloomy as death. Just as the Major and Kate arrived
at the turn of the road, the fire, racing before a brisk wind, had
come into sight at the further end of the clearing. In little more
than a minute, it swept across a tract of woodland nearly a furlong
in extent. The flames had scarcely caught the lower part of a tree
before they had run to its very top. Distance seemed to be no
impediment to them, for, reaching a side-road, they did not
perceptibly pause, but crossed it at once. Indeed, the dry, resinous
trees appeared often to take fire without the contact of the
elements, flashing into conflagration from the heat alone.

As the ocean of
flame advanced, it tossed billows of pitchy smoke up into the sky,
while red forky tongues shot continually forth, and lapping the air
for a moment, went out forever. Where the undergrowth had been left
standing along the edge of the wood, or where there was a tract of
wild grass, the fire, catching to it, whistled along with a rapidity
the eye could scarcely follow. It was a melancholy sight to see the
tall pines, the growth of a century, standing one moment green to the
top; and the next, after writhing helplessly in the lurid fire, left
blackened and shrivelled wrecks. The roar of the conflagration,
meantime, was awful, the sound of it seeming to pervade all space.
Every instant it grew louder and deeper, for the flames had now
skirted along almost the entire side of the clearing, and were
consequently directly opposite to our equestrians, within only half a
mile.

For the first time
it now occurred to the Major that their situation might possibly
become perilous. He censured himself for not suspecting this before,
but as less than five minutes had elapsed since their arrival,
perhaps less than half that time, and as, in that brief interval, his
whole attention had been engrossed by the novel spectacle, his error
was natural. He turned immediately to Kate.

She had not been
less absorbed than himself, and was still eagerly regarding the
conflagration, her whole attitude and air betraying intense
abstraction. The quick, earnest words of her companion aroused her,
however, at once. She started with a blush, at the first sound of his
deep voice.

“We shall be cut
off by the fire,” he said, “if we don’t fly for our lives. As
soon as the flames reach this end of the clearing, they will extend
laterally in our direction; for that is the course of the wind. Not a
minute must be lost.”

Kate scarcely waited
to hear him out. At once she saw the truth of what he said, and
recognizing the imminency of their peril even better than he did, for
she was more familiar with the treacherous rapidity of these
conflagrations, she turned her steed, and, with no answer but a look,
galloped back along the road they had come.

The horses had, for
some time, been restless. But their riders, engrossed by the scene,
had not observed this, though mechanically quieting them, from
unconscious habit. The moment the animals felt the rein relax, and
found their backs turned on the nameless horror which had oppressed
them, they gave way to their affright, and rushed onward with terror,
the sweat starting on their glossy coats, and their distended
nostrils reddening with blood. Neither the Major nor Kate made any
effort to check them. For both now recollected that the road they
were following curved in towards the line of the fire, and that for a
considerable time at least, they would be approaching the
conflagration, instead of increasing their distance from it. In this
extremity the same thought occurred to both. It was whether it would
not be wiser to return, for, even in the event of being surrounded by
the flames, the clearing would afford comparative safety. But each
felt that already it was doubtful if they could regain the clearing,
and that nothing was left but to press on at the most rapid pace of
which Arab and Selim were capable. They looked at each other but did
not speak, for looks supply the place of words in great emergencies.
Both read each other’s thoughts, and both said mentally that their
lives now depended on the mettle of their horses.

The air, meantime,
was becoming so oppressive, that breathing grew difficult. The smoke
and heat filled the whole atmosphere, and the terrified animals, now
more unnerved than ever, were bathed completely in sweat, and began
to exhibit a disposition to bolt aside. It was with the utmost
difficulty that Kate could keep Arab’s head facing the approaching
fire, the alarmed beast swerving continually. Selim, from having been
trained to the battle field, was less affrighted at the smoke,
though, as terror is infectious, he also commenced to be
unmanageable.

Precious moments
were thus lost. Suddenly the conflagration made its appearance, about
two hundred yards in front of them, and crossing the road almost
immediately, blocked up the passage with a solid wall of fire; while
rapidly spreading laterally, it threatened, in a few instants more,
to engulf our equestrians. Blazing fragments of bark were already
falling around them; the flames crackled sharper, and the roar
deepened.

Heretofore, in
seasons of danger, Major Gordon had invariably known what to do.
There had always been some possibility of escape, something which, if
tried, might perhaps avert death. But now he saw no chance, however
remote. He was like the miserable victim, who, bound hand and foot,
is laid down in the path of the hideous Juggernaut, and who beholds,
with chill horror, the terrible machine advancing continually nigher
and nigher. Yet he thought less of himself than of Kate. To see her
perish before his eyes, and of a death so awful, he being powerless
to assist her, was the pang that wrung his soul. But his agony was
not unmixed with a certain pleasure. From the deep recesses of his
heart, surprising even himself, there thrilled, in this crisis, a
wild joy. He could not pause to analyze it, but it seemed to say that
death was sweet, with Kate to share it. Instinctively he looked at
her, something of all this finding expression in his glance. Her eyes
met his, in a long, full gaze, as if her whole soul was in it, a gaze
which raised this sensation of joy to one of absolute bliss. For a
moment he almost thanked heaven for the calamity which had broken
down the barriers of conventionalism and sex between them. The near
approach of death had revealed to him how much he loved Kate; and
that look, did it not, he said, betray that she loved him as well?

All this occupied
but an instant. But the conflagration, in that brief interval, had
diminished its distance one-half.

CHAPTER XVI.

THE MISUNDERSTANDING

Trifles, light as air,

Are to the jealous, confirmation strong

As proofs of holy writ —Shakespeare.

‘Tis than delightful misery no more,

But agony unmixed. — Thornson.

Suddenly Kate cried,
in a voice almost inaudible from eagerness,

“I see a bridle
path, I remember. Follow me.”

As she spoke, she
struck Arab with all her strength, so that he shot forward like a
bolt from a cross-bow, entering the forest, on the right, where the
tracks of an old road were dimly visible. The trees had so overgrown
the way, indeed, that Kate had to stoop to his neck, in order to
avoid striking the branches. Her companion darted after her, burying
both rowels into his steed.

There was no sign,
as yet, to what point the path would lead. It was evidently a
temporary road, made by the wood-choppers long before, at some period
when they were cutting rails or timber in the forest. There were
scores of such tracks traversing the woods, but their course was
never direct, and often they led back quite near to the place where
they started. A person, unfamiliar with the particular road, might
lose himself speedily in its labyrinths. But the positiveness with
which Kate spoke convinced Major Gordon that she had used the path
before, and that it held out a possibility, at least, of escape.

In confirmation of
this, he observed that the conflagration, though pressing close on
their left, moved in a parallel line with them. For several seconds
it was a race for life and death between the advancing fire and the
fugitives. On sped the horses, their muscles starting out like
whip-cord, and the ground fairly flying beneath their hoofs. But
close and hot in pursuit, like a troop of hungry wolves, whose breath
already burns the flying hunter, the conflagration came leaping and
roaring behind. Not once, however, did Kate look around after the
first hurried glance, which ascertained that her companion had
understood her and followed.

Rushing through the
forest in this way, they regained, after a while, a spot where the
path widened, the road not being here so much overgrown. They were
now able to see that the way opened ahead into a broad, well-beaten
highway, with several parallel wheel tracks, which crossed nearly at
right angles to the horse path they were in. Never was harbor a more
grateful sight to the mariner than that white, glaring, sandy road to
the Major and Kate. The latter glanced back over her shoulder, waving
her hand as she dashed on; while, the former, in his excitement,
found himself almost bursting into a huzza. The cheer, however, would
have been checked on his lips, if he had yielded to the impulse; for
a second glance revealed a tree, lying right across their path, its
branches forming a chevaux de frieze, while the thickness of the wood
on either side forbade the hope of turning it. Meantime, the forest
was shaking in the eddy which ran immediately before the fire; and
looking back eagerly over his shoulder, he beheld the flames, only
about a pistol shot behind, careering fiercely after them.

But what was his
amazement, and an amazement coupled with the wildest delight, when he
saw Kate rushing Arab at the tremendous obstacle before them. The
leap was one, which, except in such an emergency, he would have
thought it suicidal, even for the best horseman, mounted on the
finest of hunters, to attempt; but Kate, not hesitating an instant,
lifted her horse with a sudden cry of encouragement, and went flying
over the impediment, just brushing its top as she passed. Quick as
lightning the Major followed, driving his spurs deep into Selim’s
flanks, and cheering him on.

They had escaped, by
what seemed a miracle; for directly after the conflagration reached
the fallen tree. There, checked by the width of the highway,
temporarily, it seemed to rage more furiously than ever, roaring and
leaping like baffled wolves that howl along the shore from which
their prey has escaped.

They galloped
forward in silence, for some time, Kate leading the way. A swampy bit
of ground being crossed, they reached the head of a pond, around
which Kate made a short circuit, when she drew in her rein.

“We are safe now,”
she said; “this is the pond of Waldo furnace, and is between us and
the fire, so we can take our time.”

She was scarcely
audible, and Major Gordon, looking into her face, saw that it was
pale as death. High-spirited as Kate was, the reaction had been too
great for her, and she seemed, for a space, as if she would actually
fall from her saddle.

“Let me help you
to dismount—you are fainting,” cried Major Gordon, springing to
the ground.

But she shook her
head, smiling her thanks.

“At least rest a
while,” he urged, “
dear
Miss Aylesford.”

It was the first
time he had ever used this mode of address, and his whole frame
thrilled as he tremulously uttered it. Kate made no reply. She was
plainly too weak, for the time, to speak. But her eyes drooped, the
color mounted to her face, and the delicate hand which held the rein
shook perceptibly. She did not, however, check her horse; and her
companion seeing, by this, that she preferred not to stop, ceased to
urge her, but vaulting into the saddle, followed her slowly.

The last half hour
had opened Major Gordon’s eyes. He had yielded, for more than a
fortnight, to the fascination of Kate’s society, without inquiring
what was the nature of the spell which bound him; but that moment,
when he thought death inevitable, had suddenly, as if by a
lightning-flash, revealed the truth. He knew that he loved Kate with
all the ardor of his soul. Nor, if he had interpreted her look
aright, was he indifferent to her. At any other time, he would at
once have urged his daring suit. But the agitation of Kate forbade it
now.

He followed her in
silence, therefore, until they reached the vicinity of the church
near Sweetwater, when, just as they were crossing the old bridge in
its rear, Kate drew Arab in.

“I never pass this
spot without wishing to stop,” she said. “Running water and its
musical sound always fascinates me.”

The old bridge
fascinated Major Gordon also, as he looked at the dark waters, some
twenty feet below, swirling and rushing from under it. Almost
completely shaded by the sombre cedars, which here entirely
overarched it, the river swept swiftly onwards, the color of dark
walnut, except when a stray sunbeam, penetrating the thick canopy,
and falling in broken gleams on its surface, burnished it momentarily
into gold. Insects skimmed to and fro on the water, now darting out
into mid-current to be borne rapidly downwards, and now dozing on the
very edge of the rushing tide, or circling in the eddies that
revolved under the mossy banks. An almost undistinguishable hum
pervaded the atmosphere, from the thousands that buzzed on busy wing
about. Occasionally a low sound, as if the cedars audibly sighed,
rose up when some faint breeze stirred through their ancient boughs.
The scene was the more lovely and absorbing, for its contrast to the
conflagration they had just witnessed.

Suddenly a horse’s
hoofs were heard striking the bridge. Kate and her companion looked
up, the former with perceptible embarrassment; a circumstance which
induced Major Gordon to examine the new comer narrowly.

This person was a
young man apparently about eight and twenty years of age, and attired
in an elegant riding-dress, such as only gentlemen of birth and
fortune wore in that day. Slender and tall, though not
disproportionally so, and with a haughty yet graceful carriage, he
had that peculiar air which the world is accustomed to call
aristocratic. He sat his steed with careless ease, managing him
principally by the heel. To the Major’s practiced eye he was
plainly an adept in horsemanship; though his skill was that of the

manege
rather than of the field; in short, he was evidently no
military man, though so finished a rider. His face was of the high
Norman cast, and would have been strikingly handsome, if less cold
and supercilious in expression. In his fiery eye were traces of a
daring, if not passionate will. But either care, or late hours, or
excessive dissipation, had given to his countenance a worn and
exhausted look, not generally seen out of great cities, nor often
even there in persons so young.

A perceptible scowl
gathered on the face of the stranger at sight of the Major. But
without noticing him further, he checked his horse, and addressing
Kate, said, authoritatively—

“Your aunt has
sent me for you. She became alarmed at your long absence, and the
woods on fire, too. So, the moment a horse could be saddled, I
galloped in search of you, without even stopping to change my dusty
coat.”

Kate colored, but,
to Major Gordon’s surprise, she showed no signs of resentment,
though the Major felt as if he would have liked to punish the speaker
for his insolent tone. In fact, she turned Arab’s head immediately
homeward, as if obedience to the mandate so surlily delivered was a
matter of course.

“Who can the
fellow be?” said Major Gordon to himself.

But his curiosity
was not destined to annoy him. Kate directly remembered that the
gentlemen were strangers to each other, and proceeded to introduce
them.

“Cousin, this is
Major Gordon,” she said, turning to the new comer. “Major
Gordon,” she said, turning to the latter, “my cousin Charles;”
then correcting herself, she added, “Mr. Aylesford.”

The gentlemen bowed
distantly. Kate’s cousin, with a supercilious air he did not
attempt to conceal. Major Gordon, with a look, at first of surprise,
and then of marked resentment.

“A cousin,” said
the latter to himself, his whole feelings taking a sudden revulsion,
“and I never even so much as heard one mentioned before! Strange!
He seems to exercise more than a cousin’s authority over her.”
And a jealous pang shot through his heart.

A constrained
silence followed, which was first broken by the lady.

“When did you
leave town, Charles?” she said.

“At daybreak this
morning,” was the reply. Then, as if he could no longer contain
himself, he said, emphasizing her name formally, “Really,
Catharine, you do wrong in worrying your aunt in this way. She
insists that you will come to harm, riding out in these troubled
times.” And he looked as if he echoed the opinion. “But, above
all, what or who induced you to go out to-day?”

“Oh! you forget,”
answered Kate lightly, affecting not to notice this last remark,
“that Major Gordon attends me.”

“I beg Major
Gordon’s pardon,” said the cousin, without even an attempt to
conceal a sneer. “I had quite overlooked that circumstance, which
of course insures your safety, though unfortunately it does not, it
seems, prevent your aunt’s alarm.”

Kate’s face was
crimson at these words. But she said nothing, and did not even look
to Major Gordon to implore his forbearance, as the latter, with a
lover’s exacting nature, thought she ought. The consequence was
that the Major, already jealous of the cousin, became irritated at
Kate herself; and insensibly drawing his horse to one side, left Mr.
Aylesford and lady to ride together; for, during this conversation,
the speakers had set off slowly towards Sweetwater.

“What a fool I
would have made of myself,” soliloquized Major Gordon, angrily, “if
I had told her, five minutes ago, I loved her, as I was tempted to
do. She is evidently plighted to this cousin, for in no other way can
his cool assumption of authority over her be explained; and she has
been only amusing herself with me; her look I misinterpreted, or,
which is probably truer, she is the most arrant of coquettes.” An
angry lover is rarely just or logical. “Why did I not see whither I
was being led? Yes; if she had not been trifling with me, she would
have mentioned her cousin at some time or another,” he continued,
getting more enraged, “but it was necessary to her success to keep
me ignorant of him, and so his name was studiously avoided. All she
seems to think of now is the possibility of a collision between us,
for he has probably returned sooner than she expected; and she dreads
his haughty insolence. Well, my pretty lady, it would give me a
pleasure, if the gentleman and I were alone, to make him taste my
sword.”

In this way he rode
on, sullen and apart, till they reached the gate of Sweetwater, where
courtesy compelled him to approach to make his adieus.

“Won’t you come
in?” said Kate, in her old, frank way, though in a lower, perhaps
softer tone than usual.

In an instant he
forgot his indignation. But recollecting that he could not be
mistaken, and saying to himself that this was only another of her
wiles, he answered, coldly—

“No, I thank you,”
and, replacing his hat ceremoniously, he rode stiffly on, internally
cursing the whole sex, from Kate back to mother Eve, as irritated
lovers will.

CHAPTER XVII.

JEALOUSY

I care not for her, I. —Shakespeare.

It is a quarrel most unnatural,

To be revenged on him that loveth thee. —Shakespeare.

The instant Major
Gordon was out of sight of Sweetwater, and had plunged into the
forest that lay between it and his quarters, he gave vent to the
angry emotions that had raged, like a suppressed volcano, in his
bosom.

His first ebullition
was directed against Aylesford. The insolent tone of the cousin, in
recalling, galled him to the quick; and his hand instinctively sought
the hilt of his sword, when he remembered that supercilious and
confident look. A savage, almost murderous feeling took possession of
him. He muttered between his teeth. “If I had him alone, here in
the forest, with a clearing of but a dozen yards or so, he should
answer for his conduct with his life.”

The angry lover felt
that he could not return to the Forks as yet, where prying eyes might
read his mortification, so he turned into a cross-road, which led
into the heart of the wilderness, and, giving the rein to Selim,
galloped till the panting beast was covered once more with foam. In
this rapid motion the turbulence of his soul gradually found a
partial vent. The first blind impulse of outraged love passed away,
and he began to scrutinize the facts with comparative calmness.

He went over,
mentally, the whole of the last fortnight. He recalled every word,
gesture and look of Kate. Something almost like a groan burst from
him, as he admitted to himself, after this review, that she had never
given him cause to indulge the wild hopes he had entertained that
morning. She had invariably been affable. But a woman in love, he had
heard, was shy and timorous. She had boldly controverted his
opinions, when they differed from her own. But if she had secretly
loved him, she would have implicitly adopted them. Major Gordon
reasoned in this way, not from experience, for he had never before
been in love, and had enjoyed comparatively little female society,
but from what he had read of the passion, in its effect on the sex,
in the romances of the day: Clarissa Harlowe, Amelia, Tom Jones, and
Sir Charles Grandison. It is no demerit, we hope, even in these days,
for an honest man to be practically ignorant about such matters, when
there is no way in which he can be informed, except by trifling with
the happiness of trusting innocence.

Nor was this all.
Kate’s social position, her large fortune, and the hereditary
loyalty of her family, now rose before him, the barriers they really
were to a union with a rebel officer, who had no income but that
derived from his sword. Instead of repeating the charge of coquetry
against Kate, he owned to himself that she had been frank throughout;
for a new light was thrown upon him, in reference to their
conversations respecting rank and descent. She had evidently
intended, he saw, to put him upon his guard. “Into what a bit of
folly has not my vanity led me,” he cried.

The day was drawing
to its close before he returned to the Forks. As he emerged from the
denser forest, he discovered that the obscuration in the sky, which
he had noticed for some time, and which he had thought was smoke from
the conflagration, was in reality a thunder-storm coming up. He
quickened his pace at this, and reached his quarters just in time to
escape a drenching.

For half the night
he walked his chamber, his mood of mind alternating, as that of
lovers will under similar circumstances. Now the first angry impulse
against Kate would return. Now he would exonerate her from all
intentional coquetry. Now he would recall her glance in the forest,
when both considered death inevitable, and decide that there was some
mystery, which, if understood, would explain satisfactorily her
subsequent conduct.

In this mood he
retired to bed. The rain still continued. It had been falling in
torrents the whole evening, the huge drops rattling on the roof like
shot. The water splashed like a small cataract, as it ran off from
the eaves. The great buttonwoods about the house creaked in the gale;
and the river, which ran close by, surged along with a wild, mournful
sound, at times rising to a sullen roar, as if threatening a freshet.
Amid such noises our hero fell asleep.

When he woke, the
storm had ceased, the sun was shining brightly, and the birds sang as
merrily as on a morning in spring. It was Sunday. The usual busy hum
of the Forks was hushed, and everything breathed a Sabbath silence,
made more eloquent by contrast with the tumult and rage of the
preceding night. Not a leaf stirred; a thousand diamonds sparkled in
the grass; the air was full of balm; and all was still, save the
sound of a hymn that rose from a neighboring cottage, whose family
was at morning worship. The sweet influences of the hour, combined
with his late sleep, made Major Gordon heartily ashamed of his angry
mood of yesterday. “What if Mr. Aylesford is preferred to me,” he
said. “Is that a reason why I should seek his blood? It is nobler
to forgive than to resent.”

In this mood he
prepared to attend church. It was the first Sunday that services had
been held since his arrival at the Forks; for, at that time,
Sweetwater had no regular minister, but was compelled to rely on
chance itinerants. The Methodist connexion, always a missionary
church, but never more so than at that period, was then just
beginning the great work, which has made it since such a bulwark of
morality and religion in this republic. A new preacher, who had never
visited the district, was to conduct the services.

The Major reached
the edifice early. But the excitement of a strange minister and of
the conflagration of yesterday had already collected an unusual
crowd, at least for the period; for half the male population was
absent in consequence of the war. Having tied his horse, as the rest
had done, to the bough of a tree, our hero joined the principal
group. He heard, as he had expected, that the storm had extinguished
the fire, which otherwise, it was declared, might have swept the
whole region, “down to Waldo itself,” as one of the men said.

While they were
talking, Uncle Lawrence came up. It gratified Major Gordon to see the
respect, almost reverence, in which the veteran was held. The
conversation still continued to turn on the fire.

“I’ve often
wondered,” said Uncle Lawrence, with quick sagacity, divining a
scientific truth which has since been demonstrated, “if there
wasn’t a connection between these great fires and the rains which
nigh a’most always follow ‘em. I’ve observed, neighbors, nine
times out of ten, that a fire in the woods brought a deluge of rain
close on its heels.”

“That’s a fact,
anyhow,” said one of his hearers, with a puzzled look, “though I
never thought of it afore.”

“The Lord is
always merciful,” continued Uncle Lawrence. “If he didn’t send
these rains, I don’t know what would become of us, for mortal man
couldn’t put out such a fire. It’s skeered the deer clear off
their old haunts, for I met one at the crossing of the branch in the
main road, as I came to meetin’.”

After awhile, Major
Gordon left the group conversing and turned aside into the
grave-yard, on the right of the church. It was a spot that might have
been selected for an elegy as fittingly as that of Stoke-Pogis. There
were few headstones in that humble cemetery; no pompous heraldic
emblems; nothing of the usual vanities of life, that seem, in similar
places, such a mockery of death. Good and true men, who, in their
lowly walk, had lived more nobly than Pharaohs who now slumber
beneath pyramids, or conquerors who repose under marble mausoleums,
slept there unheralded, and forgotten by all, except by the
descendants who still reverenced their virtues, and by that
Omniscience in whose eyes the sainted poor are “beyond all price.”
As the Major stood, thoughtfully regarding the graves, he heard a
step behind him, and turning was accosted by Uncle Lawrence.

“A sweet, quiet
spot, sir,” said the old man. “Just such a place as seems fit to
lay this mortal body in, to await the resurrection. Some day, I shall
sleep here myself. Yonder,” he continued, pointing to the right
hand, close to the fence, and about half way down the little
cemetery, “is the corner I should choose of all others. I have
thought of it so often that I have got a sort of home feeling for the
spot. I never could understand,” he added, “how folks can have
grave-yards in cities; it seems kind of natural like, however, to be
buried where the birds can sing, and the grass grows above you.”

“You view the
grave with no horror, I see,” said his companion. “It is a noble
state of feeling, and eminently Christian, for the old Pagans had
nothing like it.”

“I bless God,”
said the patriarch, “that I have no fear of death. It is but
casting off this old garment of the flesh, and, when a little while
has past, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump, I shall be
raised again.” And, leaning on his staff, he looked above,
reminding his hearer, for the moment, of Elijah, when the prophet saw
the chariot of fire.

If Major Gordon had
retained any of his yesterday’s anger, its last traces vanished
now. His mind was attuned by the calm yet elevated conversation of
his companion to the services of the day, and the solemn thoughts
they merited. In this mood he followed the veteran into the church.

CHAPTER XVIII.

THE COUNTRY CHURCH

You raised these hallowed walls; the desert smil’d,

And Paradise was opened in the wild.

No weeping orphan saw his father’s stores

Our shrines irradiate, or emblaze our floors;

No silver saints, by dying misers given,

Here bribe the rage of ill-requited Heaven;

But such plain roofs as piety could raise,

And only vocal with the Maker’s praise. —Pope.

The bustle of the
arrivals had reached its climax at this moment. For nearly half an
hour the congregation had been collecting, some on foot, others on
horseback, and still others in antiquated, worn out carriages. The
last, however, were very few. Generally the conveyance was nothing
better than a common hay wagon, with temporary seats placed for the
good dame and her children; while the harness was of the most
primitive description. The horses were tied about, under the shade of
the trees, and were busy whisking the flies off with their tails, and
occasionally glancing around with a knowing look at the groups of
people. The women generally entered the church as soon as they
arrived, but the men stood talking about the crops, the war, or other
matters of interest. Now and then a rustic beauty would create a buzz
of remarks, as she tripped coquettishly by the young bachelors,
glancing askance at them; and now some elderly person would step out
from the throng to assist a poor, ancient dame, who came hobbling
along on crutches.

A murmur of voices
without, and of rustling fans within, filled the air.

Suddenly a handsome
carriage dashed up from the direction of Sweetwater, drawn by two
spirited horses, and was checked in front of the church. In the
driver Major Gordon recognized his rival, who, throwing the lines to
a servant that rode beside him, leaped out, and hastened to assist
the ladies to alight. But Kate was too quick for him, for already she
had opened the door and stepped nimbly to the ground, much to her
cousin’s discomfiture, as Major Gordon thought.

When Kate turned,
after her aunt had descended, to enter the church, her eye met that
of Major Gordon. The latter bowed with all his old cordiality. Her
recognition was instantaneous and frank, and was accompanied with a
bright blush, and a sudden lighting up of the whole countenance, as
if with gratified surprise. This little incident was not, however,
observed by her cousin, who had preceded Kate, Mrs. Warren leaning
heavily on his arm, with more than her usual assumption of dignity.

“I declare,”
said Uncle Lawrence, “if that ain’t Charles Aylesford come back.
I thought he’d gone to Philadelphy for a month or two.” And,
shaking his head, he added, “Strange, that two such near relations
as Miss Katie and he should be so different. But their fathers were
so before them, and there’s a good deal, Major, in blood.”

In what this
difference consisted, Major Gordon had not time to inquire, even if
he felt so disposed, for as he finished speaking, Uncle Lawrence led
the way into the church.

It was, as we have
stated, a small edifice. A single block of benches, with an aisle on
each side, afforded room for a few score of people only; but these
were quite as many as the neighborhood supplied, even in better
times. The pulpit was high, approached by a staircase, and surmounted
by a sounding-board. On each side it had a window, half obscured
outside by waving oaks; and through this casement the summer air
stole in, laden with sweet fragrance from the cedars that overhung
the stream. In either corner of the edifice, to the right and left of
the pulpit, was a deep square pew, reserved for the proprietors of
Sweetwater and Waldo, who together had built the church. One of these
young Mr. Aylesford now occupied, in solitary state; while the other
was tenanted by Kate and her aunt. The sexes, throughout the
congregation, sat apart, in like manner, the women to the right of
the preacher, and the men to the left. Uncle Lawrence, advancing to
the head of the church, took his seat, evidently an accustomed one,
on the front bench, dragging with him the Major, who would have
shrank, if alone, from such a conspicuous position. The old man
evidently expected Mr. Aylesford to rise and invite Major Gordon to
enter the pew, a civility usually tendered to strangers in the
Major’s rank of life; but as Kate’s cousin sat still, and only
noticed the officer by a civil stare, Mr. Herman signed to his
companion to occupy the bench at his side.

Our hero could not
avoid, after a while, glancing in the direction of Kate. She sat,
with eyes downcast, and her hands folded meekly before her, looking,
in her spotless white, like some virgin saint. The deep love for her,
which already filled the heart of Major Gordon, welled up warmer and
more gushing than ever at this sight. For true manhood reverences
woman all the more for those religious instincts which, implanted in
her by her Maker, can never be obliterated without defacing her fair
image. Her lover thought as he looked, that Raphael, when painting
his Madonna, must have had a vision of such a face.

The preacher
ascended the pulpit, and at once the shuffling of feet subsided, the
preparatory coughs ceased, and a profound silence fell on the
audience. For a few moments, with his head leaning on the Bible, the
man of God engaged in silent prayer. The hum of insects without, and
the light rustle of leaves, gave audible meaning to this deep
stillness. In at the east windows, the sunshine, glimmering through
the grave-yard oaks, slanted downwards into the church, and dappled
the white, sanded floor with shifting light and shade. The murmur of
the stream, like the solemn undertone of a distant organ, swelled
softly on the ear, filling the whole atmosphere with sacred quiet.

The hymn was given
out. It was that one of Charles Wesley’s, beginning, “Lo! on a
narrow neck of land.” After a slight pause, a manly tenor struck
up. The solitary voice was soon joined by a treble; a deep bass
followed; and directly the whole congregation, women and men, adults
and children, had joined in the singing. Rude as the music was, it
had an earnestness, which placed it, in Major Gordon’s opinion, far
ahead of the meretricious vocalization he had often heard in
fashionable churches. At the end of every stanza, the preacher read
the next, when the singing commenced again. It seemed to our hero
that he could distinguish Kate’s voice, rising melodiously above
all the rest, like that of some fair seraph, soaring high up over the
choirs of Heaven.

The text was suited
to the hymn. At first the preacher labored perceptibly, and the
attention of the audience slackened. The disappointment was great.
Near Major Gordon sat a pompous, self-satisfied looking man,
occupying a corner of the bench, who was notorious for his noise in
meeting, his sharp bargains out of it, and his opposition to all new
preachers. He had publicly declared he would not like this one, and
now, after listening awhile, he quietly leaned his head back, covered
his shining bald pate and face with a bandanna handkerchief to keep
off the flies, and surrendered himself to sleep. But as the preacher
warmed in his discourse, the opinion of the congregation began to
change. The orator, though what is called illiterate, was evidently
deeply read in the Bible; and no man can be that, yet remain really
ignorant; for he will know the human heart, if he knows nothing else,
and will have at his command the most sublime imagery in all ancient
or modern poetry. The preacher soon showed that he was also terribly
in earnest. Heaven and hell, God and Satan, were awful realities in
his eyes; and he labored to impress them as such on his hearers. He
described a conscience-struck sinner, seeking to flee from the wrath
to come; and described him with a glow of language and a fervor of
eloquence which went directly to the heart. Cries of “Amen!”
became frequent in the congregation. Even the comfortable old
sleeper, disturbed in his slumbers, began to respond occasionally
also, though still retaining the bandanna over his face, and making a
vigorous effort to doze on. But now the warnings of the orator became
more earnest than ever. The conflagration of the preceding day was
introduced. “Where will the sinner be,” he cried, “when, at the
last judgment, the whole world will be wrapt in flame? No
providential rain will then put out the fire of an angry God.” The
effect was electric. The women sobbed aloud, and some even shrieked.
“If eloquence means the adaptation of style to an audience,”
reasoned Major Gordon, “this man is a Christian Demosthenes.”
Even the captious sleeper could endure it no longer, but, half
starting to his feet, he snatched the handkerchief from his face, and
shouted stentoriously, “Amen!”

Towards the close,
the sermon became a fervid appeal, in which the most majestic Bible
imagery was employed with startling power. Tears rolled down the
speaker’s face, while emotion often choked his utterance. The
effect, when the preacher sat down, was evidently deep. For some
minutes not a listener stirred. Even the noisy critic was now melted
into heartfelt and silent emotion. Indeed, it was only when the
minister, apparently too exhausted to conclude the services, leaned
over the pulpit, requesting the well-known patriarch of the
neighborhood to conclude with prayer, that the spell seemed even
partially dissolved. Then, for an instant or two, there were deep
drawn breaths, as of relief, and a slight movement through the
audience, as of persons shifting from uncomfortable postures.

The prayer of Uncle
Lawrence was simple, but fervent, and while Major Gordon listened to
it, he could not help saying to himself, “this is the religion of
the primitive Christians.”

A doxology and
benediction concluded the services, after which the congregation
streamed out, the boys snatching their hats before the blessing was
over, and rushing from the church, pell-mell.

Major Gordon
lingered behind, not wishing to be jostled in the crowd, so that,
when he reached the doorway, the Aylesfords were just driving off
with the preacher, whom they were entertaining as was the patriarchal
custom of Sweetwater. He remained a few moments, watching the
congregation disperse. Here a good dame was climbing into a rude
vehicle, there a small farmer was untying his plough-horse from a
tree; here a group of damsels were glancing aside at the young men,
and there the young men were sheepishly returning the glances.
Finally, Major Gordon, mounting his horse, and bowing to the crowd,
rode off.

CHAPTER XIX.

THE MEETING

My bloody thoughts, with violent pace,

Shall ne’er look back, ne’er ebb to human love,

Till that a capable and wide revenge

Swallow them up. —Shakespeare.

In this

You satisfy your anger and revenge;

Suppose this, it will not

Repair your loss; and there was never yet

But shame and scandal in a victory,

When, rebels unto reason, passion fought it. —Massinger.

The next morning
Major Gordon was early in the saddle. Like a brave man and a soldier,
he resolved to see Kate at once, and know his fate.

But he was destined
to meet with a disappointment. He had ridden about half a mile, when
he was startled from a revery, in which she took a leading part, by
the soft sound of hoofs advancing through the same path. He looked
up, and recognized Kate’s cousin.

The influence of the
preceding day had not yet left Major Gordon. He was no longer eager
for a quarrel with his rival, but on the contrary was resolved, if
Kate refused him, to withdraw entirely from the contest, and even to
avoid Mr. Aylesford, in order to prevent the possibility of a
collision. He bowed, therefore, civilly, though distantly, and was
passing on, when the other stopped him by placing his horse across
the narrow road.

“Excuse me, Major
Gordon,” said Mr. Aylesford, haughtily, “but, as I was on my way
to visit you, I would thank you to give me your attention for awhile.

“Certainly,”
said the Major, politely, endeavoring to look calm, though inwardly
chafed by the manner of his rival: “I wait your commands,” he
added, seeing that Mr. Aylesford did not speak; and he backed his
horse, so as to widen the space between himself and the other.

“I was
astonished,” said Mr. Aylesford, looking up with a frown, “to
find, sir, on my return from the city, that you were paying attention
to a lady engaged to myself,” and he paused for a reply.

Major Gordon felt
his color change at this confirmation of his worst fears; but the eye
of his rival was on him, and he strove to seem composed. He could not
trust himself to speak, however; so he only bowed, as if for the
other to proceed.

“I presume,
however,” resumed Mr. Aylesford, “that you were not aware of the
circumstance; at least such is the conclusion I have arrived at on
second thoughts. I have made it my business, in consequence, to seek
you, in order to state the fact, and to suggest to you, what your own
sense and honor doubtless will hint also, that, for the future, your
visits at Sweetwater should be made fewer, if not altogether
dispensed with. For the services rendered to the ladies, my aunt, and
cousin, by the party with which you were in company, when they had
the misfortune to shipwrecked, I thank you, in their name.”

It was not possible,
perhaps, to frame a speech more galling to one of his disposition
than was this to Major Gordon. The taunt in regard to his honor, the
sneer at his conduct at the wreck, and the supercilious tone in which
Mr. Aylesford thanked him, as if he had been a mere lackey, made his
blood boil. Nevertheless he endeavored to retain command of himself.
He saw that a brawl between him and Kate’s cousin could not but be
disreputable.

“I thank you, sir,
for your courtesy,” said the Major, at last breaking the silence,
and looking his rival steadily in the face; “but as for your
advice, I shall take the liberty of declining that—”

The hot blood
mounted to the forehead of Aylesford, as, interrupting the speaker at
this point, he stammered, half insane with rage—

“Sir, sir, do you
know who you are talking to?” I am a gentleman, and not a mere
adventurer—

“What do you mean,
sir?” said Major Gordon, temporarily losing control of himself, at
this crowning piece of insolence: and he pushed Selim close to
Aylesford.

“I mean what I
say, sir,” answered the latter, drawing back his horse, and putting
his hand on his sword.

But a moment’s
reflection recalled our hero to himself.

“Put up your
sword,” he said, contemptuously; “I have no quarrel with you. I
was on my way,” he continued, “to call on Miss Aylesford, and
from her, if from anybody, must I receive notice that my visits are
disagreeable.”

“Do you question
my word?” fiercely said Aylesford, again interposing his horse
across the road.

“I merely deny
your right to prescribe who shall, and who shall not visit her.”

“That is the same
thing.” And he stuttered, white with rage, “sir, sir—”

“Permit me to
pass,” said Major Gordon sternly

“Never.”

The temptation was
strong to rush Selim at his antagonist, ride him down, and pass on.
But Major Gordon was still unwilling to be driven into a brawl; and
therefore, after a moment’s pause, during which he was conquering
his anger, he wheeled his horse about in order to seek another road.

His irritated
antagonist, however, was not thus to be baulked. He seemed determined
to fix a quarrel on Major Gordon, now that the latter had expressed
his resolution to visit Kate, if he had not indeed determined on it
from the beginning. He, therefore, followed our hero, saying
contemptuously—

“Coward!”

Under any other
circumstances, that word would have been enough. Observing, however,
after going a few paces, that Aylesford still followed him, he
sternly said.

“Enough of this,
sir. You must see that I won’t quarrel with you. Permit me,
therefore, to take my way, and you take yours.” And, as he spoke,
he checked his horse again.

But the rage of
Aylesford had now become ungovernable. Nothing, indeed, maddens a
temper such as his so much as cool conduct like that of Major Gordon.
Taking his sword by the hilt, he suddenly raised it, and striking our
hero across the face, before the latter could parry the blow, said,
with an oath,

“Take that, sir.
It’s the first time that I ever saw even a rebel officer disgrace
his cloth by poltroonery.”

Natures that are
slow to anger, or that give way to it only after strenuous attempts
at self-control, are always the most terrible in their wrath. The
countenance of Major Gordon grew livid as he reeled from this
insulting blow. It was a considerable interval before he spoke, for
at first the words choked in his throat; and afterwards he could not
trust himself to speak, lest he should, in the first moments of
passion, utter something unworthy of himself.

“Dismount,” he
said silently, in a low, concentrated voice. “Your blood be on your
own head.”

Aylesford, with a
mocking laugh, leaped from the saddle, threw his bridle over a
convenient bough, and stepped into the middle of the smooth, shaded
road. Then drawing his sword he stood on guard.

Major Gordon did not
keep him waiting. Disposing of his horse in a similar manner, he
unsheathed his blade and placed himself in front of his antagonist.

Nearly a minute
elapsed before the duel commenced, the combatants measuring each
other, meantime, with their eyes. Our hero saw at once, from the easy
position of his opponent, that all his skill and caution would be
required to disarm Aylesford; for already he had cooled sufficiently
to come to the resolve not to shed his adversary’s blood.

On his part
Aylesford was secretly admiring the fine person and practised air of
our hero. But no charitable feelings found place in the bosom of the
insulter. He had determined to take his opponent’s life, and he had
few misgivings as to success, for he was not only an expert
swordsman, in a day when every gentleman thought it a necessary part
of his education to have skill in fence, but he had been considered,
by his teacher, the most adroit of scores of pupils. As yet, indeed,
he had never met his match, except in his old master. “It will be
easy work with this militia officer, and quondam attorney,” he said
to himself, scornfully beginning the contest.

But Aylesford was
not long in discovering that he had underrated his adversary’s
skill. He quickly saw, by the style of his opponent’s fence, that
it was the intention of Major Gordon to disarm him: and irritated at
what he believed to be a contemptuous forbearance, in one of whom he
had just been expecting to make an easy victim, he began to throw
more vehemence into the combat than was altogether prudent. He soon,
in consequence, laid himself open to a lunge from his antagonist;
but, as we have seen, it did not suit Major Gordon’s purpose to
take advantage of this; and Aylesford, taught a lesson, fought for
awhile with more caution.

We will not weary
the reader with a catalogue of terms, of whose meaning he is probably
ignorant, in order to describe, in accurate detail, the progress of
the duel. But if he had been a spectator, he would have held his
breath in horror at the rapid flashing of the blades and the rattling
of the steel, whose lightning-like movements his eye would have
vainly tried to follow. Every moment he would have expected one or
both of the antagonists to fall, and would have wondered, as the
struggle went on, why this did not happen.

The reason was, that
never, perhaps, were two combatants more equally matched. Aylesford
was really superior in skill, but Major Gordon was more cool; the
first was ready to take every advantage, the latter fought only to
disarm his adversary. For some time, therefore, the chances hung
equally balanced. At last Aylesford, impatient to terminate this
protracted strife, began again to be more vehement in his assault.
But though pressing his opponent severely, he took care not to expose
himself a second time. His attack was so rapid and fierce, that Major
Gordon was compelled to give ground, at which Aylesford, now
confident of a speedy victory, rushed on more relentlessly than ever,
though still covering himself with so much skill, that his antagonist
could not but admire, even as he reluctantly fell back. Had the
assault been less splendid, Major Gordon might have reserved his own
strength, while Aylesford was expending his; but it demanded our
hero’s whole energies to save his life, so that he soon became as
exhausted as his opponent. The assailer perceived this, and continued
his vigorous assault, knitting his teeth, and inwardly vowing, in the
savageness of his passion, to run his rival through to the very hilt.
At last, when he had pressed Major Gordon a considerable distance,
the foot of the latter struck against an inequality in the ground; he
made a slight stumble backwards; and, for an instant, lost his guard.
Quick as thought, Aylesford took advantage of it, and lunged
desperately, regardless of caution, which he thought no longer
necessary.

But what was his
astonishment, instead of seeing his blade enter the defenceless front
of his antagonist, to observe Major Gordon recover himself, and avert
the thrust by a dexterous twist, which he thought was known only to
himself and his master. It was all the work of an instant, demanding
less time than it has taken the reader to peruse the description.

“Ha!” hissed
Aylesford to himself, with a curse, now fairly frantic with rage and
baffled revenge, “he must have had lessons from my old teacher.
From no one but him, or the devil, could he have learned that trick
of fence. But he is blown; he is less practised than I am; and I’ll
have his heart’s blood yet.”

It must not be
supposed that there was any pause, while he thus soliloquized. On the
contrary, the attack went forward as desperately as before. Major
Gordon at last began to acknowledge to himself it would be impossible
for him to disarm his adversary, and that he must either lose his own
life, or take that of the vindictive young man. The last alternative
was only less objectionable than the first, since it would
incontestibly banish him forever from Kate. But the liberty of choice
was not left to him. He felt himself so hard pressed that he could
count on nothing with certainty. All he could do was to defend
himself, and watch for his opportunity, if fortunately it should
come, or to die, if another and more serious stumble should be his
lot.

CHAPTER XX.

THE INTERRUPTION

There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave,

To tell us this. —Shakespeare.

Do not insult calamity,

It is a barbarous grossness. —Daniel.

But at this crisis,
and when another instant would have dismissed one, if not both of the
combatants, to death, a gun-barrel was thrust between them, striking
up their blades, and simultaneously Uncle Lawrence stepped out into
the road, having approached unperceived and unheard, through the
woods.

“For shame,” he
said. “Put up your swords, young men. I thought better of you,
Major Gordon,” he continued, addressing the latter, “for your
blood belongs to your country, and you’ve no right to waste it in a
private quarrel.”

Somewhat abashed,
the Major dropped the point of his weapon.

Uncle Lawrence,
turning to Aylesford, went on.

“Put up yours
also, sir. I’ve no doubt this brawl is of your making. You needn’t
scowl at me; it will do no good; I was respected by your father
before you was born, and I shan’t allow you to murder, or get
murdered. Now mount your horse, young man, and go home. You needn’t
look at the Major. He’s coming with me, for I have business with
him: and I know he’ll promise me there shall be no more of this.”

Sullenly Aylesford,
after a vain attempt to bluster, sheathed his sword, and telling his
late antagonist, with an oath, that they would meet again, got into
the saddle, and moved away as he was directed. When he had turned a
corner of the road, a few rods distant, and was out of hearing, Uncle
Lawrence said to Major Gordon:

“Now tell me how
all this happened. He insulted you, of course, for I know him of old,
and I marked his rudeness yesterday in church.”

There was a tone of
authority in the speaker, yet one entirely free from assumption,
which there was no resisting. With his blood still boiling, the Major
put up his sword and prepared to obey the old man. He could not tell
everything; Kate’s name was studiously avoided: but he gave
otherwise a fair account of the interview. When he had concluded,
Uncle Lawrence said:

“It is just as I
expected. Now it’s strange,” he continued, “how one brother’ll
differ from another. This young man’s father wasn’t the same man
at all that Kate’s father was; and the son’s worse even. The old
one spent half his fortune on wine and women, and the son has sent
the helve arter the hatchet. He leads a wild life, when he’s in
town, where he can get company of the same sort; and did the same
here, for awhile, when his cousin was in Europe. You can see that,
though, in his face.”

Uncle Lawrence
paused, but as Major Gordon was silent he went on.

“His family, even
Miss Katie, are in fear from his temper. You’ve had a taste of that
yourself, and they say its sometimes awful: he’d as lief kill a
person, if he was angry, as look at ‘em. Miss Katie, too, pities
him, as is natural, for they were children together. I have heerd it
was a plan of their fathers to marry ‘em, when they grew up.” His
listener winced. “How that’ll be now, however, I can’t tell.
Miss Katie worships the very name of her father, and would do a’most
anything that she knew he wished: but I’m sartain, if he was alive,
he’d sooner see her dead than married to her cousin. Her aunt, I
hear, don’t think so, and is a great friend of the young man’s,
which is the more odd, because she married just such another, who
spent all her money and nigh broke her heart. But they do say, she
went a’most crazy with grief, in spite of it all. Women, Major, are
queer critters.”

“I suppose it’s
this old compact,” said the Major, endeavoring to assume a
composure he was far from feeling, “which has brought Mr. Aylesford
down to Sweetwater.”

“Most likely.
Though there may be something else afloat, as other sarcumstances
make me suspect. He’s a tory at heart, I’m sartain. He was always
high, and thought nobody good enough for him, talking of his cousin,
Lord somebody, just as Mrs. Warren does,” and he laughed that low
chuckling laugh, which was all his mirth ever rose to. “Such a man,
Major, is naturally a tory; and tories are always on the watch, with
their cunning ready, for this youngster’s as cunning as a fox; so I
don’t know but there’s mischief afoot. That brings me, too, to my
business, which is public, and to that private affairs must always
give way, you know. But you’ll go back to the Forks?”

In manly bosoms,
love, though the master-passion, is not the selfish and
all-engrossing one, which mere romancers would have their readers to
believe. Though Major Gordon was as anxious as ever to learn his fate
from Kate, he saw that the present was not the time for it, and
therefore declared his readiness to return to the Forks, and
meanwhile, to hear what Uncle Lawrence had to say.

“It’s about the
refugees, Major, that I’ve come to see you,” he said, walking by
Selim’s side, as the latter proceeded homeward at a slow pace.
“Yesterday, when we were all at meeting, widow Bates’ house was
robbed and fired; and it could have been by none but them thieving
vagabonds. Poor thing! she has a hard time to get along anyhow. Her
husband was killed at Brandywine; and both her oldest sons are
‘listed for the war; so that she had nobody at home but her
youngest, a boy of only twelve, and her little darter, who’s still
younger. Among us, we manage to plow her little bit of land, so as to
give her corn and rye enough to eat; but how she picks up the rest of
her living, it’s hard to tell. Yesterday she walked into meeting
with her children, though it’s a matter of five miles or more; and
when she was away, somebody robbed her, taking everything that was
worth carrying off, and then burning down her house.”

“The villains!”
exclaimed the listener.

“You may well say
that,” continued Uncle Lawrence, “for it’s not charity to call
the scoundrels by softer names, as some folks, I hear, do in these
times. Nobody but a villain would rob the widow and the orphan.
Especially a soldier’s widow. It could only have been the
refugees.”

“But have you no
clue to them?” said Major Gordon.

“No what?”

“Can you guess who
did it?”

“Oh! ay! can I
guess? I think I can. It’s Ned Arrison, I’m a’most certain.”

“Who is Ned
Arrison?”

“He’s a vagabond
well known about these parts, Major, and likely to git his desarts if
he’s ever caught by the folks. He used to be a hanger-on of young
Aylesford; he was ostler, I believe, at Sweetwater, for awhile; and
as Master Charles, as they called him, was always in the stables, the
two got pretty thick. Arrison’s ten years the oldest, however, and
wasn’t born in this country either, but had to leave Ireland when
he was about nineteen, I’ve no doubt for gittin’ into some scrape
or other there. He taught the young fellow to drink, and play cards,
and worse, if all accounts are true. Long before Katie’s father
died, however, the tricks of Arrison were found out, and he was
turned off.”

“What makes you
think he had to leave Ireland for committing some crime?”

“Why, you see,
Major, the rogue has had some eddication, and it stands to reason
that such a man couldn’t have been brought up an ostler, or forced
to fly his country without being in a scrape. To do young Mr.
Aylesford justice, he’d never have been so thick with Arrison, if
the fellow hadn’t had some eddication. But this, and his cunning,
and his always being ready to lick Master Charles’ shoes, or go
down on his knees to sarve him, which pleased the lad’s high
notions, made him the right-hand man of the young fellow.”

“But all this does
not prove that Arrison had anything to do with yesterday’s affair.”

“Not so fast,
Major. It helps, as you’ll see by-’m-bye. Arter being turned off,
Arrison went away, and I heerd was living in Philadelphy. I’ve no
doubt at all that Master Charles and he were as thick as ever, there,
when the lad went up to town to school. I’ve heerd that a poor
girl, whom it’s said the youngster ruined, was arterwards made to
marry Arrison, in order to hush it up; and that Arrison took the wife
for the money that was put down, and then spent the money and broke
his wife’s heart, that is if it wasn’t nigh broke before: but of
this I ain’t sartain, as what happens away off in Philadelphy,
isn’t easy to be got at here; and I never liked to ask outright,
when I’ve been in town, and, besides, didn’t know rightly who to
ask.

“When the war
broke out, and the time came, before Washington re-crossed the
Delaware, that ‘most everybody feared the king was going to win,
who should come down here but Arrison, and as Katie’s father was
now dead, Master Charles was living at the big house, and took
Arrison into his employment at once. There was deviltry enough went
on, in a few weeks then, to ruin the souls of a hundred men. However,
before long, the tables turned, and this young Mr. Aylesford, who, as
I’ve said, is as cunning as he is hot tempered, began to be afeerd
for himself, if he allowed such a tory to live with him. At this
Arrison went away agin. But not long after he was seen, with some
other precious scoundrels, hanging about the British camp; and
by-’m-bye he came back to our parts, where he took to a reg’lar
refugee life. Some of us, at this, turned out and tried to hunt him
off. But we couldn’t find him, till one day, he robbed a house down
near the Banks. John Sanders was away when it happened, but coming
home at night, and hearing from the women all about it, and how
Arrison had sworn at ‘em, and struck his old mother because she
tried to hide some silver tea-spoons under her apron, he swore an
oath, that he’d have revenge. He guessed that the refugees wouldn’t
go far that night, for they’d come in a boat, and as the wind was
agin them, they’d naturally wait for the next tide: besides there
were few men left in these parts at that time, and so they’d
nothing to fear. On this, he struck through the woods, coming out on
the shore of the river, t’other side of the big bend, some dozen
miles below this. He’d taken his axe with him, and what does he do
now,” and Uncle Lawrence laughed a low laugh, “but cut a path
through the brush, alongside the river, leavin’ just bushes enough
between him and the water to hide him. He made his path a couple of
hundred feet long, and when he’d finished it, lay down at its lower
end, after having double-loaded his gun with buckshot, to watch for
the refugee boat. It was a bright starlight night, and I’ve often
heerd Sanders tell, that as he lay there, he could see the dark tide,
as it rolled by, rippling past the pint, and twinkling as if a swarm
of fire-flies was settling close over it. It was as still, too, as a
grave-yard. He could hear the water
lip-lapping
agin an old
tree trunk, that lay in the stream right in front of him; and the
whip-poor-wills, he said, never wailed so loud; while, whenever an
owl
hoo-hooed
, away off in the swamp, it a’most skeered him,
it seemed so near. At last, arter he’d waited a long while, he
heerd the sound of oars, soft-like, as if a boat was being rowed only
just enough to give her steerage way. He peeped out, his heart
a-beatin’, and sure enough there they were, dropping down the river
with the tide. He knew Arrison, who had the tiller; and thought he
knew one of the others too. There were five of ‘em. So he kneeled
down, resting his gun lest his hand should shake, for he wanted to be
cock-sure, and when the boat came directly opposite, blazed away. He
jumped up at once, but not before he’d time to see that Arrison
clapped his hand to his side, as if hurt, and that the fellow next to
him, who was pulling the stroke oar, tumbled over dead like. Then he
ran, let me tell you, for dear life. The men who weren’t hurt,
fired right off. But,” and again Uncle Lawrence laughed his low
chuckle, “Sanders, by this time, was two hundred feet off, one way,
while the tide had carried them a couple of hundred in another; so
that their buckshot only stripped a few leaves off the bushes, and
cut down a huckleberry branch or two. Sanders got home safe before
daylight, and we heerd no more of Arrison for a long while, till it
was told that he’d been laid up, for months, with a wound, and had
arterwards gone over to Maurice river to carry on his deviltries
there, thinking that these parts was too hot for him.”

“Now that’s just
the kind of rogue,” continued Uncle Lawrence, “that would rob a
poor widow. And what makes me think, above all, that it was he burned
widow Bates’ house, was that, when Arrison was living at Sweetwater
last, he insulted the widow, one day, when he was drunk, for which
her husband, who was alive then, gave him a sound thrashing. He’s
the very man to remember such a thing, and take out his revenge in
this cowardly way.”

“Your conclusions
seem accurate,” said Major Gordon, “for it is scarcely credible
that there can be two men, in all this district, who could commit so
mean an outrage. You wish me, I suppose, to put my men on his track.
If that is it, I will do it cheerfully. Though how we are to succeed
in running him down, if you, who have better woodcraft, failed when
he was last here, I don’t see.”

“There’s nothing
like trying,” answered Uncle Lawrence, “and there’s the more
need of it, because there’s worse mischief a-brewin’, you may
depend on’t. This varmint wouldn’t have dared to come back,
especially when he knew there were soldiers at the Forks, unless he’d
a good many men at his back, or there were other reasons for thinking
he could snap his fingers at us. I can’t tell what it is, but
there’s something, I’ll stake my life on that.”

“I’ll go out
this very hour with my whole force. Will you help?”

“That’s what I
came over for. I’m a pretty good guide through these woods, though
I say it that should not say it, and can track a man a’most as good
as an Ingin can. I’m agin shedding human blood, too, when it can be
helped,” added the old man; but slapping his gun, he went on, “yet
if I draw sight on Arrison, he’s a dead man, for I’ve loaded her
with as many buckshot as she can carry, and I’d no more mind
shooting him, than I would a mad dog.”

As he spoke these
words he came in sight of the Forks, where we will leave them for the
present.

CHAPTER XXI.

AYLESFORD AND MRS. WARREN

For on his brow the throbbing vein

Throbb’d as if back upon his brain

The hot blood ebb’d and flowed again. —Byron.

I am burned up with inflaming wrath;

A rage, whose heat hath this condition,

That nothing can allay, nothing but blood. —Shakespeare.

It would be
impossible to convey, in words, an adequate idea of the state of
Aylesford’s mind, after his separation from Major Gordon. Rage,
shame and jealousy possessed him by turns. But to one sentiment he
was constant through all; he was resolved yet to have the life of our
hero; to consummate the revenge of which he believed he had been
baulked at the very moment of success.

Uncle Lawrence’s
description of him had not exaggerated the reality. On the contrary,
it had fallen short of the truth in many particulars; for the
patriarch was ignorant of some of the worst passages in the young
man’s life. Aylesford had long since squandered his entire
patrimony, in the wildest excesses, and had now no prospect of
retaining his position in life unless by marrying his cousin. Relying
on the family understanding to that effect, he had never allowed
himself to doubt Kate’s assent; but had looked forward to her
return to America as the period which was to set him afloat anew on
the tide of fortune.

Expecting, however,
that Kate would not only land at New York, but remain there until the
colonies, as he hoped and believed, would be subdued, he had made
every preparation to meet her at that port; but not supposing that
she would arrive as soon as she did, he had delayed, until the last
moment, entering within the royal lines, a step which he knew would
prevent his return to Sweetwater or to Philadelphia. He was at the
former place, accordingly, when his aunt and cousin, arriving from
the wreck, brought the first intelligence alike of their having
sailed earlier than they had designed, and of the catastrophe which
had terminated their voyage.

At first he saw
nothing in the somewhat reserved manners of Kate, but the coyness
natural to her sex and age; in fact, for awhile he attributed it to
secret admiration of himself. But time gradually undeceived him.
Kate’s reserve changed occasionally to marked aversion. He
resembled, indeed, so little the cousin she remembered when a boy,
that, when his attentions became particular, she shrank from him with
feelings almost of disgust. As whatever was worst in his past career
was concealed from her, this growing dislike must have arisen from
the fine instinct of her sex.

Aylesford, like men
of his class, looked everywhere but to himself for the cause of this
aversion. He could find no explanation so plausible as in a romantic
fancy, on the part of his cousin, for the handsome young officer who
was said to have been the principal cause of saving her life. Giving
way to his unbridled passions, he secretly swore to avenge himself on
this rival. But, meantime, resolving to lose no opportunity of
ingratiating himself with his mistress, he offered to visit
Philadelphia, in order to attend in person to those commissions which
the damaged wardrobe of the ladies rendered necessary.

Arriving at
Sweetwater, after an absence unavoidably protracted, his first
inquiry was for Kate; and his rage was only equalled by his
astonishment, when he learned she had gone out on horseback with
Major Gordon. Once, before his departure, he had offered to accompany
her himself; but she had declined in terms that left no opening for
repeating the request. A few questions, angrily put, extracted from
the frightened servant, that Kate had been riding out daily for a
fortnight with the man he already considered his rival. He was almost
white with passion, therefore, when Mrs. Warren appeared.

His aunt, like all
weak-minded persons, loved him none the less, perhaps, for his wild
life, or his ungovernable temper. He had been her pet before she left
for Europe, the more probably because his uncle so often frowned upon
him, and now that she had returned, he seemed to her to be the same
frank and good-hearted lad she had always persisted in believing him,
only somewhat older in years, handsomer in person, and more finished
in manner. To do her justice, Aylesford did all he could to deceive
the simple dame. He was punctilious in attending to her wants,
flattered her whims, and paraded his royalist sympathies freely in
her presence. Accordingly, such was the hold he obtained over her,
before leaving Sweetwater, that when, once or twice, her maid began
to gossip about his antecedents, she sternly bade the girl to be
silent, and resolutely refused to believe anything to his
disadvantage.

“What is this I
hear?” said Aylesford, with a lowering brow, when they had entered
the parlor. “How could you allow this paltry rebel officer to
establish himself here?”

Poor Mrs. Warren
knew not what to say. She felt like a culprit. At last, not daring to
look in his face, but fumbling, like a truant girl, the little, round
pin-cushion, which, in common with all dames of her day, she wore at
her side, she stammered—

“Indeed, Charles,
I couldn’t help it—”

He answered angrily—

“Why didn’t you
say that her horse was too wild? That you were afraid of the
unsettled condition of the country? That it wasn’t proper for Kate
to be seen with an American officer?”

Bewildered by so
many questions, Mrs. Warren could only reply to that which came last.

“Oh! Charles, how
could I be so rude?” she answered, “Major Gordon, you should
remember, saved our lives—”

“That’s the very
difficulty,” broke in her nephew. “I wish the intermeddler had
been at the bottom of the ocean.”

“But we should
have been drowned then,” and Mrs. Warren held up her hands. “You
don’t mean what you say, Charles.”

“Well, then, I
wish I’d been there—”

“I wish so, too,
from the bottom of my heart,” said Mrs. Warren, beginning to cry,
for his impetuosity had quite unnerved her.

“There, aunt,”
he said, curbing his passion, “don’t. I’m sure I never intended
to hurt your feelings.” And he approached and kissed her.

“Nor have you, my
dear boy,” sobbed Mrs. Warren, throwing herself on his neck, and
crying for a while hysterically. “But I’m sure nobody can blame
me. I always knew there’d be trouble. I felt it from the first. I
was satisfied you wouldn’t approve of such an acquaintance, any
more than our cousin, Lord Danville, would.”

“Confound the old
fool!” muttered Aylesford to himself. Then, giving up to his
impatience, he said aloud. “It’s not as an acquaintance I care
about him. But,” and he forgot himself so much as to utter a savage
oath, “the fellow will be having Kate in love with him.”

Mrs. Warren sank
into a chair, holding up both her hands.

“In love with him?
Deary me! deary me! I never thought of that! But it can’t be,
Charles,” she said, eagerly, “you’re joking with me. Kate would
never throw herself away on such a person.”

“How do you know?”
abruptly said he. “There’s nothing Kate won’t do, if she takes
a mind to it. The man saved her life, too, or she thinks he did; and
she’s as romantic as the devil!”

“So he did. So she
is!” said Mrs. Warren, confusedly. “Oh! I see it all now. Why did
I not do it before? But I never suspected such a thing. A rebel too,
and worse, a rebel officer! We’re disgraced forever. What would
Cousin Danville say? What will the King say when he hears of it?”

“Well, if this
isn’t a precious partner I’ve got,” said Aylesford to himself,
“to help me in my difficulty. I might as well have a crazy person.”
But after a turn about the room, seeing that the handkerchief was
still at her eyes, he said— “I’m not finding fault, aunt. But
why the deuce,” he cried “didn’t you say that Arab was too wild
for Kate?”

“I did, my dear
boy, I did,” was the eager reply. “I was going to tell you so,
only you frightened me. I told her so again and again. But your
cousin’s as headstrong as her father, poor, dear man—I don’t
mean to abuse him, now that he’s in his grave, but he’d always
have his way; or for that matter so would your father, too, Charles,
when we were children—I remember once seeing him, when he wasn’t
ten years old, jump on an unbroken colt, that the grooms were afraid
to ride, in spite of all they could say, and though I screamed as if
I’d go into fits—and so she would ride Arab, when the Major had
tried him and pronounced him safe, and though I begged him not to
favor the child’s whim, and said to him, says I, ‘she’ll kill
herself yet’—but he no more minded me than if I hadn’t spoke,
for I see now that he wanted to have a
tete-a-tete
with
her—and so they’ve been riding together nearly every day—and
it’s all over with the marriage between you two, on which I’ve
always set my heart”—and here the good dame, after this
marvellously lucid narrative, burst into a perfect passion of
sobbing, for she really could see no end to the troubles that
threatened her.

Aylesford, with
another oath, muttered— “Cold comfort this for a man. But what
else can be expected from a whimpering old dunce? If she’d had
sense and courage, she’d have got rid of this militia Major
civilly, after the first interview. However,” he continued, “I
mustn’t let her see what I think. She can be of service to me yet,
and I must keep her in temper. I really believe she loves me as if I
was her son.” So, again going up to her, and embracing her, not
without something even of affection, he said— “There, aunt,
compose yourself. What’s done can’t be helped. But, now that I’ve
come back, I’ll take this matter into my own hands; and the first
thing is to get rid of this rebel visitor. How long have Kate and he
been out?”

He looked at the
clock as he spoke, his frown deepening, for the hour was even later
than he had thought.

“Deary me,”
exclaimed Mrs. Warren, in reply, her face displaying visible
consternation, “it’s almost noon. I wonder if anything has
happened. I’m sure something has,” And she began to wring her
hands. “I’ve felt all the morning that it would.”

Aylesford wheeled on
his heel to conceal his impatience. But immediately he returned.

“Have they been
absent two hours? Three? How many?”

“Deary me, don’t
be so cross?” replied his aunt, his very impatience frustrating his
object. “You frighten me, Charles. I’m sure I’ve done nothing
to deserve this—”

“For heaven’s
sake,” cried her nephew, losing control of himself, “cut this
short, and tell me how long they’ve been gone, and what road they
took.”

Aylesford at last
extracted the unwelcome intelligence that Kate and his rival had been
absent since eight o’clock.

“Time enough to
make a dozen proposals,” muttered he, “and talk down the scruples
of twenty heiresses, especially when a beggar of an officer is the
suitor, who has had the good luck to help her off from a wreck. But
I’ll put a stop to the fellow’s insolent pretensions. If the
mischief be not done already, I’ll take good care he gets no more
such opportunities; and if he has practiced on my cousin’s
susceptibility, of whom I’m the natural protector, as being her
nearest male relative, I’ll run him through.”

With these words he
stepped to the window, ordered a horse to be saddled, and having
ascertained the direction in which the equestrians had ridden, set
off in search of them. Fortune conducted him immediately to them, as
we have already seen.

CHAPTER XXII.

AYLESFORD AND KATE

Helen I love thee; by my life I do:

I swear by that which I will love for thee,

To prove him false that says I love thee not. —Shakespeare.

I cannot love him,

He might have took his answer long ago. —Shakespeare.

I’ll have my bond, I will not hear thee speak.

I’ll have my bond. —Shakespeare.

Though Kate could
not think, without aversion, of ratifying the family contract to
marry her cousin, yet she commiserated his disappointment, and was
consequently more tender to his feelings than she would otherwise
have been.

These sentiments had
governed her during the interview at the bridge. No true woman takes
pleasure in the suffering of an unfortunate lover. Kate had, on that
occasion, thought more of her cousin’s disappointment than of Major
Gordon. But, when she had reached Sweetwater, and was left to
solitary thought in the privacy of her chamber, she saw that, in
trying to save the feelings of Aylesford, she had hurt those of her
preserver. Her momentary anger at the latter’s coldness gradually
subsided, and when she met him, on the following day, she returned
his bow, as we have seen, with all her old cordiality.

Kate was sitting
alone in the parlor, to which we have already introduced the reader,
on Monday morning, when her cousin entered the apartment. Something
in his manner betrayed to her that he sought a private interview. Her
heart began to beat fast.

Aylesford, for a
minute or two, did not speak. He walked, in an embarrassed way, to
the window; looked out a moment, glanced at Kate, and then tattooed
on the panes with his fingers; and, finally, turning abruptly towards
her, said—

“How is it, Kate,
that you have compromised the family, by permitting this Major Gordon
to visit here so frequently? His rebel commission surely ought to
shut your doors against him.”

Kate’s color,
which had been heightened ever since Aylesford entered, flushed to a
still deeper crimson at these words. But, having determined, while
remaining firm to her purpose, to do everything else to conciliate
her cousin, she paused awhile before replying, in order to command
voice and judgment alike.

“I do not see,
Charles,” she said, finally, “that I have compromised the family.
Major Gordon, though not a royalist, is a gentleman, and entitled to
the civilities due to all such. In addition,” she added, with
another blush, “he deserves particular attention at our hands; you
yourself must admit this.”

“I don’t admit
any such thing,” answered her cousin, nettled alike by her quiet
manner and by her words. “He helped to save your life, I know; but
so would any other person in his place. I myself,” he added, with
an outburst of really natural feeling, “would have given my right
hand to have been there, and risked my life also for you.”

Kate was touched.

“I believe you,”
she said, with a voice full of feeling.

To do him justice,
Aylesford loved her with all the passion of his illy regulated
nature, and when he heard this reply, and saw Kate’s emotion, what
was good in him awoke responsive to it. He fell upon his knee, by a
sudden impulse, and seizing her hand, said—

“Then why won’t
you believe still more, dear Kate? Why won’t you believe that I am
the most sincere and devoted lover ever woman had? That I have been
taught, from my youth up, to look upon you as my future wife? That
all my associations of home and happiness have centred around you?
Oh! Kate,” he cried, as she withdrew her hand and shook her head
sadly, “have pity on me. Don’t let your heart be estranged from
your own blood and kin, merely because a stranger has done that which
I would have died a thousand times to do.”

Kate shook her head
again mournfully. “It is not that,” she faltered.

“Then what is it?
I implore you to tell me. By the memory of our fathers, who loved
each other so well, what is it that makes you cold to me, and to me
only?”

Kate had been
struggling for composure to reply. Deeply moved, she said—

“Rise, Charles.
This is no attitude for you to assume, nor for me to allow.”

Her manner was firm,
though gentle, and Aylesford rose and stood before her.

“I cannot listen
to such language,” she began. “I must be truthful, even if I
speak words that may seem harsh; and I do not love you, Charles—”

He clasped his
forehead violently with both hands.

“Yet what have I
done,” he cried, after a moment, like one beside himself, “to win
this hatred? Oh! never man loved as I love you, Kate.”

“I do not hate
you, Charles,” was Kate’s mild reply. “You are my cousin, and
the last male representative of our family, and therefore have a
double claim on me. I like you as a relative, though I see much,”
she added, hesitatingly, “to condemn. But to be your wife is
impossible. It would bring happiness to neither of us. And knowing
that it would not bring happiness,” she added, in a firmer tone,
“it would be a sin in us to contract it. Otherwise, perhaps,” and
here her voice trembled, “I might have ratified the wishes of our
parents; which, but for this incompatibility between us, I should
feel bound to obey.”

Aylesford, whose
angry sense of humiliation had been gradually rising, was subdued
again by these last words, for he thought Kate was relenting. He,
therefore, answered eagerly—

“There is no
incompatibility. Or,” for she shook her head, “there shall be
none. Only try me. I will be anything you wish. We have been apart so
long, that perhaps we do differ in some things; but I place myself in
your hands; mould me as you will.”

His impassioned
manner left no doubt on his hearer’s mind that he was sincere, at
least for the time; but Kate well knew that natures like his were
past reforming; and she could not, therefore, permit herself to be
misled by these earnest protestations. The interview was becoming too
painful, and she rose to terminate it.

“Don’t talk in
that way, Charles,” she said, with tears in her eyes. “Please
don’t,” she added, placing her hand restrainingly on his arm, as
she saw he was about to renew his pleadings. “My decision is final.
The heart cannot be forced.”

There was no
mistaking the sincerity of this avowal. It left no room for hope. Her
manner also confirmed her words. As Aylesford seized her dress to
detain her, when she would now have left the room, she gently but
resolutely removed his hold.

The ill-regulated
nature of her cousin passed, in a moment, from entreaty to rage. He
was like one of those volcanic countries, where suddenly, on a clear
day, the heavens are filled with smoke and the solid ground shaken
with earthquakes.

“Then you love
this Major Gordon,” he cried, livid with suppressed passion. “You
have lost your heart, like a romantic fool, to a rebel beggar, merely
because he happened to be present when you escaped from shipwreck.
Yes! go,” he added, bitterly, as Kate, with dignity, was proceeding
towards the door, “but know that I will go to him, and force down
his throat a disavowal of his suit to you.”

This threat checked
Kate’s steps. The scandal of an encounter between her cousin and
her preserver, apart from her well-founded dread of the former’s
skill at fence, induced her to stop, with the hope of preventing this
mad threat from being executed.

“You will do no
such thing,” she said, fronting Aylesford with decision, yet with
something of entreaty too in her manner. “You will not, you cannot,
so disgrace her whom, but a moment ago, you professed to love. Nay,
Charles,” she continued, as he was turning away, and advancing
quickly she caught him by the arm, “you must promise me this. I
demand it as a woman, as a relative,” and seeing he was still
unmoved, she added, with spirit— “the honor of our family is
concerned, that a gentleman who preserved my life should not be so
grossly insulted; and I call on you, as my nearest male connexion, to
sustain that honor.”

But Aylesford still
turned from her with gloomy rage. As she still continued to hold fast
to him, he finally shook her off roughly, saying—

“It is you who
dishonor the family, by loving this base-born adventurer.”

“Oh! Charles,”
she cried, reproachfully, with a burst of feeling, “I had not
expected this of you.”

He turned on the
instant. Again he thought she might be induced to relent.

“Promise me,” he
said, eagerly, “that you will listen to my suit. Only promise me a
probation, I ask nothing more. I will then do anything you wish.”

She shook her head
sadly, but firmly.

“Then it’s no
use deceiving me,” was the angry answer, as he flung off the hand
which he had taken.

“You love this low
fellow, this cowardly traitor—”

“Stop,” said
Kate, with an air of command, her person seeming actually to dilate
before her companion’s eyes. “I will not hear a gentleman
maligned to whom we all owe so much. Nay!” she continued, almost
sternly, as Aylesford attempted to speak, “I will be heard, and
once for all. You forget yourself, and trespass on even the
privileges of a relation, when you charge me with loving Major
Gordon. You grossly insult me, when you say that I could love any man
merely because he saved my life. Moreover,” she added, with
something of haughty scorn in her manner, “if you will seek this
gentleman’s blood, you may find to your cost that he is anything
but a coward. As for me,” and her eyes sparkled with determination,
“I shall take good care that Major Gordon knows that I have no
share in this dishonorable requital.”

With these words she
swept from the room like an empress, not condescending to pursue the
altercation further.

Aylesford, with an
oath, saw the door close after her, when, hastily arming himself, he
ordered his horse saddled and went forth to provoke the duel which we
have seen so opportunely interrupted.

CHAPTER XXIII.

THE REFUGEE’S HUT

Oh! Buckingham, beware of yonder dog;

Look, when he fawns he bites. —Shakespeare.

Few men dare show their thoughts of worst or best;

Dissimulation always sets apart

A corner for herself. —Byron.

Deep in the forest,
that stretches, a pathless wilderness, to the south and west of
Sweetwater, there stood, at the period of our story, a solitary
log-cabin, with about two acres of cleared land surrounding it. On
nearly every side it was surrounded with swamps, so that approach to
it was almost impossible. Here, an hour or two after the rencontre
between Aylesford and Major Gordon, the former drew up his horse.

It was a wild scene,
characteristic of the region. Huge pines surrounded the clearing, and
towering high into air, almost shut out the light. In the small
fields about the house the stumps were still standing. A rude stable,
or rather shed, built of logs with the bark left on, stood a few rods
from the house, while between the two was a well, with a high
swinging pole hung in the crotchet of a young sapling. The
atmosphere, even on that sultry morning, was damp and cool from the
evaporation; the clearing being situated on a small knoll, which rose
like an island in the midst of vast swamps, miles from any village,
or even farmhouse. It was a haunt fit for outlaws.

As Aylesford
approached, a huge bloodhound started up in front of the house, at
whose outcry a short, thick-set man came forth, with a countenance
which had never been pleasing, but was now embruited by intemperance
and other vices. A dirty red beard, which had not felt a razor for a
week, increased the repulsiveness of his appearance.

“What a hole you
have, Arrison,” said the visitor, with an oath. “It’s the
devil’s own retreat. I was half an hour in finding the blind path,
and twice came near being swamped before I succeeded. And now, in the
fiend’s name, tell us what’s brought you into these parts, and
what you want with me.”

“As many questions
as would take a week to answer,” replied the man, coolly, “and
asked in a temper that would get anything but a civil return from
most persons. You needn’t frown. You know I dont’t care a curse
for such things. What’s the matter with you? Out with it, or it
will choke you.”

Aylesford looked,
for a moment, as if he would have liked to run his sword through the
speaker, as well as through Major Gordon. But the man met his angry
gaze with cool indifference, turning a quid leisurely in his mouth,
and waiting for an answer.

“I came here to
question,” said Aylesford, haughtily, “not to be questioned.
Again I say,” he added, as he dismounted, “what, in the devil’s
name, has brought you here.”

“Let me tie the
horse. It’s my trade, you know,” said the other, with a sardonic
grin. “Or shall I put him up? No, you must return, that there may
be no suspicion! Well, then, come in, and I’ll tell you all about
it.”

They entered the
cabin, and took seats by a table, on which Arrison immediately placed
some peach brandy. No one else appeared to be present about the
premises, though, at first, Aylesford thought he heard a light step
moving in the interior room, for the house had two apartments. After
taking a long draught, Arrison spoke.

“You were
surprised, I suppose, to get the word I sent? You thought I was
completely driven out of these parts? But there’s a good time
coming, let me tell you,” and he rubbed his hands, “for his
Majesty, God bless him! is going to send an expedition against the
Neck, burn the vessels there, and reduce the whole district about the
mouth of the river. Before a week we’ll have the pick of all the
booty here, live and dead, that can be had. The pretty girls, I
suppose,” he added with a leer and chuckle, “are not all gone
yet.”

For a moment
Aylesford sat in mute surprise.

“You amaze me,”
he cried, finally. “I have heard nothing of this.”

“How should you?”
answered Arrison, with a laugh. “’Gad, if the rebels caught you
acting the spy, they’d string you up to one of the buttonwoods, at
the Forks, before you could say Jack Robinson. They’d not stop a
minute for your laced coat. It would be a short shrift and a dance on
nothing, as they say in the old country.”

“Then you play the
spy on the rebels, and in return get at the royal General’s
secrets—is that it?” said Aylesford.

Arrison nodded.

“And you are sure
of your news?”

“As sure as I sit
here. The expedition has sailed before this, and its arrival can be
delayed only by head-winds. It may be playing the devil among the
rebel privateers and their prizes even now.”

“This is news,”
answered Aylesford, joyfully, filling his glass. “Let us drink to
his most sacred Majesty, and confusion to all traitors.”

“With my whole
heart. The toast is good and the liquor better.”

“It is this which
has brought you back? Under the shelter of the royal wing you think
you can safely resume your former pranks?”

“Yes, if nothing
better turns up. I’ve some old scores to wipe off, and began them
yesterday.”

And he narrated his
outrage at the widow Bates’ farm, describing, with boisterous glee,
the rueful face which the widow must have worn when she returned home
and saw but the smoking ashes of her late dwelling.

“But,” said
Aylesford, “the people will know your mark, and hunt you down at
once. I shouldn’t be surprised if old Herman was already on your
trail.”

“They’ll have
enough to do to take care of themselves,” was the cool reply.
“Before another week, I’ll burn old Herman himself out, like a
rat in his hole. There is not many men left in these parts anyhow,
and the attack on the Neck will take away what few there are. I owe a
debt to another, Jack Sanders, whom I’ll not let off so easily. I
carry two of his buckshot still in me; and I’ve sworn to have a
life for each one; himself and his wife, if possible; if not, others
of his family.”

“And now, what’s
the matter with you?” resumed Arrison. “Even this good news can’t
make you look pleased more than a minute. Come, drown care in a cup.”
And filling his glass again, he handed the bottle to his guest.
“What, not drink? It must be something very serious, then.”

“I have to return
to Sweetwater, you know. My cousin and aunt are there.”

“I’d forgot. And
it wouldn’t do, so early in the day, to show signs of a debauch.”
He interlarded this and all his other speeches profusely with oaths.
“And how are the good ladies?” he added. “Miss Kate must be
grown up into a beauty, if all I hear is true. Ah! you change color.
You frown. I have it at last,” he continued, slapping his hand on
the table and bursting into a laugh, “it’s about her that you’re
so cursedly cross.”

“Come,” answered
Aylesford, in a heat, rising from the table, “I’ve had enough of
this. Remember, I was once your master. Have you forgotten, sirrah,
how to be respectful?”

“I cry your
pardon,” answered Arrison, with a profound obeisance, though with a
slight tone of mockery. “Sit down again, Mr. Aylesford. I do forget
myself sometimes, in talking to you, but it’s because you’ve
always allowed me to be familiar. There, don’t let us quarrel; I
may want your countenance yet; and in return might be of use even in
this affair, if you’d tell me what’s the matter.”

Aylesford allowed
himself to be persuaded to take a seat again; but, had he seen the
cat-like glance of Arrison, he would have felt far less confidence in
the outlaw’s professions.

“You have been a
faithful fellow,” said Aylesford. “I’ll not deny that. But this
is an affair above your surgery. However, you’ve a quick wit, and
may hit on something; and I want somebody to advise with. I’m
desperately in love with my cousin, who’s more beautiful even than
report allows, and she won’t have me.”

Arrison felt very
much inclined to make a jest of Aylesford at this confession. But he
saw that his guest was in no mood for banter. So he answered—

“She must be a
prude of the worst kind, then.”

“No, she’s in
love with a rebel officer, who is stationed at the Forks, a Major
Gordon,” and he ended with a hearty curse on his rival.

“Are you sure of
this?”

“She has refused
me, and that’s enough,” replied Aylesford, passionately, drinking
off a bumper, and setting the glass down with such force as to dash
it to splinters. “Besides, this fellow has saved her life, or she
thinks he has, which is the same. The ship, in which she came over,
was wrecked off the mouth of the river, and he had a hand, somehow or
other, in getting her ashore. I had my sword at the rascal’s throat
this morning, and was on the high road to revenge, when we were
interrupted.” And he proceeded to narrate the rencontre, which
Uncle Lawrence had so opportunely broken off.

“That old, canting
scoundrel again,” answered Arrison. “Well, he hasn’t long to
run. He’s about hunted to the end of his track, I take it; and I’ll
put a bullet through him, or a knife into him, before the moon’s a
week older; and so have my revenge for the harm he did me with your
uncle, and for his stopping your slitting this Major’s windpipe.
But, to come back to your own affairs,” continued the villain, “I
don’t see that they’re half as desperate as you think they are.
You remember the old proverb, ‘out of sight, out of mind,’ don’t
you?”

“What of it?”

“Only,” answered
Arrison, with a laugh,” get rid of this Major.”

“But how?”

“If ‘twas me I’d
go out quietly, some fine morning, and take a good position in the
brush, near by where I was sure he would pass, and when he came
along, I’d pull trigger on him, and so have done with his
interference forever. All things are fair in love as in war, you
know.”

But Aylesford had
sufficient honor left to decline such a proposal, involving
deliberate assassination, though he would have eagerly seized any
opportunity to take the life of his rival in a less cold-blooded way.

“Well, then,”
said the villain, “since you won’t take that course, we must try
and get him picked off in a fight. He’ll probably, if he’s not a
coward, go down to the Neck the moment he hears the vessels there are
in danger. It would be a possible thing, though not an easy one, to
shoot him there.”

But Aylesford shook
his head.

“Too much
uncertainty about it, you think? Well, maybe you’re right,” said
the outlaw. “I would wish to make a sure thing of it, if I was yon,
that’s a fact. But my invention is almost at an end. I really don’t
know what to advise,” he concluded, with a puzzled air.

“If she had only
reached New York, there would have been none of this,” said
Aylesford, gloomily. “I wish to heaven she was there now.”

“Nothing easier
than to get her there,” answered the refugee, “if that will suit
your purpose. By the Lord, I’ve hit it at last,” cried he, with
sudden energy, emphasizing his words by striking the table till the
bottle danced again. “I can put her in New York in a week’s time,
if you’ll trust to me; and you shall, moreover, do what will make a
set-off to this Gordon’s rescue of her; in short, if you place
yourself in my hands, she’ll be yours, or else you’re a fool,
which no one yet ever took you to be.”

Aylesford gazed at
the speaker with undisguised astonishment. But there was evidently no
jest in what Arrison said. His plan, whatever it was, he clearly
considered feasible.

“I give you my
word,” reaching over and taking the outlaw’s hand, “which I
never broke to any man yet—”

“We’ll say
nothing of woman,” interrupted Arrison, with a coarse laugh.

“Which I never
broke to any man yet,” repeated Aylesford, “that I’ll pay you a
thousand pounds if you succeed. On the day I marry my cousin, the
money is yours.”

“I’ll put her in
New York for half the sum—is it a bargain?”

“It is,”
answered Aylesford. “Now for the scheme.”

But we must reserve
this for another chapter.

CHAPTER XXIV.

THE PLOT

Foul whisperings are abroad; and unnat’ral deeds. —Shakespeare.

I follow you.

To do I know not what. —Shakespeare.

“Does Miss
Aylesford ride on horseback as she did before she went abroad?”
said Arrison.

“Yes! This militia
Major has been riding with her every morning.”

“But don’t she
ever ride alone?”

“Sometimes, I
suppose. He can’t be for ever dangling after her. At any rate, now
that I’ve come back, I’ll take good care that he don’t.” And
he finished with an oath.

“Then, without
having yourself suspected, get her to ride unattended to-morrow or
next day. Yon must also find out which way she is going. I will be on
the lookout, with three or four trusty fellows of my gang, and on a
sudden, we will rush out and make her our prisoner. You needn’t
start and look in that fashion,” said Arrison, with a laugh at his
hearer’s glance of alarm, “we’ll not hurt a hair of her head.
We shan’t even gag her, as we would anybody else, for the road will
be a lonely one most likely, and there’ll be no occasion for rough
usage.”

“What next?”
said Aylesford, seeing that Arrison paused. And he proceeded
contemptuously— “I can’t see any such pretty scheme in this
project of kidnapping.”

“Then you haven’t
the sense I give you credit for,” answered Arrison. “Don’t you
see? I and my followers are to seize her, and you are to rescue her.
That’ll be an ace to play on this Major Gordon’s king, and a
trump card at that.”

Aylesford’s
countenance brightened, the look of suspicion disappearing totally.

“I am dull,” he
said. “This infernal affair has driven me half mad, I believe, and
benumbed my senses.”

“Of course,”
answered Arrison, “it won’t do to rescue her right away. For
then, you know, you’d have no good excuse for carrying her within
the royal lines, a step which must be taken if you wish to get her to
New York. Though, for my part,” added the outlaw, “I don’t see
why you should trouble yourself to make so long a journey. Now, in
the old country, and especially in the parts where I lived when a
boy, it was a common practice, when a gentleman wished to get a wife,
for him to call together a party of his friends, waylay the girl,
make her a prisoner, carry her off to the mountains, and never let
her go back till the priest had made them man and wife. Many’s the
Squire’s lady that was won in that way; and they say girls of
spirit like it better than more formal wooing. Now, if you say so,
we’ll play the part of your friends, instead of acting more
naturally as refugees; and though a priest may not be so easy to come
at, you’re not what you once were, if you can’t find a way to
make the lady eager enough to marry you, after she gets out of the
swamp.”

The cool,
matter-of-fact manner in which this atrocious proposition was made,
showed how business-like the villain considered it. But Aylesford,
though he would not have hesitated, as Arrison knew from the past, if
the victim had been some poor and friendless girl, revolted at such
an outrage on Kate. His face flushed with anger, and he partially
rose from his seat. But recollecting immediately that Arrison was not
in love like himself, and that the customs of his country had
accustomed the refugee to look on such abductions leniently, he
resumed his place, while the red tint of passion faded from his brow.
But he shook his head.

“No, we’ll stick
to the other plan,” he said. “I won’t woo Kate in that fashion,
if I never get her, so help me God,” he added, earnestly.

“Just as you say.
But I meant no offence,” answered Arrison.

“I believe you”
replied Aylesford. “But, apart from every other consideration, my
cousin is not the girl to be won in that fashion. She would, I am
convinced, kill herself sooner than yield; and even if she was
prevented, by force, from injuring herself, she’d hate me to her
dying day. No, it would be madness.”

“I think you’re
mistaken,” answered Arrison. “I know women better than you do, if
you have such notions of them. Their bark is worse than their bite.
There’d doubtless be a great tearing of hair, any amount of
screeching, vows to starve herself to death, to stab herself, to kill
you, perhaps even to turn informer; but she’ll be at last, as they
always are in Ireland, as gentle as a lamb, and would crawl to your
knees, if necessary, to beg you to make an honest woman of her by
marrying—”

He was not allowed
to finish the sentence. There was still enough that was good left in
Aylesford, or, if not this, love had temporarily bestowed it on him,
to make his blood boil at the cool deliberation with which this
hardened villain spoke. He sprang from his chair, half drew his
sword, and exclaimed—

“Are you man or
devil? Another word like that, and I’ll run you through. Miss
Aylesford,” he added, haughtily, “is not to be spoken of, sirrah,
in this diabolical way.”

Arrison, on seeing
him rise, had sprang also to his feet, knocking down the chair behind
him and retreating a few paces, while at the same time he whipped out
a knife, whose blade gleamed as he held it ready to strike. For
awhile, the two men stood regarding each other, without a word being
uttered. At last the outlaw spoke—

“Put back your
sword, Mr. Aylesford, and I’ll sheathe my knife. You really are not
yourself any longer. I don’t know how to talk to you. Every word
seems to anger you to-day. We’ve often spoke of women—well,
well,” he continued, observing Aylesford’s quick frown, “enough
of that. I only seek your good. I’ll say nothing more about the
lady, except to tell you my original plan, and to swear by all that’s
good, that I never thought to insult you or her.”

Had Aylesford been
less accustomed to his present associate, or even perhaps had he been
less eager to secure Arrison’s co-operation, he would have broken
off the interview. But he allowed himself again to be soothed, and,
replacing his sword, took his seat.

“I have said,”
resumed Arrison, “that it won’t do for you to rescue Miss
Aylesford at once: for then you’ll have no excuse for not taking
her back to Sweetwater. I’ll put her in a boat and carry her down
the river, making her believe my intention is to throw pursuit off
our trail. In this way I’ll conduct her to the vicinity of the
Neck, if not past it; the exact point will depend on yourself. You’ll
of course be on the watch. Having gone ahead, you’ll know where to
look for me, for you’ll have found out how far his Majesty’s
pickets extend; and you’ll naturally wish to attack me before I get
within the lines, as otherwise the lady might see that I was really
taking her to the British, instead of to the woods, and was your
confederate.”

Aylesford nodded
approvingly, as Arrison paused for an opinion, on which the latter
proceeded.

“It will be easy
for you to get together a half dozen stout fellows, followers of the
royal forces, with which you’ll put yourself in communication at
once. I’ll time my arrival so as to reach your neighborhood about
dusk. You’ll know my boat by seeing me in the stern sheets. You
must shoot out from under the bank of the meadow, where you’ve been
hid, and, with a cheer, dash right on us. We’ll have our cue, and
pretend to be taken by surprise. You’ll board us, after a few guns
are fired, which we’ll take care, on both sides, shall be without
shot. To seize your cousin, transfer her to your boat, and sweep away
as fast as the tide and four oars can take you, needn’t be but the
work of a moment. Some of us will, meantime, have leaped overboard,
the better to carry out the farce; for we can easily swim back to our
boat, or make the shore, where our comrades will pick us up. By this
little bit of stratagem,” he continued, with a hearty laugh at his
own cunning, “you’ll get the credit of having saved your cousin
from blood-thirsty villains; and if that don’t trump this Major
Gordon’s claims, call me a fool. Curse me,” he added, as he
filled his glass, and laughed till the tears ran out of his eyes, “I
ought to have been a writer of plays, as I might have been, I
suppose, if I’d stayed in Dublin; I think I can fix off a plot as
well as old Shakespeare himself.”

“It’s certainly
a capital plan,” answered Aylesford, even his disgust now gone, so
certain seemed the result. “If it succeeds, I’ll make you a
gentleman for life.”

“Succeed? It
must

succeed. Come, cheer up, sir. Faint heart never won fair lady. Gad,
I’m bound to have it succeed, if only to make me a gentleman again;
a thing I was born for, but missed by my cursed stupidity.”

“You’ve often
hinted at that,” said Aylesford, “and it’s easy to see you’ve
had a good education. How did you ever come to seek your fortune as
an ostler in the colonies?”

“Some other time,
maybe, I’ll tell you,” answered Arrison, his gayety giving way to
gloom. “It’s enough for to-day, that I became an ostler because I
knew more about horses than anything else.”

And gleams of
dignity broke through even his imbruted face, and exhibited
themselves in his manner as he spoke.

“Of course,”
resumed Aylesford, in an ironical tone, “I’ll find it impossible
to carry Kate anywhere else than down the river, right into the heart
of the British squadron, where the royal commander, also of course,
will retain us. My cousin, as an heiress, will be too valuable a
prize to be parted with, and her desire to return, if she urges it,
will be civilly, but resolutely resisted by his Majesty’s officer.
Besides, we will tell her that it would be madness, after her narrow
escape, for her to go back to so disturbed a region, and one also
which is about to become the theatre of incessant skirmishes. It’s
a capital plan, most capital,” said Aylesford, gleefully. “You
have a genius for scheming, Arrison. I’ll do my part, and engage
that, to-morrow, Kate shall ride out alone. Let me see. She’ll take
the road through the cedar-swamp, towards Herman’s. I think I can
manage that. You know the way, don’t you. Be there early. If, by
any accident, she fails you to-morrow, then be there every day till
she passes.”

“I’ll wait near
the spring,” said Arrison, rising, as he perceived Aylesford
prepare to go. “In going down the bank of the river, I’ll take
the other side. You’ll be ready below, will you?”

“Yes,” answered
Aylesford, as he proceeded to mount his horse. “But it’s nearly
noon, and I must be at Sweetwater by dinner-time.”

With these words, he
put spurs to his horse and disappeared in the forest.

CHAPTER XXV.

TREACHERY

Thus do all traitors;

If their purgation did consist in words,

They are as innocent as grace itself. —Shakespeare.

Thou art a traitor and a miscreant;

Too good to be so, and too bad to live. —Shakespeare.

Circumstances
favored the wishes of Aylesford even more than he had dared to hope,
for that evening, at the teatable, Kate announced her intention of
riding over, on the following morning, to Uncle Lawrence’s. She had
heard of the destruction of Widow Bates’ dwelling, and
understanding that the houseless family was sheltered at Mr. Herman’s
for the present, desired to ascertain in what way she could best
assist them.

Aylesford had been
watching for an opportunity, the whole afternoon, to fulfill his
promise to the outlaw; but none had offered. He, therefore, heard
this announcement with pleasure. But, in order to prevent suspicion
from afterwards resting on himself, he ventured to suggest that it
was scarcely safe for Kate to venture out.

“Surely,” were
his words, as he looked at Mrs. Warren rather than at his cousin, “if
the refugees are so daring as to burn houses on Sunday, they will not
be afraid to rob, and perhaps insult, a defenceless lady on Tuesday.”

“Suppose you go
with me, Charles,” said Kate looking up.

To understand this
frank offer, it is necessary to recall the fact that, as but one
person, beside the actors, had witnessed the rencontre between
Aylesford and Major Gordon, and as Uncle Lawrence had wisely kept his
own counsel, Kate was ignorant of the affair. She naturally
concluded, therefore, that her cousin’s threat had been an idle
one. In his calmer moments he had, she reasoned, repented of his
angry violence. She accordingly resolved to exhibit, by a
conciliatory manner, her appreciation of this conduct.

Aylesford, for a
moment, was embarrassed, but less by the offer than by the tone in
which it was made. He attributed it, however, to its true cause. “She
would be very far from being so affable,” he moodily thought, “if
she knew all.”

“I am sorry,” he
said, “that I cannot accompany you,” addressing his cousin. “But
I leave, as early as possible, for the mouth of the river.” And as
he spoke, he looked around to see that none of the servants were
within hearing.

“For the mouth of
the river,” exclaimed Mrs. Warren and Kate in the same breath.
“Deary me, what now’s the matter?” added the aunt.

Aylesford made no
direct reply, but began whistling the Jacobite air, “Over the water
to Charlie.”

“What does he
mean?” said Mrs. Warren, looking in alarm at Kate.

“I suppose he is
going to join his Majesty’s troops,” answered our heroine. “But
surely,” she added, addressing her cousin, “you choose a
roundabout path.”

It must be confessed
that Kate’s heart beat high even at the suspicion that Aylesford
was going within the royal lines; for in that case he had concluded,
she reasoned, to abandon his pretensions to her hand. She waited,
therefore, for his reply with deep interest.

“What if his most
gracious Majesty’s forces,” said her cousin, speaking low, and
again glancing cautiously around, “were coming half way to meet me?
What if there was a royal expedition at this moment lying in the bay
below?”

“I hope not,”
answered Kate, turning pale. “I sincerely hope not.”

“And why not?”
asked Aylesford. “Is my fair cousin so much of a rebel to her king
as to wish for the defeat of his Majesty’s cause.”

“Deary me!” said
Mrs. Warren, lifting her hands, “Kate a rebel. How can it be? Who
told you so?” she added, confusedly, looking from one to the other.
“It isn’t so, Kate, is it?”

“I never said it
was,” answered our heroine composedly. “I merely expressed regret
at the possible arrival of a royal expedition against the bay,
because it would lead to bloodshed, and bring the horrors of war
almost to our very doors, and lo! Charles,” she added, with
something of haughty contempt, “cries out that I am a rebel.”

“I knew Kate
wasn’t a rebel,” said Mrs. Warren, looking appealingly to
Aylesford. “You don’t really mean to say she is one, nephew? You
were only jesting?”

“I cry Kate’s
pardon,” answered Aylesford, whose object was not to irritate, and
who had now hastened to repair his error. “As you say, aunt, I was
only jesting. But, in serious earnest, a royal expedition has
probably anchored in the bay by this time; and, as I am tired of an
aimless life,” he glanced meaningly at Kate as he spoke, “I
intend seizing the opportunity to offer my sword to his Majesty.”

“Oh! my dear boy,
don’t think of it,” cried his aunt in alarm. “You’ll be
killed, I know you will; and then what will become of us.”

“Never fear for
me, aunt,” replied Aylesford. “I am no more unfortunate than
others, at least in war,” he added, significantly looking at Kate.
“The chances are ten to one that I’ll escape even a wound. And
then, you know, I’ll naturally rise in the service; all officers
who serve faithfully do; so that, by the time these revolted colonies
are subdued, I’ll probably be a Colonel. Let us hope, some day, to
attend a levee of his Majesty, I accompanying you in the uniform of
that rank. Besides, aunt, I’m but doing my duty. No Aylesford
should refuse to draw sword for his king. I’ve no doubt Cousin
Danville has often wondered why I did not serve.”

This last allusion,
adroitly introduced, calmed the good lady’s fears, and reconciled
her to the scheme more than anything which had gone before. She
still, however, looked undecided.

“What do you think
of it, Kate?” she said, in perplexity. “It does look odd, doesn’t
it, that none of our family are in arms for the King?”

Kate, during the
time Aylesford was speaking, had been carefully counting the grounds
in her tea-cup. She was persuaded that this sudden scheme of her
cousin’s had its origin entirely in her refusal. She could not but
feel a pang at being the cause of his exile, yet her reason told her
that it was the best for both him and her; and therefore, on being
thus appealed to, she looked up and said—

“If Charles thinks
he ought to go, under all the circumstances,” and she emphasized
these last words, “it is not for us to thwart him. There is
certainly both honor and wealth to be had in the service of King
George; while here there is nothing at all to engage a man of spirit.
And if any Aylesford joins the royal standard,” she added,
laughingly, striving, for her aunt’s sake, to give a gayer tone to
the conversation, “it must be Charles, unless you choose, aunt, to
enlist,
a la
Joan of Arc, or I go a soldiering, like a
vivandiere in the French army.”

“Well, you two
children will have it your own way,” said Mrs. Warren, with a sigh.
“All I hope is that we shall soon see you back again, Charles, with
a royal army. Who knows but his Majesty may make you Governor of New
Jersey, when the war’s over?” she added, abandoning herself to
her favorite castle-building.

“Who knows?”
answered Aylesford.

“But Kate said
nothing. She was again studying the contents of her cup. After awhile
she looked up.

“You really go
to-morrow, Charles?” she said.

“Really and
positively. I shall only wait to see you in the saddle, that is if
you still persist in your determination.”

“I see no reason,”
answered Kate, frankly, “why I should not. The very fact that a
royal expedition is down the river will make it all the safer here;
for the refugees will flock there like vultures to a feast. They are
but carrion warriors at best,” she added, contemptuously, “and
only devour generally the prey that stronger and braver ones have
pulled down.”

Aylesford thought
that he had remonstrated enough for his purpose, so he said no more,
not wishing to hazard Kate’s undertaking, by arousing his aunt’s
fears.

“I will attend you
as far as the church,” he said; “for my way will lie down that
side of the river.” He deemed it best to do this, in order to be
sure, before he finally left Sweetwater, that Kate would fall into
the ambush prepared for her. “But,” he added, lowering his voice
and looking across to Kate, as his aunt turned for a moment, “a
word from you will change all my plans.”

“It cannot be,
Charles,” answered Kate, in the same low tone. But her eyes thanked
him for his forbearance.

Aylesford was not so
degraded but that he felt a pang of shame. It was not too late, he
reflected for a moment, to retreat. But the thought passed as
instantaneously as it came. Before he could reply, Mrs. Warren again
turned and spoke; and directly afterwards they all rose from the
table.

“Why here is Aunt
Chloe!” cried Kate, approaching the window. “She has come to see
you, cousin; for it was but the other day she was asking when you
would come home.” And she ran out into the porch.

“How is yer,
honey?” said the old nurse. “’Pears to me yer gets more
beautiful ebbery day, ‘deed yer does.” Kate blushed, as she
answered—

“Ah, aunty, you
know how to flatter. But you’ve heard, I suppose, that Cousin
Charles has returned. And here he comes.”

“Glad to see yer,
Marse Charles,” was the old creature’s greeting. “It does yer
old mammy’s eyes good, ‘deed it does. I heerd yesterday dat yer
was come; but dis ole rheumatiz kept me at home. Dey do say dat dar
is sometin’ dey sell at de Forks dat’ll cure it, sartin sure. Yer
hasn’t got a dollar, Marse Charles, or haf a crown, has yer, for
poor ole aunty?”

Aylesford laughingly
handed her the gratuity. After a few kind words from Kate, Aunt Chloe
kept on to the kitchen, where, seated in the high-backed settle,
within the ample fire-place, and with her short clay-pipe in her
mouth, she prepared to have a gossip with the magnates of that
apartment, about the fire in the woods, the new preacher, the return
of Aylesford, and other current topics of interest.

CHAPTER XXVI.

POMP’S ADVENTURE

Did you ever see the devil,

With his iron-wooden shovel,

A scratching up the gravel.

With his night-cap on?

* * * *

Did you ever, ever, ever,

Ever, ever, ever, ever,

Ever, ever, ever, ever,

Catch a whale by the tail! —Comic Song.

The indigenous
negro, as he used to exist in New Jersey, has long since disappeared
before the inundation of new comers of the same race. Aunt Chloe, and
her kitchen friends, belonged to the good old stock, however, such as
our elder readers may remember to have met with in their youth. They
had all, at one time, been slaves in the family, and, though now
free, still regarded the Aylesfords as belonging to them, in a sense
at least. Hence they freely canvassed the conduct of all, from Mrs.
Warren down; and on this occasion, we may be sure, their criticisms
were not withheld.

In this conversation
Aunt Chloe maintained the principal part. Her auditors were the cook,
a good-looking mulatto about forty years old, whose stout and comely
person bespoke the excellent living at Sweetwater. A Madras
handkerchief, tastefully wrapped about her head, and a new dress,
gave Dinah quite an imposing air this evening. Her husband, who was
at once overseer, gardener, and head ostler, a Guinea coast African,
as black as midnight, sat in front of the fire; while her son, Pomp,
a lad of eighteen, who officiated as stable boy, squatted on the
floor in the background. Two other servants hovered in the distance,
eager listeners, but not daring to join in the conversation with
their superiors, especially with Aunt Chloe.

After the fire had
been discussed, the return of Aylesford was brought up, and its
effect on Major Gordon duly canvassed. Servants are more observant
than is always thought, and the kitchen at Sweetwater had discovered
the condition of our hero’s affections long before the parlor, or
even himself, had suspected it. Aunt Chloe, in spite of having known
Aylesford when an infant, leaned to the side of the Major, chiefly,
it must be confessed, in consequence of the douceur the latter had
bestowed upon her. For a similar reason, Pomp, who as stable-boy, had
often received small gratuities, secretly favored the same cause.
But, on the other hand, Dinah, as well as her husband, neither of
whom had been in the way to be favored by our hero, were warm
advocates of Aylesford.

For a time the
discussion waxed quite animated, but finally it died away, and the
new minister came up for scrutiny in turn. On this subject Aunt Chloe
spoke authoritatively, laying down the law to her gaping listeners.
It is well known that illiterate negroes are somewhat peculiar in
their religious notions. The imagination has a powerful influence
over them, and they are exceedingly susceptible to nervous
excitements, as any one, who has ever been at a camp-meeting, must
have observed. Frequently, indeed, they seem to actually realize mere
dreams. Hence it is a common thing to hear them tell, with the
greatest gravity, stories of personal interviews with the Arch Enemy.
Sometimes, however, these are not delusions, but deliberate romances,
invented to increase the importance of the narrator.

“It did dis chile
good,” said Aunt Chloe, “to hear dat preacher dis morning. I
bless my hebbenly master dat dar are left some who speak de plain
trufe. It ‘most made me feel as I did when I fast got religion. Ah!
dat was a happy time. It was long ago, Pomp, before you was born, at
a woods meeting over by Waldo. ‘Peared as if I was light as a bird,
and could fly right up to hebben. I nebber saw de stars shine as dey
did dat night, when I walked home; and nebber ‘spect to till I get
over Jordan, and into de New Jerusalem—dat is if de ole debbil, dat
roarin’ lion, who goes about seekin’ whom he may devour, don’t
git dis chile yet.”

Pomp, at this
mention of the ubiquitous character of the enemy, mindful, perhaps,
of some late improper acts, looked fearfully over his shoulder, as if
expecting to see him lurking in the dark shadows at the further end
of the kitchen; for it was now after sunset, and the only light in
the room was that of the smouldering fire.

“Ah! dat debbil,”
groaned Pomp’s sire, rolling up the whites of his eyes. “We must
watch and pray, Aunt Chloe, or he’ll git de best of us in spite of
all. He ‘most had dis chile once. He was near to me, ‘deed he
was, as Pomp dis minnit.”

Pomp started as if
he had been shot, and began to edge away from his parent, at this
renewed assault upon his nerves.

“You don’t say
dat?” cried Aunt Chloe, lifting up both hands. “You’re makin’
fun.”

“’Deed I isn’t,
aunty. I seed de debbil, dat ole dragon, only dis last spring, sure
sartin.”

“How?” and Aunt
Chloe, stuffing more tobacco into her pipe, began to smoke anew,
looking the speaker eagerly in the face.

“I was out in de
cornfield, one day, hoein’,” said he, “when, stoppin’ to rest
a minnit, and looking up, I saw dat of a sudden de woods at de odder
end had clean gone away, and de field had stretched hisself away
out,” and he extended his arm as he spoke, with the palm of the
hand inclined downwards, “just so, slopin’ like, as de roof of a
barn does, yer know, only it went slopin’ down, down, till it cum
to de end of de world. But it didn’t ‘pear to be de end of de
world eider. For over again de field dar was a hill, which sloped up
‘most as high on de odder side,” all this time going through an
active pantomine, “and between de two, and kind o’ under de one I
was on, was de bottomless pit, ‘deed dere was, wid de brimstone
flames and smoke a-shootin’ up, ebbery now and den, like fire out
of de stack of Waldo furnace. And standin’ dar between de two
hills,” continued the narrator, leaning forward, “and right ober
dis pit, I saw de debbil hisself, ‘deed I did, aunty. He had great
horns on his head, and eyes like red-hot iron, and held a big
pitchfork in his hand, and ‘peared to be a watchin’ me, as near
as I could tell, for you see de smoke kept rollin’ up and hidin’
him ‘bout half de time. ‘Oh! Lor’ Amighty!’ I said, ‘dis
chile done for now; de debbil will hab him, and no mistake.’ Wid
dat, of a sudden, my knees guv way, I fell, and as I fell I begun a
slidin’ down de hill. De debbil he saw me a-comin’, and made a
grab at me wid his pitchfork; but he couldn’t reach me yet. I tried
to cotch hold of somethin’ to stop me, but de field ‘peared to be
nuffin but loose sand, widout a cornstalk left, or a blackberry bush,
or even a root. De debbil he now made anoder grab at me, but he
wasn’t near enough yet. By dis time de sand of de field began to
slide, like shelled corn pourin’ out of a half-bushel, slippin’,
slippin’, and de debbil reachin’, reachin’, to get my poor ole
soul. By’m bye, I saw dat de next time he would fotch me sure. I
was away down, yer see, just at de bottom of de hill, and could hear
de roarin’ of de flames, and Dives a lookin’ up and cryin’ for
a drop of water. De debbil he kind of braced hisself, seein’ me so
close, and lifted his pitchfork to hab it ready; and I went slidin’,
slidin’, and de hill wid me, faster dan a streak of lightnin’,
right down—”

“Datll do,”
cried Aunt Chloe, rising authoritatively. “Lord a massy, how you
can lie, ole nig.” And as she spoke, the expression of her
countenance, which had been one of incredulity almost from the first,
settled into disgust.

“I’ll not stay,”
she continued, “to hear sich tales. I wonder you ain’t ashamed,
and before Pomp too.”

The abashed romancer
could not utter a word. Dinah in vain interposed to persuade Aunt
Chloe to remain. At last the offender, eager to purchase his peace,
said that, if Aunt Chloe must go, at least she must permit Pomp to
accompany her home. “Dar was nuffin so ungenteel,” he said, “dan
fur company, ‘specially ladies, to be ‘lowed to go home alone.”

Pomp, whose ever
active fears had been unpleasantly excited already, would fain have
declined, but did not dare; and Aunt Chloe, somewhat mollified by
this civility, set off with her attendant. The distance was about a
mile, which was soon passed, too soon for Pomp, indeed, who, all the
time, had been dreading the lonely walk back.

There was no help
for it, however, and so, after leaving Aunt Chloe at her gate, the
lad, whistling to keep his courage up, set his face homewards. As
long as he remained within sight of the cabin, he managed to keep
down his fears; but when he had fairly plunged into the forest, his
teeth began to chatter, his knees to shake, and his heart to
palpitate. The night was starless, as well as moonless, so that, even
in the open country, it was quite dark, while in the narrow wood road
the gloom seemed almost palpable. Pomp could not see a dozen feet
ahead. He began to recall, not only the story his father had related,
and which he firmly believed in spite of Aunt Chloe’s skepticism,
but all the supernatural narratives he had listened to during his
whole lifetime. Tales of the Arch Enemy, assuming the shape of a wild
beast, and pouncing on lonely travellers from some dark covert; tales
of the dead coming forth; tales of whole legions of devils carrying
off benighted wayfarers; these, which he had often heard beside the
kitchen fire, recurred to him now, till his hair stood on end, and he
started at every sound.

His road lead near
the grave-yard, and as he approached it, his terror redoubled.

All at once, and
when at the very darkest part of the road, what seemed a groan made
him come to a halt. He immediately rallied, however, and tried to
persuade himself that it was only the wind in the tree-tops, which
had again momentarily startled him. But as he listened, it came once
more, an awful, unearthly sound, that chilled his very marrow. His
limbs now refused to support him, and he sank nerveless and shaking
to the ground. But when a moment had elapsed, and the sound was not
repeated, he began to gather a little courage, thinking that,
perhaps, it was only the distant hooting of an owl. Reassured
somewhat, by this idea, he rose feebly to his feet. But he had not
advanced a step before the sound was heard again, and indisputably
close at hand, so close indeed, that he seemed to feel the hot breath
from the invisible presence that uttered it. He fell at once flat on
his face, half dead with horror, and expecting the next instant to be
clutched and borne off.

He was almost too
frightened to pray, a duty in which, he now remembered, he had lately
been remiss: but he managed, with rattling teeth, and nearly
paralyzed jaws, to articulate at last.

“Oh! Marse Lord,”
he cried, “don’t let de debbil git dis poor chile, not dis time
anyhow. ‘Twasn’t Pomp, dat was in de watermelon patch dis
mornin’, when he ought to have been at meetin’. Dar’s some
mistake, deed dar is. It’s Sam Jonsing dat you want, Marse Debbil.
Tink what my ole mammy will do if you—”

But he never
finished his adjuration, for at this crisis two glowing eyes emerged
out of the darkness, and stood staring over him, two enormous horns
followed, a bellow was heard that seemed to shake the woods for
miles, and Pomp felt himself lifted bodily from the sand. It was more
than nature could endure. He fainted outright.

When he came to
himself, he was lying at the side of the road, stiff with bruises. At
first he could not believe that he was still alive. But gradually,
though not till after he had pinched himself frequently, he became
assured that he was yet in mortal guise; and that his unearthly enemy
had disappeared. He now feebly struggled to his feet, and began to
feel his limbs; but none were broken, though he found his breeches
torn nearly off. Gathering courage, by degrees, he crept away, moving
fearfully and cautiously, however, till he had fairly emerged from
the woods and passed the grave-yard, when he broke into a run and
fled homewards as fast as his limbs would carry him.

Here, to a gaping
audience, he recounted breathlessly his narrow escape.

“You darn fool,”
said his sire, when Pomp had finished his narration, incredulous of
others, because conscious of his own habit of romancing, “do you
tink your ole farder’ll believe dat pack of lies? You neber saw
anything, but made it all up.”

“De chile didn’t,”
said Dinah. “Dar! What you say to dis?”

She exposed to view,
as she spoke, the damaged seat of Pomp’s breeches, which afforded
unmistakable proof of his having come into contact with an enemy of
some kind, even if not a supernatural one. But the sire was still
incredulous.

“He’s gone done
tore it a purpose,” was all the stubborn skeptic said.

But the next day he
professed to solve the enigma. He came in from the barn, where he had
been giving Arab an early feed, and, laughing, said—

“De black bull was
loose all night, and went way up de road, past de meetin’-house,
‘zactly whar dis darn fool of a Pomp says he met de debbil. It’s
lucky his breeches tore, or de critter might have killed him, deed he
might. I told you de chile was lyin’. Lor’ Amighty, to get
skeered dat way, at nuffin at all!” and he laughed till the tears
ran out of his eyes.

But Dinah as well as
her son persisted in their original version of the story, and
thereafter two distinct accounts of interviews with the Arch Enemy
were told in the kitchen at Sweetwater, neither party, however,
believing a word that the other said.

CHAPTER XXVII.

THE ABDUCTION

And many an old man’s sigh, and many a widow’s,

And many an orphan’s water-standing eye—

Men for their sons’, wives for their husbands’ fate,

And orphans for their parents’ timeless death—

Shall rue the hour that ever thou wert born. —Shakespeare.

Infamous wretch!

So much beneath my scorn. —Dryden.

Kate came down to
breakfast in her riding habit, and when the meal was concluded,
mounted almost gayly; while Mrs. Warren, nearly weeping, awaited the
departure of her and Aylesford.

She watched the
equestrians till they reached the bend of the pond, when Aylesford,
with a low bow and a wave of the hand, parted from Kate; and
immediately after both were lost to sight in the forest, he keeping
on over the bridge, and she turning to the left.

Kate rode on, with a
light heart, talking to Arab, in the exuberance of her feelings, as
if he had been a human friend, patting him caressingly, with her
right hand, as she spoke. The intelligent beast pricked up his ears,
and looked around as if he actually understood her words.

“Let us have a
gallop,” she said. “Here is the road where you beat Selim. You
remember it—don’t you, old fellow?”

She gave her horse
his head, at these words, striking him smartly, and away they went at
full gallop.

Her fate hung, at
that crisis, on a single thread. If Arab had maintained, for a
quarter of an hour, the pace at which he was going, Kate would have
passed the ambush prepared for her, at a speed which would have
prevented her detection. Could but a warning voice have whispered to
her the peril, could but one of those strange presentiments have come
which often occur, she would have escaped the danger. But, suspecting
no peril, she drew in her horse, as she approached the spring, where
the road became rougher, and reduced his pace to a walk.

“Well done,” she
said, leaning over him and patting him again, “good Arab.”

Suddenly she felt
her bridle seized, and instantaneously the road was filled with
strange faces, to the number of at least half a dozen. They were all
alike coarse and ruffian-looking. The person who had seized her
bridle was the only one who struck Kate as not unfamiliar; but his
countenance was artificially blackened; and she could not, therefore,
discover when or where she had seen him.

At first she had
uttered a slight scream. But this had been occasioned rather by the
startling suddenness of the attack, than by the assault itself. In an
instant she had recovered her self-possession, when her first act was
to strike her spur violently into Arab, and simultaneously to give
him his rein, in hopes to shake off the grasp of the stranger.

But the ruffian’s
hold was too firm to be loosened. Arab sprung forward like an arrow,
with a snort of rage and terror, lifting the villain almost from his
feet and dragging him several paces forward. But it was in vain. The
gripe now fixed on the bridle was one evidently accustomed to such
work, and though the horse plunged, reared, sprang aside, and
resorted to other means to get rid of his mistress’ assailant, the
effort was to no purpose.

“So ho, so ho,”
said the man, in a deep, gruff voice of authority. “Won’t you be
still, sir?” Gradually the restive animal subsided into quiet, and
stood trembling all over, the sweat oozing out from every pore, till
his satin-like coat glistened like glass.

Meantime his
mistress, who had continued spurring him till she saw it was useless,
sat in her seat as if she had been part of the animal, till even the
coarse ruffians about her audibly cried out at her skill. “It’s
no use, miss,” said the voice of the disguised leader. “I’ve
held worse colts than this, and when once I get my grip on a horse,
he’s bound to stand till I let him go.”

The man’s voice,
she thought, was one she had often heard. His evident familiarity
with horses was another proof of his identity. She looked again at
the burly figure, and at once remembered who he was. “James
Arrison!” she said, in surprise.

The ruffian made no
distinct reply, but muttered an oath between his teeth.

“What do you mean
by this rudeness?” she said, with a dignity amounting to sternness.
“Let go my bridle, sir.”

The villain had now,
however, recovered from his momentary discomposure at the detection
of his disguise. He looked boldly up, and said ironically—

“Not if you
please, miss. We haven’t come so far or waited so long, to give up
our booty in this fashion.”

Kate’s heart,
stout as it was, sunk within her. Though she had heard nothing of
Arrison’s proceedings since his return to the vicinity of
Sweetwater, and did not therefore identify him with the burning of
widow Bates’ house, yet she knew enough of his former deeds to
satisfy herself that she had fallen into the hands of refugees. The
utter disregard of law, both human and divine, exhibited by these
outlaws, was well known to her. She was aware that they valued even
human life lightly, when it stood in the way of their plans. It was
but a few months ago, if report spoke correctly, that a gang of them
had attacked a lone farmhouse at midnight, in a neighboring county,
murdered the owner and his wife, and sought even the blood of the
innocent daughter, who, however, luckily escaped to a neighboring
wood. It was within a period, scarcely less remote, that a band,
fifty or sixty strong, had assailed the dwelling of Major Huddy, at
what is now Colt’s Neck, and carried off the proprietor as their
prisoner, after a protracted defence, which was only terminated by
the outlaws setting fire to the house. It was less than a twelvemonth
since an armed launch, managed by twenty similar ruffians, had
cruized off the mouth of a neighboring river, and even ravaged its
shores. Innumerable were the tales authenticated of the ruffianly
character of these desperadoes. Old age had been assassinated by them
in cold blood; and women, it was said, had been not unfrequently
violated. Their brutal ferocity had passed into a proverb. At the
name of refugee the very children turned pale, and crept closer to
their mother’s side. Yet into the hands of a gang of these ruffians
Kate saw that she had fallen, and fallen moreover in consequence of a
premeditated ambush.

Most persons of her
sex would have lost all presence of mind, at realizing her situation.
But Kate’s courageous heart rose with the occasion. Others of her
sex also, even if they had retained their presence of mind, would
have resorted to tears and supplications. She, however, saw that
these would be wasted on the hardened ruffians into whose hands she
had fallen. She resolved, accordingly, to appeal to their
self-interest, supposing that ransom was their real purpose.

She turned to the
refugees, saying—

“Name your price,
and, if it is within our means, it shall be paid when and where you
please. You all know who I am, I presume. The word of an Aylesford is
as good as a bond.”

The men looked at
each other, and then at their leader but none of them answered,
evidently leaving it to him to be their spokesman.

“And how much do
you think you could raise at Sweetwater?” asked Arrison,
sneeringly. “If we had known it was such a bank of England, that it
could pay down golden guineas for your ransom, maybe we’d have
sacked it first, and then carried you off afterwards. Now how much
will your ladyship give?”

The tone in which he
spoke, coupled with his enigmatical words, gave Kate her first
suspicion that the ruffians’ motive was not wholly mercenary in
waylaying her. Her cheek, in spite of herself, was a shade paler, and
her voice trembled as she replied—

“In heaven’s
name, Arrison, state your terms, and let me go. We have but little
gold on hand, as you ought to know, in these times; but we can get
it; and I pledge you my honor, the honor of my father’s daughter,
that your price shall be paid.”

“Without
treachery?”

“Without
treachery.”

“If I name a day
and place, will you send a trusty servant with the gold, and let no
one know of it?”

“I will.”

“Will you swear
it?”

“I will swear it.”

The particularity
with which he proceeded gave Kate hope, which was increased by his
next words.

“Will a hundred
guineas be too much?”

“I will promise
you a hundred guineas,” she said promptly. “It is a large sum, a
very large sum, for these times, and you must give me leisure to
procure it.” She would have added, “The more as my cousin, Mr.
Aylesford, is absent.” But, remembering that this betrayal of her
defenceless condition might stimulate the cupidity of the refugees,
she corrected herself, and said— “It will require at least a
fortnight.”

Anxiously, as she
spoke, she studied the faces of her hearers, especially that of their
leader, to notice the effect of her words. The affected interest with
which Arrison had conducted the conversation, now suddenly gave place
to a look of sardonic triumph, which betrayed to Kate that he had
been amusing himself at her expense, as the tiger is said to play
with his victim before he laps his blood.

“It won’t do, my
pretty miss,” said the villain. “I’m too old a bird to be
caught with such chaff. Your promises wouldn’t be worth a farthing,
when once you were out of my sight. No, no, my cunning she-fox,
you’re not so smart as you think you are. I have a plan of my own
which you shall know in good time, by which I expect to make a better
thing than a hundred guineas out of you. But, for the present, we
will listen to no talk of ransom. You go with us, and if you can make
up your mind to go quietly, it will be to your interest. But if not,
we’ll find a way to make you.”

Kate trembled
secretly at the dark hints of the ruffian. Oh! how she longed, at
that moment, for the sight of even her cousin. The thought of Major
Gordon also, and his stout arm, and of Uncle Lawrence and his brave
spirit, rushed across her; and she glanced eagerly up and down the
road, in the wild hope of beholding one or both.

“Come,” said her
captor, brutally, “make up your mind quick. You needn’t count on
help, for we’re strong enough for twice as many as would be likely
to pass by; and now that we’ve got you we mean to keep you, even if
we have to slit the throats of a dozen rebel officers or canting old
scoundrels.” And as Kate’s countenance betrayed that he had
divined her thoughts correctly, he continued— “You see I know
what you’re hoping for; but they’ll not come, if you wait till
to-morrow; since they’ve both gone down the river to fight King
George, like two fools, leaving the coast clear for us.” And he
laughed again mockingly.

With this
announcement, that the only persons to whom she could have looked for
aid were absent, her last hope departed. She now recognized fully to
what a deliberate and carefully-executed plan she had fallen a
victim. As Arrison had intended, she believed herself to be a prey to
a lawless gang, who, as they seemed to be above the temptation of
lucre, must have designs upon her at which she shuddered even to
glance.

But she saw that not
only expostulations but even promises were useless, and from this
moment, therefore, she was haughtily silent. She resolved that, at
present, she would make no further efforts at resistance, since they
would only be fruitless; but that, yielding to necessity, she would
accompany her captors; determining to reserve all her strength for a
crisis, which she now deemed not improbable, when death might
probably be her only resource from dishonor.

“If you don’t
try to escape,” said Arrison, seeing she did not speak, “we’ll
not disturb you, except to lead your horse; and in that case you may
ride. But if you give us trouble, we’ll make you dismount and walk;
and if you refuse to do this, I’ll blow your brains out.”

The ruffian; as he
spoke, drew a pistol from his breast, while he laid his hand
emphatically upon her arm. Kate knew that he would keep his promise,
both from his past reputation and his present determined look.

“Don’t touch me,
sir,” she said, sternly, shrinking back by an impulse she was
unable to control, “I will go quietly, since go I must.”

The man answered by
a brutal laugh, but removed his hand and put up his pistol. Turning
to two of his gang, whom he called by name, he directed them to take
Arab by the bridle, close to the bit, one on either side, and so lead
the animal.

“And now, miss,”
he said, “we’ll be off; for we must put many good miles of land
and water between us and Sweetwater before night; because, in matters
of this kind,” and he sneered in his cold-blooded way again, “it’s
just as well, you know, to clinch the nail. There’s nothing like
making even a sure thing surer.”

Without further word
the party set forth, in something like military order. Two of the
gang went a hundred yards in advance; then came the two who were
leading Arab; and, a hundred yards behind, the remaining two brought
up the rear. Arrison, at first, walked beside Kate, but as they
progressed, he shifted his position frequently, now going ahead even
of those in advance, and now dropping to the extreme rear, always on
the watch against surprise. Occasionally he addressed our heroine,
but as she adhered firmly to her purpose of not answering, and
scarcely made an effort to conceal her scorn, he finally relapsed
into silence.

Their way led
through old and half-overgrown wood-roads, through most of which a
vehicle would have found it impossible to pass. Familiar as Kate
considered herself with the by-ways of this description in the
neighborhood of Sweetwater, most of these they now followed were
quite strange to her. She soon lost all knowledge of their
whereabouts, in consequence.

Her suspicion that
they were following the river towards its mouth became a certainty,
as the day wore on, when they emerged suddenly on the banks of a
deep, and comparatively wide stream, the shores of which she
recognized immediately. A boat lay concealed, under the shadow of
overhanging trees and bushes, as if awaiting them.

“You’ll dismount
here,” said Arrison, breaking silence for the first time for
several hours. “Remember my threat, which, if you scream or
resist,” he added, with an oath, and a meaning tap of his breast,
“I’ll keep.”

Kate haughtily waved
him away, as he approached to assist her, and leaping from the
saddle, gathered up the skirts of her riding-dress and walked to the
boat, whither his look had directed her.

But even in that
perilous moment, when she knew not but that the crisis, which she had
feared all day, was close at hand, she could not part from Arab
without a pang. As she took her seat in the boat, her eyes still
followed her horse; and she was comforted to see that a lad, who
appeared all at once, was hoisted into her saddle, as if to ride the
animal to a place of safety.

Directly that Arab
had disappeared, after turning his head sadly, and as if
reproachfully, towards her, the refugees entered the boat, the men
assumed the oars, and Arrison taking the rudder, in a moment more
they pushed off.

CHAPTER XXVIII.

THE VOLUNTEERS

“Why have they dared to march

So many miles upon her peaceful bosom;

Frighting her pale-faced villages with war.” —Shakespeare.

“Front to front,

Bring thou this fiend of Scotland, and myself;

Within my sword’s length set him.” —Shakespeare.

We must now return
to Major Gordon and his companion, whom we left, long ago, proceeding
to the Forks.

The Forks, as its
name imported, was situated at the head of navigation, at the
junction of two small branches of the river, on whose shores the
events we have been narrating occurred. It was a settlement
comprising about twenty-five houses, whose inhabitants were
exclusively engaged in the trade, which the unloading of prizes at
this point had created. Springing up in an incredibly short time, its
prosperity was as evanescent as things of rapid growth often are; and
long since every vestige of it has departed, except a solitary
domicile, and a few grand old buttonwoods.

At the time of which
we write, however, the Forks was in the full career of success. The
western shore of the narrow but deep river in front, was lined for a
considerable distance with vessels, which either had discharged
valuable cargoes, or were about to do so. Many a fat merchantman,
which had been originally laden with goods for the markets of
Jamaica, was there contributing unwillingly to the wealth of the
American patriots; and many a proud West Indiaman, which had been
freighted at Kingston with sugar, rum, or molasses for London, was
now unloading at the Forks for the benefit of Philadelphia. The
place, in fact, was the head-quarters for the spoils, ravaged by
American privateers from his Majesty’s mercantile marine.

As such it presented
a scene of comparative liveliness. Teamsters were there, swearing at
their horses, drinking in the tavern, or wrangling about their load;
brokers were there, in behalf of the merchants of the capital,
bartering for desirable goods; and sailors, watermen, laborers, and
occasionally a small farmer or two were there also; while a few
soldiers, constituting the small command of Major Gordon, lounged
about and completed the diversity of the scene.

Scarcely had Major
Gordon arrived at the Forks with his companion, when he was called
aside, and informed that an express rider had just reached the place
and was anxiously inquiring for him. It was added that the man,
though he refused to divulge his errand, was evidently from
Washington’s head-quarters.

“Send him in,”
said the Major, leading the way to his bed-chamber, the only private
apartment he could command. And turning to Uncle Lawrence, he asked
the latter to excuse him for a few minutes.

The express rider
was soon ushered into the presence of the young officer.

“His excellency,
the commander-in-chief,” said the emissary, “has received news
that the British are about fitting out an expedition against the
lower settlements on this river, with the intention to burn the
prizes collected below, and perhaps even to penetrate up to this
point. So much I was told to carry by word of mouth, in case any
accident happened to my despatches. But I was to preserve them, if
possible, and hand them to you.” With these words he drew out a
packet, which he delivered to Major Gordon.

The official
document confirmed what the messenger had stated, but went much more
into detail. It informed our hero that General Washington had
ascertained, from reliable informants in New York, that the British
commander-in-chief, enraged at the serious damage done by the
privateers harboring in the river, had resolved to despatch the Vesta
man-of-war, with a sufficient number of auxiliary vessels and a force
of nearly a thousand men, to break up the American settlements,
capture the armed ships, and burn or bring off the prizes. “In a
word,” concluded the despatch, “it is the royal General’s
intention to devastate the whole region. No hope is left for the
inhabitants but in rallying promptly to resist the aggressors. Had
the enemy been able to surprise the district, as he confidently
expected, his bloody designs would incontestably have been carried
out. But the commander-in-chief is in hopes that the timely warning
he sends, will allow the inhabitants to make such preparations for
defence, as will frustrate the plans of the invaders. He advises that
all private armed vessels be conveyed immediately to a place of
security; that defences be thrown up at the points most likely to
become the objects of attack; and that those persons who are well
affected to the Congress be summoned, from the surrounding
neighborhoods, to defend the soil from aggression. He will despatch a
body of dragoons, under the Count Pulaski, as soon as possible, to
assist the militia; meantime, Major Gordon is instructed to hasten at
once to the Neck, which is one of the spots certain to be assailed
first, and remain in command there until relieved by the Count.”

Major Gordon, having
hastily perused this missive, turned to the express rider.

“Are you too tired
to go on with the news?” he said. “if not, you are the most
suitable person.”

“I’m all ready,”
answered the messenger. “I sort of thought you’d wish to send me
forrard, and so I took a bite while waiting for you, not knowing,”
and he touched his cap, and smiled, “when I’d get another.”

“You are a veteran
already in one thing,” answered Major Gordon, gayly, “even though
young in years. Mount then, at once, and make the best speed you can
to the Neck. Once there, despatch messengers across the country and
along shore to rouse the people. Let the rendezvous be at the Neck. I
will march, with all the forces I can collect, within an hour or two;
but as my progress will necessarily be slow, as compared with yours,
I trust to find, by the time I arrive, a goodly number of armed
citizens assembled to meet me.”

Having dismissed the
express rider with these words, Major Gordon called Uncle Lawrence
aside, and communicated the intelligence he had received. He
concluded by saying, “So it will be impossible for me, as you see,
to give you any assistance at present in tracking the refugees. The
object of their return here, however, is now apparent. They all keep
up communications with the royal forces, and having heard of this
expedition, have swarmed here to plunder at will if the enemy should
succeed. Under these circumstances, the shortest way to drive the
vermin from the region, is to strike at the royal forces; for if we
defeat them, the refugees can afterwards be easily mastered in
detail. Even, however, if my judgment continued in favor of your
proposal, my orders would forbid my entering on any such enterprise
at this juncture.”

Uncle Lawrence
answered promptly,

“You are right. My
old blood warms, too, at the news of this expedition. What! the
tories coming to attack us, in our own river, and to burn down our
very houses. God helping me,” he said, glancing reverently upwards,
and then striking his gun emphatically, “I’ll march myself
against the invaders. You’ll take, me, Major, I spose?”

“Gladly,”
replied our hero, seizing the old man’s hand, and shaking it
warmly. “It is what I would have desired, above all things else;
but could not have presumed to ask, considering your years. Your
example will be worth fifty good men to me. When such as you march,
who can hold back?”

“Strike while the
iron’s hot, then,” pithily said Uncle Lawrence. “Call for
volunteers right off, Major. There’s a dozen idle fellows here that
might go as well as not; and will, maybe, if you tell the news
straight out, and say, too, that every man’s wanted.”

Taking the old man’s
hint, the Major stepped out in front of the house, just as everybody
was crowding, full of curiosity, to see the express rider depart; and
having waited till the messenger dashed off, he proceeded to impart
the contents of the despatch, after which, in a short, but stirring
speech, he called for volunteers.

No sooner had he
finished than Uncle Lawrence, who had stood leaning on his gun, as if
idly listening, stepped forward, and taking off his cap, remained a
moment gazing at the crowd in silence, the wind waving his long,
thin, silvery locks.

The action drew
every eye upon him. All saw that he had something to say, and waited
for it respectfully.

“Neighbors,” he
said, looking around with simple dignity, “here stands the first
volunteer.”

At this unexpected
declaration—unexpected, however, only because of the veteran’s
age, for otherwise it was in keeping with his whole life—the
audience, after a pause of silent admiration, broke forth into an
enthusiastic cheer.

The old man’s eyes
brightened. “And now,” he continued, “who’ll go with me to
fight for our homes, our wives, our darters, and our babies? Liberty
or death!” And he waved his cap around his head. “Huzza!”

“I’ll go—and
I—and I,” cried almost every voice, as the speakers rushing
forward, grasped first his hand and then that of Major Gordon; for
the effect of his appeal was electric. “Liberty or death! Liberty
or death!” And the welkin rung with the reiterated shout.

“That’s what I
expected,” said the Major, when silence had been procured again.
“That’s what I expected—after such an example—from such brave
fellows and such good friends to their country. The right way, my
lads, when an enemy is about, is to march boldly to meet him, and not
wait to be smoked out like a fox in his hole. One more huzza for
liberty or death,” he continued, leading off the shout; “and now
every man arm himself, taking plenty of powder and ball; and be ready
to set out within an hour. We must reach the Neck by nightfall, or
earlier, if we can.”

The crowd dispersed
at this, though not till they had given nine cheers, three for Uncle
Lawrence, three for Major Gordon, and three for General Washington.

In little more than
an hour, nearly the whole available male population of the Forks had
rendezvoused in front of Major Gordon’s lodgings; and boats having
been provided, as affording the speediest method of reaching the
Neck, they pushed off, with a round of huzzas to cheer the hearts of
their wives and sweethearts left behind.

Uncle Lawrence had
not even returned home to acquaint his family with his intentions. He
had, however, despatched a lad to perform this duty, for which he had
not time himself. The youngster passed directly in front of the
mansion at Sweetwater, in the execution of this task; but as the
inhabitants were regarded as being tories at heart, he forbore to
communicate his news.

Meantime, Major
Gordon, and his veteran companion, little imagined the peril that
threatened Miss Aylesford. The idea of so daring an outrage as the
abduction of Kate would never have suggested itself to them under any
circumstances; but in fact, they were both so engrossed by the news
of the threatened invasion, that they thought of nothing but
repulsing it. It was long after the Forks had faded in the distance,
before even Major Gordon, hero as he was, remembered our heroine; and
though, after this, her image often recurred to him, it was with no
suspicion that she was less secure from harm than the queen on her
throne.

As they descended
the river, the Americans stopped at the various farmhouses on the
shore, to give notice of the British expedition. At the principal
settlement, Major Gordon landed in person, and directed that
sentinels should be posted to watch ascending and descending boats.

“There are more or
less disaffected persons above,” he said, “who may seek to join
the enemy or carry information to him, so that it is important that a
strict watch be kept and every boat stopped. This is so necessary
that we shall leave a few men with you till your neighbors can rally.
If more than a dozen come in, however, send on the balance to the
Neck, where every musket will be wanted.”

CHAPTER XXIX.

CHESTNUT NECK

“The sky

Is overcast, and musters muttering thunder.” —Byron.

“I heard the wrack,

As earth and sky would mingle.” —Milton.

The Neck was a
tongue of land, which, jutting out into the tide, and surrounded on
two sides by salt marshes, formed the last piece of solid ground as
the voyager descended the river. As the crow flies, this point was
but a few miles from the bay. But the navigator, after leaving the
Neck, practically had to conquer many a weary league before he
reached the Atlantic, the stream winding, in sinuous turns, in and
out among the low meadows, before it finally attained its
destination.

On this bit of fast
land a few scattering houses had been built, the principal one being
about a hundred yards from the water’s edge. Cornfields extended
for some distance inland, where they were met by dense woods, which
stretched on both sides, wherever there was solid ground, as far as
the eye could see. A few fine old chestnut trees, growing in a clump
near the extreme end of the point, made the spot a land-mark, visible
for miles up and down the stream.

The neck of land
formed, on its upper side, a little bay, in which were now disposed
about thirty dismantled merchant vessels. Bales of goods were piled
upon the shore, as if just unloaded; while others were being hurried
into the neighboring store-houses. At least five hundred men were
already collected, when Major Gordon reached the rendezvous. They
were all busy, for those who were not engaged in securing the cargos
of the prizes, were occupied in throwing up a rude earthen breastwork
for the defence of the place.

Among the first to
welcome our hero was the old waterman, Mullen, whom the reader will
recollect as having been with him, when Kate was rescued from the
wreck. Charley Newell was also there, but came forward more coyly,
and blushed like any girl when the Major complimented him for his
conduct on that occasion.

From these old
comrades our hero learned that the express rider had preceded him
several hours; that intelligence had already reached the settlements
on both sides of the river; and that the privateers had made good
their escape. Nothing, as yet, had been seen of the British.
Meantime, the whole country was rising, and Mullen predicted that,
before four and twenty hours, a thousand men would rendezvous at the
Neck.

“There’s no
danger of surprise?” said Major Gordon, interrogatively.

“We know the cut
of every sail on the river,” said Mullen, “and can tell a strange
one miles off. There isn’t a child even, hereabouts, who can’t
say whether a craft is ours or not, a’most as soon as he can pint
out a gray-back or a millet. The river makes a wide sweep, as maybe
you may remember, just below here, so that what’s but a mile right
across the mash hereaway, is a matter of three miles as the water
runs. You can see a sail an hour or more before she can reach the
Neck.”

Satisfied on this
point, and having posted sentinels at every proper point, so as to
provide against being surprised in the darkness, Major Gordon
dismissed his command to their quarters soon after nightfall; and
directly hundreds of men, fatigued by a hurried march, or a day of
severe labor in storing goods, were fast asleep, bivouacking around
him. Slumber was not, however, for his eyes. Though he scarcely
expected an attack before the following day, even if then, the
anxiety natural to his position kept him awake. He paced slowly up
and down, hour after hour, under the shadows of the chestnut trees,
now listening to the sentry’s cry of “all’s well,” and now to
the low plash of the tide as it swept past the point. Or he stood,
with folded arms, cooling his heated brow in the night air, or gazing
dreamily over the vast and silent expanse of salt meadows between him
and the ocean, as they were vaguely seen in the starlight.
Occasionally he went the rounds personally. At other times, he leaned
against one of the old chestnuts, and gave himself up to reflection,
Kate dividing his thoughts nearly equally with the responsibilities
of his command.

The morning dawned,
close and misty. The fog hung low and thick over the marshes, or lay
packed, like aerial fleeces, upon the stream. Now and then a faint
breeze would wave it gently, as when a light curtain is stirred by
the wind; and here and there it eddied and undulated, apparently
without cause. The atmosphere was warm, almost stifling.

“An enemy might
steal on us now, like a thief in the night,” was Uncle Lawrence’s
morning salutation to Major Gordon. “The fog’s so thick it looks
as if one might cut it with a knife.”

“It’s a’most
as bad as the fogs off Newfoundland,” put in Mullen, coming up,
“where the Marblehead fishermen have a saying they can make steps
in ‘em, as if they were rock. Ha! ha!”

“When I was at
Newport,” remarked Major Gordon, joining in the humor of the
moment, “in the beginning of the war—and Newport’s famous for
its fogs, you know—they told me the girls used to hang their heads
out of the windows, whenever there was a fog, to bleach their
complexions; and certainly the ladies there look almost like
wax-work.” And thus speaking, he laughingly passed on.

“Like wax-work!”
said Mullen, contemptuously. “Give me an honest tan on the face. A
woman ain’t good for much that can’t dig potatoes, or maybe hold
a plough a bit, while her husband’s out a fishin’. In these
parts, at any rate, a man don’t want a wife that he has to keep in
a glass case.”

“Every one to his
taste,” interposed Uncle Lawrence. “Now there’s Miss Aylesford
would stand but a poor chance digging potatoes with them white little
hands of hern, yet she’s a brave gal for all that, as you know, Mr.
Mullen.”

“Ay, ay, that do
I. Lord A’mighty, how beautiful she looked, when she ran for’ard
on that ere wreck to cast off the cable. What a pictur she’d a
made. There’s nothing in my old woman’s family Bible as fine.”

As the day wore on,
the fog lifted, and Major Gordon’s anxiety was relieved by
discovering no signs of the foe. Aware of his as yet insufficient
means of defence, he wished to postpone the struggle as long as
possible. For though he had several hundred men under his command,
and though the number was hourly being augmented, they were wholly
undisciplined, and the breastwork, which might have aided him
materially, was still unfinished.

Meantime, he urged
forward the construction of the fortification, often personally
assisting the laborers. He hoped, by another day, to have the
defences finished, in which case he thought he could make good his
post, even if Pulaski should fail to come up. Nevertheless, he was
not over-sanguine. For the thousand disciplined soldiers, marines,
and sailors, whom the British were despatching against him, were not
to be despised by a brave and prudent commander. Two-thirds of his
men had never seen fire; and though their patriotism was
unquestionable, no leader, he well knew, could count certainly on
such troops.

When, at last, noon
arrived, and the fortifications were pronounced half-finished, and
when, having swept the river below with his glass, no enemy was seen,
Major Gordon went to his meal with something like relief.

Clouds had been
hovering all day, however, around the horizon, portending rain; and
more than once low growls of thunder had come up faintly from the
distance. While the men were at dinner, the threatening vapors
culminated, and a storm, as sudden as it was violent, broke upon the
little camp. The Major was seated at his meal, in the “best parlor”
of the principal dwelling, when his attention was aroused by the
unexpected darkness that fell across the room. Almost immediately
there came a rush of wind, which dashed the sand against the
window-pane like showers of fine shot, while the enormous chestnuts
were heard swaying and moaning as if twisted and tortured almost
beyond their powers of endurance. Rushing to the casement he saw the
air filled with a ghastly dust, through which the light looked lurid,
as if the Judgment Day had come. The young saplings were bending like
reeds; while some cattle, which had been driven into the camp to be
slaughtered, had broken loose, and now ran wildly about, tearing up
the loose soil and bellowing in affright: and overhead, the birds,
scared from their noontide shelter, flew hither and thither blindly.

All at once a dead
silence fell upon the scene. The wind ceased as if by the command of
some fell magician. This quiet was, however, even more awful than the
preceding turmoil. It was, indeed, as if all things had come to their
last gasp, and earth wanted but the word to dissolve forever.
Suddenly this ominous stillness was broken by a terrific clap of
thunder bursting almost overhead. Simultaneously a vivid streak of
lightning, that filled the whole room with dazzling light, and
blinded Major Gordon for a moment, shot to the ground just in front
of the garden fence; the earth opened, ploughed up for yards on
either side by the red bolt, and then, while a dense smoke rose, or
seemed to the dizzy eyesight to rise from the spot, the house
apparently rocked to its foundations, and the firmament shook, while
peal on peal reverberated into the distance, as if thousands of
artillery wagons were jolting at full gallop down the pavement of
heaven.

Involuntarily Major
Gordon sprang back from the window, while the servant girl, who had
been waiting on him, ran screaming from the room, crying that the end
of the world had come. Then a rushing sound was heard, and a burst of
rain followed, as if the windows of the sky had been opened, the rain
dancing on the road in huge drops, and hissing as though it fell on a
furnace. Hail was soon mixed with the descending water, which now
poured down in sheeted cataracts, and with the roar of an avalanche.
The icy particles, as big as hazel-nuts, rattled on the roof like
buckshot, cracked the frail glass of the window-panes, and heaped
themselves up in the ruts, like pebbles left by a mountain torrent.
The trees once more bent in the driving gale, and the rain, swept
almost horizontally along, smoked over the fast land and vanished in
clouds of gray mist across the distant marshes.

For more than an
hour, the rain continued to fall. The fury of the tempest, however,
began to subside long before that period had elapsed. At last Major
Gordon ventured out. The storm had crossed the country diagonally,
and was now moving towards the Atlantic, its gloomy mass extending
along the eastern horizon and far up towards the zenith, black as a
funeral hearse and procession. No sable pall could have descended
more wall-like, over the salt marshes and river below the Neck, than
did the ebon clouds of the tempest. Continually, down this inky
curtain, crinkled the zig-zag lightning, its white-heat blaze
irradiating all around for an instant, and then leaving it seemingly
duskier than before. Wherever the storm came down, in this way, on
the river, a murky glare fringed its lower edge, diffusing a ghostly
reflection on the troubled waves in front of it. Every few minutes
the thunder boomed from out of this black ominous mass, sounding
fainter as the storm receded, however, until at last it subsided into
a low, sullen growl, as when a baffled lion retires reluctantly into
the night before the hunters.

Suddenly, around the
nearest bend of the river, a fleet of boats was seen advancing
towards the Neck. The rowers were evidently men-of-wars men; while
intermingled among them were the red coats of British soldiers and
the caps of British marines. The whole number of the boats was not
less than thirty, and Major Gordon, at a hasty glance, estimated the
entire force of the assailants at nearly a thousand.

The enemy had
approached undetected, under cover of the tempest, and in consequence
of having no sails; and was now within a quarter of a mile. Not a
minute was to be lost in preparing for defence. Our hero, therefore,
hurriedly ordered the alarm to be sounded, and began to marshal his
men, eager to do the best he could to avert the consequences of this
surprise.

CHAPTER XXX.

THE PURSUIT

“White as a white sail on a dusky sea,

When half the horizon’s clouded and half free,

Fluttering between the dim wave and the sky,

Is hope’s last gleam in man’s extremity.” —Byron.

“Hope, for a time,

Suns the young floweret in its gladsome light,

And it looks flourishing—a little while—

Til passed.” —Miss London.

It will be
remembered that we left Kate a few chapters back, about to be
embarked on the river.

Clouds had been
hovering, all the latter part of the morning, around the horizon; and
about noon these had collected into the thunder-storm, which we have
seen pass over Chestnut Neck. Kate and her captors, however, escaped
the tempest, it being almost an hour in advance of them.

With rapid strokes
the refugees urged their boat along, as if desirous to gain their
destination, whatever it was, before nightfall. For nearly an hour
they continued to advance in this way, between shores still overgrown
with forest, with here and there a small clearing peeping out on the
river. At last, on turning a sudden bend in the stream, they came in
sight of a considerable settlement. A small field piece was mounted
near the bank; and quite a number of armed men lounged about; while a
couple of sentinels marched to and fro behind the cannon. On a
flag-staff, in front of one of the houses, floated the stars and
stripes of the confederated states.

Kate had noticed,
that, as this settlement opened to view, the refugees had kept away,
as close as possible to the other side of the river: but scarcely had
they rounded the point and came fairly in view of the sentinels, when
a hail sounded across the water.

To pass this armed
party was almost impossible, for the boat had still a considerable
distance to go before it would be in front of the dwellings: and even
if it should safely reach and pass that point, it would be within
range of their muskets for a long distance below, to say nothing of
the field piece. The heart of our heroine beat high with hope. Here,
when she least expected it, was succor. For she resolved, the instant
the boat came to, to declare herself and claim protection, even if
Arrison had his pistol at her heart.

The refugees
appeared as disconcerted as she was overjoyed. They looked at each
other and at their leader in dismay; but continued pulling lustily,
still hugging the opposite shore. They were not allowed to go far,
however, unchecked; for the sentinels, finding their summons
disregarded, fired at the boat; and the ball of one of them passing
close to Arrison, he suddenly ordered a halt.

“This is the
devil’s own work,” he said, savagely. “Keep still, Miss, or
I’ll put my knife into you,” he added, as Kate seized the
opportunity to waive her handkerchief; and he snatched the
handkerchief from her. “They are getting ready to fire their
field-piece. We shall never be able to pass them. Who’d have
thought that the rebel knaves would have rallied so quickly.”

“We’d better
turn back,” said one of the men, who seemed the leading person
after Arrison. “It’s been slack water for some time, and the tide
will begin to run up directly; it’s making up, in fact, already,
along shore. Before we could get by, with no wind and a head tide,
they’d smash our boat to pieces with their cursed gun.”

“Back let it be
then,” said Arrison, after a minute’s angry reflection. “We’ll
lose the bounty, lads; but,” he continued, as if by a sudden
thought, “we’ll have the prize; and gad! I’ll find a way to
make that pay you better than if we had gone on.”

A burst of brutal
merriment from the man was the answer to this sally, which, though
partly enigmatical to Kate, had yet sufficient meaning to her to
terrify her beyond description. For the words seemed to imply that
the return of the ruffians would involve her in a more dreadful peril
than even that which she had escaped.

The sentinels had
remained quiet, watching the boat during this pause, because
evidently expecting obedience to their summons. But when the refugees
turned her head up the stream, and began vigorously propelling her in
that direction, there was a general stir on shore, and several
persons, hastily running to the bank, fired their muskets at the
retreating boat. The balls came whistling by, and one even struck the
gunwale not far from Kate. Simultaneously the field piece was trained
after the fugitives, while a man ran to the nearest house as if for
fire to discharge it.

“Pull, pull for
your lives, my boys,” shouted Arrison, leaning forward and
assisting the man who pulled the stroke oar. “If we once get round
the point again, we are safe.”

Kate saw, from the
velocity with which they moved, that this object would soon be
gained. She feared also that the patriots had not seen her, and would
probably not pursue the boat. With the quick decision and boldness of
her character she rose suddenly from her seat, and screamed for help,
making gestures of appeal to those on shore.

But, almost
instantaneously, Arrison, who had seen her rise, struck her a violent
blow, which felled her nearly senseless into the sternsheets. Here
she lay, comparatively helpless for a while, stifling the moan which
pain extracted from her.

Meantime, however,
her scream had been heard on shore. The firing of the field piece was
stopped. But, in its place, a boat, which lay near the bank, was
instantly manned by several of the men, and a pursuit begun. The
refugees had, indeed, a considerable start; but so energetically did
the patriots row, that, before the former had got half a mile beyond
the bend, the latter were seen rounding it gallantly in full chase.

The struggle soon
became one of thrilling interest. The refugees had the lightest boat,
but were fatigued with their day’s toil, and with their exertions
at the oars in descending the river; while the patriots were entirely
fresh. In a short while, consequently, it became apparent that the
former were losing ground.

Arrison, at this,
broke into a torrent of oaths, and urged his crew afresh.

“Pull, pull,” he
cried; “do you want to taste cold hemp, you rascals?”

The stimulus of
these words produced a perceptible influence on the speed of the
boat. The refugees, stripped to their shirts, and with their chests
and arms bared, toiled at the oars till the big drops of perspiration
gathered like beads upon them. The stout ashen blades, with which
they propelled their craft, bent until they seemed about to snap in
two. The boat itself fairly leaped along, the water surging under her
bows, or whirling in roaring eddies from the rudder.

“We hold our own
now,” cried Arrison, swaying to the strokes of the oarsmen. “Pull,
pull, and we’ll gain on them. There, we made something at the short
bend. No,” he added, suddenly, his inflamed face reddening still
more, “they cut across after us. Pull, pull, I say,” he shouted,
“or we are taken.”

As he spoke, he
glanced over his shoulder continually and in perceptible anxiety. The
men knew that the chase was for life and death; and rallying all
their strength, they struggled on.

Meantime the
exertions of the other crew were not a whit behind those of the
refugees. Their helmsman could be seen stimulating them by pointing
to Kate; and continually one or more of them glanced over his
shoulder to see how the chase went on. The water flashed and
glittered in the fading sunlight, as it fell showered from the blades
of their oars; while the cataract of foam that rolled under the bows
of their craft, proved with what velocity they were driving her
along.

“Give way,
stronger and longer,” shouted Arrison, looking over his shoulders
for the thirtieth time during the last half hour, “they gain again
on us. Give way, or we are lost.”

They had just
crossed from one side to another of the river, in order to take the
shortest cut up the next reach, and Arrison had confidently expected
to see their pursuers follow in his track. But the patriots, by
selecting a somewhat different course, had apparently secured more of
the current, for they were now rapidly coming up, lessening the
distance between the two boats astonishingly.

The refugees, like
hounds incited by a fresh blast of the hunter’s horn, sprang anew
to their task; and for awhile their boat perceptibly increased her
swiftness. But the pursuers, observing how much they had gained by
their helmsman’s dexterity, cheered lustily, and stretched to their
strong blades, like thorough-breds coming down the last quarter.
Gaining steadily now at every stroke, they rapidly approached, huzza
following huzza, in the confidence of approaching victory.

Much of this
advantage was evidently owing to their helmsman, who, by still
continuing his adroit manoeuvres, constantly cut off more or less of
the distance, or availed himself of more powerful currents of the
tide. He plainly knew the river even better than Arrison.

The countenance of
the refugees had been darkening with sullen despair for some time,
when at last Arrison’s lieutenant broke the silence, by addressing
their leader.

“They gain on us,
captain,” he said.

“Yes,” was
Arrison’s curt reply.

“That fellow knows
how to steer.”

“Yes! curse him.”

Nothing could exceed
the intense bitterness with which this was pronounced.

“Couldn’t you
manage to put a ball through him?” continued the lieutenant.

Arrison half started
from his seat as if he had himself been shot.

“By the Lord,”
he cried, a gleam of savage delight breaking over his face, “it’s
the very thing. Why didn’t I think of it?”

He seized a loaded
musket as he spoke, turned, took rapid but sure aim, and fired.

It was all done so
quickly, that Kate, who had sprung up as soon as she comprehended the
plan, in order to knock down the refugee’s gun, had not time to
effect her purpose, before the report sounded heavily on the evening
air.

“He’s hit,”
cried Arrison, with a hurrah, not seeming to notice Kate, and leaving
his lieutenant, who pulled the stroke oar, to drag her down again.
“See, they stop.”

As he spoke, the
crew of the pursuing boat ceased rowing, and the two nearest rushed
aft, for the coxswain had fallen across the seat, as if dead. When
they lifted him up he had every appearance of being lifeless.

For the first time,
on that agitating day, Kate burst into tears. The hopes of rescue,
but a moment before, had amounted almost to a certainty; but now it
would be impossible, she knew, for the pursuers to overtake the
refugees.

The patriots
apparently had come to the same conclusion, for one of them suddenly
took up a musket, as if their only hope was in disabling the refugees
in turn; but just as he was about to fire, a companion knocked the
gun down, pointing vehemently, as if at Kate.

“Oh! if they would
but disregard me and fire,” she cried to herself.

But her agonized
exclamation was in vain. After a few moments, apparently employed in
eager consultation, the patriots turned the head of their boat down
stream, and reluctantly gave up the chase.

All this time the
refugees had been rapidly increasing the distance between them and
their pursuers. But at this sight, they burst into a huzza.

“Now you can take
it more easily, lads,” cried Arrison. “These fellows have had
pepper enough for their supper.”

The men laughed at
his coarse wit, and relaxing their exertions, rowed slowly up the
river, wiping the perspiration from their heated brows; and in the
general hilarity, Kate’s daring attempt at interference was either
pardoned or forgotten.

Faint from physical
exhaustion, from the blow she had received, and from the utter
destruction of her lately awakened hopes, Kate lay, or rather
reclined in the sternsheets, where she had been thrust down by the
lieutenant. More than once, in her despair, she was tempted to throw
herself overboard and seek refuge in death. Perhaps Arrison suspected
her of such a purpose, for he kept his eye almost constantly on her,
so that, even if she had made the attempt, he would have been able
instantly to frustrate it.

The night now began
to fall. Yet, for nearly an hour, the refugees continued to urge
forward their boat. At last, landing on the southern bank of the
river, they rudely bade Kate arise. Resistance was in vain. While
Arrison proceeded to cut off the superfluous part of her
riding-skirt, so that she might walk, one of the gang took her by
either arm. In this way they led, or rather dragged her, over rough
wood-paths, and by circuitous ways, deep into the forest.

After a journey that
appeared to her to extend to hours, they reached a house, surrounded
on all sides by swamps. A savage bloodhound came forth baying to
welcome them, eyeing Kate curiously, and by no means in a friendly
spirit.

“Down, sir, down,”
said Arrison, addressing the dog: and entering the house he said to
his prisoner, “we have but two rooms here. You will occupy that,”
and he pointed to an inner one.

With these words, he
pushed her unceremoniously in.

CHAPTER XXXI.

THE REFUGEE REVEL

“Beyond the infinite and boundless reach

Of mercy, if thou didst this deed of death,

Art thou damned.” —Shakespeare.

“I’ll lay a scene of blood,

Shall make this dwelling horrible to nature.” — Otway.

Our heroine was so
completely prostrated by physical fatigue and mental excitement, that
she sank into the first chair which presented itself, when the door
closed; and covering her face with her hands, remained in a sort of
stupor, till she was aroused by some person endeavoring to effect an
entrance. Starting to her feet, she was only in time to see Arrison
enter, bearing some food, which having deposited he was about to
address her, when voices were heard calling him from without, on
which he abruptly departed.

Those few minutes of
rest had, however, partially refreshed Kate, and, alive now to her
unprotected situation, she looked about her to see if there was any
prospect of escape, and failing in this, if she could preserve her
apartment from intrusion. Though she had eaten nothing since
breakfast, the instinct of safety predominated over that of hunger,
and therefore she left the coarse, and by no means tempting food,
untasted for the present.

Her chamber was
comparatively small, quite one half of it being taken up by the bed,
which, to her surprise, was neatly arranged, as if female hands had
been occupied about it. Opposite its foot, and where the light from
the solitary window fell strongest, stood a dressing-table, made of
common pine, but cushioned on top, and covered with spotless dimity,
another proof that some person of her own sex, and one not without
germs of refinement at least, occupied the apartment generally. This
discovery cheered Kate’s spirits wonderfully. Her naturally
sanguine character whispered to her that, with a woman by, she could
not be foully wronged.

But this bright
coloring to her thoughts was not destined to be of long duration. An
examination of the room satisfied her that escape was impossible.
There were no outlets but the window and the door, and while the
former was secured without, the latter led, as we have seen, into the
common apartment. There was but one consolatory feature, which was
that the door opened inwards, so that by barricading it, ingress
would be effectually prevented, except with considerable difficulty.

The refugees,
meantime, appeared to be preparing for a debauch. They had called for
something to eat, as soon as they arrived, and Kate now thought that
she heard a woman’s step, moving about as if preparing a meal. She
listened in vain, however, to detect a female voice amid the
increasing din of jokes, laughter, snatches of coarse songs, and
noisy conversation. The uproar, however, served her purpose, since in
consequence of it, she was enabled to move the bedstead unheard, and
barricade the door with that comparatively heavy article of
furniture. After this, reflecting that she would need all her
strength, she forced herself to partake of some of the food which had
been brought by Arrison.

The clink of
glasses, and the increasing boisterousness of the mirth, showed that
the refugees, in the contiguous apartment, had now finished their
meal and were beginning their debauch in earnest. It was impossible
for Kate, in such close vicinity to the revellers, not to hear much
that was said. Her attention was soon arrested by her own name being
mentioned in connexion with that of her cousin: and listening with
awakened curiosity, she gradually made out that she had been betrayed
into the hands of her captors by Aylesford himself. She had not
dreamed that such baseness and perfidy could exist in the world. With
ashen lips she asked herself, “if this was the conduct of her own
relative, who was a gentleman by birth and education, what had she to
expect from a ruffian like Arrison?”

Breathless with
interest she listened to what should come next. At last, after much
had passed, but little of which, however, she could distinguish, in
the uproar, though that little confirmed the connexion of Aylesford
with the murderers, the conversation took a new turn, and now
consisted principally of boasts of their exploits, on the part of the
ruffians, alternated with jests at each other’s courage. The
narratives of their several butcheries, though loathsome to Kate as a
woman, were yet terribly fascinating to her as a prisoner in the
unrestrained power of such villains. On their own showing her captors
had nothing of human mercy left in their hearts. The gratification of
all unbridled passions was the acknowledged object of their lives;
and they appeared to have been collected together from all parts of
the state, lured to this comparatively remote quarter, by the
prospect of increased booty under the leadership of Arrison.

“You should have
seen how Steve Ball prayed and begged for his life,” said one, with
a mocking laugh, alluding to one of his exploits, “when we hung him
at Bergen Point. He wouldn’t believe we were in earnest for a good
while; for he had brought provisions to sell under a promise of a
safe return, but when the time was up, and he saw the tree and cord,
he bellowed like a bull. If we’d only give him an hour, he cried,
or a half, or a quarter. Ha! ha! ‘twas better than a play. But we
told him we’d no time to lose, and that if he wanted a parson, one
of us was ready to serve him in that line. When we turned him off, I
put a pistol into his hand, telling him it should never be said we
sent him into the other world without arms.”

There was a roar of
general laughter, at the end of which Arrison said, “why didn’t
you tell him, that when he met the devil, he might cry to Old Nick to
stand and deliver.”

“Be Jabers,”
cried another, whose brogue betrayed his birth-place, “you’d have
seen the rare sport, if you’d been with me, and some other of the
boys, when we picked Major Dennis’ feathers for him, down here
jist, by Manasquan river. The Major wasn’t at home, the more’s
the pity, for we’d have strung him up in no time, and done the job
nately too; but the old woman was, and though one cried out to let
the rebel go, the rest of us determined that she should hang, bad
cess to her. And we took her own dirty old bed cord, and tied her up
by the neck to a cedar; och! you should have seen dancing there, as
merry as at a fair!”

“But I’ve heard
she got off after all,” interposed the lieutenant. “You were so
busy filling your pockets you forgot her; the rope slipped, and she
made off to the swamp with only a fright.”

“It’s the true
word you say,” answered the narrator, not a whit abashed. “But
now we’ll have the fun of hanging her agin, which couldn’t have
been if she hadn’t got off.”

Another burst of
laughter followed this. Then one of the company said,

“What’s become
of Jack Stetson? as jolly a blade as ever lived. I thought, captain,
I’d meet him here, sure. He went over to Maurice river with you,
didn’t he?”

“Yes,” answered
Arrison, “but he was in that affair with Riggins. If I’d been
there it would have ended differently.”

“With Riggins? I
haven’t heard of it.”

“Why, Jack and a
lot of others, without my knowledge, made up their minds to attack a
shallop belonging to a whig named Riggins. Now I’d have let Riggins
alone, if he had let’ me alone in turn, for he’s as big as an ox
and as strong. But Jack thought he’d frighten the whigs by making a
bold dash, so he attempts to board the shallop, as she was going down
the river. Gad! though all of Riggins’ men jumped overboard, or
skulked into the cabin, except one man, the old pine-knot stood to
it; fired twice, and then clubbing his gun, knocked our lads in the
head as fast as they attempted to board. He settled poor Jack with
one blow. They say too that he thinks more of having smashed his gun
than of cracking so many skulls. Some of these days I’d like to
draw a sight on him.”

“Well, if Jack is
gone,” was the answer, “and here’s to him, I’m glad to say
that Parson Caldwell, the canting scoundrel, went to the devil before
him.” And he proceeded, amid shouts of approving laughter, to
recapitulate a tragedy, with which the whole country was ringing, of
which the Rev. James Caldwell, one of the best patriots, purest
clergymen, and most upright men of his day, was the victim.

“He was always
preachin’ agin the King, and agin us in particular,” said
another. “He act’lly used his meetin’ house for a hospital. He
oughter ha’ been shot when his wife was.”

“Gad,” said
Arrison, his eye gleaming with tiger-like ferocity, “I’d liked to
have been the fellow that finished her. She was as bad as him, if not
worse. She was praying, wasn’t she?” he added, laughing
sardonically. “Praying with her young whelp, Smith, when she was
shot by one of your fellows through a window.”

“Yes,” replied
the outlaw appealed to, “and arterwards we threw her body into the
road, where it lay all day in the sun, before we’d allow ‘em to
take it away. If a few more were sarved in the same fashion, it would
be better for all of us, as well as for the King.”

“They ought to
have their throats cut, the whole spawn of them, women and children
too,” said another savagely, striking the table with his clenched
fist. “There’ll never be peace till there is.”

“Nor booty for
us,” cried another, with a laugh.

With a shudder of
horror, Kate reflected that the men who applauded these atrocities,
had her now in their power; and that to their natural ferocity the
stimulus of intoxication was rapidly being added. Involuntarily she
began to grope about the room, hoping to find a knife, or other
weapon of defence. “But you haven’t told us,” said the
lieutenant, after awhile, addressing Arrison, “what you’re going
to do, to make up the plunder we were to get by taking this gal down
the river. Will you put her to ransom?”

“Better than
that,” was the answer. “I intend to marry her.”

“Marry her? But
where’s the parson?”

“I’m parson
enough.”

“Whew! that will
be playing, high, low, Jack and the game. But you ought to double the
pay,” he continued, “if we help you to such an heiress.”

“And such a
devilish fine bit of woman flesh,” put in another. “What an ankle
she has! If the captain hadn’t began the affair, I’d say we ought
to toss up for her; and maybe we ought as it is.”

“Hold your
tongue,” said Arrison, with a frown that knit his forbidding brows
into dark, red knots. “She’s mine, and there’s an end of it.
But I’ll come down handsomely, lads” he added, seeing signs of
discontent. “I was a fool ever to think of carrying her off for
Aylesford. In my country, many’s the rich heiress that’s married
in this way by gentlemen; and gad! as I too was born a gentleman, I
mean to do the same.”

“The captain’s a
broth of a boy,” interrupted the Milesian. “I’ll help to do the
thing nately, and play praist if he says it.”

“You’ll find her
a restive filly, though,” laughed the lieutenant, brutally, “if
she is often like she was in the boat.”

“I know a way to
tame her,” was Arrison’s reply. “I’m used to breaking in her
sex; and have bitted and spurred worse fillies than she is. She’ll
be glad enough to marry me, before I’ve done with her.” And he
burst into a roar of drunken derision, in which his hearers joined.

The reader can but
faintly imagine the feelings of our heroine as she listened to this
conversation. More than once she started to her feet in wild alarm,
as the uproar occasionally deepened, thinking for the moment, that
the imbruted wretch was about to force his way into her chamber.

“Oh, God!” she
cried, clasping her hands and raising her eyes above, “is there no
help?”

CHAPTER XXXII.

THE ATTACK

“It was a dread, yet spirit-stirring sight!

The billows foamed beneath a thousand oars.” —Scott.

“Though few the numbers—there’s the strife,

That neither spares, nor speaks for life.” —Byron.

The British advanced
in the most gallant manner to the attack of Major Gordon’s
position, each boat keeping its place as carefully in the line as
soldiers on parade. In a few minutes the fleet turned the point of
the river, and came dashing up to the landing, the water rolling
under the bows and the oars keeping steady time. The sunshine, which
now began to stream from the west, glanced from the muskets; was
reflected from the bright buttons of the soldiers; and flashed back
from the millions of drops showered from the ashen blades, till the
river seemed alive with diamonds, sparkling as they fell.

Major Gordon, by
this time, had arranged his men behind the half-finished breastwork,
which, being within a short distance of the river, was intended to
command the landing.

“Look to your
priming carefully,” were his last words. “Let nobody fire till I
give the word; then every other man. When I give command again, let
those who have reserved, fire. Everything depends on steadiness.
Remember Bunker Hill.”

He had scarcely
finished passing along the line, repeating these orders, when the
boats dashed up to the landing, their crews giving three cheers; and
immediately the British, numbering several hundred, began to marshal
themselves on dry ground, as coolly as if Major Gordon and his little
force were a thousand miles away. Our hero saw that not a moment was
to be lost. Springing upon the rampart, where he could be seen by
all, he waved his sword and gave the command to fire.

Instantaneously a
volley of musketry rattled on the air; a stream of fire ran down the
line; and the rampart was covered with light blue smoke, which the
breeze wafted slowly away. Other muskets followed in irregular
succession, when the firing ceased.

At first the enemy
had staggered: but the stern voice of the British commander, crying,
“close up, close up,” they moved steadily forward, with fixed
bayonets, giving a gallant cheer. This was the moment for which Major
Gordon had reserved his second fire. He knew that if the enemy
reached the rampart, there would be but little prospect of a
successful defence.

Again, therefore,
leaping up on the breastwork, he waived his sword and shouted to
fire.

But no volley, as he
had expected, answered his command. Only a few dropping shots were
heard. His men, in the ardor common to raw troops, had been unable to
retain their fire before, and being flurried by the novelty of their
position had scarcely taken aim at all. Fifty good muskets, in fact,
would have done more execution than the hundreds which had been
discharged ineffectually, leaving scarcely a score serviceable now.

The British
discovered immediately the advantage which they possessed. Their
leader, springing in front, raised his blade, and pointing to the
Americans, called on his men, in words distinctly heard behind the
breastwork, to “drive the rebels to the woods.”

At the same instant
a heavy launch, which, armed with a swivel, had pulled around on the
flank of the fortification, began to open a galling fire on the
defenders.

“Stand to your
post,” shouted Major Gordon, observing that some of his men began
to waver under this unexpected assault. “Load and fire as quick as
you can. Beat them back with the butts of your muskets. Liberty or
death!”

The stirring cry;
the gallantry with which our hero exposed himself; and the firmness
which a few exhibited, headed by Uncle Lawrence and Mullen, stayed
the rout for awhile. The men hurriedly loaded and fired, each one for
himself. But in the excitement of their novel position in presence of
an enemy for the first time, they generally wasted their powder; and
in fact it was no uncommon thing for many a gun to be discharged
before the ball had been placed in it, while a few actually fired off
their ramrods.

Major Gordon saw all
this with feelings it is impossible to describe. As long, however, as
there was the remotest prospect of success, he omitted no effort to
repulse the foe. He rushed to and fro along the line, encouraging,
ordering, and appealing; now snatching a musket from a hesitating
defender and discharging it himself; and now heading a hand to hand
struggle, at an opening in the defences, where the British were
endeavoring to enter.

It was here that the
crisis of the conflict took place. In less time than we have taken to
describe it, the enemy had reached the foot of the ramparts, when the
cry became general that all was over, and most of the militiamen
sought safety in flight. Up to this point they had fought
courageously, even if with comparative inefficiency, but when they
saw the glittering bayonets, levelled in a serried line directly
under them, they recoiled in dismay. Not once in a hundred times,
indeed, can raw troops stand a bayonet charge. It is scarcely an
imputation on those undisciplined defenders of the Neck, that,
finding themselves without this weapon, they abandoned the
breastwork, leaving the position to its fate.

Not such, however,
was the conduct of Major Gordon and the few heroic followers, who,
either attached to him personally or gifted with more than ordinary
courage, rallied to the defence of the spot we have described. Here,
for the space of nearly thirty feet, the ramparts were unfinished:
and assailants and defenders consequently met on equal terms. At the
near approach of the enemy, the Major had flown to this spot, aware
of its weakness: and hither also had followed Uncle Lawrence, Mullen,
Charley Newell, and about a score of others, equally indomitable in
courage.

“Never give up the
gate,” cried Major Gordon, manfully opposing himself to the
glittering line of bayonets. “Stand fast about me. Liberty or
death!”

“Liberty or
death!” shouted Uncle Lawrence, swinging in the air his heavy
musket, which he had taken by the muzzle, and placing himself at the
side of our hero.

“Liberty or
death!” echoed the brave Mullen, holding his loaded piece ready,
with his finger on the trigger, and only waiting for a suitable foe
to fire.

“Liberty or
death!” repeated Charley Newell, as he pressed forward to the side
of the latter; and “Liberty or death!” cried every man of that
devoted band, rushing to this new Thermopylae.

It was a sight that
might well make the bravest pause, that little company of heroes,
thus declaring their readiness to make a rampart with their bodies.
Foremost of all stood Major Gordon, conspicuous in his blue and buff
uniform. His brow was knit; his eyes flashed; his mouth was rigid
with indomitable resolution. The next most striking figure was that
of Uncle Lawrence, who, having lost his hat in the melee, now stood
with his bare locks streaming in the wind; while his eye blazed with
all the fire of youth, and the usual wintry russet of his cheek was
flushed to vivid crimson.

At the aspect of
this little band, the serried line of bayonets came to a halt, and
for a moment the two parties stood breathlessly regarding each other.
The British, up to this crisis, confident of an easy victory,
recoiled at the expression in the faces and attitudes of the patriots
before them, as a party of hunters may be supposed to start back,
when, having followed the lion’s cubs to their den, they suddenly
hear the growl of the parent lioness, and discover her eyes gleaming
at them from the entrance.

It was only for a
moment, however, that they hesitated. An officer, who was but a few
paces distant, rushed to the spot, exclaiming that the Americans were
in full flight everywhere else, and that it needed only a bold push
to carry the works.

“Forward,
forward,” he cried, throwing himself into the very brunt of the
conflict. “Come on, the day’s our own.”

But, at that
instant, and before Major Gordon could measure swords with him,
Mullen discharged his gun, and the chivalric officer tumbled headlong
at the very feet of our hero. His example, however, had not been lost
upon his men; and the sight of his fallen body stimulated them to
madness. With a wild, angry cry, they dashed forwards, bearing
everything before them for an instant.

“Break in on their
line,” shouted Uncle Lawrence, as with a blow of his tremendous
gun, he struck down the bayonet of the soldier opposed to him.
“Liberty or death!” And with the words, he grasped his opponent
in mortal struggle.

“Close in, close
in,” cried Major Gordon, availing himself of the disorder caused by
Uncle Lawrence’s blow, to grapple with a soldier likewise. “Liberty
or death!”

In an instant all
was confusion. Nearly everywhere the patriots succeeded in breaking
the steel rampart before them, and in engaging hand to hand with the
enemy, though it was often at the cost of the lives of those who
attempted it. Foe soon became intermixed with friend. The cries of
“Liberty or death” were mingled with those of “God save the
King.” The shouts of the living rose to heaven simultaneously with
the groans of the wounded and the expiring gasp of the dying. Such
was the fury of the fight, that the combatants disappeared on either
side like grass before the scythe. Yet Uncle Lawrence and our hero
still remained unhurt, as if bearing charmed lives, and still led the
terrible strife. Each had long since overcome his first antagonist,
and was striking right and left in aid of others of the defenders
unequally matched or overpowered by numbers. Wherever the former
rushed, with his uplifted musket, it seemed as if a new Artimesius,
with his flail, had come; for his opponents went down before him like
oxen in the slaughterer’s stall. His voice was faint with shouting
the war-cry of his little band, “Liberty or death!” but his arms
appeared as nervous as ever, and his blows fell with crushing
rapidity and force.

But the defenders
were now reduced to a dozen men, and what could that number effect
against hundreds? Already the British had cleared the works
everywhere else, and now assailing Major Gordon and his party, in
flank, rear and front at once, soon left no hope of retreat, if
retreat had been even now the aim of our hero. But such was not his
purpose. Unappalled by the overpowering odds, he continued battling
stoutly, with Uncle Lawrence at his side, until a bayonet thrust
pinned him to the earth, and the assailants rushed in over his body.

CHAPTER XXXIII.

THE SACK OF CHESTNUT NECK

“Alas! poor country,

Almost afraid to know thyself.” —Shakespeare.

“But things like that, you know, must be

After a famous victory.” —Southey.

The British, being
thus masters of the field, proceeded to their work of destruction.
Their wounded had first to be removed indeed, and their dead buried;
but as there were few of the former and still fewer of the latter—the
chief defence having been by Major Gordon’s band—little time was
occupied in this duty.

The sun was still an
hour high, therefore, when the first torch was applied to the
store-houses and dwellings. Very soon the whole number were in
flames, with all their valuable contents. The combustible character
of the edifices, for they were built altogether of wood, and the
inflammable materials collected within the warehouses, rendered the
heat rapidly so intense that the troops were compelled to withdraw to
some distance, where they stood for a while watching the scene of
ruin, giving an occasional hurrah whenever a roof fell in. No other
persons were in sight, except a few women who watched, afar off, from
the edge of the wood, the destruction of their humble houses, and the
total loss of their scanty, but hard-earned household goods.

There had been
comparatively little breeze when the first torch was applied; but
before long the wind was roaring around the burning edifices, in
almost a gale. Swiftly the various store-houses succumbed to the
conflagration. One, which had been overlooked when the others were
fired, and to which no torch had been applied, resisted for some time
the contagion, standing up black and weather-beaten in the centre of
the burning circle, like some dark rock at sea amid the angry surges.
The shingled roof could be seen smoking for a long while, though
without any sign of fire within; but at last it flashed all at once
into flames, as when a train is touched; and, quick as thought, the
whole was in a blaze. Directly after, forked tongues of fire shot out
from under the eaves, and though they were gone in a moment, they
reappeared almost instantaneously. Next, the fire showed itself at
the windows, and then between the clap-boards; until finally it burst
out from the doorway, and curling upwards, covered the whole edifice
to the very top.

The conflagration
had now swept over nearly the entire settlement, sparing only a few
dwellings, which either stood too far off to be reached by the fire,
or were too inconsiderable to call down the vengeance of the
invaders. Thick masses of pitchy-black smoke rose in puffs, and
collecting overhead, afforded a canopy, impervious to the sunshine,
against which the lurid reflection from below shone with a dull red
glare. The leaves of the chestnuts, close by, were blackened and
shrivelled up by the heat; and at one time it seemed as if the old
trees would actually burst into a blaze. The spectacle had an almost
human interest added to it, by a few tamed pigeons, who, having been
harbored in the loft of the last store-house, were now seen flying
wildly to and fro, refusing to leave the vicinity of their old home,
circling around and around, crossing and re-crossing, until they
dropped one by one into the conflagration. It was pitiful, amid the
cheers of the British and the deep roar of the flames, to hear
occasionally the flapping of their wings as they ventured near to a
spectator, only however to fly immediately from their human enemy
back to their burning homes.

To increase the
terror of the scene, the dismantled ships, which had been fired soon
after the warehouses, speedily began to irradiate the river. The
flames mastered the vessels even more rapidly than they had the
buildings. The fire, once fairly started, shot up the masts, till it
soared above the round-top, licking up whatever bits of rigging had
been left, and rising, like the pointed spire of a Gothic cathedral,
needle-like into the sky. A thousand tongues of fire, hissing and
flashing, came and went; and then, darting into light, again hissed
and flashed once more for a moment or two, in as many different
points; after which an unbroken sheet of flame wrapped the entire
vessels above the bulwarks from sight. Continually bits of fire,
whirling off from one ship, alighted on another; while millions of
sparks rose in showers and floated to leeward, in startling relief
against the deep sable canopy, which now covered the sky above both
sea and land. Up the river, at a cable’s length from the burning
fleet, the smoke had settled down upon the stream like a fog,
obscuring the sun, and rendering the outlines of sky and water
undistinguishable. Occasionally fragments of wood, swept away by the
tide, were seen drifting into the gloom, like meteors of unknown and
terrible aspect floating through the darkness of space.

By nightfall most of
the warehouses were reduced to heaps of smouldering ruins, glowing
all over with fiery chinks as lava when it is half cooled. Every few
moments, however, one of these heaps would belch upward a huge column
of bituminous-looking smoke, after which flames would leap out at the
spot and the conflagration renew itself there for a while. The air
was heavy, almost choking, and impregnated with a pungent, stifling
odour indescribable.

The hulls of the
vessels, however, continued to burn brightly, though the masts and
rigging, where such had been left standing, had long since
disappeared in charred fragments that strewed the decks or dropped
sullenly into the stream. The wind, no longer nourished by the
powerful conflagration, which compels currents of air to its centre
as into the mouth of a furnace, had now almost entirely died away.
What little was left, drew up the stream; and in that direction, as
we have seen, the smoke lay packed close on the water, and reaching
across the river, excluded from sight both shores towards the west.
But the northern bank, opposite the Neck, was still dimly visible
through the twilight; while, down the river, the prospect was
comparatively clear. It had a strange and weird effect to see the
stars, that shone so clear and lustrous on the eastern horizon, grow
dim and ghostly through the smoke overhead, and then gradually vanish
in the west, devoured by the pitchy darkness that lay in wait there
like a second chaos.

The British, though
they had accomplished their purpose, showed no disposition however to
retire. The few Americans, who hovered in the neighboring woods, and
stole occasionally to the edge of the fields to make observations,
noticed that picquets were posted as if it was the intention to
remain for the night. The two or three houses, which had been spared
in the otherwise general conflagration, were hastily prepared for the
accommodation of the principal royal officers; the cattle which had
been brought in for the use of the Americans, and had become part of
the spoils of victory, were slaughtered for the conquerors; and a
succession of camp fires, lighted to cook the food of the soldiers,
soon twinkled, like a continuous chain of beacons, along the whole
extent of the British line. As the evening wore on, sounds of
merriment rose from the encampment, and floated dimly to the woods
where the ejected women and children cowered in darkness and terror.
Snatches of lewd songs; ballads coarsely ridiculing the Americans;
oaths of blasphemous exultation over their fallen foes; shouts of
drunken laughter; boasts of how many rebels had been killed that day;
all these, and other noises as horrible, were wafted to the ears of
the weeping mothers, who clasped their houseless babes as they
crouched on the cold earth. Or the ribald songs and rejoicings were
heard, with half smothered oaths, by the fathers who were forced to
look on all this, yet were impotent to redress it.

Towards midnight,
however, the reveling in the British bivouac ceased. The camp-fires
died down; the songs were hushed; the merriment gave way to sleep;
and the low hum, which by day always attends any large body of men,
was distinguishable no longer. The royal force lay in profound
repose. The conflagration had exhausted itself long before, even
among the shipping, only a few skeleton-like hulls burning redly,
here and there, through the now ashen-gray smoke. A deep silence
brooded over the scene, broken only by the breeze soughing gently
through the trees, the tide lapping against the shore as it came
lazily in, or the wail of a solitary whip-poor-will, which, slowly
sailing in the obscure distance, seemed to be the spirit of some
slaughtered patriot come back to bewail his ravaged life, the
dishonor to his country’s flag, and the fresh perils which the
morrow would probably bring forth.

But, notwithstanding
this stillness, it was evident that the British slept on their arms,
and that, at the slightest intimation of an attack, they would be up
in a moment and ready for the foe. The dark forms of the sentries
could be seen constantly going the rounds, and the warning cry of
“all’s well” periodically passed around the bivouac.

CHAPTER XXXIV.

THE REPULSE

“Hear me, for I will speak;

Must I give way?” —Shakespeare.

“By his closed eye unheeded and unfelt,

While sets that sun, and dews of ev’ning melt.” —Byron.

The story-teller is
like the weaver of an elaborate pattern in tapestry. To a spectator
he seems continually to be dropping threads without necessity, and as
often taking up new ones which are uncalled for; but it must be
remembered that he has the completed picture before him, and that he
knows best what is necessary to do.

Aylesford, whom we
last saw parting with Kate, reached the lower part of the river in
safety, about noon; and proceeded immediately to procure the
assistants, necessary to carry out his plot against Kate. He was not
able, indeed, to gain the British camp, and had therefore, to hire a
boat’s crew at random. But there were men of idle habits and
royalist sympathies to be found, all through the war of independence,
in every district of New Jersey, but particularly in those bordering
on the sea-coast, where many circumstances contributed to render
patriotism at a discount and open the field for venal services to
either side. Aylesford, by his course of life, had become cognizant
of one of these persons, to whom he now applied. This man was
acquainted with others; and so, after only a few hours’ delay, he
was enabled to set out to meet Arrison.

But the best laid
plans of villains, as Burns says of mice and men, “aft gang agee.”
We have seen how Arrison’s scheme to deliver Kate, by collusion,
into the hands of Aylesford, had miscarried: and this failure
necessarily involved the disappointment of the plans of Aylesford
also. The boat of the latter was actually in sight of the refugees,
when Arrison turned and fled up the river, though no one of the
outlaws, nor even Kate, saw it, all having their attention
concentrated on the patriots on shore, and subsequently on the
pursuing craft. But Aylesford, seeing his prey ravished from him
almost in the moment of seizing it, became nearly beside himself with
rage. He had, in fact, arrived at the bend of the river below the
settlement, quite half an hour previous, when, observing to his
surprise that the inhabitants were keeping watch, he had laid by,
under the bank, intending to wait for Arrison. He did this, because
the latter would have to pass the armed party on shore but once,
whereas if he should keep on his way, the risk would be run in both
going and returning. He never doubted, meantime, that Arrison would
push on at any cost.

When, therefore, he
saw the refugees face about, he lost, as we have said, all control of
himself. Starting up, he exclaimed—

“Cast off, board,
give way. I’ll double your reward if we catch them.”

The men obeyed,
though not without some signs of reluctance, until they had gained a
position nearly opposite to the settlement. This was a little later
in point of time than when the patriots had put off in pursuit of the
refugees. During the whole of this period, Aylesford, who officiated
as coxswain, had not ceased to stimulate his men to row faster,
alternating promises of reward and urgent appeals, with passionate
ejaculations against the poltroonery and treachery of Arrison.

“Pull, pull with a
will,” he cried. “We’ll catch them yet, huzza! The double-dyed
traitor. Yes!” he added, between his teeth, “he has intended it
all along. I see it now, dupe that I am. Curses on my mad folly in
trusting him! Why do you stop?”

This last sentence
was spoken aloud and angrily, for the men suddenly ceased rowing.

But the reason was
apparent as soon as he looked ashore. The sentinel at the settlement
had presented his musket, and now followed it up by crying,

“Boat ahoy!”

The men looked at
each other and then at Aylesford.

“Never mind him.
Pull away,” cried the latter.

The report of the
musket was heard, and the ball whistled close past; while at the same
time some of the patriots ran to the field-piece. Instantly, as if by
one impulse, Aylesford’s crew pulled their boat around and began to
urge her down the stream.

At this, Aylesford,
his whole countenance distorted with rage, reached forward and laid
his hand on the stroke oar.

“How dare you?”
he cried, his face white with rage.

The man, who pulled
the oar, was far more powerful than his employer, and he wrenched the
blade from Aylesford almost immediately, saying sternly,

“None of that, if
you don’t want to be pitched overboard. We’re not going to get a
skin full of shot in us, or be sent to the devil by grape, just to
please you.”

Even through his
passion, Aylesford had the sense to see that he could do nothing
against the majority by compulsion, but that his only hope was in
appealing to the selfish interests of the men.

“I’ll give each
of you twenty guineas, twenty guineas in gold,” he said, eagerly,
“if you’ll keep on and overtake the boat.”

But, by this time,
the field-piece on shore was ready to fire. The match was being
whirled around to keep it burning, while a patriot sighted the gun
for the last time; and the men saw this with a terror against which
even the large bribe could not prevail.

“We’ve come too
far already,” said the spokesman. “Steer the boat while we pull,
or I’ll blow your brains out. What good would your guineas be to
men who wouldn’t live to get them?”

At these words, the
four oarsmen gave way lustily, as men only row when the race is for
life or death.

“God! there it
comes,” suddenly cried the stroke-oarsman, ducking his head
involuntarily.

At the moment, a jet
of flame shot out from the cannon, followed by a puff of dense,
whitish smoke. Instantaneously a hurtling noise was heard through the
air, the water was ploughed up astern of the boat, and Aylesford,
with a sharp groan, suddenly dropped the tiller, and tumbled headlong
forward into the stern sheets.

“He’s hit,”
cried the oarsman, and without looking around, he continued, “is
anybody else hurt?” For the others had ceased rowing.

No one answered. All
the rest had fortunately escaped.

“Then pull like
devils,” cried the spokesman, when he saw this. “If they get
another chance they’ll sink us. We must put the bend of the river
between us and them, before we even stop to see how much he is hurt.
Once in the next reach and we’ll be safe.” And, suiting the
action to the word, he pulled till his strong blade bent like a
whip-stalk.

The remainder of the
crew made corresponding exertions, so that in a few minutes the boat
shot around the turn, interposing a wooded point between it and the
settlement. The men now rested on their oars, when two of them, the
spokesman being one, proceeded to examine into the condition of their
fallen employer.

He was not dead, as
they had begun to believe from his silence and his not even stirring,
but badly wounded in the side by a slug, the gun having been
apparently loaded with that description of missiles. On being moved,
he opened his eyes with a groan, stared vacantly around, and then
closed them in a swoon.

“He’s booked for
Davy Jones’ locker,” said the spokesman, “unless we can get a
doctor for him soon; booked for it whether or no. Lay him down easy,
Bill; put his head here—that’s all we can do for him.”

With these words
they resumed their oars, and pulling steadily down the river with a
long, regular, man-of-war’s stroke, soon left the vicinity of the
settlement behind them. The men, thus unexpectedly burdened with a
wounded employer, were as yet uncertain where to find a physician
soonest in the disturbed state of the region, and were debating it
among themselves, when suddenly the noise of firing, as of volleys of
musketry, was heard in the distance ahead.

“The King’s men
hare attacked the Neck,” cried the man who had been the principal
speaker all day. “Hark! there it is again.”

There was no
mistaking the sounds of battle, which now grew momentarily stormier,
filling the air and booming along the water. As the boat struggled
onward against the tide, the noise of the strife continued to
stimulate the rowers, who, though comparatively near, yet made such
slow headway as to be uncertain, for what seemed an age, which way
the victory would incline. At last the curve in the river disclosed
to sight the group of tall chestnuts, and immediately afterwards the
British flag floating over the works.

Aylesford had now
recovered from his swoon, and was sensible of what was going on,
though as yet he had not spoken.

“We’d better
land him there,” said the spokesman. “There’s always plenty of
doctors with his Majesty’s troops. Besides, they’ll make us come
to, any how.”

“Yes! land me at
once,” said Aylesford, feebly. “I’ll see that you’re
protected.”

Accordingly the man
directed the boat to the landing, where they disembarked just as the
evening was closing in.

CHAPTER XXXV.

THE DEATH-BED

“Ah, what a sign it is of evil life,

When death’s approach is seen so terrible.” —Shakespeare.

“Black it stood as night,

Fierce as ten furies.” —Milton.

“To die, I own

Is a dread passage.” —Thomson

It was several hours
later in the evening. In a small room, in one of the dwellings which
the conflagration at the Neck had spared, Aylesford lay extended on a
bed, his life ebbing fast away.

On landing, he had
desired to see some of the principal officers, to whom he had
disclosed the name of his family, which he found not unknown; and
having besought that the men who had accompanied him should not be
considered prisoners, desired next the services of a surgeon as soon
as one could be spared. Fallen, as he was, in many particulars, his
sense of honor made him thus provide for the safety of his companions
before looking after his wound.

The surgeon attended
immediately, accompanied by the leader of the expedition, for the
latter, aware of the vast estates of the Aylesfords, in the colonies,
as well as of their noble connexions in England, and hearing that the
male representative of the name had been brought in wounded,
naturally concluded that the hurt was received while he was hastening
to join the royal standard. On discovering the precarious condition
of his guest, this officer directed that the utmost attention should
be paid to him, and left with reluctance to attend to the urgent
calls of his command.

The surgeon was not
long in discovering that the wound of his patient was mortal; that
human skill could even do but little to prolong life; and that all
which was left for him was to alleviate the sufferings of the dying
man. Aylesford read his doom in the countenance of the physician. He
had, however, suspected it from the first. As we have seen, on former
occasions, he was not deficient in courage, and he asked in a voice
quite calm if his suspicions were not correct.

“Don’t be afraid
to speak out, Doctor,” he said, resolutely, though in a feeble
voice. “It’s false kindness to conceal the truth, when a man’s
within an hour of death.”

“You have been
bred a gentleman,” answered the practitioner, replying in a spirit
more common then, when caste was thought to make one man superior to
another, than now, “and can therefore summon courage to face
anything, I suppose. I am sorry I cannot hold out hope. If you have
any arrangements to make, it would be wise to lose no time. Can I be
of service to you otherwise than professionally?”

Aylesford turned
uneasily in his bed, and did not reply for a moment. At last he
spoke.

“No, thank you,
Doctor. I have no affairs to settle, such as you mean.”

He seemed, however,
as if there was something on his mind, so that the surgeon, lingering
as he arranged his instruments, was induced to speak again.

“Perhaps you would
like to see a parson,” he said. “Fortunately we have a chaplain
with us.”

“It is not that,”
answered Aylesford. “But you may send him, nevertheless.” He
spoke, all this while, with difficulty. Then, as the surgeon went
out, he murmured to himself, turning uneasily again, “Oh! Kate,
Kate, what have I brought on you!”

We have failed to
convey a true idea of Aylesford, if the reader considers him a
remorseless villain. He was, indeed, deeply stained with vices, but
they were mostly those, which, while violating the moral code quite
as much as more brutal ones, yet do not degrade the entire nature. He
was a spendthrift, a gambler, licentious, passionate and haughty. He
was even capable of treachery, as we have seen, under the double
temptation of interest and love. But this last crime had been the
first of its kind he had ever been engaged in; his conscience was not
yet seared to such atrocities; and now, when he found death
approaching, the idea that Kate was in the hands of Arrison, and that
she had been brought there by his own act, woke a thousand
serpent-stings of remorse at his heart.

He lay there, but
could not rest. He tossed from side to side, in spite of the
entreaties of his attendant, a surgeon’s assistant, who declared
that he was shortening his life. Deep groans continually broke from
him, not because of pain, but in consequence, as the attendant saw,
of mental anguish. The youth hoped that when the clergyman came, his
patient would obtain peace of mind; but neither the presence of the
chaplain, nor the prayers he read, nor the soothing words he
addressed to the invalid, had any effect in composing Aylesford.

It was at this point
of time that the present chapter opens. The clergyman had risen from
his knees, and was sitting at the head of the bed; the surgeon’s
assistant stood looking down on the invalid with folded arms; and
three or four other persons, who had crowded into the room in the
confusion, gazed with serious, awe-struck faces, now on the dying
man, and now on his medical and spiritual advisers. A single tallow
candle, placed on a little old-fashioned stand, on which were also
several phials, threw a dim and yellow light on the disturbed
countenance among the pillows and on the dark dress of the chaplain,
leaving the remainder of the room in deep shadow, out of which the
anxious, earnest faces of the spectators looked forth like the dark
heads in old and time-stained pictures.

For sometime there
was silence in the apartment. The invalid, at a pause in the
clergyman’s exhortations, had suddenly turned his back on the
speaker, with a deep groan that seemed wrung from his inmost heart;
and now appeared to be dozing. The priest knew not what to do. He was
a sincerely good man, far different from many among chaplains of that
day, but his services, he saw, had produced no impression, and he was
not sure that they were not positively rejected. Still he was willing
to remain, in hopes that a better frame of mind might arise in the
patient; but for this he thought it best to wait in silence.

“Will he wake
again?” said he, at last, rising and whispering to the assistant.
“This looks like the stupor of death.”

Perhaps it was the
rustling of the silk canonicals which roused the invalid, perhaps his
doze had come to an end of itself; but at this Aylesford turned
quickly around, and half raising himself on his arm, fixed his eyes
on the priest. A wild gleam shot from his haggard eyes.

“You can do me no
good,” he said, in a hollow voice, “but, but,” he struggled for
words, “stay by me to the last. I thank you.”

“I know, my son,”
mildly answered the clergyman, “that I can do you no good; but
there is one who can; and to Him I exhort you to turn your eyes.”

But the sick man,
shaking his head, interrupted the minister of heaven.

“It is too late,
too late,” he said, “even if your religion is true.” The
venerable man lifted his hands in horror, and raised his eyes in a
mute petition above. “But enough of this,” continued Aylesford.
“I don’t wish to hurt your feelings, sir; you mean well, and I
thank you: but that is a subject on which we shall never agree, and
my time is too precious to waste.”

Aylesford was, like
most fashionable profligates of that day, an atheist at heart. It was
an age, when the French Encyclopaediasts had exhausted every resource
of sophistry and satire to shake the belief in a divine revelation;
when young men thought it smart to laugh at the Bible, as a
collection of old legends only fit for women; and when Voltaire,
Helvetius, D’Alembert, and other mere analytical thinkers were
ignorantly ranked, by men of little learning and less wisdom, above
the great synthetical minds who have, throughout the generations,
held fast to Christianity, not only as a revelation historically
established on irrefragible grounds of proof, but as a religion whose
divinity is proved, apart from this, by its wonderful adaptation to
all the wants of the human soul, to its sorrows as well as to its
joys, and especially to its longings after immortality. So firmly
established was Aylesford’s atheism, that it left him with few or
no doubts, even in this dread hour. Perhaps—for who can tell?—men
may commit the unpardonable sin, so awfully denounced in Scripture,
by obdurate unbelief: and it is certain that this thought flashed
across the mind of the clergyman, who put up a mental petition that
it might not be so in this instance.

“A little while
longer, O Lord, forbear,” he prayed. “Spare the barren fig-tree
yet a space.”

“It’s another
thing I want to speak about,” said Aylesford, after a pause for
breath. “I had resolved to die without revealing it; but I feel as
if it must out. If there’s a hell at all,” he suddenly added,
while he glared, almost like a wild beast, at the clergyman, while he
struck his breast with his clenched hand, “it’s here now, here at
my heart, where it’s been gnawing, gnawing—”

“My son, oh! my
son,” cried the white-haired clergyman, deeply impressed, and with
tears in his eyes, making a last effort to benefit the dying man,
“there’s a worm that never dies, that gnaws forever.”

“Away with your
idle tales,” fiercely interrupted Aylesford, flinging himself away
from the chaplain. But immediately he turned again. “I can’t
waste time, sir,” he resumed, “and maybe by speaking, I may avert
foul wrong. But no! no! that is impossible,” he almost shrieked, as
he spoke these words, gazing hopelessly from the assistant to the
minister, like one drowning out at sea may be supposed to turn his
frantic eyes towards the unattainable shore.

“She is past
rescue.”

“She?” said the
clergyman. “My son,” he added solemnly, “if, as your words
imply, there is a wrong to be remedied, speak out without delay. Next
to repentance comes reparation, and it may be,” he added, as if
speaking to himself, “that God, in His infinite mercy, will
consider one to include both.”

Aylesford looked
eagerly into the chaplain’s face, and, without further parley,
proceeded to narrate, though in broken sentences and with rapidly
failing words, his scheme to carry off his cousin, its failure, and
the great probability there was that she was now in the power of a
licentious, brutal, and reckless outlaw.

The narrative,
indeed, was not consecutive. Whether the mind of the dying man began
to wander, or whether remorse made his thoughts incoherent, he was
not able to give an entirely connected story; but from his bitter
denunciations of Arrison, his curses on his own folly for being
duped, and his apostrophes to Kate, his hearers had no difficulty in
arriving at a tolerably correct idea of our heroine’s peril.

“Alas!” said the
clergyman, when Aylesford had concluded, “this is a wrong done
which is beyond remedy, I fear.”

But Aylesford, at
this, sprang up in bed.

“I tell you it is
not beyond remedy,” he cried, shaking his damp hair like an angry
lion rousing in his lair; and while his eyes gleamed with the fires
of partial delirium, he continued, almost with a howl, “I’ll go
myself to her rescue. Don’t you hear her reproaching me? Unhand me,
I say.” And he struggled to get out of bed.

“We will send word
to the enemy’s camp through a flag, that they may do all that can
be done,” said the clergyman soothingly, as he and the assistant
held down the frenzied man. “There, my son, lie back on your pillow
again. There is no one calling you, that you need glare into that
dark corner. God help you!”

Gradually the
delusion passed from the mind of the invalid. His eye assumed its
natural expression. He looked inquiringly around, like one awaking
from a dream, and with an attempt at a wan smile, suffered himself to
be placed in bed again.

“Thank you,” he
said feebly, as the clergyman stooped and gently wiped the big drops
from his hair. “I’ve been talking wildly, I fear. The fever’s
in my head. But did not some one,” and he glanced around, “say
that they’d send pursuers out after her?”

“I said I would
send word to the enemy’s camp,” answered the chaplain; and
looking around the room, he singled out an individual who had been a
spectator hitherto. “You have heard what has been said,” he
continued. “Will you undertake to see that this is done?”

The person addressed
nodded his head, and departed immediately, Aylesford watching his
retreating figure eagerly till it disappeared through the doorway,
when he closed his eyes with a deep sigh, and remained motionless and
silent so long afterwards that the clergyman began to think life had
departed with that profound expiration.

He, therefore,
whispered to the assistant.

“Does he still
breathe?”

“Yes!” was the
reply, after the speaker had leaned over the invalid for a moment.
“He dozes again. That burst of emotion exhausted him terribly,
however, and it may be that he’ll never come to again.”

The clergyman made
no answer, but clasping his hands, appeared engaged in silent prayer.

In about ten minutes
the dying man stirred again. His eyes were still closed, but he
murmured incoherently. At first his words were low and disconnected,
but gradually he spoke louder; and finally the listeners
distinguished parts of sentences. But whether he was referring to the
tragedy he had just detailed, or to some other, or whether what he
said was purely the effect of delirium, the hearers could not
ascertain.

“The pitiless
villain,” were his words. “No mercy, no mercy. Oh! that I had run
him through when he proposed it. I broke her heart. Mary! Mary!
blessed saint,” he exclaimed piteously, “don’t look at me so
reproachfully.”

“He thinks she is
already dead,” whispered the clergyman to the assistant.

“Or perhaps there
is still another,” was the low reply.

Tossing from side to
side on the bed, working his fingers on the counterpane, every
lineament of his face betraying the terrible mental agonies he was
undergoing, Aylesford lay, a picture of remorse which had come too
late. As his broken ejaculations went on it became evident that
another person, as the surgeon had hinted, now mingled in his
thoughts with Miss Aylesford.

“Forgive me, Mary,
forgive me,” he cried, clasping his hands, “I have indeed
deserted our child; but if I had known—if I had—”

Here his words sunk
into indistinct babblings, all that could be distinguished being the
single phrase, “they call her his niece, you know.”

He lay still for
nearly a minute. Suddenly he sprang up again, glaring wildly at the
opposite part of the bed.

“Take him away,”
he shrieked, in a voice that made the hair of his hearers stand on
end with horror, and was heard far away out across the silence of the
night; “his fingers almost touch me.”

He clung to the
clergyman, as a child, when woke from a dream in which it has seen
horrible shapes, clings to its mother; his eyeballs starting from
their sockets, his features convulsed with agony, and the
perspiration exuding, like huge rain drops, over his clammy forehead.

It was a scene,
which those who were present, could never shake off. The terrified
countenance of the dying man, the despairing clutch with which he
held on to the chaplain, and the fixed, stony gaze of horror which he
fastened, as if on some object right across the bed, and almost
within reach; the whole rendered, for an instant, visible with more
than ordinary distinctness, as a burning deck of one of the ships
that was consuming, fell in, shooting a quick, intense glare into the
room.

“Oh! my God,” he
cried, “they come; there is a hell.”

The piercing tone,
almost amounting to a shriek; the awful look; the gesture of horrible
fear with which he shrank closer yet to the clergyman; these no pen
can adequately paint.

But in a moment, a
convulsion passed over him; a deep breath was heard, which was nearly
stertorous; and he fell back into the chaplain’s arms, stone dead.

CHAPTER XXXVI.

THE ESCAPE

This night methinks is but the daylight sick,

It looks a little paler; ‘tis a day,

Such as the day is when the sun is hid. —Shakespeare.

The whole air whitens with a boundless tide,

Of silver radiance, trembling round the world. —Thomson.

We must now return
to Kate, whom we left a prisoner with the outlaws, and momentarily in
dread that she would be compelled to sacrifice life in order to avert
dishonor.

The debauch of the
refugees at last came to an end. Not being a witness of the scene,
Kate could judge as to the manner of its termination, only from the
laugh of derision with which it was said successively that another
“was under the table.” Gradually the voices of the speakers
became so thick as to be undistinguishable; the revelers apparently
grew fewer and fewer, and finally a heavy fall was heard, as of the
last boon companion, followed by silence.

For a long while
Kate listened, dreading lest she should hear some one stir, for she
dared not hope that sleep had overpowered the whole gang. But five
minutes passed without any one moving, then ten, and then finally a
half an hour. When this latter period had elapsed she began to
breathe freely again. The thought of escape flashed upon her. She
reasoned that if she could pass the sleepers undetected, and gain the
forest, she might find some place of refuge, perhaps, before the
outlaws would awake. Ignorant as she was of the exact locality of the
hut, she yet had a general idea of the direction in which the Forks
lay, and she determined to make the attempt to reach that post.

But she resolved not
to essay escape as yet. The night without was pitch dark, so that it
would have been impossible to find her way through the woods; and as
she knew the moon would rise in about an hour, she determined to wait
for that event; and accordingly threw herself on the bed to watch for
the propitious time.

Fatigued by physical
exhaustion as well as by mental excitement, however, she unwittingly
fell asleep, and when at last she opened her eyes, the moon was
shining full in at the window, having attained a considerable
elevation above the horizon. For a moment she did not recollect where
she was. She started up, at first, with a look of bewilderment, which
changed to one of affright, however, and then of despair, as the past
came up again to her memory.

“What precious
hours I have lost,” she mentally exclaimed. “Perhaps now it is
too late. Oh! how could I sleep!” And she wrung her hands.

But directly she
recovered the energy natural to her. In truth, her slumbers had
vastly recruited her strength and spirits; and of this she began soon
to be sensible. She sprang to her feel, saying to herself with
decision,

“But why do I
waste precious moments? There may yet be hope—they seem to sleep as
soundly as ever—at the most I can but fail.”

As she pronounced
these words, she began, though with hands trembling with eagerness,
to move the bedstead from the door sufficiently to allow egress. With
what intense anxiety she listened, during this proceeding, lest the
fabric should, by creaking, awaken the refugees! Even if one should
be aroused it would be fatal to her; and the slightest noise might
produce this result. She was almost breathless with suspense, until
the bedstead had been removed enough to allow her to pass. But when
this was effected, her heart was fluttering so wildly, that she had
to pause an instant, pressing her hand on it to still its throbbings,
for while it palpitated to such a degree she was too weak to proceed.

She now ventured to
lift the latch, which at first resisted her efforts, and which, when
at last it yielded, gave forth a sudden, sharp click, that, for a
moment, made her fear it had awakened one or more of the outlaws. She
waited, therefore, to assure herself that no one was stirring, before
she ventured to draw the door towards her. In the unnaturally excited
state of her nerves, the almost imperceptible sound of the hinges
smote on her ear with alarming distinctness, so that she felt
confident that now at least some one of the outlaws must awake. In
fact a burly ruffian, in whom, to her horror, she recognized Arrison,
and who lay directly across the doorway, not a foot from her,
actually stirred, muttering incoherently, as if about to arouse from
sleep; and at this sight Kate, brave as she was, felt all her courage
and strength desert her, and was compelled to lean against the wall,
in order to support herself from falling.

The ruffian,
however, proved to have been only dreaming. After mumbling a few
broken sentences, and tossing his arm over his head, as if to relieve
it by a change of posture, he sunk into slumber again. Never was
sound sweeter to Kate’s ears than the loud, almost stertorous
breathing of the inebriated sleeper. Reassured of this, the violent
beating of her heart ceased, and she recovered strength to renew her
attempt at escape.

The door of the
outer apartment was fortunately open, and the moonlight, streaming
in, lit up a scene, such as the Flemish masters loved to paint. Down
the centre of the apartment ran a table, covered with overturned
drinking glasses, and empty bottles, amid which a huge black jug,
with a cornstalk cork, stood, like a grim, giant warrior, of old, in
the centre of a troop of modern pigmies. A few square bits of wood,
in each of which a hole had been bored to insert a candle, were
scattered about the table; but the candles had long since guttered
down, the melted tallow flowing over and adhering to the board. On
one side of the table had been a row of split-bottomed chairs, but
these were now either pushed back against the wall, or had been
kicked over; while on the other side was a rude bench, made of the
first plank that is cut from a log, the convex part, to which the
bark still adhered, being downward. A broken clay pipe, black with
smoke, lay on one end of this bench, and by it slept its owner, a
brawny, unshaven savage. Two of his companions were stretched on the
floor, on either side; another was directly under the table; a fourth
filled a shadowy corner, looking an unsightly, mis-shapen mass in the
obscurity; while a fifth, still sitting in his chair, slept with his
head leaning on his hands crossed before him on the table. Across
this central figure the moonlight poured in a flood of intense
brilliancy, and shot onwards to where Arrison lay at the feet of
Kate, leaving the rest of the room in comparative darkness, as in a
painting by Rembrandt.

Kate saw that it
would require the utmost caution to pass the sleepers without
awakening them, for the room was so narrow, and they lay in such
positions, that it was almost impossible to reach the door without
treading upon more than one of them. Arrison himself lay close to the
door of her room, as if his last thought, before he succumbed to the
effects of his copious libations, had been to place himself there on
purpose to keep guard. She could not advance a single step, indeed,
without passing over his body; and if, in making the attempt, even
her skirt should brush him, all would be over. Perhaps, she
reflected, he would be aroused even by her shadow crossing him; she
herself could easily be woke in that way. These suggestions of an
active brain would have paralyzed many a female in Kate’s
situation; but they only had the effect of quickening her pulses, and
increasing her caution.

Holding her breath,
and gathering up her skirts firmly, she stepped rapidly across
Arrison’s body, and not pausing to look behind, advanced stealthily
but swiftly towards the door, keeping as much as possible in the
shadow. She was but a few seconds in crossing the apartment, but it
seemed to her almost an age. Every instant she expected to hear
Arrison spring to his feet, or to see one of the ruffians in front
rise to intercept her. At every footstep she trembled with nervous
apprehension. As she approached the door, she was compelled to almost
brush one of the outlaws extended on the floor: he stirred at that
crisis; and she thought that she was discovered. Instantaneously she
stopped and shrank into the shadow. The man was only turning in his
sleep, however, and the next moment was snoring as heavily as before.
Inexpressibly relieved, Kate drew her garments close to her figure,
and gliding lightly past him, gained the door in safety.

It was a magnificent
night without; and what a contrast to the scene within! Not a cloud
was in the sky, not even a speck of fleecy vapor; only the blue,
starless heavens were seen above, and in their eastern depths the
silver moon. A vague, awe-struck feeling came over Kate as she looked
up, and saw the solemn pine-trees standing, dark and weird, against
the silent sky, and above them the calm, cold planet, looking down on
her as pitilessly as it had gazed on the suffering Job on the plains
of Mesopotamia, ages before. Not a breath of air stirred even the
topmost tassel of the tallest fir; not a sound broke the deep
stillness: it seemed, indeed, as if to breathe was to break some
potent spell and bring down ruin on her head.

The little clearing
was everywhere as light as day, except where the shadows of the rude
fences checkered the ground, or where the gloom, cast by the forest,
fell like an ominous pall across the eastern edge. Before our heroine
was the little, tumble-down barn, which we have once before
described. One side of this, including the roof, was flooded with the
moonlight, while the other was black and vague, the deep shadows
effectually concealing its outline. Right opposite the glorious
planet, and therefore dazzlingly lit up by her radiance, a road
opened into the forest, which soon, however closed about it, sombre
and awful, as some unfathomable cave swallows up the ray of sunlight
that streams through a chink in the roof. It reminded Kate of a
pathway into some land of enchantment, at first beautiful to the eye,
and light almost as day, but soon darkening into the gloom of death,
amid bogs, and torrents, and labyrinths without end. A shudder came
over her as she gazed, as if a shadow of impending evil fell across
her; but shaking off the feeling as childish, she advanced into the
open space, and directed her steps to the road.

But scarcely had she
emerged fairly into the moonlight, when a low, deep growl startled
her, proceeding apparently from the barn. Looking eagerly in that
direction, her heart sank, for she saw the ferocious bloodhound,
which she had observed on her arrival, slowly rising to his feet from
out of the shadow. His huge form, as he stalked into the light,
seemed, to the excited nerves of our heroine, to be of even more
colossal stature than it was in reality; and with a stifled groan,
clasping her hands, she stood transfixed in speechless horror.

CHAPTER XXXVII.

INTERCEPTED

A violet by a mossy stone,

Half hidden from the eye,

Fair as a star, when only one

Is shining in the sky. —Wordsworth.

Suddenly a figure
glided forth into the moonlight, which, for one moment, Kate almost
fancied was a spirit. It was clothed in white, and bore the semblance
of a young girl, not more than ten years old; but so sylph-like were
its movements, so noiseless its tread, and so pure and innocent was
the expression of the face, that it could not, Kate thought, be
there, yet be earthly. This transient illusion, however, was
instantly dissipated, by a childish voice calling out to the dog, in
low tones, as if fearful of awaking the sleepers.

The bloodhound
apparently recognized the accents as those of one who had shown him
acts of kindness, for he ceased growling immediately, and going up to
the young girl, lifted his head as if to be caressed. The child
patted the ferocious animal, whispering soothingly to him, on which
he crouched down at her feet, like the lion before Una.

Our heroine fully
expected that the alarm given by the dog would have aroused the
sleepers; and she even fancied, for an instant, that she heard the
refugees stirring. She turned, therefore, eagerly to fly, but at the
first step the young girl advanced, laying her hand on Kate’s arm
and shaking her head in the negative.

Kate glanced
affrightedly over her shoulder, sure that she would behold Arrison;
but her excited fancy had run ahead of the reality. She drew a deep
sigh of relief, and turning to the young girl, said, breathlessly.

“You will not stop
me—you will save me from these dreadful men, by letting me go
before they awake.”

The child shook her
head again.

“I dare not,”
she said, but in a low, sweet voice.

“And why not? Oh!
surely they would not harm you.”

“He would kill
me,” replied the child, glancing in terror towards the house.

“Who?”

“Uncle.”

“And who is
uncle?”

“Don’t you
know?”

“What! Arrison?”

“Yes.”

Kate looked at the
child earnestly. There seemed to her something strangely familiar, in
the large, eloquent eyes of the young creature before her. The whole
countenance, indeed, reminded her of some one she had known, but she
could not recall whom, though she endeavored, again and again, to
remember. The likeness, after all, however, was a confused one, with
gleams of that which was familiar mingled with others which were
foreign; and these latter it was which appeared to Kate to give such
an air of innocence and even holiness to the face. After a moment’s
scrutiny, she recalled her perilous condition, and as every instant
was precious, endeavored again to persuade the child to allow her
departure.

“You must be
mistaken,” she said, “your uncle surely would not hurt you.”

“You don’t know
him,” answered the child, “Oh! I am sure he would kill me if I
let you go,” she continued, clasping her little hands.

“But I
must

go,” replied Kate, with an endeavor to overawe the child. “You
cannot help it.”

The child laid her
hand significantly on the bloodhound, which had risen from his
reclining posture and now stood at her side, watching alternately her
countenance and that of Kate. This gesture he seemed to interpret as
it was intended, for he bristled up and uttered a low growl.

Kate shudderingly
looked over her shoulder in the direction of the house.

“Don’t—don’t,”
she cried, in an eager whisper, imploringly glancing down into the
child’s face, and laying her hand on the girl’s shoulder.

The child looked up,
with her sad, earnest eyes, at the same time patting the bloodhound,
who became quiet at once.

“Oh! if I could
let you go,” she said, and her little face was eloquent in every
feature with sincerity. “I haven’t slept a wink all night,
thinking of you. That was before I saw you,” she added, naively,
“before I knew you were beautiful, or looked so good.”

“Does nobody live
here but you?” Kate said, wondering to find the child in such a
place. “I mean nobody but you and Arrison.”

“He hasn’t lived
here always,” she replied. “He did once, and then went away, and
only came back a week ago.”

“But you didn’t
live here alone?”

“No, Granny Jones
lived with me. But she’s cross too. Oh!” she suddenly added, with
passionate earnestness, “if mother hadn’t died.”

Kate was silent. The
child was then an orphan. She said kindly, after a moment.

“You remember your
mother?”

“Oh! yes. She was
so beautiful,” and the tears glistened in the child’s eyes. “Not
beautiful like you, not proud looking and grand, but so sweet and
pretty. She never scolded me in all her life, never, never.” And
the child burst into low, half-stifled sobs, which, in her effort to
suppress them, shook her little frame.

Kate was again
silent; tears sympathetically dimmed her eyes. The child saw it, and
hushing her sobs, said,

“But Granny Jones
was sent away, when uncle came back.”

“And when he’s
away, you’re alone?” The child nodded.

“All alone, except
with Lion,” she said, glancing at the bloodhound. “He’s such a
good fellow,” she added, her eyes brightening. “We play together,
when we’ve time! Don’t we, Lion?” and she caressed him.

Kate sighed to think
of this lovely child, brought up by an outlaw, yet retaining so much
of heaven’s purity, living here in the forest with no companion but
this ferocious dog. She longed to question the little outcast
respecting her mother, about whom there seemed some strange mystery.
But she refrained out of respect to the girl, who evidently suffered
at allusions to her parent’s name.

“Why won’t you
go with me?” said Kate, winningly. “Help me to get away from this
place, and I’ll take you home with me, where you shall have
everything you like, and be my little sister.”

The child looked up
at her, with eyes dilated to their utmost size in wonder, evidently
unable to credit what she heard.

“I am rich,”
said Kate; “you never need work any more. Look in my face and
you’ll see I speak truth.”

The child gave a
long, earnest gaze, and answered. “I believe what you say. I know
you are good.”

“Then come,”
said Kate. But the child drew back.

“No,” she said,
“it wouldn’t be right. Mother told me to stay with uncle till I
grew to be a woman; that he was a hard man, but my only friend, and I
promised I would do it.”

“But your mother
did not know that I would make you my sister. If she had known that
you could go away to a fine house, have plenty of clothes, have books
to read, and have a sister to love you, don’t you think she would
have been willing?”

The child looked
puzzled. She fixed her large eyes, in doubt and inquiry, on Kate, as
if she could interrogate our heroine’s very soul.

“Maybe she would,”
she answered frankly, at last. “She was always afraid of uncle, and
often cried after he’d been to see us. But I promised her I’d
stay with him. Is it right to break promises? Wouldn’t that be to
tell a lie?”

Kate felt her eyes
shrink before the gaze of the innocent child. She was no adept in
casuistry, and if she had been, the inquiry of the little girl, thus
put, would have silenced her. Even the strong instinct to escape
could not induce her to mislead one so young and pure.

“God help me!”
was her answer, wringing her hands. “I must then stay here. Oh! if
I were dead.”

The child looked at
her earnestly for a moment, and then said, pulling her by her sleeve,

“Don’t, don’t.
They won’t hurt you—will they? Uncle told me he was going to
marry you, and that I must give up my room to you, and go and sleep
in the barn, for tonight, anyhow. If you don’t like uncle, you
needn’t marry him, need you? I thought people only married when
they liked each other.”

“You cannot
understand it all, my child,” answered Kate, placing her hand on
the girl’s shoulder. “But listen! I don’t want to marry your
uncle. I never will marry him. They brought me here by force, or I’d
never have come. If you don’t let me go, I’ll not live till
night; and you’ll see me dead here, before your eyes.”

The child started
back with a sudden shriek, which she stifled as hastily, looking in
terror towards the house; and then, taking Kate’s hand, she drew
her away within the shadow of the barn. Here, pausing, she said,

“You don’t mean
it. They’ll not kill you?”

“As sure as there
is a good God above us,” answered Kate, solemnly, “if you don’t
let me go, I’ll not be alive to-morrow. There is no help for it.
While, if you do let me go,” she continued, eager to take advantage
of the favorable chance, “nobody will know you helped me. In fact,
you won’t help me; you’ll only keep Lion quiet; and if they were
to know you helped me, they couldn’t harm you, innocent child that
you are. If your mother was alive, she’d wish you to let me go. You
know I wouldn’t tell a lie, darling, or I’d have tried still to
get you to go with me, in spite of your promise to your mother. Every
minute is precious. It will soon be daybreak. Only keep Lion quiet,
leave me to myself, and go back to your bed in the barn.”

“You
shall

go,” suddenly said the child. “I’ll go inside, and take Lion
with me.”

“God bless you!”
cried Kate, seizing her in her arms and kissing her again and again.
“If I escape, and you ever want a friend, you’ll always have one,
if you ask for Miss Aylesford, of Sweetwater.”

“Good-bye,” said
the child, timidly returning the kisses. “Take the road in front,
and keep straight ahead. Only,” she added, “when you come to the
big cedar, past the log bridge, a mile off, you must turn to the
right.”

“I will, I will,”
breathlessly said Kate, but, in her hurry and excitement, paying less
heed to the direction than she ought. “Again God bless you!”

With tears in her
eyes she gave the child a last embrace, and first glancing towards
the house to see that no one was in motion, ran swiftly across the
open space, entered the road, nor slackened her speed until not only
the turn concealed her from sight, but a considerable distance
intervened between her and the clearing. Then, almost out of breath,
she subsided into a quick walk, occasionally stopping to hear if the
steps or shouts of pursuers were following in the distance.

As for the child,
she remained in the shadow, caressing the dog to keep him quiet, and
watching the retreating figure of our heroine, until Kate had wholly
disappeared. Then, suddenly bursting into tears, she turned, and
entered the dilapidated barn, leading the bloodhound, whom, the
instant they were alone together on the hay, she clasped to her arms,
in a mute eloquence that said he was now again the only friend she
had in the world.

CHAPTER XXXVIII.

THE FLIGHT

Whence is that knocking!

How is it with me, when every noise appals me. —Shakespeare.

Like one, that on a lonesome road

Doth walk in fear and dread.

* * * * * *

Because he knows a frightful fiend

Doth close behind him tread. —Coleridge.

The precious moments
which Kate had lost, first by falling asleep, and afterwards through
the watchfulness of the hound, stimulated her now to the utmost speed
of which she was capable. Running until she was forced to pause for
breath, then pausing an instant to listen, now walking at her utmost
pace, then running again as soon as she had recovered herself, she
reached the bridge of which the child had spoken, in a period of time
incredibly short, and only to be accounted for by the terror with
which the fear of death or dishonor winged her feet.

At this point she
was compelled to come to a full stop, and remain for awhile in
perplexed thought, uncertain which way to go. In vain she tried to
remember which road the child had told her to take. As she stood
there, hesitating, her fears received fresh stimulants. Every noise
was magnified into the sound of pursuers. Even the soft sighing of
the wind in the distance seemed to her excited fancy the remote
baying of the hound; while the sudden dropping of a pine-cone near
her made her start, with a half uttered scream, as if her foes were
already upon her. To have seen her then, as she stood glancing
fearfully across her shoulder, her hand pressed to her palpitating
heart, her lips parted in terror, and her cheek lividly pale, one
would have compared her only to some beautiful, milk-white doe,
suddenly startled by the hunter’s cry, and feeling in imagination
the fangs of the enormous stag-hounds already at her throat.

To no purpose either
was her scrutiny as to the condition of the two roads, in order to
ascertain which of them presented the appearance of being most
frequently travelled. It had plainly been many days, if not weeks,
since a vehicle had passed over either. At last Kate selected the
road to the right as the one which seemed to be the principal one.
Yet, at this point, it flashed across her that, perhaps, the most
travelled path was really the one she should avoid; for it probably
led into the great highway, connecting Philadelphia with the
sea-shore. She was but little acquainted with the country on this
side of Sweetwater, forests extending almost unbrokenly across from
one river to the other; but what little she knew satisfied her that
this great highway might be traversed for hours without reaching
succor. Within twenty years of the present time, the writer has
passed over a space of twelve miles at a time, without seeing more
than one house; and at the period of our story, the village at the
end of that desolate stage was not even projected. Kate, indeed,
might have walked all day along that highway, without meeting enough
persons to protect her from the refugees. It was, therefore, almost
certain recapture for her to take the path communicating with that
road.

She paused,
therefore, again. But the more she thought the more perplexed she
became. Time, meanwhile, was passing; precious moments, big with
destiny. She could not rely on the outlaws remaining ignorant of her
flight a moment after daybreak; and already the night was waning
fast. Drawing forth her watch, of which she had not been despoiled,
most strangely as she thought, she discovered that the dawn was only
an hour distant. What was an hour’s start, however, to one like
her, wearied by the excessive fatigue of the preceding day, unused to
travelling far on foot, and deprived of sleep for the last
twenty-four hours, except for the slight interval at the hut. How
could she expect to gain the Forks, even if she struck the right
road, in less than two hours?

“If I hesitate
longer,” she cried, in despair, “they will overtake me, long
before I can reach any place of safety I am acquainted with. I must
decide in some way. This right hand road, I fear, leads into the
King’s highway: I will take the one on the left: God help me if I
am wrong!”

Accordingly she
turned in that direction, and having rested herself partially by the
pause, ran forward again until she was quite out of breath. For half
an hour, she continued alternately running, walking, and running
again, occasionally pausing to listen: and in that time, as she
calculated, had traversed between two and three miles. The forest
still continued as wild as ever; but this did not alarm her; for she
was aware that the wilderness extended to the very doors, as it were,
of the settlement at the Forks. She therefore pushed forward, her
excitement enabling her to disregard fatigue, and to forget that she
had eaten little for a day. For another half an hour, consequently,
she hurried on, and as the distance between her and the outlaws was
increased, her hopes gradually rose.

Day was now
beginning to break. The moon continued to shine as lustrously as
ever; indeed, being now nearly at the zenith, her light seemed even
more effulgent than when Kate left the hut; but there was a cold,
gray hue over the eastern sky which heralded the morning. Gradually
the white light of day stole over the orient heavens, when that of
the moon assumed a partially sickly cast. The birds too now began to
twitter in the underbrush and smaller growth around.

At this point Kate
reached an opening in the woods, where the trees had been cut off a
year or two ago. On the eastern side of this was a tract of pine
land, where a fire had passed, leaving the tall firs standing
stripped of their foliage, like a forest of black, charred masts
against the heavens. Through this, in the distance, was seen a
reddened sky, a proof that the sun, though still below the horizon,
was close upon it. The route of Kate lying in the direction of this
burnt district, it was not long before she saw the upper edge of his
disc emerge, shooting long lines of light towards her, that came
glancing between the black trunks of the pines, or bathed the greener
space more directly in front with showers of golden radiance. The
whole forest around was now alive with twittering birds. Meantime the
moon, as if suddenly struck pale by an enchanter’s hand, seemed all
at once to have lost its late glorious effulgence, and was now seen,
a faint, waning orb, apparently powerless in the zenith. To the right
and left, however, in the recesses of the woods, where the sunshine
had not yet penetrated, the moonlight still lay, cold and beautiful,
though even there less lustrous than it had been.

In a few minutes it
grew dim also even in these secluded aisles, fading perceptibly to
the eye as in a dissolving view. The sun had now risen completely
above the horizon. The exhalations of the night still partially
obscured him, however, so that he loomed large and inflamed on the
vision. But directly he surmounted the region of these vapors; and at
once the whole landscape was flooded with dazzling light. The black,
charred pines; the verdant tract of low brush oak; and the arcades
that ran before the eye into the forest on every side, glowed with
the excess of effulgence: the leaves, that rustled slightly in the
wind, flashed in the bright rays: and the moon became a pale,
uncertain circle, the affrighted shadow of herself.

For another hour
Kate pursued her way, without stopping longer than a few moments at a
time, and then only to listen if she was pursued. At the end of that
period she began to think that she ought to be in the neighborhood of
the Forks. She pressed on, however, till the sun was nearly two hours
high, yet without reaching her destination. She now became alarmed.
At the pace at which she had been advancing, she ought, she knew, to
have arrived at the Forks before this; besides, the road was becoming
a mere wood-path; while the forest around was changing its character
and assuming that of an impenetrable swamp. She now bethought her to
compare the position of the sun with what it would be if she was
advancing in the right direction. To her dismay she found that
luminary over her left shoulder and behind, instead of in front, and
on the right, as it should have been. At this discovery she came to a
halt, overcome with the sudden faintness of despair.

During her progress,
she had frequently passed other roads, opening into the one she was
traversing, but as they were either evidently paths used only by the
wood-cutters, or led off at right angles, she had carefully avoided
them. Studiously had she kept to what appeared to be the most direct
and beaten way, nor until this moment had she thought of testing it
by the heavens. Thus she had unconsciously turned her face in the
wrong direction, by following its tortuous course.

A moment’s
reflection, however, suggested to her that the deviation of the road
might be only temporary, though the fact that she had not reached the
Forks, as she ought, told against this supposition. Drowning people,
it is said, catch at straws, however, and nerving herself with this
hope, she started afresh. But after walking for a considerable period
longer, and carefully noting the position of the sun all the while,
she became convinced that she was receding from the point of her
destination, instead of advancing towards it.

When this discovery
forced itself on her, nature at last gave way. Overtasked though she
had been, hope and energy had kept her up; but now both succumbed
together; and her strength departed with them. Sinking tremblingly
and powerless on the huge root of a mossy tree, she covered her face
with her hands, and burst into sobs like a child.

But, when she had
wept for a while, a reaction took place. She started suddenly to her
feet.

“Why do I give way
thus?” she cried. “Is not anything better than falling again into
the hands of those ruffians? Better to drop down and die from sheer
exhaustion, than to sit here trembling, like a hunted hare, till I am
seized.”

As she spoke, she
resumed her flight, running till she panted, and then walking rapidly
on with desperate, but alas! purposeless energy. For the further she
advanced, the more remote became the Forks, as she saw by the
position of the sun; yet she dared not turn back, as that would be to
run into the jaws of her hunters. The first cross-path that she met,
and which led in the right direction, she entered, however. But after
following this for awhile, it also went astray, and now she was in
greater perplexity and dismay than ever.

In fact she was
evidently advancing into one of those almost pathless swamps, which
abounded in that region, and which had engulphed many a lost
traveller as effectually as the sea swallows up a foundered crew. The
soil beneath her was no longer solid, though sandy; but was a soft,
black vegetable mould, in which she often sank to the ankles. The
path, for it was now scarcely a road, was almost overgrown with
bushes; and occasionally it was really difficult to tell where it
was, the wheel-tracks, if they had ever existed, having long ago been
obliterated.

Yet she struggled
on. Despair gave her now the energy which hope had formerly supplied;
and though almost exhausted with physical weakness, her brave soul
still upheld her flagging frame, and still urged her forward. Thus
she staggered on, all that morning, dragging her heavy limbs along,
and continually rallying herself to a swifter pace, when she mistook
the wind among the trees for the hurrying tread of pursuers, or the
distant bay of a hound.

The sun was now high
in the heavens. Kate had been on her feet since two hours before the
dawn. She could no longer advance at a faster pace than a walk, and
that a slow and painful one. She saw also that she was moving almost
in a circle, the sun being now before her, now on her right, now
behind her, and now to the left. But, though hopelessly lost in the
swamp, though sometimes almost miring in the oozy soil, she did not,
for one moment, entertain the thought of turning back.

“Oh! no, no,”
she said wildly, “certain death, death in any shape, is better than
falling again into those merciless hands.”

Even the idea of
lingering for days, in a state of starvation, was less terrible to
her than being retaken. She had heard of persons, lost in swamps, who
had perished miserably for the want of food, and whose bleached
skeletons, found long years after, had been the only clue their
friends ever had to their fate; and she had formerly shuddered at
such tales. But she did not shudder now. She felt that, if she could
purchase immunity from the outlaws in no other way, she would gladly
accept even this horrible alternative.

“God,” she said,
“tempers the wind to the shorn lamb. He will give me strength to
face such a death.”

Noon was now at
hand. The path had long since dwindled into a mere blind track,
formed rather by the natural space between the trees than by the
footsteps of man or beast. Frequently tall bushes, interlaced into an
impenetrable net-work, guarded the sides like a hedge; and again the
path swelled into natural openings, half an acre or so in extent.
Lofty trees, whose sombre verdure threw an almost funereal gloom
around, towered high into the sky, with here and there a blasted
pine, shooting, arrowy-like, high over all, and adding to the
desolate aspect of the landscape.

CHAPTER XXXIX.

THE BLOODHOUND

But I, in none of these,

Find place or refuge. —Milton.

What miracle

Can work me into hope! —Lee.

Then, as the headmost foes appeared,

With one brave bound the copse he cleared. —Scott.

Suddenly the distant
cry of a hound seemed borne upon the air. Often before, during the
morning, as we have said, Kate had fancied she heard such a noise;
and as often had she been happily disappointed. But this time there
was no mistaking it. No sighing of the wind among the pines, no
murmur of distant water, could produce that peculiar cry, which was
plainly the hoarse, deep bay of a bloodhound heated with the chase.

Kate gazed in terror
around, vainly seeking a hiding-place. If the earth had opened, at
that moment, and swallowed her up, she would have welcomed it as a
relief. The worst that she had feared, that recapture which was more
horrible than death, was now about to befall her. Help there was
none. The nearest human creature, possessed of the sympathies of our
common nature, was probably miles away; and as for pleading for mercy
at the hands of the outlaws, she knew she might as well petition to
the winds.

Meantime the bay of
the hound sounded louder and louder, fiercer and fiercer, nearer and
nearer. Occasionally he would appear to lose the scent for a moment
or two, for the deep cry would die away through the wilderness; and
Kate, at such times, would listen breathlessly, fluctuating between
hope and despair. But the hoarse bay broke forth invariably again, at
intervals greater or less; and always with a startling ferocity that
sent the blood back in torrents to her heart. After thus recovering
the scent, the cry of the hound would be heard almost incessantly,
till the forest resounded with a hundred echoes, and the very heavens
seemed to give back the sound. Though the pursuers now drew near, and
then receded a space, as if following a somewhat circuitous path, the
terrible bay of the hound plainly approached closer, with the lapse
of every quarter of an hour.

There was but one
hope now left for our heroine, which was that death would put an end
to her miseries, before she could be dragged back to the outlaw’s
hut. Her efforts to escape had so completely exhausted her, that her
heroic spirit would have been unable to force the weary limbs onward
much further, even though the refugees had failed to track her. She
felt satisfied that she could not retrace her steps to the cabin, and
that she would perish on the way if the attempt was made to compel
her.

But, hopeless as was
her condition, Kate still remained true to herself. The fate which
she could not avert, she resolved should be met with dignity at
least. She abandoned, therefore, all further thought of flight,
determining to face her inevitable destiny where she then stood. Like
a Roman virgin, stout-hearted to the last, as became the daughter of
illustrious heroes, she drew her garments decorously and proudly
about her, and stood up to face the foe.

It was not only on
herself that she relied, however, in this most terrible of all
extremities. The reader is already familiar with the fact that Kate
was sincere and earnest in her piety; and now, when she considered
death as imminent, she looked up to the Almighty for support in that
dreadful hour. She had been educated in the liturgy of the
Established Church, as her fathers had been since the days of the
saintly Latimer, and though she worshiped with other sects as
fervently as with her own, when the ministry of her church was
impossible, her thoughts naturally turned, in this extremity, to the
solemn words of that litany which she had learned first at her
mother’s knee.

As she stood,
therefore, facing the foe, and bravely supporting her weak frame by
leaning against a tree, her eyes were raised to heaven, and her lips
moved in earnest supplications. We have seen somewhere a picture of a
Christian virgin, bound to an oak by Pagan enemies, and about to
suffer martyrdom by being transfixed with arrows as a target. So Kate
looked now. Her hands were clasped downwards before her; and her
uplifted countenance glowed with a fervent enthusiasm that proved the
mortal part above the fear of death. Thus she stood, while the bay of
the ferocious hound drew nearer, and shouts, mingling with the hoarse
cry, showed that her pitiless hunters were now close at hand; yet not
an eyelid quivered, not a muscle about her mouth twitched, not a
shade of color rose into her composed, though pallid face.

“Remember not,
Lord, our offences,” she prayed, “nor the offences of our
forefathers; neither take thou vengeance of our sins; spare us, good
Lord, spare thy people, whom thou hast redeemed with thy most
precious blood.”

Again the hoarse
cries of the bloodhound, nearer at hand than ever, woke the echoes of
the wilderness, mingled with the exulting shouts of the outlaws; for
the pursuers knew, from the rapidity and power of the dog’s cries,
that they were now almost up with their prey.

“By the mystery of
thy holy Incarnation, by thy holy Nativity and Circumcision; by thy
Baptism, Fasting and Temptation.”

Again the ferocious
bay of the bloodhound rose to the sky, and reverberated through the
forests.

“By thine Agony
and Bloody Sweat; by thy Cross and Passion; by thy precious Death and
Burial; by thy glorious Resurrection and Ascension; and by the coming
of the Holy Ghost.”

Still a third time
the cry of the excited hound rung across the silence.

“In all time of
our tribulation; in all time of our prosperity; in the hour of death,
and in the day of judgment.”

Still rose, as if in
answer, that deep, hoarse bay of the bloodhound, which seemed almost
to deny the justice of heaven.

But now the victim
began to pray for others, and for her enemies even, as the litany of
the Church teaches.

“That it may
please thee to have mercy upon all men.”

The bay of the hound
replied almost beside her.

“That it may
please thee to forgive our enemies, persecutors and slanderers, and
to turn their hearts.”

A burst from the
bloodhound, at her very side, was the answer; and immediately the
terrible animal broke from the undergrowth.

His reddish coat
seemed more inflamed in color than ever; his open mouth, with its
blood-colored tongue, was white with foam; and his eyes blazed with
such fury, that they seemed to emit phosphoric light. He paused an
instant, erecting his tall form, his hairs bristling with rage, for
he did not immediately perceive his prey. His glance soon rested on
her, however, when, with a yell that rung far and near through the
forest, and startled the beasts of the chase from the noon-day
coverts they had sought, he sprang at the throat of our heroine.

But, at that very
instant, just as the hound was half way towards his victim, darting
through the air with distended jaws and eager fangs, a quick, sharp
report was heard, a whizzing sound smote on Kate’s unnaturally
excited ear, and the dog, as if struck suddenly by a bolt from
heaven, rolled over on the ground, nearly at the feet of his intended
prey, his head shattered to pieces by a double load of buckshot.

For a moment, our
heroine knew not whether to hail this as a welcome relief, or only as
a respite to a more miserable doom. Her first thought was that
Arrison, finding that the hound had outrun him, had fired to save her
from the fangs of the excited animal. This impression was fortified,
by seeing the refugee himself dash upon the scene, almost before the
single convulsive movement of the dog was over, after he had fallen.

But this belief was
removed by the very first words of the outlaw. Without even looking
at Kate, he rushed up to the hound, and first gazing hurriedly on his
mutilated form, glanced angrily around the little open space where
these scenes were being enacted. Discovering nobody, however, he
seemed for a moment perplexed; but instantly suspecting it was some
one who had outstripped him, he cried, with every feature working
with passion,

“Who fired that
shot? Who dared kill my dog?” And he concluded with a blasphemous
oath.

An answer came
sooner than he expected, for while he still scowled around, the
bushes parted directly in front of him, and Uncle Lawrence appeared,
his finger on the trigger of his gun, and the piece held ready for
instant service.

“I fired it, you
villain,” coolly replied the veteran, placing himself before Kate,
but without looking at her, while all the time he watched the outlaw
as warily as one would eye a panther about to spring.

“Keep still—don’t
touch me,” he whispered to our heroine immediately, in a tone so
low as to be heard only by Kate. “Help is near, if we can gain
time. I’ll die with you, my child, if I can’t save you.”

As he spoke, he
still kept his eyes on Arrison, his finger on the trigger, his piece
ready for instant use.

CHAPTER XL.

POMP AGAIN

His hand did quake,

And tremble like a leaf of aspen green. —Spenser.

Still as he fled his eye was backward cast,

As if his fear still followed him behind,

As flew his steed as if his bands had brast,

And with his winged heels did tread the wind. —Spenser.

The adventure of
Pomp with the black bull, or, as his mother persisted in declaring,
“wid dat ole enemy Satan,” had no little influence on the events
of this story, for it was partly in consequence that Kate received no
succor sooner from either Sweetwater or the Forks.

Up to within an hour
of dinner, Mrs. Warren felt no uneasiness at her niece’s absence,
but when the time for that meal came, without the return of Kate, the
good dame began to be seriously alarmed. Our heroine had not only
said that she would not be gone for more than two hours, but had
never before protracted her stay to dinner time.

Another circumstance
contributed to the fears of Mrs. Warren. During the course of the
morning the quiet of Sweetwater had been suddenly disturbed, by the
appearance of a body of cavalry, which, emerging from the woods in
the direction of Mr. Herman’s, had paused for awhile to water their
horses at the head of the pond. Lying about under the trees, in a
temporary bivouac, while their chargers cooled off, the dismounted
horsemen had not, at the time, affected the good dame with any other
feeling than that of admiration of their picturesque appearance. But
when the trumpet had summoned them to the saddle; when they had wound
slowly past the bridge, with their arms glittering in the sun; and
when, two hours after, dinner was ready to be served, without Kate
having returned, Mrs. Warren began, not only to be alarmed at her
niece’s disappearance, but to connect that disappearance with the
advent of the cavalry.

“Deary me,” she
cried, wringing her hands, as she walked the parlor, “how could
Charles leave us so unprotected. These rebel horsemen have carried
off Kate, there isn’t a doubt of it.” For Mrs. Warren, with the
prejudices of too many of her class, persisted in believing that the
patriots were little better than highwaymen. “Oh! my poor niece! My
poor niece!”

She burst into
tears, and in this condition Pomp found her, when, some time later,
he made his appearance to ask her whether dinner should be served
immediately, or whether she would wait for Miss Aylesford.

“I couldn’t
eat,” she answered. “Tell Dinah to keep the dinner waiting till
my niece returns: that is, poor dear! if she ever returns. I’ve a
presentiment she won’t, though. I felt so dreadful, when she went
away this morning, that I know something terrible would happen.”
And again she gave way to loud weeping.

Pomp, in
consternation, summoned his mother, who, in turn, called in the
assistance of the lady’s maid. Opportunely, at this crisis, Pomp’s
other parent appeared, and he, as the only male present, proceeded to
take the reins of authority into his own hands.

“Look a here, yer
lazy, good-for-nuffin wagabond,” he cried, turning to Pomp and
cuffing him soundly, “how dare yer stand dar a-gapin’, when yer
know yer ought to be off a-lookin’ up young Missus? Yer’ll come
to the gallous, some day, deed yer will.”

Pomp ran to a
corner, defending his ears with his hands, and protesting, in a
whining tone, that he did not know where to go.

“Yer lie, yer
young scape-grace,” interrupted the irate parent. “Young Missus
took der road to Uncle Lawrence’s, and dar yer’ll find her, if
nuffin has happened. Go right off, not a word,” and he menacingly
followed the unwillingly retreating messenger, adding, “go, or I’ll
skin yer, deed I will. Maybe she’s at Aunt Chloe’s, or maybe her
bridle’s broke. Take der colt, and ride for dear life,” he cried,
elevating his voice louder and louder, as Pomp increased his
distance.

Mrs. Warren, who had
become quite hysterical, was gradually soothed by assurances that
Kate had not met with any serious misadventure, and that the American
cavalry, at least, had not interfered with her.

“I axed one ob de
men,” said Dinah, “who was de handsum officer a ridin’ at de
head; and he told me dat it was a grand furren count.”

“Do you remember
his name?” said Mrs. Warren, eagerly, her face brightening. “A
nobleman wouldn’t do any harm to a gentlewoman. You’re sure
you’re not mistaken.”

“De blessed Lord
knows I’se telling de truf,” answered Dinah. “I wouldn’t for
de whole world lose my poor ole soul, by telling a lie.”

“You don’t
recollect his name? Was it Pulaski? The Count Pulaski, I believe,
commands a regiment of cavalry in the American army.”

“Dat’s de name.
Count Poorlackey,” cried Dinah.

“Pulaski,” said
Mrs. Warren, correcting her, and smiling through her tears.

“Well, Poorlackey
or Puleskaski; it’s all one, I spose,” replied Dinah, with an air
of offended dignity. But, relenting immediately, she added, “Now,
Missus, ef yer’ll just eat a little bit of somethin’, say de wing
of dat boiled chicken, dat’s a spoilin’ wid waitin,’ you’ll
feel like anodder person; deed yer will.”

The eloquence of
Dinah, who continued expatiating on this subject for some time,
finally induced Mrs. Warren to consent to her wishes. Buoyed up with
the persuasion that Pomp would soon return, bringing intelligence of
Kate, she ate with appetite, and indeed forgot for a season her
niece, in the delicacies before her.

Meantime, Pomp had
saddled the colt and set forth, but with reluctant steps, for his
thoughts reverted to his adventure of the preceding evening, and his
teeth shook in anticipation, when he remembered that his road would
lie directly past the spot where he had been set upon, as he
conscientiously believed, by the Arch Enemy. As he approached the
head of the pond, he drew the colt into a walk, and began to
soliloquize thus with himself:

“Yer’s in a fix
now, Pomp, ef ebber yer was. Ef yer go after young Missus, de debbil
will cotch you sure; and ef yer don’t go, yer daddy’ll skin you.”

He had now reached
the point where the two roads met, that to the right leading past the
church and across the bridge, and that to the left conducting to Aunt
Chloe’s and Mr. Herman’s. He came to a dead halt.

“Yer’ll be a
darn fool, Pomp,” he soliloquized again, and his teeth began to
chatter with the thought, “to run right into de jaws of de debbil,
arter havin’ got off once. He’s a lyin’ dar, like a roarin’
lion, ready to jump out on yer.”

As he thus
reflected, he slowly turned the colt’s head to the right.

“Pears to me,”
he resumed, glancing affrightedly over his shoulder towards the
haunted road, “dat poor young Missus has been a took off by dis ole
Satan; and dat it wouldn’t do no good, sartin it wouldn’t, to go
arter her. It would ony be givin’ yerself, Pomp, to de debbil, deed
it would.”

The colt’s head
was now turned even more to the bridge, and Pomp had actually
permitted it to walk a few paces in its direction, when suddenly he
checked the animal.

“Pomp,” he said,
“what yer doin’? Yer’ll get skinned alive, sartin sure. Yer ole
daddy never said he’d do it, dat he didn’t. Lor’ Almighty, how
he licked yer, Pomp, dat last time; and de more yer cried ‘murder,’
the more he said he’d giv’ yer ‘somethin’ to cry murder fur,’
deed he did.” And Pomp rubbed sympathetically that portion of his
person which had felt most keenly his sire’s wrath.

It would have moved
even the most serious to mirth to have seen Pomp’s countenance, as
he thus alternated in his fears. Twice he turned the colt’s head
towards the fatal road, and twice altered his mind, the whimsical
contortions of his face, all the time, exceeding anything that
Hogarth ever painted. At last there arose, out of the heart of the
forest on the left, one of those low, long wails, which, on a summer
day, is often the precursor of a coming storm. Pomp’s already
excited imagination needed only the smallest circumstance to decide
him. The moan of the rising wind was to him irresistible proof of the
presence of the Arch Enemy. He dug his heels into the flanks of the
colt instinctively, and sped over the bridge, as yet with no fixed
determination where to go, but only to escape as well from parental
vengeance at Sweetwater, as from the supernatural foe: and as he
galloped off, his eyes were dilated to the size of saucers, his dark
visage positively paled, and his teeth chattered, as if they would
drop out of his jaws.

When Mrs. Warren
found that Pomp did not return, all her old fears came back. It was
night before she and her attendants finally abandoned the hope of
seeing him, and then it was too late to take further action. Besides,
her servants were, by this time, nearly as incapacitated as herself.
This was especially true of Dinah, who filled the house with her
lamentations, declaring that Pomp had been carried off by Satan
himself, “deed he had.”

All that night Mrs.
Warren walked her room, wringing her hands and sobbing, and
occasionally falling into fits of hysterics.

CHAPTER XLI.

THE PRISONERS

Be just, and fear not!

Let all the ends thou aim’st at be thy country’s,

Thy God’s and truth’s, then if thou fall’st, O Cromwell!

Thou fall’st a blessed martyr. —Shakespeare.

Seek not to know to-morrow’s doom,

That is not ours which is to come. —Congreve.

Though Major Gordon
had been pinned to the earth by a bayonet, in the breach of the
fortification, he was fortunately not killed. For a moment, indeed,
he believed his last hour had come. He would, in fact, have perished,
had it not been for Uncle Lawrence. When he saw all hope of victory
gone, he dexterously threw himself down, across the prostrate body of
our hero; by this stratagem, both covering his friend, and inducing
the belief that he also was dead.

In the hurry and
confusion of the melee it was not difficult to carry out this
deception. The eager soldiery, fired with emulation of their
comrades, hurried to be within the works as soon as possible, and
consequently did not care to stop, in order to examine in whom of
their fallen enemies life yet remained. It was enough for the victors
that the way was now clear before them, and accordingly they rushed
forward, pell-mell, with loud shouts, over the prostrate heap of
wounded and slain.

In this way our hero
escaped with only a bayonet thrust in his left arm, while Uncle
Lawrence received only a few bruises, the result of being trodden
upon. Others, however, of the brave band were less fortunate. Charley
Newell lay stark and stiff, with a bullet through his heart, having
fallen in the early part of the conflict; while Mullen was seriously
injured by a wound in the side, from a bayonet. Three others also
paid the forfeit of their lives for their gallant defence.

When the fight was
over, and all danger of being murdered in hot blood had passed away,
Uncle Lawrence rose, surrendered himself a prisoner, and besought for
a surgeon to examine his friend’s wound. The rank of Major Gordon
obtained for him immediate attention. His hurt was found, however,
not to be dangerous, though it would incapacitate his arm for awhile.

“All the
inconvenience you will be subject to,” said the doctor, “will be
the having to carry your arm in a sling. Perhaps a little fever may
set in, but we can soon reduce that: I will look you up, later in the
day, and give you some medicine, if necessary.”

For the present the
prisoners were placed in a barn, Major Gordon being accommodated, as
an officer, with a place by himself. This was a small apartment,
partly shut off from the rest of the building, in which meal had been
kept. A few armsful of sweet, salt hay, thrown upon the floor,
rendered the accommodations a palace comparatively, at least to one
who had experienced the hardships of Valley Forge. Uncle Lawrence was
permitted to remain with our hero at his own request.

Here, as evening
closed in, the two friends sat, conversing in low tones. Major Gordon
was regretting that Uncle Lawrence had not availed himself of a
chance to retreat, instead of remaining to save the speaker’s life.

“I have no
family,” said the Major, “no ties on earth whatever. I have lost
this post. Life is comparatively of little value to me.”

“Don’t say that,
Major,” interrupted the veteran. “It’s agin religion, if not
agin natur. No man knows what the Lord may have in store for him.
You’ll not be long a prisoner, maybe, and you’ve friends, and
warm ones, where you least suspect, perhaps.”

“No, my good, kind
Herman; I will not affect to misunderstand you; I know to whom you
allude; but it is not so. Your partiality has misled you. That lovely
creature, whom I shall never cease to reverence, through my whole
life, is too far separated from me by fortune, social position, and
difference of political opinion, for me ever to hope to be honored
with her love. I talk to you as to a father, you see, frankly and
unreservedly. She can never be mine. It was folly in me to think
otherwise, even for a moment.”

“You are
low-speerited, Major,” said the honest old patriarch. “You’re
worn out, body and soul, just as I’ve been sometimes after hunting
all day. The loss of this post sticks in you too, I see; though a
braver fight was never made than you made, and so everybody, even the
tories, will say. Cheer up! It’s always darker, you know, just
afore the dawn.”

“Ah!” answered
the Major, “it’s less for myself than for you I am cast down. For
my sake you are a prisoner. And do you know,” he said, looking
earnestly at his companion, “what that means?”

In the uncertain
twilight of the place, the countenance of the speakers could still be
faintly discerned; yet Major Gordon saw no perceptible change in the
face of the old man, as the latter replied.

“It means a
prison-ship, the fever, and maybe death,” he said, “but I am in
the Lord’s hands, and his will be done. I’d do it over agin,
Major, this minit,” he said, earnestly, “if I had the chance; for
it was duty; and my notion is that a man’s got to do that, if wife,
and children, and life too, all go for it.”

The veteran’s
voice quivered at this thought of his family. But he resumed almost
immediately, and in a firm voice.

“Howsomever, as I
said afore, the Lord’s will be done. He took Daniel out of the
lion’s den, and saved Shadrach, Meschid and Abednego in the fiery
furnace; and if his ends are to be sarved by it, he’ll open my
prison doors as he did those of Peter.”

“Alas! I don’t
wish to say anything to shake your beautiful faith,” answered Major
Gordon, “but the days of miracles are over. It’s because I see no
way in which you are to be restored to your family, that I blame
myself so; for I was—say what you will—the instrument of bringing
you to this pass.”

Uncle Lawrence
paused a moment, when he replied, in a voice slightly husky, but
which he evidently tried to deprive of every evidence of emotion.

“If you please,
Major, we’ll say no more about the wife and boys at home. It’s
not the wisest plan, I take it, when a man’s never to see ‘em
agin, perhaps, to aggervate it by telling him of ‘em.”

“Forgive me,”
said the Major, deeply touched, and grasping his hand; feeling more
poignantly than ever the evil he had unconsciously done.

“Well, we’ll say
nothing about it,” continued Uncle Lawrence, “but there’s
nothing to forgive.”

There was a moment’s
silence; and then the old man spoke again.

“You’re
mistaken, though, Major,” he said, “in what you say of Miss
Katie. She’s no more a tory than you and me.”

“Not a royalist!”
exclaimed Major Gordon, surprised out of his depression. And he
added, after a pause for reflection. “Indeed, you must be mistaken.
What grounds have you for your opinion?”

“Did you ever hear
her say she was for the King?”

The Major thought
awhile. He could, to his surprise, recall no such circumstance.

“Never!” he said
at last.

“Haven’t you
heerd her say that she was a patriot?”

Again Major Gordon
reflected.

“I have,” he
said, “but only in jest.”

“Only in a joke,
you mean, I suppose,” answered Uncle Lawrence. “And don’t you
know Miss Katie well enough to know, that she says many a true thing
in that gay, joking way of hers? Have you ever heerd her make fun of
the poor fellers in General Washington’s army, the Lord bless him!
as she makes fun of the red coats and their dandy officers?”

Major Gordon was
compelled to acknowledge, greatly to his own astonishment, that he
never had. In fact a light began to break in upon him. He suspected
that he had been in error all along, simply for having started with a
fixed impression that Kate was a royalist, and having consequently
viewed her acts and weighed her words under that delusion. Uncle
Lawrence confirmed his opinion.

“I’ll tell you
what it is,” said the veteran, with a triumphant chuckle, “you’re
like what I was once, when I put on the preacher’s green
spectacles, which he wore for his eyes; everything was sort of
colored by the glasses; the sand looked as green as a meadow in
spring, and the sky all over sickish-like, as if it had been on a
spree, as they used to call it when I was a wild youngster. You’ve
thought Miss Katie was a tory because her aunt was, and her cousin;
but she’s as good a whig as Lady Washington herself; and what’s
more, she’d as soon marry a monkey as one of them red coated
captains,” and the old man snapped his fingers with a gesture of
sovereign contempt.

“There’s her
cousin,” Major Gordon ventured to say; for since the conversation
had became so familiar, he no longer avoided questions, which, at an
earlier period of his acquaintance with Uncle Lawrence, he would have
omitted from motives of delicacy to Kate.

“Her cousin!”
and the veteran snapped his fingers even more scornfully than before.
“If there wasn’t another man on airth, she’d never marry
Charles Aylesford. I tell you, Major,” he added decisively, “she’d
never marry where she don’t love; and there’s one man she loves
already, or my name ain’t Lawrence Herman.”

His hearer’s heart
leaped into his throat, but he dared not ask who the man was.

The veteran saw, by
the faint light the conflagration cast through the chinks, the
emotion of our hero; and his gratification was evinced by another
silent chuckle. He waited awhile, but receiving no answer, went on.

“You don’t ask
who the lucky man is,” he said. “Now what if I was to tell you it
was yourself?”

“You can’t mean
it!” cried Major Gordon, half starting to his feet; a glow of
happiness, such as he had never experienced, shooting through his
frame.

Uncle Lawrence was
about to answer, when the door opened, and a stranger stooped to
enter. He carried a lantern, which, though it threw a vivid glare on
the two prisoners, did not at first reveal the face of the intruder.
But, when the door was closed, this person raised the light so as to
show his countenance, and held out his hand to the Major, whom he
called by name.

“Captain Powell!”
exclaimed our hero in astonishment, rising and grasping the proffered
hand. “It is—isn’t it?”

“It is Captain
Powell,” was the reply. “The last person, no doubt, you expected
to see. But I owe you a heavy debt, and I have come to pay it, by
setting you free.”

“The Lord’s hand
is in it,” cried Uncle Lawrence, lifting up his eyes reverently.
“Did I not say, ‘trust in the Lord,’ Major?”

CHAPTER XLII.

THE RELEASE

Oh! give me liberty. —Dryden.

Thus doth the ever-changing course of things

Run a perpetual circle. —Daniels.

‘Tis not the many oaths, that make the truth;

But the plain single vow, that is vow’d true. —Shakespeare.

Captain Powell was
one of those who had been a listener at Aylesford’s bedside, during
the confession of the latter. Arriving in New York, after the loss of
his ship, without employment, or the chance of any, he had
volunteered on the expedition against the Neck, and hence his
presence. He it was, also, who had been commissioned by the chaplain
to quiet Aylesford, by carrying a message to the American camp.

Accordingly, Captain
Powell had left the room, but with other ulterior designs. He had
already ascertained that Major Gordon had been made prisoner, and
having heard his name mentioned by Aylesford more than once, a
suspicion of the truth had flashed upon him. Indeed, often since his
rescue from the wreck, had he speculated on an attachment springing
up between our hero and Kate; for though he had seen little of the
officer, he had observed enough, during those hours of terrible
peril, to be convinced that he and Miss Aylesford were eminently
fitted for each other. He resolved, accordingly, to see Major Gordon,
in this crisis, satisfied, that if it was as he suspected, the best
course would be to secretly liberate the prisoner.

“This is my
friend,” said our hero, turning to Uncle Lawrence, on observing
that Captain Powell seemed surprised at not finding him alone. “He
has, this day, saved my life, and whatever debt you may think you owe
to me, I transfer to him.”

The captain looked
at Uncle Lawrence, at these words, with increased interest. But he
was a judge of character, and the simple dignity with which the
veteran rose and returned the salutation of the visitor, at once
convinced the latter that the old man was no common person. The
delicate subject, however, on which he had come to see Major Gordon,
made him hesitate. Our hero, discovering this from his manner, said,

“You can speak,
Captain, before Mr. Herman, as frankly as if he was myself.”

Still, Captain
Powell knew not how to open his mission, and paused in embarrassment.
At last he bethought him to mention the fact, that “a young
gentleman, named Aylesford, had come into camp desperately wounded,
and was now at the point of death.”

The surprise of
Major Gordon, the horror of Uncle Lawrence, and the interest of both,
produced immediately a torrent of questions, which led the
conversation to the point that the visitor desired.

We will not attempt
to paint the excitement of the hearers, when Captain Powell informed
them that Kate was in the hands of Arrison. The emotion of Uncle
Lawrence was almost as great as that of Major Gordon. The former, in
fact, was more thoroughly acquainted with the refugee’s character,
and had consequently a keener sense, if possible, of Kate’s peril.
It was fortunate it was so: fortunate that the Major could scarcely
believe in depravity so great as Arrison’s; for otherwise he must
have gone mad with suspense.

As it was, he could
not keep still for an instant. He had started to his feet again, on
the first intimation of Kate’s danger; and had heard the conclusion
of the narrative, striding up and down the narrow apartment, like a
chafed lion in a cage.

“Oh! if I had been
there, instead of here,” he cried, clenching his hands. “Just
heaven! such villainy.”

“Calm yourself, my
dear Major,” answered Captain Powell. “You will be overheard.”
For this, as well as the former conversation between the prisoners,
had been conducted in low tones, to prevent the other occupants of
the building from hearing, whereas the Major, under the excitement of
his feelings, had uttered these exclamations aloud.

“Calm yourself,”
continued Captain Powell. “It is to set you free, remember, that I
am here.”

The words were
scarcely uttered before Major Gordon stopped in his walk, and seizing
the speaker’s hand, wrung it with energetic gratitude. His heart,
however, was too full to allow him utterance.

“I need not say,”
resumed Captain Powell, “that there is not a minute to be lost.”

But suddenly a shade
of deep concern extinguished the light in Major Gordon’s
countenance. For the instant he had forgotten his fellow prisoner.
But it had been only for an instant. Much as he desired freedom, in
order to rescue Kate, or die in the attempt, he could not abandon
Uncle Lawrence. He paused, and fixed his eyes on the old man, who
stood silent and motionless, though every feature of his face was
working with intense emotion; emotion not on his own account; not
because the Major was to be freed, and himself remain a prisoner, but
because his darling was in the hands of such a ruffian as Arrison.

“I cannot go,”
said Major Gordon, turning frankly to Captain Powell, “at least
alone. My friend must accompany me. He has a family, and his life is
precious to them; let him be released in my stead.”

Captain Powell
looked perplexed. But Uncle Lawrence spoke up.

“No,” said he,
addressing Captain Powell, “I am an old man, and my time is nearly
out, while the Major is young, and can yet be of service to his
country.”

“But the young
lady, consider her, sir,” urged Captain Powell, speaking to Major
Gordon. “Time is precious, and succor ought to be sent at once. For
God’s sake, Major, don’t stand on scruples, which would honor you
at another time, but are only periling Miss Aylesford’s life at
this crisis.”

A sharp pang of
agony shot visibly across his hearer’s face. But the Major was
inexorable. He resembled Uncle Lawrence, indeed, in the inflexibility
with which he walked in the path of duty, when that duty became
plain. No martyr, condemned to pass barefoot over burning
plough-shares, could have executed his task more unflinchingly.

“Mr. Herman,” he
replied, “is the more suitable person then to be released, for he
knows every acre of the forests about Sweetwater; and can do more, in
an hour, in tracking these ruffians to their den, than I could in a
day.”

Captain Powell was
evidently struck with this remark. He looked inquiringly at Uncle
Lawrence, feeling, by that instinct which is called insight into
character, that the veteran would speak the truth in reply,
irrespective of conventional reserve on the one hand, or of
self-interest on the other.

“I’ll not deny,”
said the patriarch, mildly, “but what the Major speaks truth, in
that partic’lar. I’ve hunted a’most every inch of the woods,
for a dozen miles about, on every side, these forty years nigh. And
I’d give,” he added, earnestly, “half of the years I may have
to live, if the Lord allowed me the right to do it, that I might be
free. I’d burn the rascal out, like a fox from his hole, I’ll
warrant, afore to-morrow’s sun was many hours high.”

Captain Powell
looked from one to the other, in perplexity, for a full minute,
before he spoke again. At last he said, with sudden impulse,

“You shall both be
free. Nay! no thanks,” he continued, as the Major sprang forward
again, and grasped his hand, “but listen. I have a pass for the
Major. You, my venerable sir, are luckily about my height. You must
exchange hats and coats with me,” removing the articles as he
spoke, and proffering them to Uncle Lawrence. “Go boldly out, for I
left the pass with the sentinel, as if you were myself. The breeze
was beginning to blow freely up the river, when I came in. You’ll
find a boat, with her sail ready, lying near the outside of the camp.
The sentinel there will let you pass, on giving the watchword,
‘loyalty.’ Make the best of your way, in God’s name, up the
stream; and may success crown your efforts!”

He pressed the hands
of both his hearers, as he ceased speaking, and the change of
garments having been effected, fairly pushed them out of the place,
first giving the lantern in charge to Uncle Lawrence, and whispering,
as a parting admonition, “I brought it in with me, and they’ll
naturally expect to see me carry it out—be sure to lose not a
minute, for the trick must soon be found out.”

We will not detain
the reader with the obstacles which the fugitives met on their way to
the boat. To avoid being seen they were forced to skulk along in the
shadows; but twice even this failed; though fortunately the knowledge
of the pass-word secured their safety. At last they reached the
skiff, and were almost instantly sweeping up the river, carrying what
was a wholesale breeze, when we consider the size of their craft.

She was, indeed, but
a mere cockle-shell, one of those small, decked, gunning skiffs, such
as are still used in those waters, intended for only one person, but
capable on emergency of carrying two; and she sank under the weight
of her passengers, quite to the gunwale. There is, in these light and
buoyant craft, which a strong man may easily carry on his shoulder, a
small hole cut in the deck, where the sportsman sits, covered with
sedge, and so paddles himself unperceived upon the wild fowl. Into
this aperture, Uncle Lawrence directed Major Gordon to insert
himself, while the old man, sitting flat on the stern, took both the
tiller and sheet in his hand.

“Now, all I’ll
ask,” said the veteran, “is that you’ll trim boat as I tell
you, and that this ‘ere wind will hold all night. There’s one or
two reaches, where we’ll have to row, probably.”

“But I must first
land and seek my late command,” interposed Major Gordon. “If
Count Pulaski has come up, I will then attend you; but if not,” and
he sighed audibly, “you will have to proceed alone.”

Uncle Lawrence did
not reply immediately. But a little reflection convinced him that his
companion had decided aright, and therefore he said nothing to change
the Major’s opinion, though his heart ached.

“We had better
come to here,” he said, at last. “There’s a road, somewhere
near, that’ll take us where we’ll be pretty sure to find the
Count, if he’s on the ground.”

CHAPTER XLIII.

PULASKI

The storms of heaven

Beat on him; gaping hinds stare at his woe. —Joanna Baillie.

Deserted is my own good hall,

Its hearth is desolate; Wild weeds are gathering on the wall,

My dog howls at the gate. —Byron.

An exile, ill in heart and frame,—

A wanderer, weary of the way. —Mrs. Osgood.

Fastening the skiff
to the overhanging bough of a tree, Uncle Lawrence stepped ashore,
followed by Major Gordon. For about ten minutes, the two advanced
along a narrow woodland path, until suddenly they were stopped by the
challenge of a sentry.

Yielding themselves
prisoners immediately, they were conducted to a woodland bivouac,
where several volunteers recognized both Major Gordon and his
companion. The horses picketed about, with the dismounted cavalry
soldiers, imparted to the Major the glad intelligence that Count
Pulaski had arrived.

“Say to the
Count,” he said, addressing his captor, “that I desire an
interview, as soon as possible.” For he was now all impatience to
be gone.

In a few minutes he
was ushered into the presence of his successor, whom we must take
this opportunity to describe.

The Count Pulaski,
who served so gallantly in the war of independence, until he fell at
the storming of Savannah, must not be confounded with his relative,
who achieved the daring feat of carrying off Stanislaus, King of
Poland, from the heart of his capital. Nevertheless he was scarcely
inferior in daring to that adventurous conspirator. Driven from his
native land, in consequence of his connexion with the patriotic
party, the Pulaski to whom we now introduce the reader, had, like
Kosciusko, offered his sword to the struggling colonies of England,
and now held the rank of Brigadier General, with the command of the
entire American cavalry.

A more consummate
horseman, perhaps, never lived. When in the saddle he seemed to be a
part of the charger he bestrode. The traditions told of his skill
appear really fabulous. He could pick up a pistol when galloping at
speed; dismount and mount again in full career; and make his horse
execute the most difficult feats apparently without moving hand or
limb. Seventy-five years ago, equestrianism, as an art, was carried
to a perfection unknown at the present time; and to say that Pulaski
was considered the most perfect rider of his day, is, therefore, to
assert that he would have been regarded as a miracle now.

Those who were
intimate with the exile spoke enthusiastically of his lofty honor and
the steadfastness of his friendship. But the number of these were
few. Though courageous in his deportment, he was reserved, and this,
added to his ignorance of the language, circumscribed the number of
his associates. When alone he was the victim of a settled melancholy;
for he remembered then, in all its force, that he was an exile, and
what exile meant. As an officer he was diligent, sober and intrepid,
never permitting himself to be disheartened by difficulties, but
prosecuting the vexatious duty of organizing the cavalry force amid a
thousand discouragements. The legionary corps which he established,
and which he so chivalrously led till he fell at the siege of
Savannah, was the model of one subsequently raised by Major Henry
Lee, and which won immortal laurels under Greene, in the southern
campaign.

Major Gordon was
among the few who enjoyed the friendship of Pulaski. The gallant Pole
was standing with folded arms, looking sadly up to the sky, thinking
that the stars, which shone down on him, shone also on his native
land, when the Major was announced. At once the melancholy faded from
the Count’s face, and he eagerly embraced our hero in the Polish
fashion.

“Mon ami,” he
cried, in excellent French, “this is, indeed, a surprise. I heard
you had been taken prisoner, or killed, the accounts did not agree as
to which. How did you manage to escape?”

In a few hurried
words, Major Gordon explained the cause and manner of his
deliverance. The Count listened breathlessly. When, at last, the
Major paused, Pulaski said, earnestly,

“Much as I wish to
have a friend’s companionship tonight, for I am in one of my dark
moods, I beg you, dear Major, to be gone at once. Miss Aylesford must
be rescued, or avenged, no matter at what cost. I shall count it one
of the few fortunate events of my life, that I arrived here in time
to release you from your command, especially if you succeed in
recovering this fair girl from the hands of the refugees.”

The Count
accompanied Major Gordon to the river side, where, with many a
“God-speed” from Pulaski, our hero and his companion embarked
again. The little lateen sail was given to the wind, and the boat
went dancing up the stream, until it vanished from the eyes of the
spectators like the white wing of a gull disappearing in the distant
gloom of the seaboard.

For some time there
was silence on board the skiff. But at last Uncle Lawrence spoke.

“We’ll be able,
I suppose,” said he, “to find a few men at the Forks; and we’d
better strike into the woods there, instead of following the track of
the varmints from the river. I’ve a notion I know pretty well where
to find the rogues. If Arrison was alone, you might have to hunt him
here, and there, and everywhere; but when a lady’s in the case,
he’s sure to take to some roof; and there’s a clearing, a matter
of six miles or so, sou’east of Sweetwater, and right in the heart
of the swamp, where a little gal lives, that I’ve heerd was a niece
of Arrison’s. I once stopped there for a drink of water; but though
it’s the only time I was ever there, seein’ I don’t gin’raly
hunt on that side of Sweetwater, I can go to the place as straight as
my gun would carry buckshot; it’s a pity,” he added, with a sigh,
“that I’ve lost the old piece.”

The fugitives did
not, however, continue their route without pausing at the post where
the refugees were fired on. They did this in the faint hope that the
patriot boat, which Aylesford had seen set forth in pursuit, had
overtaken the refugees.

Neither Major Gordon
nor Uncle Lawrence knew how much each had secretly nourished this
expectation, until it was destroyed by the intelligence they received
at the post. But one good result followed the narrative they
hurriedly gave in return. The sentry, who proved to be an old
acquaintance of Uncle Lawrence, when he learned who the lady was, and
into whose hands she had fallen, promised to follow, within half an
hour, with four other able woodsmen. “We shan’t be wanted below
now, since the Neck’s burnt,” he said, “unless the British
advance up the river; which they’ll not try, I reckon, since
Pulaski’s come.”

The sun was but an
hour high, when every arrangement had been completed, and a party of
a dozen determined men, all experienced shots, and all well armed,
set out from the Forks, under the guidance of Uncle Lawrence and the
leadership of Major Gordon. To hunt down the refugees, if it took
days instead of hours; to rescue Kate unharmed, and to avenge her, at
any cost:—these were the solemn vows of every member of the party.

While Uncle Lawrence
had been marshaling the expedition, Major Gordon had thrown himself
on Selim, and galloped to Sweetwater, with the faint hope that Kate
might have been released, or made good her escape. Early as it was,
he found Mrs. Warren already up. The good lady, as we have seen, had
not slept a wink; and, just before the Major’s arrival, she had
been summoned to interrogate Pomp, who, to the amazement of all, had
suddenly appeared, leading Arab captive.

The lad, of course,
suppressed his fright, but said, that not hearing anything of Kate on
the road to Mr. Herman’s, but observing the tracks of what he
thought her horse, he had followed down the river, by unfrequented
paths, till about nightfall, when, passing a small cabin, he had been
surprised to hear Arab whinny, from a shed that was apparently used
for a cow-stable.

“When I hears
dat,” said he, “I goes up to de door, and axes ef dey wouldn’t
let me stay all night, telling ‘em I’d lost my way, and was
afeerd of de refugees. Dey said I might, ef I’d sleep in de barn;
and guv me some cold pork. De minnit I goes in de stable, Arab he
knew me, and lays his nose agin me, as ef he’d been a kitten, deed
he did. I got in among de salt hay, and begun to snore dre’ful
loud; but I wasn’t asleep for all dat. By’m bye, when de moon
rose, I gits up, saddles de colt, takes Arab by de halter, and here I
is.” And he looked around, not a little proud of his exploit, while
Dinah, hugging him in her arms, sobbed over her recovered boy.

It was at this
juncture that Major Gordon arrived. Mrs. Warren, in dishabille, her
hair all dishevelled, no sooner saw him, than she rushed forward,
frantically asking if he had brought back Kate. The Major, who had
hoped, as we have seen, to find Miss Aylesford at Sweetwater, was not
less disappointed than the anxious aunt; but he controlled his
feelings better, and considerately forbore informing Mrs. Warren
either of the terrible situation of her niece, or of Aylesford’s
death. A fit of hysterics almost immediately seized the now
heart-broken woman, in which condition, time being precious, the
Major was compelled to leave her, in order to reach the rendezvous.

Uncle Lawrence was
waiting for him on his return. The little party set forth
immediately, the veteran leading the way to the refugee’s hut,
almost in a straight line.

CHAPTER XLIV.

THE PURSUIT

A stony adversary, an inhuman wretch

Incapable of pity, void and empty

From ev’ry drachm of mercy. —Shakespeare.

Spare not the babe,

Whose dimpled smiles from fools exhaust their mercy. —Shakespeare.

The astonishment of
Arrison, when he discovered the escape of Kate, was only equaled by
his rage. He was not the first, however, to detect her flight. Having
resisted the influence of the last night’s potations longer than
the rest, he slept sounder than some of the others, and was still
lost in a deep stupefying slumber, when one of the gang waking, and
looking around, as he sat up on the floor, started to observe the
door of the inner chamber open.

“Hello!” he
cried, rubbing his eyes, to be sure that he beheld aright. “The
bird’s flown.”

With the words, he
sprang to his feet, and advancing hastily to the chamber, leaned over
Arrison’s recumbent body, and looked in. His suspicions were
immediately verified. Their prisoner was gone. The discovery struck
him in so ludicrous a light, that he burst into uproarious laughter.

This loud mirth
roused all the sleepers, Arrison among the rest.

“What do you
mean?” cried the latter, leaping to his feet, and collaring the
laugher. “What are you doing here?”

Arrison, still
confused in intellect, and not yet comprehending the truth, had
seized his comrade, by instinct, on finding the refugee so near
Kate’s chamber.

“Ha! ha!”
continued the youth, unable to restrain his merriment, “to think
she’s flown, after I nailed fast her window too.”

“Who’s flown?”
angrily cried Arrison, shaking the youth violently; while, with an
oath, he added, as he now first observed the open door, “You don’t
mean to say Miss Aylesford’s gone.”

The youth stopped
laughing, and breaking loose by a sudden effort, answered, with a
flushed and angry face,

“Take care who you
collar, Captain; I’m not a nigger.” And as Arrison rushed into
the chamber, he muttered, sulkily, “I’m not sorry she’s gone;
for he was goin’ to make all for himself there was to be made;
takin’ the oyster and leaving us the shell.”

A rapid glance
satisfied Arrison that his prey had really escaped, and he came back,
perfectly white with rage, just in time to hear the concluding
murmurs of the youth, though without being able to make out what was
being said.

“What’s that
you’re muttering, you mutinous rascal?” he shouted, darting on
the speaker. “I believe you had a hand in it. She couldn’t have
got off alone.”

The youth sprang
nimbly to one side, just in time to elude the grasp of his enraged
leader, and interposing the table between himself and Arrison, drew
his knife.

“Keep off,” he
cried, “or I’ll drive this into you, Captain or no Captain. Say
that again, if you dare. It was your own stupidity, in getting drunk,
not drawing the bolt on this side, and sleeping like a log of wood,
that let the girl off.”

He flourished his
weapon as he spoke, and glared at Arrison with such savageness, that
the latter, heated as he was with passion, paused. Before either
could make any new movement, and while they watched each other like
two angry tigers, the lieutenant, whom we have seen so active the
preceding day, rushed between them.

“Captain, you’re
too quick,” he cried; “Bill, put up your knife; the Captain’s
hardly awake. If the gal’s really gone,” he continued, more
composedly, “the best thing to do is to put after her; she can’t
have got far; and with that hound of yours,” and he turned to
Arrison, “we ought to be able to track her to hell itself.”

“I meant no
offence,” said Bill, who was easily mollified, as men of his
disposition usually are. “But when I found she’d got off, by
walking right through this ‘ere room, I couldn’t help thinking it
a good joke. She’s a gal of mettle, anyhow.” And he laughed
again, in spite of Arrison’s scowling brow, and the lieutenant’s
significant winks.

Arrison, now that he
had time to reflect, saw that Bill spoke the truth, and though the
youth’s laughter galled him, he could not resent it further. The
ties which held his followers to him, were wholly voluntary, and he
feared, if he persisted in wreaking his vengeance on Bill, that a
real mutiny might arise; for the lad was a general favorite, as he
always told the merriest tale, was continually joking to beguile the
time, and generally was the life of the gang, socially. So the chief
answered, smothering his rage, “I was but half awake, that’s a
fact. The jade’s had no one to help her but herself; and Bill must
forget what I said.” He held out his hand as he concluded, which
the youth took and shook in token of restored amity.

“That’s all I
ask, Captain,” replied Bill. “I don’t wonder you’re a little
riled, for if she’d been mine, as she was yourn, I’d have fell on
the first feller I saw, when I woke and found her gone, so infernally
rampaging mad would I have been. She’ll be lucky if she gets away;
for them ere swamps ain’t so easy for a stranger.”

But the wrath which
Arrison could not discharge on Bill, found vent on the helpless
child, his reputed niece. It suggested itself to him, at this point,
that the bloodhound must have been roused by Kate’s escape; that
the child must have interposed to quiet the dog; and that thus his
prey had succeeded in escaping. Scarcely had the speaker ceased,
therefore, before Arrison rushed out, and entering the barn, where
the child still lay asleep, grasped her rudely by the arm, and jerked
her to her feet.

Terrified, and as
yet but half awake, the poor thing began to tremble violently; and
seeing Arrison’s face distorted with rage, burst into tears,
exclaiming,

“Oh! don’t—please
don’t—”

But the ruffian,
shaking her violently, she could not proceed; and so remained sobbing
and choaking, piteously supplicating him with her eyes.

“You jade,” he
cried, “I’ll shake the breath out of you to some purpose. You
little liar, don’t dare to say you didn’t do it.”

“I didn’t say
it,” gasped the child. “Please don’t, ple-e-ase—”

But again he shook
her, till it seemed that her little limbs would be rent apart; and
her touching words of pleading ended in inarticulate murmurings. When
he had fairly exhausted himself by this brutal exhibition of passion,
he stopped, and holding her before him, as in a vice, said,

“Tell the truth,
or I’ll break every bone in your body. You kept the dog quiet while
she went off.”

“Oh! please,
don’t. You hurt me so,” answered the child, endeavoring, with one
of her little hands, to remove his iron grasp, which was bruising her
arm.

“Answer me,”
yelled the monster, purple with rage, and shaking the friendless
orphan again.

The child would not
reply falsely; she, therefore, said nothing.

“What! You won’t
speak?” he cried, perfectly beside himself and; he struck her a
blow over the head, which brought the blood gushing from her ears and
nose. She fell, as if dead, at his feet.

His comrades had
witnessed this scene, and though hardened to most descriptions of
crime, could not longer endure his brutality. Indeed, Bill and
another would have interfered before, if the lieutenant had not held
them back, telling them it was Arrison’s niece, and that “he had
a right to do as he pleased with her.” But now even this personage
overcame his scruples.

“Come, come,
Captain,” he said, picking up the child, “we’d better be off.
What’s done can’t be helped. She’s but a poor, weak thing,
anyhow; and who knows that the dog gave the alarm at all?”

At first Arrison
scowled at this interference, but the faces of his followers showed
him that the lieutenant had spoken the will of the majority. So,
resolving to punish her to his heart’s content at a future period,
he bade her “go and wash her face, and stop crying, or he’d give
her something to cry for,” and turned away.

It took but a few
minutes longer to complete the preparations for the pursuit. The
refugees hastily swallowed some food, and drained each a deep draught
of Jamaica, after which, with the bloodhound for their guide, they
began the search. The dog struck the trail immediately, and went off
in full chorus: and in a little while the pursuers were out of sight.

The child remained
where she had been left, sobbing as if her heart would break, and
with her face buried in her hands; every bone in her body aching from
the violence she had suffered.

“Oh! I wish I was
dead! I wish I was dead!” she cried, rocking her little body to and
fro. “Mother, mother, let me come to you;” and she looked up
piteously to the skies.

Gradually, however,
the passion of her tears ceased. She had often endured equally brutal
treatment before; and she was, in a measure, hardened to it. So her
sobs grew less frequent; her thoughts dwelt less on her own
sufferings; and she began to recollect Kate.

“I hope she’ll
get off,” she cried, jumping up and clapping her hands. “If she
only took the right road.”

But scarcely had she
spoken, when she reflected that, if his prey wholly escaped, Arrison
would return more violently enraged than ever. Experience warned her
that, in such a case, he would wreak double vengeance on her. She
burst into tears again, in almost speechless terror at the idea.

She could think of
nothing in this extremity, but the little prayers her mother had
taught her, and which she still murmured nightly before retiring, for
lack of others more suited to her years. So she fell on her knees,
and, with her hands clasped before her, prayed. But, with the almost
infantile words went up earnest heart-petitions, which, more eloquent
than the most burning language, reached—who shall doubt it?—the
ear of the Father of all.

When Uncle Lawrence
reached the hut, an hour or two later, the child, who had heard the
approach of the party, was nowhere to be seen; for she had hidden
herself in terror in the barn, thinking her persecutor was coming
back. But she was not long suffered to remain concealed. Alarmed at
the evidences of the debauch, Uncle Lawrence decided to search every
spot about; and thus the child was soon discovered. On finding that
the intruders were friends of Kate, the poor thing lost her terror,
however, and answered their questions eagerly, giving what
information she could as to the route the pursuers had taken.

The woodcraft of
Uncle Lawrence now came into full play. No Indian could have tracked
the refugees more surely than he did. Occasionally, a few moments
were lost in hesitancy, but he invariably selected the right crossing
at last. Such minutes of delay, however, were almost intolerable,
especially to Major Gordon; for, now that the crisis of Kate’s fate
approached, he felt the agony of suspense increase tenfold. His
incessant cry to himself was, “we shall be too late.” This
terrible conviction deepened, as the hours wore on without conducting
them to our heroine, or apparently bringing them nearer to the
refugees, the bay of whose bloodhound they listened for in vain.

But when the way
became more difficult, they began, though as yet ignorant of it, to
gain rapidly on Arrison; for, as the path had grown more intricate,
the bloodhound had been often at fault, and thus had lost much time.

At last the cry of
the hound was heard. What a thrill of joy it sent through Major
Gordon’s frame! Every nerve tingled, as he cried,

“She is yet safe.
On, on, for the love of God—we may not be too late after all.”

The pace of the
pursuers was now accelerated to a run. Suddenly Uncle Lawrence said,

“That dog is
nearly up with her; I know it by the quick way in which he cries.
Follow the track as fast as you can. I’ll take a short cut through
the swamp; I think I can make something by it, though none of the
rest can. The cry of the hound will lead me to the right spot.”

He had never ceased
running as he spoke; and it was wonderful to see how he could run,
with the weight of sixty winters on him; and he now vanished from
sight, the bushes crackling as he dashed right into the undergrowth.

Following the trails
made by the wild animals, and occasionally breaking through a
thicket; now wading in black, slimy water up to his knees, and now
plunging into blacker mud ankle-deep; and guiding himself, partly by
the cry of the hound, and partly by a woodman’s instinct of the
course which he knew Kate must have taken, he reached our heroine, as
we have seen, just in time to save her life by shooting the
bloodhound that was springing at her throat. Then pausing to reload,
with a veteran hunter’s precaution, he leaped into the open space,
and confronted Arrison.

Everything now
depended on the length of time it would take Major Gordon to come up
with his companions. Minutes, at present, were worth hours at any
other crisis.

CHAPTER XLV.

THE DEATH-SHOT

With wild surprise,

As if to marble struck devoid of sense. —Thomson.

Amaz’d,

Astonished stood, and blank, while horror chill

Ran through his veins. —Milton.

Arrison was
thunderstruck by the sudden apparition of Uncle Lawrence. His first
movement was to start back, as if he saw a spirit; for the old man
was the last person he had expected to confront him. But in a moment
he recovered his usual presence of mind. When he perceived that he
was opposed by veritable flesh and blood, and that too in the person
of one he hated for his goodness, he secretly exulted; for having no
suspicion that Uncle Lawrence had friends at hand, he considered that
his long threatened vengeance was certain.

Yet he was in no
hurry to assail the old man. Aware that his followers must be close
behind him, and that a few moments at furthest would enable them to
arrive, he determined to keep the contest confined to words, if
possible, until they came up. Old as Uncle Lawrence was, he bore a
reputation for bravery, skill and strength, which made Arrison quite
willing to avoid a hand to hand struggle with the patriarch.

“You!” cried
Arrison. “Take a word of advice then, old man, and don’t mix
yourself up with a business that’s none of your concern.”

“But suppose I
think it does consarn me,” coolly answered Uncle Lawrence. “Miss
Katie here is an old pet of mine, so stand aside and let us pass.”

“Not so fast.
Again, I say, go your ways and save your life.”

“I do not go
without her. Stand aside, villain.”

“Never,”
exclaimed Arrison, chafed at these words. “I warn you not to try my
patience too far.”

“I’m not afeerd
of you, James Arrison,” answered the old man, in a tone of
contempt, “and you know it. Keep your warning for some one else.”

“Will you go?”

“No!”

Scarcely had the
veteran spoken, when the refugee pulled trigger. But, quick as he had
been, the old man was quicker. Resolving to save his fire if
possible, in order to be better prepared for self-defence, if the
refugees arrived before Major Gordon, he suddenly and dexterously
thrust forward the barrel of his piece in such a manner as to knock
up the gun of the outlaw. The movement was so swift that Arrison had
time neither to counteract it, nor to prevent his load from going
off; and the consequence was that his ball whistled harmlessly over
Uncle Lawrence’s head, burying itself in the tree against which
Kate leaned, a few inches above her. A savage oath broke from the
refugee at this failure, and his eyes flashed lightning as it were.
He shortened his gun instantly, as if to club it; then hesitated
whether he had not better throw it away and rush in on his
antagonist; and finally stood irresolute, his face purple with rage
and baffled hate.

Had it suited Uncle
Lawrence’s purpose that second would have been the last of the
ruffian’s existence. A younger man would have been unable, in the
sudden heat of the affray, to have restrained himself, even from
motives of the clearest policy. But the veteran was as cool and wary
now as when sitting by his own hearth. Nothing could induce him to
waste his fire; for, in that case, he might not have time to reload
before the other refugees came up.

“Throw down your
gun,” he said, however. “You are at my mercy.”

What answer Arrison
would have made, if no succor had arrived, we cannot say. But, at
this crisis, his sharpened ear heard the crackling of the
undergrowth, as his followers came running up at full speed, their
pace accelerated by the two shots which had been fired in such quick
succession; for though it has required a considerable time to
describe all this, the whole period between the death of the
bloodhound and the useless discharge of Arrison’s gun, had scarcely
occupied more than a minute.

Aware that an
overwhelming force was now at hand, the outlaw sprang forwards
towards Kate, endeavoring to elude his antagonist, and crying out,

“Shoot the old
man; but spare the girl. Shoot quick!”

But he did not
finish the sentence. Uncle Lawrence, who faced the intruders, had the
advantage of observing what Arrison could not; and saw that the new
comers, so far from being refugees entirely, were partly Major Gordon
and his follows.

In fact, the speed
of the patriots had been also accelerated by the shots; they had
rushed forward at full run, fearing that Uncle Lawrence was
overpowered; and had arrived at the scene simultaneously with the
outlaws, the latter only discovering the presence of foes at the very
moment that Arrison cried out; for, on their part, they had been so
entirely absorbed in what was going on ahead, that they had neither
looked behind, nor heard the steps of their pursuers. Instead,
therefore, of being able to assist their leader, the outlaws found
their own hands full; for the patriots dashed upon them at once, like
hunters that have run down a wolf, which has long been the terror of
the district.

All this Uncle
Lawrence took in with one rapid glance, and seeing that the ruffian’s
time had come, he leveled his gun at Arrison’s heart and pulled the
trigger, just as the wretch was darting past to lay his sacrilegious
hands on Kate.

“To die the death
of a dog at last,” he mentally ejaculated. “I knew it years ago.”

As he thus
soliloquized, the burly person of the ruffian, spinning half round,
while the arms were suddenly thrown up, tumbled headlong to the
ground, where it fell directly across the body of the dead hound.
Life was gone, even before the form touched the earth.

Meantime the
pursuers had closed with the refugees, discharging their guns, each
at an antagonist, and following this up by closing with such as were
either not injured, or only wounded. Some, dropping their fire-arms,
drew their swords, and engaged in a hand to hand conflict; others
clubbed their pieces, using them like maces; and some grappled with
the refugees to prevent the latter employing their guns, few of which
had been discharged in consequence of the surprise.

The onslaught had
been so unexpected, and was kept up in so rapid a manner, that the
refugees did not hold out long. Two were killed at the first assault;
others soon lay on the ground desperately wounded; and finally the
survivors, seeing that all was over, broke desperately from their
antagonists, and rushing madly into the next thicket, disappeared
from sight. Only two succeeded, however, in making good their escape
in this way, and one of them at least was seriously wounded, for the
bushes were stained with blood as he passed.

The victory was
complete, and, owing to the surprise, comparatively without cost. The
patriots did not lose a man, and had but two seriously wounded, the
rest receiving only slight scratches, scarcely requiring surgical
aid. As one of the conquerors was accustomed to say, in rehearsing
the transaction afterwards,—he was an inveterate duck-shooter whose
language always drew its metaphors from his favorite pursuit— “We
stole up onparceived, you understand, and killed and wounded five,
whom we got, besides two that scattered that we didn’t get.”

Uncle Lawrence had
not joined in the fray after his decisive shot. In fact, the conflict
was over before he could have taken any further part in it, even if
he had wished; but knowing that a chance shot might strike Kate, he
chivalrously threw himself before her; and thus protected her at the
risk of his own life.

Major Gordon,
ignorant whom he was assailing, had engaged Arrison’s lieutenant.
The latter had been the first to discover the pursuers, and had
turned immediately and fired at our hero; but in the hurry of the act
had fortunately missed his mark. The Major, having no gun, had rushed
in with his sword, and though incommoded by his wounded arm, which he
still carried in a sling, had run his antagonist through, after an
ineffectual attempt on the part of the refugee to avert the lunge.
Disregarding every other consideration, our hero had sprung to Kate’s
side immediately, which he attained just as the combat was finished,
and the last of the outlaws took to flight.

The cold formalities
of conventional life were forgotten, in that moment of joyous
excitement, as if they had never existed. Even those considerations
of superior fortune and presumed difference of political opinion,
which had so tormented our hero before, were overlooked. Clasping
Kate’s hand, he pressed it with a fervor, which brought the
eloquent blood over her pallid countenance. On her part, the behavior
of Kate was equally impulsive. It is fair to presume that she did not
know what she was doing; for she returned the pressure almost
convulsively. Giving one long, grateful look, in which her whole soul
went forth, as her eyes met those of her lover, she essayed to speak.
But though the sweet lips half parted, no words followed, for a
faintness suddenly overcame her; and feeling everything swimming
around, she involuntarily staggered towards the Major for support,
who clasped her in his arms just as she was falling to the ground.

When next Kate
opened her eyes, her head was lying against her lover’s shoulder,
while Uncle Lawrence, kneeling beside her as tenderly as one of her
own sex, was bathing her temples.

For an instant she
did not recognize where she was. She even shuddered at first, with a
vague notion that she was still in the power of the outlaws; but when
she saw Major Gordon’s face, which was looking anxiously down on
her, she closed her eyes with a smile. If, simultaneously, she
nestled closer to that manly shoulder, it was only for an instant;
for, while she was still half unconscious of what she did; for
immediately after she opened her eyes again with a deep blush, and
made an effort to rise.

But Uncle Lawrence
prevented this. He gently pressed her back, while bathing her
forehead, saying, soothingly,

“Hush, darling,
and lie still a bit longer. You’ll be fainting right off again, if
you get up awhile yet: and you mustn’t think you hurt the Major,
for it’s the other arm that’s wounded.”

To his dying day,
Major Gordon was accustomed to say that a sly look, almost
imperceptible, accompanied these last words. But, if so, Kate saw
nothing of this, having grown faint again, from the exertion she had
made. Her head now swam around to such a degree, that she was
compelled, at this crisis, to close her eyes, and even to repose once
more on the Major’s shoulder.

Strange to say, the
turn of Uncle Lawrence came next. When Kate was, at last,
sufficiently restored to be able to sit up unsupported, she observed
a slight stream of blood trickling down the hand of the good old man.
With a faint scream she called Uncle Lawrence’s attention to it,
who, stripping up his sleeve, found, to his surprise, that a ball had
struck him just above the wrist; evidently one of those discharged in
the melee, and which would have hit Kate, if he had not interposed
his body, in the true spirit of ancient knighthood.

“It’s nothing,
my child,” he said, as, indeed, Kate immediately perceived.

But even while he
spoke he fainted dead away, for Uncle Lawrence, brave as he was, both
morally and physically, had that strange peculiarity common to some
of the most courageous men that ever lived, to swoon at sight of his
own blood.

It was now Kate’s
turn, and, weak as she was, she would allow no one else to bathe the
old man’s brow and bind up his wound. Uncle Lawrence’s swoon soon
passed away, however. When he opened his eyes, it was with a smile of
gratefulness inexpressibly sweet.

“The Lord bless
you, darling,” he said, tenderly, as his gaze lingered on Kate’s
countenance. Then he added, looking around on the anxious faces,
“Pretty doings, to get sick in this way, like a narvous, sterricky
woman. You’d drum such a cowardly fellow out of the army,
Major—wouldn’t you?”

“If we had a few
thousand heroes like you,” answered Major Gordon, pressing his
hand, while sudden tears dimmed his eyes, “we’d have had our
country free long ago.”

CHAPTER XLVI.

SWEETWATER AGAIN

Such is the power of that sweet passion,

That it all sordid baseness doth expel,

And the refined mind doth newly fashion

Unto a fairer form, which now doth dwell

In his high thoughts, that would itself excel,

Which he, beholding still with constant sight,

Admires the mirror of so heavenly light. —Spenser.

But now lead on;

In me is no delay; with thee to go

Is to stay here; with thee here to stay

Is to go hence unwilling; thou to me

Art all things under heaven. —Milton.

It was some time
before Kate was able to undertake the fatigues of a return. At last,
however, she set forth, supported by Major Gordon, who had,
notwithstanding his wound, an arm uninjured to offer to her. When
they had emerged from the denser part of the swamp, it was proposed
to construct a litter for her, the road now allowing of her being
transported in this way; but she declined the proffer, insisting that
she was able to walk to the hut, at least.

For, as the way led
back to within a mile of that place, Uncle Lawrence decided that it
would be advisable to go there at once, because Kate could then
obtain some repose, while a messenger, despatched to Sweetwater,
might bring a carriage to transport her home, later in the day. As by
this plan Mrs. Warren would obtain intelligence of her safety sooner
than if they all pursued their way to the family mansion immediately,
Kate pronounced in favor of it. Moreover, by this scheme, she would
be able to bring away with her the orphan child, who had been so
instrumental in her escape, and who, now that the reputed uncle was
no more, would be willing, Kate reasoned, to accompany her to
Sweetwater. To this desolate little girl our heroine felt her heart
strangely drawn, even apart from the gratitude which filled her heart
towards the child as the preserver of her life.

Accordingly, when
they reached the main road, where Kate had taken the wrong turn, two
of the patriots left the party, and hastened with all their speed to
Sweetwater; while the remainder, striking into the byway that led to
the cabin, advanced at a slower pace, accommodated to our heroine’s
fatigue.

When the latter
reached the clearing on the knoll of the swamp, they found that the
child, already forced by circumstances to be a housekeeper, had
removed the evidences of the last night’s debauch, and restored
everything to order and comparative neatness. The table was set away;
the chairs replaced in their positions; the floor swept and
subsequently sanded, as was then the fashion. The child was sitting,
trying to read with difficulty, when the party came up; and the book
falling from her hands in her surprise, Uncle Lawrence took it up,
and discovered, as he had suspected, that it was a Testament.

When she recognized
Kate, the orphan stole immediately to her side, and, clasping the
hands of our heroine between both her own little palms, said, gently,

“I’m so glad
you’ve come back. Oh! how I wished, all the morning, that these
good people would find you.”

“I’ve come back
to take you away with me,” said Kate, stooping, and kissing the
child. “You musn’t shake your head sadly. There’s nothing now
to keep you here. That bad man, who called himself your uncle, is
dead and gone.”

The orphan looked
wonderingly at Kate; then at Uncle Lawrence; and, finally, around the
entire group. Reading a confirmation of this truth in every eye, her
little face assumed an awe-struck expression, and she burst into
tears.

Kate tried to soothe
her.

“He wasn’t your
uncle at all, dear,” she said, taking the child in her lap, for
they had now entered the house. “These gentlemen,” turning to
Major Gordon and Uncle Lawrence, “say they know all about you. So
you musn’t think of him, except as a bad, bad man, who has brought
death on himself by his own wickedness.”

“It’s that that
makes me cry,” said the child, looking up through her tears.

Uncle Lawrence,
laying his hand on her head in his fatherly manner, said to the
orphan,

“I’ve no doubt,
my little one, that this lady here is nearer related to you than
maybe you or she thinks. But more of that bye and bye,” he
continued. “It’s to her house you’re to go, and you ought to
thank the Lord, my child, that he’s given you such a friend.”

“Now,” said
Kate, kissing her, “you can’t help being my little sister.”

“I’ll be so
glad,” murmured the child, hiding her face on Kate’s shoulder,
and closely entwining her arms around our heroine, who looked up,
smiling through her tears, at Major Gordon and Uncle Lawrence.

Nearly four hours
elapsed before the expected vehicle arrived from Sweetwater. During
this interval, Kate was urged to snatch some repose, for it will be
recollected that excepting the short period she slept by accident the
night before, she had not closed her eyes for thirty-six hours,
while, meantime, she had undergone the greatest fatigue of body and
mind. But her nerves were still too excited from the agitating events
which had followed her first capture, to permit her to compose
herself to sleep; and besides, she shrank from re-entering the
chamber where she had passed a night of such agonizing suspense.

Mrs. Warren’s
joyful consternation, when she heard of Kate’s safety, it is almost
impossible to describe. The effect of the news was completely
paralyzing to her, as much so, for awhile, indeed, as if it had been
intelligence the most disastrous.

For quite a minute
the servants thought she was dying, and being, to use one of their
own expressions, “a’most as flustered as herself,” they did all
sorts of absurd things in the effort to help her. Pomp’s father
seized a flower-vase, which Kate had arranged the preceding morning,
and threw its contents into her face, plants and water alike. Dinah,
his wife, attempted to cut the good lady’s stays with the back of a
bread-knife, with which she had rushed in from the kitchen, being
engaged in slicing a loaf when she heard the uproar. The maid
screamed at the top of her lungs, and ran out of the room, with a
vague design of seeking a vinaigrette bottle in one of the chambers;
but she finally captured a phial of patent medicine, which Mrs.
Warren patronized, as many excellent old dowagers will, and
unconscious of her error, rushed back again, screaming as fast as
ever, and popped the horrible compound under the dame’s nose.
Between the application of Jim, and this of the maid, Mrs. Warren
soon came to; and it was fortunate for her she did; for, as one of
the news-bearers said, in rehearsing the tale afterwards,— “they’d
have killed her next, seein’ that we was so frightened by the
infernal screechin’ of that Frenchified gal, with the
physic-bottle, that we thought the old ‘oman had gone for sartain.”

When Kate at length
arrived at Sweetwater, the good dame had recovered her usual
equanimity. Having improved the interval to repair the disorder of
her attire, she now appeared in all her ordinary pomp of costume; her
voluminous furbelowed gown sweeping half the room; her high,
red-heeled shoes pattering, as she rushed down the porch; and the
powder flying like snow from her tower-like head-dress, and perfuming
the air around her, as if the wind blew from a spice-garden.

Extending her arms,
into which Kate threw herself, she said,

“Bless us, my
child, what trouble you’ve given me, and all from riding alone. I
knew something terrible would happen from the first. But don’t
think I blame you. I’m too glad to see you for that.”

In fact, Mrs.
Warren, having discharged her conscience in the way of reproof, began
to kiss her niece passionately, at the same time bursting into tears.
Uncle Lawrence afterwards remarked, that he thought, that “next to
fallin’ into the clutches of a baar, the most dangerous thing was
bein’ hugged by Mrs. Warren, for she nigh a’most squeezed Katie
to death.”

It was a long time
before Kate recovered from the effects of that terrible day and
night. Though she had borne up so heroically while the peril
continued, she broke down completely after she found herself safely
at home; and for nearly a week she was unable even to leave her
chamber. By the end of that time, however, she appeared in the
parlor, where, though still pale, she seemed to Major Gordon lovelier
than ever.

Our hero, who had
called daily to inquire after her progress, was almost transported
beyond himself, when, one morning, on being shown as usual into the
parlor, he saw Kate sitting there instead of her formal aunt. The
young heiress rose immediately, and frankly advanced, extending her
hand.

“This is, indeed,
a surprise,” cried Major Gordon, taking the delicate little palm
between his two hands. “I had not hoped so much, after what Mrs.
Warren said yesterday.”

“My good aunt,”
replied Kate, with a smile and a blush, “always takes the worst
view of things, you know.”

“Has she done
censuring you for being the sole cause of your late peril, by riding
out alone?” asked the Major, smiling also, as he led her to the
sofa.

“She has it over a
dozen times a day, and always ends by declaring she ‘knew something
dreadful would happen;’ that’s her pet phrase. But come, we
musn’t laugh at aunt’s foibles in this way; she’s an excellent
creature; and, you know, you and she are to be the best of friends.”

From this opening of
the conversation, and from the tone of the speakers, it was evident
that they had come already to a perfect understanding. Major Gordon,
in fact, had written a letter to Kate, when he found that she could
not leave her chamber; for he deemed it due to both herself and him,
that an explicit avowal of his feelings should be in her hands
without delay. This letter was really the best medicine Kate could
have had; for, by assuring her of his love, it removed what otherwise
would have been a source of secret agitation to her.

The reader, indeed,
must long since have suspected that Kate was as much in love with
Major Gordon as he with her. The interview at the bridge, with our
hero’s conduct afterwards, had first opened her eyes to the state
of her heart. The letter of our hero afforded her at last an
opportunity, consistent with maidenly propriety, to acknowledge her
affection; and as she was too true-hearted and sincere to trifle with
her correspondent, she wrote immediately such an answer as made the
recipient nearly wild with joy, though the note itself was quite
simple and even laconic.

We leave them
together, on this first meeting since their betrothal, to exchange
those questions as to when each first began to love, and renew those
protestations, which made the pair happy beyond words, as such things
have made many another pair, but which would be insipid enough if
printed.

CHAPTER XLVII.

THE ORPHAN CHILD

Is there, in human form, that bears a heart—

A wretch! a villain! lost to love and truth?

That can with studied, shy, ensnaring art,

Betray sweet Jenny’s unsuspecting truth?

Curse on his perjur’d arts! —Burns.

Naught so ill

As the betrayer’s sin! salvationless

Almost. —Bailey.

The intelligence of
Aylesford’s death deeply affected both Kate and her aunt. The
latter, who had lavished so much of her affection on him, was almost
inconsolable. In charity to the dead, and from respect to Mrs.
Warren’s feelings, Aylesford’s connection with Kate’s capture
was concealed from her.

“Why tear open the
wounds of the past?” said Major Gordon, when Uncle Lawrence, from
what he thought justice to Kate, would have told the whole story. “He
has gone to his account, bitterly repenting, before he died, this act
at least. His aunt is childless, and had lavished the chief stock of
her love upon him; and to destroy her idol now, will go near to
breaking her heart. At least, wait until Miss Aylesford recovers, and
can be consulted.”

These arguments
prevailed. When Kate’s opinion was asked, she pronounced at once
against informing her aunt. “It can do no good to the living, and
can but harm the good name of the dead. I freely forgive him. Aunt
would go pining all the rest of her days, if forced to believe the
truth of my poor cousin.”

But this abnegation
on the part of our heroine, cost her many a complaint from Mrs.
Warren, who, ignorant of the true cause of Kate’s capture,
continued to insist that her niece’s temerity, in riding out
unattended, had led to all the perils which had followed. It is
probable that the good dame, if she had known that Aylesford was in
chase of the refugee boat, when shot, would have secretly laid his
death at the door of her niece.

It was long before
Mrs. Warren became reconciled to her nephew’s loss. She openly
bewailed his death, as the extinction of the family name, “for,”
said she, “when you marry, Kate, you know you’ll be an Aylesford
no longer.” The cup out of which her “child,” as she now called
him, had drunk at his last breakfast; the knife and fork which he had
used; and a pair of gloves he had accidentally left on the hall
table, were carefully preserved by the old lady, and were annually
drawn from their receptacle, on the anniversary of his death, and
regarded with tears. Let us not ridicule the fond illusion of the
poor creature. She worshipped, in this sacred way, a visionary memory
it is true; but the image was a reality in her eyes and therefore
dear to her.

They were so careful
of her feelings that they spared her even the knowledge of the
parentage of the little girl, whom Kate had brought home and now
publicly adopted as a sister. That the child had been instrumental in
preserving our heroine’s life was the avowed reason of this
adoption; and it satisfied Mrs. Warren, though she could not help
saying, that “Kate was an odd girl, and often over, paid her
debts.” But those, who knew the true history of the orphan, were
aware that other considerations also had led to this solemn act.

The Testament, which
Uncle Lawrence picked up, and which was subsequently handed to Kate
by Mrs. Herman, contained the inscription, “Margaret Rowan, her
book, A. D., 1769,” written in Aylesford’s handwriting. The
volume was evidently, therefore, the gift of Kate’s cousin to the
child’s mother, about the time when his acquaintance with the
latter commenced, and before he had, by deserting her and her babe,
brought on that broken heart of which she died. The book, as was
frequently the fashion then, was carefully covered with cloth,
between which and the original sheepskin binding Kate found a paper,
the purport of which was that “Charles Aylesford and Margaret
Rowan” were lawfully married “on the 10th of December, A. D.,
1769.” On the back of this certificate was written, however, in a
tremulous, unformed female hand, “I have proof that the within
named clergyman was an impostor,” the words being signed, “Margaret
Rowan, 1773.” The whole book, inside and out, was much thumbed and
blotted with tears. It revealed to Kate, already possessed of other
facts in relation to this early aberration of her cousin, a tale of
youthful passion, deliberate perjury, and subsequent abandonment,
which made her heart yearn to the innocent orphan more than ever.

From chance
references made to her mother by the child, from what Kate had heard
formerly, and from the results of inquiries she set on foot now, our
heroine succeeded in finally filling up the outlines of this humble
tragedy, which, if it could have had a Shakespeare to narrate it,
might have moved nations and generations, instead of making but a
faint echo in its little circle, and then dying away forever.
Aylesford, when still a youth comparatively, had met and loved the
reduced and orphan daughter of a British officer, who, dying in
America, towards the close of the old French war, had left his child
and wife penniless strangers in a foreign land. The mother had soon
followed the father, and the daughter being left destitute, had sunk
into a subordinate position. When Aylesford first met her she was
only sixteen, innocent in every thought, and a mere child in her
knowledge of life. Occupying the place of a seamstress, in the house
of a wealthy female connexion of the Aylesfords, she was thrown in
the way of the young man, and readily bestowed her affections on one
so much superior in outward bearing to other persons of his age and
sex whom she had met. Aylesford had but little difficulty in
persuading her to give him a right to elevate her from her dependent
position; but he brought forward the prejudices of his family as a
reason for having the marriage secretly performed. He chose this
method of betraying his victim, because he knew that a false priest
could easily be procured, and because he was aware that in no other
way could he carry out his base designs on this friendless girl.
Accordingly Arrison, who had been the Mephistopheles of this tragedy
all along, procured a tool to play the part of a clergyman; and the
unsuspecting Margaret became a victim, where she fondly believed she
was to be a wife.

More than a year,
however, elapsed before she discovered the perfidy to which she had
been sacrificed. But when, after the birth of her child, Aylesford’s
passion began to cool, Arrison surprised her by insulting proposals,
which, on her indignantly rejecting them, and adding that she would
expose him to her husband, led to an avowal from the ruffian of the
true position in which she stood. She lost no time in charging
Aylesford with the deed; a violent altercation ensued, and the sated
young man, not sorry for an excuse to quarrel, parted from her
forever.

We draw a veil over
years that followed. The deserted, heart-broken creature, whom common
rumor said had consented to marry Arrison, would not even see that
person, but hiding herself from all eyes, sought to earn a humble
livelihood by her needle. But the blow, which had ruined all her
bright hopes, had undermined her health forever. She was not fitted,
either physically or otherwise, to struggle with adversity. From the
hour that she learned she was not a wife, she faded slowly but
surely. After a few years of severe toil, rendered necessary to
obtain food for herself and child, she found herself on the bed of
death.

At this crisis, the
pride, which had made her reject pecuniary assistance from Aylesford,
gave way in view of the approaching destitution of her child. She
penned a letter to her betrayer, which would have moved a heart of
stone, and which induced him, though he had long since forgotten her,
and though he had sworn, when she first declined his money, never to
give her or her babe a farthing, to propose supporting the orphan. He
would not consent, however, even to do this, unless the child should
pass for Arrison’s niece. An annual stipend, promised to his
uncle’s former servant, secured the co-operation of the latter. To
these cruel terms the dying mother was compelled to accede. Deserted
by all the world, she was fain to charge her child to remain with
Arrison.

But trembling for
the influences the orphan would be brought under, she besought the
little one to remember what she had taught of God, and to read, at
least once a day, the Testament, her only legacy, which she placed in
the daughter’s hands. Perhaps the dying mother would have declined
the proffered aid altogether, if it had not been for a secret hope
that when Aylesford knew the child he would become interested in it.
But this expectation was never realized. Aylesford studiously avoided
seeing the friendless orphan, and only remembered her existence when
called on to pay her annual stipend.

With these facts
before her, no wonder that Kate loved that orphan so much. The
mother’s wrongs, not less than the child’s sufferings, appealed
to our heroine’s heart. “Little Maggy,” as she called her
protege, repaid these feelings with a fervor that was beautiful to
see. Never having had any one to love since she lost her mother, the
child fairly worshipped our heroine.

Kate took pleasure
in instructing the orphan, and in watching the rapid unfolding of
this youthful intellect, which promised to be one of rare and
precocious power. Yet often a sigh rose to our heroine’s lips, as
she thought of the future destiny of her protege, for in that day,
even more than in this, such children suffered for the parent’s
sin; and Kate foresaw that the cruel sneer, the whispered remark, the
cold avoidance, would be almost death to the sensitive nature of
little Maggy.

Meanwhile the family
at Sweetwater went into mourning for Aylesford, and the marriage of
Kate, which otherwise would have taken place immediately, was
postponed until the spring. There was a town house in Philadelphia,
belonging to the family, and thither it was resolved that they should
remove for the winter, partly because Kate wished her protege to have
the benefit of teachers, who could not be obtained at Sweetwater, and
partly for reasons connected with her large property.

In one particular,
the arrangement was fortunate for the lovers, for, about this time,
Major Gordon received an appointment in the metropolis.

While these events
had been transacting, the British expedition, which burned the Neck,
having found itself thwarted in the further measures it proposed, had
returned to New York. Count Pulaski, though arriving too late to
prevent the destruction of the prizes, succeeded in intimidating the
enemy, who abandoned the field, being able to pluck no more laurels
except the surprising of a picket, about thirty in number, whom they
slaughtered in cold blood. In retiring, the man-of-war which
accompanied the expedition grounded in the inlet, when the British,
finding they could not get her off, set fire to her, lest she should
fall into the hands of the Americans. It was amid the derisive cheers
of the patriots, and the echoes of her guns, which went off as they
became heated, that the royal troops finally stood out to sea, and
took their way, crest-fallen, towards Sandy Hook. They had, indeed,
burned a few store-houses, given some thirty dismantled prizes to the
torch, and ravaged one or two inconsiderable patriot settlements; but
they had failed of the great object of their undertaking, the seizure
of the privateers, and had lost the most valuable ship of their
flotilla. Taught by the result of this enterprise, they never again
vexed the neighborhood, though it continued to be a thorn in their
side to the very last month of the war.

This is the proper
place to mention that one of the refugees who had escaped into the
swamp, was captured the day subsequent to his flight, on his coming
forth to seek some food; and that, it being proved that he had
committed many atrocities, which brought him within the pale of the
law, he was condemned to be hung. The sentence was executed at the
Forks, and to this day, as a superstitious tradition goes, his ghost
haunts the spot where he expiated his crimes.

CHAPTER XLVIII.

THE AYLESFORD MANSION

Hark! through the dim woods sighing,

With a moan;

Faintly the winds are crying,

Summer’s gone. —Mrs. Norton.

Farewell! I will omit no opportunity

That may convey my greetings, love, to thee. —Shakespeare.

When the leaves had
fallen, the November rains set in, and the winds begun to rave and
sob, alternately, around the mansion at Sweetwater, the family
departed for Philadelphia.

The old church, amid
its now verdureless grove of oaks, seemed, as they drove past, to
look sadly on their departure; while the stream in its rear audibly
lamented, and the ancient cedars sighed mournfully in the wind. Kate
gazed at the dear objects, and then turned, just as the carriage was
about to enter the forest, for a last glance down the pond, in the
direction of the house. At that instant the sun, which had been
obscured by the leaden-colored clouds, suddenly burst forth, kindling
the whole landscape into life: the white mansion flashed out; the
ruffled lake sparkled like silver; and a glory was flung over the
whole western heaven, where the clouds lay piled like peaks and
ridges in a mountain region.

When the travellers
reached the cross-road, which led towards Uncle Lawrence’s farm,
the old man was there waiting for them. He stood leaning on his gun,
silently enjoying the beauty of the autumn-tinted sky, and inhaling
the soft air, as one quaffs delicious wine. So profound was his
abstraction, that he did not hear the approaching vehicle, until it
was close at hand.

“Good morning,
Uncle Lawrence,” said Kate, merrily. “Confess now that we have
taken you by surprise; and surrender a prisoner at discretion. In
other words, jump in and go to town; for we have a spare seat.”

The veteran smiled
kindly.

“I own that I was
off my guard,” he said, “but it was the sweet air and beautiful
skies that made me forget myself. I was thinking, my child,” he
continued, his eye kindling, and looking at Kate as if he knew she
would appreciate him, “that the New Jerusalem must be as much more
splendid than the clouds yonder, as they are than the common things
of earth; and I said to myself, that if looking at ‘em made me so
happy here, what would I be should I get to the heavenly Canaan; and
so I prayed to the Lord to keep me steadfast to the end.”

Kate gazed at him
almost reverently.

“But I’ve not
been idle, either,” he said. “I’ve no doubt I was up before
you, after all; for I had shot a deer two hours ago; he hangs out
yonder, a mile away, where I left him for the boys to bring home.
Remember, you’re to tell the Major that I’ll look out for him
about the time he promised; and that we’ll have as great a hunt as
ever was known in these parts. Now will you be honest in telling
him?” he asked, with a sly twinkle, “for, if you won’t, I’ll
get sister Maggy to do my errand instead.”

“Oh! I’ll tell
him,” replied Kate, with a blush and a gay smile, answering in
something of her old rattling style. “He’ll be getting tiresome,
I’ve no doubt, before Christmas, so that it will be a happy
deliverance to me to have him go away for awhile. But, meanwhile,”
she added, “why not come to town with us, as I have proposed? You
don’t know,” she continued, seriously, “how I shall miss you
all.”

“It’s onpossible
just now,” replied Uncle Lawrence, shaking his head. “But I
reckon I’ll be there next spring,” he added, with a significant
smile, “that is, if I’m alive, even though I have to walk all the
way.”

Kate blushed crimson
at the allusion, but rallying, answered promptly, while she extended
her hand for a parting farewell,

“I shall be sure
to expect you, and will take care that a carriage is sent for you.
You must bring my old friend, Mrs. Herman.”

“Mother’s too
much of a home body, to come,” replied the veteran. “Besides
she’d be flustered so, she wouldn’t know what she was doin’,
when she found herself among all the grand folk I spose will be
there. I shouldn’t wonder now,” he added “if General Washington
himself was to be present.”

“Oh! you must come
and see,” laughed Kate.

“And that you’ll
be married by your own preacher. I’ve heerd they wear black gowns,
like we see in pictures. I reckon that’ll be more cur’us to me
than a’most anything else.”

“You shall see
all,” said Kate, “only come; and there’ll be no one more
welcome.”

“Well, you may
depend on me, as I said before; that is if I’m alive. The Lord
bless you, my child,” he concluded, with great seriousness, “and
make you as happy as you are good and beautiful.”

“Farewell,” said
Kate, the tears coming into her eyes; and the carriage drove on.

The veteran remained
standing, with his hat off, and his thin gray hairs stirring in the
autumn breeze, until the coach had disappeared; when he turned to
seek his dwelling, feeling as if he had parted with one of his own
flesh and blood; and that night, when he led the family devotions, he
prayed as fervently for Kate as for any member of his own household.

The Aylesford
mansion, in Philadelphia, was an imposing, aristocratic looking
edifice, standing back from the street, amid venerable trees, and
surrounded by a spacious garden. Thirty years ago, more than one such
stately relic of the ante-revolutionary times was still to be seen in
our midst; but they have all been long since demolished, or have been
so shorn of their surroundings, as to have lost most of their ancient
dignity. The town-house of the Aylesfords was among the proudest of
these old colonial mansions. It had been, in the preceding
generation, the head-quarters of fashion in the city. In the grand,
wainscotted room, every person of distinction, who had visited the
metropolis, during a period of nearly twenty years, had been
entertained. There beauty had rustled its silks, dazzled with its
diamonds, conquered by the graceful use of the fan, and awed by the
haughty carriage of its plumed and scornful head. There Washington,
then a young man, had visited, on that memorable tour in which he
lost his heart to the beautiful tory of New York. There royal
governors and titled nobles, courted heiresses and worshiped belles,
officers and statesmen, the proud Virginia planters and the wealthy
Boston merchants, the chivalrous Carolinian and the princely manorial
lords of the Hudson, had assembled to drink the rare wines of the
host, dance the minuet, or exchange the stately courtesies of the
time.

But for many years
the mansion had been shut up. A solitary servant had been its sole
tenant during all this time. The boys had been allowed, unchecked, to
club down the English walnuts from the trees in the yard, and the
towns-people had come to consider its desolate look as one of the
characteristics of the street where it stood.

Consequently, when
the shutters were seen thrown open, one fine November day, and the
servant was observed to be carefully scrubbing the gray stone steps
in front, everybody was agog with curiosity. The arrival of a
travelling carriage, towards evening, collected quite a crowd, and
when a tall and graceful girl alighted, followed by a child, and
subsequently by a stately, dowager-like lady, the spectators spread
the intelligence that the Aylesfords had actually come to town as if
to stay, a fact which set half the teatables in the place speculating
as to whether the family could be as great tories as rumor had said,
or whether it was really true, as had begun to be whispered by those
who ought to know, that the heiress was going to marry a patriot
officer, high in the esteem of General Washington.

When Kate, the
morning after her arrival, walked through the desolate-looking
garden, she almost despaired of ever being able to restore it to
order. The once clipped boxwood had grown into all sorts of fantastic
shapes; the gravel walks were covered with grass; rank weeds had
overrun the flower beds; and the grotto at the foot, which, in her
childish days, she was accustomed to regard as the greatest wonder of
the world, was damp with water, stripped of its shells, and covered
with green, slimy moss.

Mrs. Warren, who, to
do her justice, was as notable a housekeeper as she was a martinet in
dress, walked through the mansion, meantime, absolutely beside
herself with dismay. Panes of glass were cracked; spider-webs were
everywhere; the wood work was almost black from damp and want of
light; the roof leaked; and the whole place, she declared, smelt
musty. The good dame exaggerated not a little; nevertheless, the
house was in sad, almost dismal disarray, and as the instructions to
have it renovated had been disregarded, maids were set to work
immediately. For nearly a fortnight buckets and scrubbing brushes had
it all their own way. Mrs. Warren, with the true spirit of an
old-fashioned Philadelphia housekeeper, was so happy amid this
turmoil, that she forgot to reflect on Kate for having ridden alone.
Indeed, the excellent dame was never better pleased than when
house-cleaning, unless, perhaps, when talking of her cousin, Lord
Alvanley, or appearing in a new damask gown.

At last, however,
the dowager pronounced “things fit to be seen;” and, ceasing to
scold the maids, reassumed the great lady. To use her own phrase, she
could now go about the house without “getting the fidgets.” We
may amuse ourselves in this harmless way, with smiling at the
excellent creature’s nervous abhorrence of illy-performed
housework; but, perhaps, the dames of the present age would be none
the worse if they imitated the habits of their great-grandmothers in
personally supervising such labor more frequently than they do. The
highest in the land, in the good old times, were not above ordering
their households; and did not either delegate the duty to upper
servants, or leave things to chance.

By the close of
November, the Aylesford mansion was restored to all its pristine
freshness, and to much of its former vivacity. There were no balls,
it is true. But visitors came and went continually, for it was
impossible for a family of such consideration to fix their abode in a
city so small as the metropolis then was, without all the gentry
calling upon them. A whisper of the approaching wedding, which, as we
have seen, had got abroad, assisted to stimulate these civilities;
for every one wished to be a guest at what, judging from the wealth
and position of the bride, could not fail to be an unusually
brilliant affair.

CHAPTER XLIX.

MAGGY

I cannot speak, tears so obstruct my words

And choke me with unutterable joy. —Olney.

With goddess-like demeanor forth she went,

Not unattended, for on her as queen

A pomp of winning graces waited still. —Milton.

That what she wills to do or say

Seems wisest, virtuousest, discreetest, best. —Milton.

The venerable
edifice of Christ Church, the oldest house of worship of its
denomination in Philadelphia, still retains the outward appearance it
wore five and seventy years ago. But its stately front and exquisite
steeple, instead of rising within view of the fashionable quarter of
the town, as it did then, now overlooks a wilderness of shops, while
its pavement is encumbered on market days with the eggs, chickens,
and vegetables of farmers, who chaffer for a cent. The interior of
the ancient edifice, however, has undergone great changes, not the
least of which is the substitution of comfortable modern sittings for
the stiff, high-backed pews in which Lady Washington and the
elite

of that day used to worship.

The appearance of
the Aylesfords in their family pew at Christ Church attracted
universal attention. The worthy rector lost no time in paying his
respects to them, and was charmed with little Maggy as well as with
Kate. He became a frequent visitor. He often seemed lost in thought,
as he gazed on the child. At last, when Kate and he were alone
together one day, he said,

“I have long
wished, my dear young lady, to broach a delicate subject to you. I
hope you will not think I wish to interfere impertinently in your
family matters; but permit me to ask whether that beautiful child,
who has just left the room, is really, as report declares, your
cousin.”

“She is,”
answered Kate. “But why this question?”

“The daughter of
Mistress Margaret Rowan, so called?”

Kate inclined her
head in assent.

“From what I know
of you then, my dear young lady, and from the kind countenance I see
you bestowing on the child, you will rejoice to hear that the fraud,
so basely attempted on her mother, utterly failed.”

“What!” cried
our heroine, with sparkling eyes, clasping her hands in joy. “Can
it be possible?”

“Never was there
wife, if that poor girl, whose father I knew in England, was not
legally wedded to the late Charles Aylesford, Esquire.”

“Thank God!”
ejaculated Kate, fervently.

“Yes! we may well
thank the Almighty one,” reverently replied the clergyman; “for
out of evil counsel he brought good. But I must explain. It happened
in this way.”

The rector then
proceeded to state that, a few months before the Aylesfords arrived
in Philadelphia, he had been summoned, one evening, to the bedside of
a dying man in one of the miserable taverns then, and still existing,
by the water-side. The invalid was undergoing the most terrible
agonies of remorse, having, on his own confession, lived a life of
the greatest depravity for many preceding years. He had been, he
said, originally a clergyman of the Church of England, had been left
a small fortune, and had graduated at Trinity College, Cambridge.
But, having fallen into evil courses, through his fondness for
company and wine, he had gradually been excluded from the society he
was born for, and, finally, had been obliged to fly to America to
escape the vengeance of the law. In the colonies he had met Arrison,
had become a confederate in his villainies, and had consented to be
the tool of Aylesford and him in the clandestine marriage of Miss
Rowan. Neither of his employers, however, were aware of his true
clerical character; but supposed his assumption of the robes was only
a cleverly managed disguise. Nor was this all. Abandoned as he was,
the fallen clergyman had still some conscience left, so that he
secretly procured the documents necessary to render the marriage a
valid one, in all respects. Subsequently he had left Philadelphia,
and had remained absent for years, having only returned, in the last
stage of a consumption, a few weeks before sending for the rector. A
principal object of his coming back, he confessed, was the desire to
make reparation for the great wrong he had done Mistress Rowan.
Nothing in his whole career, though he acknowledged to being stained
with the blackest crimes, had ever affected him, he said, like his
share in that treacherous transaction. He had just succeeded in
tracing the poor victim, in discovering that she had been abandoned
by her husband, and in ascertaining that she died after a few years
of toil and shame, when his disease assumed so violent a character
that he was unable to prosecute further inquiries. What had become of
the child, whether it was dead or living, he had been unable to
ascertain. In this extremity, tormented by restless anguish, he had
sent for the rector of Christ Church, and placing in the good
clergyman’s hands the proofs of the legality of the marriage,
enjoined him to endeavor to discover the fate of the orphan. Having
done this, he seemed more at ease, and expired the same night,
shortly after the rector had departed.

“As soon as you
came to town, and I saw your little cousin in your pew, I felt that
the lost child was discovered,” continued the clergyman. “But it
was not until I had more certainly ascertained that she was really
your blood-connection, that I ventured to take the present liberty.”

It now became
necessary to acquaint Mrs. Warren with Maggy’s real parentage, and
consequently with one of those transactions in her nephew’s life
which had been studiously concealed from her. It was, at first, a
terrible shock to the poor creature. But after awhile she became more
reconciled to it, finding those excuses which simple, loving hearts
like hers always will. It had the beneficial effect, in the end, of
making her almost worship little Maggy, whom heretofore she had
treated, as we have seen, with comparative indifference. The orphan
now came in for the love that had been lavished on Aylesford, and
Mrs. Warren entered eagerly into all Kate’s plans for the
instruction of Maggy; but especially did the good lady interest
herself in what she called the “domestic” education of the child,
saying naively to her protege; “my dear, as every woman’s proper
destiny is to be a wife, and to be happy as a wife, it is
indispensable that you should know how to prepare a good table for
your husband, as all men like good eating, and can indeed be best
kept in humor by tickling their palates.” This remark was the
nearest approach to wit which the dowager ever made; and was slyly
quoted to Major Gordon by Kate, as a commentary on his sex.

No one could have
progressed with greater rapidity in her studies than did Maggy.
Perhaps it is a mistake, into which modern times have fallen, that
they put children to school too soon; for, if the young intellect was
left unvexed awhile longer, it would probably learn all the quicker
when once it began. Certainly, little Maggy, who, at ten years old,
could read with difficulty, made the most astonishing progress, so
that, by the time she was fourteen, no young lady of her age could
boast of so many acquirements. The superior education which Kate
herself had received was doubtless of benefit to the child, because
it enabled our heroine to impart much instruction not then taught in
American schools. In music Maggy had an exquisite ear, while her
voice was one of great promise. To hear her sing the simple ballads,
then so popular, often brought tears into the eyes of the listeners.
It is a strange sight to see such effects produced in our days; but
it would be heretical nevertheless to say that we ought to give up
opera music in parlors, and return to the artless, plaintive song;
for of course we are wiser in this, as in other things, than our
ancestors; and it is quite absurd to think that there can be music
unless the windows shake, the piano shudders as if in an ague fit,
and the dear, sweet performer, opens her month as if she was about to
swallow music sheets, instruments and all.

Among those who shed
tears, at hearing Maggy’s ballads, were several French noblemen,
officers in the army of his most Christian Majesty Louis the
Sixteenth, at that time the good ally of the confederated States of
America. These members of the most artificial and luxurious court in
Europe, the principal part of whom had joined the expedition to
reinforce Washington out of sheer ennui, having long ago exhausted
every phase of life that even Paris presented, were delighted beyond
measure at the artless singing of this innocent child of nature. It
was not mere highbred courtesy either, which induced them to extol
her simple ballads, though never were men more polished in manner
than the French nobility of that day. But, as we have said, the
unbidden tears started into their eyes as they listened, and there
was an earnestness in their tones, that carried the conviction of
truth with them, when they told Major Gordon that they had never
heard such singing from the gay Marchionesses of Versailles, or even
the stars of the opera.

For it was with
Major Gordon that these visitors always came. Whenever a French
officer brought letters of introduction to the city, our hero was one
of the first he called upon; and the latter took his guest to the
Aylesfords, as a matter of course. Indeed, had he not done so, he
would have constantly been besieged for an introduction to our
heroine, as the Duc de Lauzun, who had met her early in the winter,
went back to camp enthusiastic in her praise. “La belle
Americaine,” as he called her, had, he said, the grace and
refinement of a Marchioness, with a freshness and originality that
was perfectly bewitching. It was said of him, by his intimates, that
he had really lost his heart; and it is certain that, years after,
when he had became le Duc de Biron, he would talk of the fair
Philadelphian; and once he was heard to declare, with a sigh, that he
had seen, in America, “the sprightliness and beauty of Marie
Antoinette, combined with the innocence and truthfulness of St.
Pierre’s Virginia;” and it was to our heroine that he referred.

If Mrs. Warren
worshipped Maggy, the orphan adored her cousin. It was beautiful,
indeed, to see the constant evidences which the child gave of her
affection for Kate. When the latter spoke even the most trivial
words, Maggy listened eagerly, and seemed by her looks to appeal to
others to hear also. On one occasion, when our heroine was sick for a
few days with cold and fever, the orphan went almost distracted. She
always waylaid Dr. Rush on his retiring, in order to receive the
assurance from himself, that Kate was really only triflingly
indisposed. When her cousin recovered sufficiently to come down again
to dinner, Maggy was nearly beside herself for joy, dancing and
skipping about the convalescent, bursting into snatches of song, and
continually catching Kate’s hand and kissing it.

This slight
indisposition reminded our heroine of an unfulfilled intention
regarding Maggy. Kate had early resolved to dower the orphan with a
portion of her own wealth, and now, as soon as she had recovered, she
sent for her attorney and directed him to make out a deed of gift, in
favor of the child, as well as to prepare other law papers for her.

“If anything
should happen to me,” she said, “I wish my affianced husband to
inherit the principal part of my estate; but I wish, as much, that
Maggy shall not be unprovided for; and I desire also to leave a
competence to my aunt.”

These generous
wishes were accordingly fulfilled. The Major, when he heard of the
intentions of his betrothed with respect to himself, would have
remonstrated; but Kate silenced him by the gravity of her reply,
declaring that, “if he was not worthy to be entrusted with her
fortune, in case of her decease, he surely was not with her
happiness, if she lived.”

Thus the winter
passed on. March, with its blustering winds, succeeded; April, fickle
as ever, followed; and May, blushing and beautiful, came in. The
appointed time of the wedding had nearly arrived, and every body was
on the
qui vive
for an event which promised to be so dazzling.

CHAPTER L.

A WEDDING IN 1780

Her gentle spirit,

Commits itself to yours to be directed,

As from her lord, her governor, her king. —Shakespeare.

To cheer thy sickness, watch thy health,

Partake, but never waste thy wealth,

Or stand with smile unmurmuring by,

And lighten half thy poverty. —Byron.

She is mine own;

And I as rich in having such a jewel,

As twenty seas, if all their sand were pearl,

The water nectar, and the rocks pure gold. —Shakespeare.

Expectation was more
than realized when the ceremony actually came off. All that was
distinguished in rank, talent, wealth, beauty, fashion, or social
position in Philadelphia, assembled on the eventful evening at the
Aylesford mansion. The commander-in-chief, who happened to be in the
metropolis, conferring with the Congress, honored the occasion by his
presence, and gave away the bride; while the French ambassador, with
a large number of officers of his most Christian Majesty’s army,
also attended; in fact, it was universally conceded that so brilliant
a social assembly had never before been gathered together in
Philadelphia.

That city, it must
be remembered, was not only the political capital of the country at
that period, but was also the first in the nation in respect to
wealth, intelligence, scientific attainments, and social influence. A
few years before, John Adams, on coming up to Philadelphia to attend
the first Congress, had written home to his wife, in terms of
amazement at what he styled the princely luxury in which the richer
citizens lived, and to which, he declared, he had seen no parallel in
Boston. Since that period there had been no decline, but rather an
increase, in this splendid hospitality. There were fortunes, at that
day, which, considering the difference in the value of money, would
put even some of the colossal ones of a more modern period to the
blush; while the example of the mother country, and the
characteristic ostentation of the age, led to a far grander style of
living than the taste of the present generation favors. The pompous
coach and four; the crowd of liveried footmen; and the gold brocade
dress, which a whole year’s expenses of a modern toilet would
scarcely purchase; these have long been things of the past.

The front of the
Aylesford mansion was a blaze of light, on the evening in question.
The uproar of carriages, arriving and depositing their precious
freights, was almost deafening at times. Between lanes of servants
the guests passed up to the imposing doorway, and entering the carved
and wainscoted hall, which was now fairly dazzling with light, were
shown up the wide staircase to the chambers set aside for dressing
rooms. It was a splendid spectacle to see the proud dames, attended
by their lovely daughters, come pouring down the ample, heavily
balustraded steps, and flock towards the drawing rooms like stately
birds. The rustle of stiff brocades, and the fluttering sound of
fans, were mingled with a rich, low murmur of animated conversations,
carried on in whispers, that was like a soft undertone to a gay piece
of music. Nor were the cavaliers less aristocratic looking than the
swan-like creatures, before whom they bowed, offering the tip of
their gloved fingers to their partners, in the ceremonious but lofty
gallantry of the time. The age of dark and sober hues had not yet
wholly usurped that of gay colors and silken fabrics for gentlemen’s
wear; and the
petit maitre
of the day thought himself unfit
for female society, if his ruffles were not of the choicest lace, his
coat and waistcoat elaborately embroidered, and his white hands
sparkling with jewels. All was a blaze of light and grandeur,
therefore. Swords jingled; diamond shoe-buckles flashed; necklaces
sparkled till they rivaled the fair wearer’s eyes; and the air was
fragrant everywhere with the exquisite perfumes of the powder shaken
from dozens of lovely heads whenever they moved. From a military
band, stationed close by in the garden, came bursts of proud music
continually, that made many a charming little foot move impatiently,
and stirred the blood even of the old.

It would be
impossible for us to describe half the superb dresses that made their

debut
on that occasion; but our fair readers would never
forgive us if we omitted those of Mrs. Warren and the bride. The
former wore a petticoat of crimson satin, thick as a board, the very
sight of which would drive a modern belle crazy with envy. Over this
was a skirt of rich, gold-flowered brocade; the boddice being made of
the same material; and sleeves that, reaching to the elbow, were
trimmed with deep, yellow, old lace, of almost fabulous value. But
the head dress of Mrs. Warren was the crowning triumph of the good
lady’s toilette. This coiffure was, in fact, the masterpiece of the
French artist, whom Mrs. Warren had engaged three months before, and
who had spent most of his leisure moments since in studying out this
grand achievement of his genius. It rose nearly two feet in height, a
perfect mass of interwoven ribbons, curls and jewels, almost rivaling
that, which, a few years later, gave a European reputation to the
celebrated Lemard, hair-dresser to Marie Antoinette, because he had
consumed in it upwards of fourteen yards of gauze. It was, in short,
a miniature tower of Babel, done in hair, pomatum and powder. The
dowager was as proud of this
chef d’oeuvre
as her artist,
and had but one drawback indeed on her satisfaction, which was that
her cousin, Lord Alvanley, could not behold this miracle of art,
taste and beauty.

The bride’s dress
followed the fashion of the hour less servilely, having been made
subservient to her own excellent taste. Her hair was drawn back
entirely from her face, as was the prevailing
mode
: a style
that eminently suited her regular features; but instead of being
raised into an enormous tower, it was simply combed over an ordinary
cushion, a long curl or two being allowed to fall behind each ear. It
was slightly powdered on this occasion, but with silver
mareschale
,
which produced an indescribably brilliant effect against her fair
complexion; and further ornamented by a wreath of delicate flowers
placed on one side. On her snowy, swan-like neck, she wore a superb
necklace of diamonds, which had belonged to her mother. Her petticoat
was of rich white satin, the bottom being trimmed with wreaths of
flowers; while her gown was of rose-colored brocade, wrought with
silver flowers, and looped back from the under skirt with bunches of
ribbons and flowers. Her stomacher was of costly lace, interspersed
with diamonds. Her sleeves, like her aunt’s, were tight to the
elbow, where they were trimmed with a double ruffle of lace, whose
fabric of frost-work set off the taper and rounded arm, heightening
even its statuesque beauty. Her shoes were of white satin, pointed at
the toes, and with high, red heels, a fashion which showed to the
greatest advantage a lady’s instep. She carried a Watteau fan, a
gift from the French ambassador, worth almost its weight in gold.

Such was our
heroine’s costume, and amid all that splendid circle, with its
furbelows and flounces, its silken net work over fair bosoms, its
white shoulders, its powdered coiffures, its diamonds, and its scores
of beautiful forms, she was, beyond rivalry, the loveliest. Nor was
the bridegroom, who appeared simply in the uniform of his rank, less
conspicuous among the array of magnificently clad gentlemen, who, in
silk stockings, embroidered coats, broad-flapped vests descending to
the hips, and lace frills and ruffles, moved proudly about the rooms.
His air of command and of manly dignity had, indeed, but one rival
there; and that was in Washington himself, who then, as ever,
“towered pre-eminent.” The grand, yet simple dignity of that
heroic form; the quiet authority in the somewhat severe face; and the
unaffected, yet awe-inspiring manner: ah! what pen can describe
these, which contemporary painters confessed themselves unable to
limn, and which the tongues of his most gifted compatriots fell short
of depicting. But, though every eye turned first on the
commander-in-chief, (even the eyes of those suspected of secretly
wishing well to the royal arms,) the next object of admiration, at
least among the ladies, was the bridegroom, as that of the gentlemen
was the bride. Even the graceful, highbred, and splendidly clad
French noblemen, who were present, altogether failed of attracting
attention by the side of these.

The ceremony was
impressively performed, the bridegroom making the responses in a firm
voice, and the bride in one a little fluttered. After a proper
interval had elapsed, the dancing began. But our fair readers must
not suppose that those highbred dames permitted themselves, as their
descendants do, to be taken familiarly about the waist by a
comparative stranger, and whirled around the room in a schottish, or
other waltz, as if the giddy pair were human spinning-tops. Nor must
they imagine that the cavalier and his partner, with arms a-kimbo and
faces alternately turned towards each other and averted, went
stamping up and down the apartment, like wild Indians, in a polka.
They must not even think that the gentlemen was at liberty to swing
his partner till her wrists ached, whenever he approached her in a
quadrille, for that now comparatively obsolete dance had not then yet
come into fashion. The minuet was the only dance sufficiently courtly
for that highbred age. It required something more than ordinary grace
also to elicit admiration in that princely pastime; for it was
performed in single couples, and with the eyes of the whole room
watching for a blunder, or even for the slightest display of
awkwardness. When the minuet, however, was danced to perfection, as
it was more than once during this evening, it elicited that complete
satisfaction in the beholder, which any finished work of art always
produces. The gentleman, leading out his fair partner as
ceremoniously as if she was a queen, bowed over her hand till he bent
almost to her waist; while she curtsied in return, with lashes
drooping on her cheek, the color rising into her face, and her
damask-gown rustling as it sank to the floor; ah! this had a grace, a
stateliness, and an air of chivalrous worship, such as, alas! we
never see in a modern ball room. Then the exquisite ease with which
the partners subsequently moved through the aristocratic dance,
gliding to the slow, measured, stately music, the cavalier inclining
his powdered head profoundly, with his hand on his heart, whenever he
touched the hand of his companion, while she performed each evolution
with a lightness of step, a tender coyness, and a formal grace, which
seemed to be the poetical realization of that lordly and perhaps
pompous, yet knightly age! When the bride executed the minuet, she
carried off all plaudits, however, for notwithstanding others danced
well, she danced surprisingly so.

Amid this brilliant
assembly there was one personage who attracted no little attention.
He was a man, apparently about sixty, dressed with great simplicity,
yet with perfect neatness, in the plain garb of what was then called
a yeoman. He was evidently unaccustomed to such assemblies, and
consequently deficient in the conventional usages proper for the
occasion; but no one could look upon his broad, square brow, or
kindly eye, or observe his native ease of manner, without being
satisfied that he was one of “nature’s noblemen.” The attention
exhibited towards him by the Aylesford family, had already made the
guests curious to know who he was; but when the commander-in-chief
was observed to be conversing with him, eager inquiries began to pass
around. When it was told that he had been an old field companion of
the bride’s father, and that he was the same person who had saved
her life in a moment of great extremity, the romantic story of which
was well known in town, everybody, especially the ladies, was crazy
to be made acquainted with him. Franklin, in his plain costume, was
not a greater favorite among the beauties of the French court, than
was Uncle Lawrence on this occasion. Indeed, if it had been at all
allowable so to distinguish any one but the bride, it is probable the
enthusiasm of the fair creatures would have crowned the veteran with
a chaplet, after the manner in which the ambassador and philosopher
was honored about the same time at Versailles.

The conversation of
Washington with the old man lasted for a considerable time. The
unassuming character of Uncle Lawrence; his plain, homely sense; his
sincere, yet unaffected piety; and the bravery which, as the General
knew, had been proved at more than one crisis, were exactly such
qualities as the great hero could fully appreciate. Few could so
readily discern, and so thoroughly honor, true manhood, as the Father
of his Country. In the course of their conversation, the General
alluded to his companion’s passion for the chase, which he declared
he had once been as fond of as any man; asked several questions about
the mode of hunting practised about Sweetwater; and on parting
expressed his determination, if ever he visited that part of New
Jersey, and had the leisure to spare from the cares of his office, to
track a buck with the patriarch.

To say that Uncle
Lawrence was not flattered by this mark of attention from the
commander-in-chief, would be to misrepresent human nature. Yet he did
not permit it to destroy his composure at the time, nor would his
manner, a minute after, have betrayed the fact to an observer. He had
too just an estimate of himself to be awed by the notice even of the
General, though he looked up, and almost reverenced Washington, as
possessor of a virtue nearly fabulous. He had also too strong a sense
of the common brotherhood and inborn equality of all men, to feel
dwarfed in the presence of any one, however high his rank or fortune.

“You have kept
your promise. I am so glad,” said the bride, beckoning Uncle
Lawrence to her, as the General left him. “How are they all at dear
Sweetwater?”

“Very well,
darling,” said the veteran, “or rather I should say,” he added,
with a sly twinkle of the eye, emphasizing the name, “Mrs. Gordon.”

Kate blushed
crimson. It was almost the first time she had been called by her new
title. She understood the little touch of pleasantary on the part of
the old man, however, and replied,

“No, call me
darling still, I like it better from you. Though,” she added,
archly, “the other is a pretty name enough, at least ‘my lord and
master’ thinks so, I suppose.”

“He’ll have his
hands full,” answered the old man, entering into this gay spirit,
“if you begin in that fashion. I’m telling your bride, Major,”
he said, as the bridegroom approached, “that you must begin at once
breaking her in, or she’ll get the bit in her teeth, and runaway
with you one of these days. When I was married, an old friend told me
that the best way was to smash all the chaney, break the looking
glass, and kick over the breakfast table, the very first day, and
that arter that my wife would be so skeered that she’d never dare
to have a will of her own.”

“But you didn’t
do it,” answered Kate, laughingly, quick as ever at repartee, “or
else you wouldn’t be afraid to go into the best room with your
muddy boots on, which, you know, Uncle Lawrence,” she added,
saucily, “is your great cross in life.”

“It’s no use
talking, when you’re by,” replied the veteran, “you’ll have
the last word always. If the Major here was to get druv half crazy,
and drown you, as they did scolds in the old times, you’d snap your
fingers at him, after your head was already under water.”

The bride turned
fondly to her husband, and putting her hand on his arm, looked at
Uncle Lawrence, merrily challenging his misrepresentation. The Major
laughed, Kate blushed, and the veteran, shaking his head, said,

“Well, if I’m
not called in till you quarrel, I reckon I’ll have an easy time of
it.”

CHAPTER LI.

FAREWELL

A perfect woman, nobly plann’d,

To warn, to comfort, and command,

And yet a spirit still, and bright

With something of an angel light. —Wordsworth

A good man, and an angel! there between,

How thin the barrier! What divides their fate?

Perhaps a moment, or perhaps a year. —Young.

The lives of Kate
and Major Gordon were as happy as might have been foretold, from
their mutual affection, their firm principles, their good sense, and
the adaptability of their characters. They were not exempt from the
ordinary mutations of life, having their disappointments and griefs
like other people; but these sorrows were never of their own making,
but mysterious dispensations from an all-wise Providence.

They had the
misfortune to lose their first-born, a beautiful little girl, in her
early childhood, just as her budding intellect and grateful
tenderness were making her dearer than ever to the heart of her
parents. But with this great sorrow, came also many mercies. Other
children, good and beautiful daughters, brave and conscientious sons,
grew up around them, filling their household with happy faces, sweet
laughter and dutiful affection. As years rolled by, and the parents
verged to middle age, they had the gratification to see these
daughters married to worthy men, the choice of their own hearts, and
to know that these sons had found partners, who were not mere
playthings of the hour, but companions competent for all the varied
duties of life. One of the sons-in-law was an eminent Senator, and
his wife an acknowledged leader of society in Washington, who is
still remembered for her grace, her goodness and her rare talents. A
son distinguished himself greatly at Tripoli, and another rose to be
a foreign ambassador. Our heroine, in her mature middle age, and when
still a beautiful woman, could say, with the British matron, that all
her daughters were virtuous and all her sons brave.

At first, part of
the year was spent at Sweetwater, and part in Philadelphia, but
finally the residence of the family became fixed in the city, except
for the summer months. This was in consequence of the professional
calls on Major Gordon, and the unwillingness of Kate to be separated
from her husband; for the Major, after the close of the war, had
resumed the practice of the law, declaring that he could not be an
idle man, even if his fortune was ten times as great. He brought up
his sons, in imitation of his own example, each to some particular
pursuit. “Every man, who wishes to be either happy, or useful,”
the Major was accustomed to say, “must have some business to
follow; for otherwise the mind eats itself, and
ennui
and
ill-health follow, even if idleness does not lead to evil courses.”
Thus it happened, that while other rich men’s sons were bringing
the gray hairs of their fathers prematurely to the grave, the
children of our hero and heroine grew up to “honor their father and
mother,” and call their names “blessed.”

But the Major, even
to a late period in life, was always glad to escape to Sweetwater.
Once a year, during the hunting season, he visited it for the purpose
of bringing down a deer; and many an exciting day he and Uncle
Lawrence had in the old forests round about. The veteran came at last
to say that the “Major,” as he still called our hero, “was nigh
about as good a shot as himself;” and many a tale was he accustomed
to rehearse, with a low, triumphant chuckle, of their mutual success.
Even Mullen often received a visit from our hero. The waterman,
though dangerously wounded at the fight on the Neck, subsequently
recovered, and settled down, at the close of hostilities, in the
harmless pursuit of a fisherman. He knew where all the best places to
catch the finny tribe were to be found, and religiously kept the fact
to himself, only admitting Major Gordon to the knowledge of it, and
this under strict promise of secrecy. But, at last, our hero,
profiting by this information, became so successful, that he often
excelled his teacher and patron. Mullen, now grown to be a hardy,
weather-beaten old man, with a face the color of mahogany, and a form
as wiry as if made of steel, was accustomed, after such defeats, to
shake his head, saying, half in jest and half in earnest, “That
such treatment was too bad, he had a
despise
for it; it was

scandal-ous
.”

Uncle Lawrence lived
to a good old age. To the last he retained his fondness for the
chase, as well as the physical vigor to endure its fatigues. In rain
or shine he would set out, even when past the “three score and ten”
allotted as the term of human life, with his gun on his shoulder,
whistling as he went. At night his return would be announced by that
low, monotonous whistle, long before his form could be discovered
through the gloom or falling mist. His death was consistent with his
life. One winter Sunday he walked to the old, dear church at
Sweetwater; participated in the exercises with even more than his
usual earnestness; answered the ordinary kind inquiries of his
friends as to his health; and was told by the Major, who happened to
be on a business visit to the place, that he had “never seen him
looking better,” on which he answered, “the Lord is merciful to
me, and I have long since tried, as much as poor, human flesh can, to
set my house in order.” Returning home, he saw that the fire wanted
some fresh wood, and his children being, by this time, grown up, and
absent, he went out to get an arm-load. He had, however, scarcely
laid it on the hand-irons, and was stretching out his palms to warm
them, as the logs snapped and crackled into a merry blaze, when he
suddenly fell over in his chair, and was dead before his wife could
reach his side. The physician pronounced the cause of his sudden
demise to be a disease of the heart. He was buried in the grave-yard
at Sweetwater, in the spot he had mentioned to Major Gordon; and the
leaves rustled, the birds sang, and the flowers blossomed over him,
as he had desired. His farm passed long since into other hands.
Lately it has been abandoned to the forest, which is growing up, wild
and rank, on the fields where the patriarch tilled the soil, and
close around the hearth where he offered his morning and evening
prayers. Mother earth has claimed not only his own ashes, but even
“the place that knew him.” His memory, however, still lives, and
he is yet traditionally known, in his native region, as a mighty
hunter, who left no successor.

Mrs. Warren and
Maggy are the only persons of whom it remains to speak. The former
was characteristic to the last, and died at a good old age, about the
period that Louis the Sixteenth, to use her own phrase, “suffered.”
In fact, the good lady never recovered from the blow, which the
execution of that monarch inflicted on her heart. She had,
originally, almost detested him, because he had taken sides against
King George; for Mrs. Warren lived and died a tory. But when what she
called “the
canaille
” obtained the ascendancy in Paris;
when Lafayette carried the king and queen in triumph from Versailles;
and when the monarchy itself fell on the fatal tenth of August, she
became as violent a friend of the dethroned king as she had ever been
his enemy. The trial and execution of the monarch smote her heart to
its core. She could talk of nothing else. The bloody deed, in fact,
brought second childhood upon her. And when, a few months after,
Marie Antoinette herself was so brutally led to the scaffold, Mrs.
Warren gave up the ghost, declaring that all order was lost, that
birth was no more respected, and that the world was coming to an end;
adding that “she had known it would happen all along, she had felt
certain something dreadful would occur.” In her will, she left what
little she had saved to be equally divided between Maggy and “her
cousin, Lord Alvanley,” thus paying tithe of mint to affection and
of cummin to rank.

Maggy grew up all
that her friends could have desired, and finally made what everybody
admitted was a brilliant match. It was, in truth, more lastingly
brilliant than such unions generally are; for it was one of real
esteem on both sides, and not a mere marriage of convenience. Her
husband was a wealthy Virginia planter, who spent his time on his
estates, devoting it to the improvement of his numerous servants: a
man, who, though wealthy and well-born beyond most, considered it his
duty to labor in his sphere for the interests of his race, and
despise no man, however humble, poor, or degraded. In Maggy he found
a help-meet, in the full sense of that good old Saxon word; a
companion, a counsellor, and co-worker, who “smiled when he smiled,
and wept when he wept.” If we had not already reached the limits of
our story, or if we should ever again take up the pen, we should be
tempted to describe the married life of Maggy, in order to show that
all romance does not cease when the nuptial knot is tied, and that
there is a bliss of domestic life as perfect as the raptures of an
Amanda Malvina or a Lord Mortimer.

The whole of that
section of New Jersey in which the events of our story occurred, has
greatly changed since the period of which we write. Sweetwater itself
is in decay; the Forks is in ruins; and vast portions of the original
forest have fallen before the woodman’s axe. A railroad runs close
to the place where the hut of the refugee stood; the scream of the
locomotive is fast driving away the few deer left in the region. As
we send these sheets to press, we notice that a land company is in
operation in the neighborhood, and is issuing proposals to furnish
“cheap homesteads,” according to the approved fashion of these
modern associations. All things have changed. If the author has
succeeded in describing, however faintly, a region, a society, and a
state of manners already nearly eradicated, he will be content to let
the genius of improvement complete the work of destruction, and
forever remove all traces of the ruder, but more picturesque past.

End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Kate Aylesford, by Charles J. Peterson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KATE AYLESFORD ***

***** This file should be named 58846-h.htm or 58846-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/8/8/4/58846/

Produced by Dennis Hyer
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.