Project Gutenberg's Judith Moore; or, Fashioning a Pipe, by Joanna E. Wood

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Judith Moore; or, Fashioning a Pipe

Author: Joanna E. Wood

Release Date: February 11, 2019 [EBook #58876]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JUDITH MOORE ***

Produced by Al Haines

FASHIONING A PIPE.

"He tore out a reed, the great god Pan,

From the deep, cool bed of the river.

* * * * * *

"Hacked and hewed as a great god can,

With his hard, bleak steel at the patient reed,

Till there was not a sign of the leaf, indeed,

To prove it fresh from the river.

He cut it short, did the great god Pan,

(How tall it stood in the river!)

Then drew the pith, like the heart of a man,

Steadily from the outside ring,

And notched the poor, dry, empty thing

In holes as he sat by the river.

'This is the way,' laughed the great god Pan,

... 'The only way since gods began

To make sweet music, they could succeed.'

... Yet half a beast is the great god Pan,

To laugh as he sits by the river,

The true gods sigh for the cost and pain,

For the reed which grows nevermore again

As a reed with the reeds in the river."

—MRS. BARRETT BROWNING.

JUDITH MOORE;

OR,

FASHIONING A PIPE.

BY

JOANNA E. WOOD.

Author of "The Untempered Wind," etc.

TORONTO:

THE ONTARIO PUBLISHING CO., Limited

1898.

Entered according to Act of the Parliament of Canada, in the year one

thousand eight hundred and ninety-eight, by THE ONTARIO PUBLISHING

Co., Limited, at the Department of Agriculture, Ottawa.

JUDITH MOORE.

CHAPTER I.

"Behold a sower went forth to sow."

Andrew Cutler, with his graceful and
melancholy red Irish setter at his heels, walked
swiftly across his fields to the "clearing" one
morning late in spring.

He was clad in the traditional blue jeans of
the countryman, and wore neither coat nor vest;
a leathern belt was drawn about his middle.
His shirt, open a bit at the throat, and guiltless
of collar and tie, displayed a neck such as we
see modelled in old bronzes, and of much the
same colour; for Andrew Cutler was tanned to
the point of being swart.  His head had a
somewhat backward pose, expressive of an
independence almost over-accentuated.

His hair was cropped short, and was of a
sun-burnt brown, like his long moustache.  His eyes
were blue-grey, that softened to hazel or
hardened to the hue of steel.  His nose was aquiline,
with the little flattened plateau on the bridge
that we call "Spanish."  His chin was strong—the
chin of a man who "manlike, would have
his way."

Mother Nature must laugh in her sleeve at
the descriptive names we tack to her models.
This man so completely satisfied the appellation
"aristocratic," that, with the stubbornness of a
much-humoured word, it persists in suggesting
itself as the best vehicle to describe this young
farmer, and indeed the combination would be
entirely to the advantage of the adjective, which
is often seen in poor company.  A veritable
rustic Antinous he was, with broad chest, slim,
lithe loins, and muscles strong as steel.  Slung
athwart his shoulder was a sack of coarse brown
canvas that bulged with a heavy load; but he
strode on, his balance undisturbed, and presently
he stood upon the verge of the clearing.  This
was simply a part of the woodland that Andrew
was taking under cultivation.  A somewhat
unpromising piece it looked, with its stubborn
stumps standing irregularly amid the broken
furrows—(for it had been ploughed, in such
fashion as ploughing may be done when one has
to twist around stumps, over stones, and tear
through long strong roots).

Andrew remembered the ploughing, as he
walked across to begin his sowing, like the good
farmer that he was, at the end-rigg.  Here was
the stump that had resisted gunpowder, leverage
and fire, and that now was being tortured by
saltpetre, charged in a deep augur hole.  Well, it
had been a right brave old tree, but the
saltpetre would win to the stout oaken heart yet.
It was perhaps a step in the right direction, this
clearing of the woodland, but all progress seems
cruel at first.  Here—as he passed over what
seemed a particularly smooth bit—the great
stone lay hidden that had broken his ploughshare
off with a crash, and sent him flying from
between the plough-stilts.  He would remember
that stone for some time!  So doubtless would
good old Bess, whose patient brown shoulders
had borne the brunt of the shock.

Ploughing a field is like ploughing the sea—one
needs must have a chart of each to steer safely.
That more formidable sea, "whose waves are
years," has no chart.  Next winter would see
the uprooting of all these stumps, and the felling
of more trees beyond.  Next spring the plough
would pass straight from end to end, and the
seed-drill would sow the space which now he
was about to sow in the old classic fashion—as
they sowed, in intervals of stormy peace, the
grain after the wooden ploughs on the Swiss
hillsides; as Ulysses sowed the salt upon the
seashore; as the sowers sowed the seed in the
far-off East, as has been handed down to us in a
matchless allegory.

He began his task, hand and foot moving in
rhythm, and cadenced by the sharp swish, swish
of the grain as it left his hand, spreading
fan-wise over the soil.  It takes a strong wrist and
a peculiar "knack" to sow grain well by hand;
he had both.

The dog followed him for a couple of ridges,
but, besides the ploughed ground being
distasteful to him (for he was a dainty dog and
fastidious), the buckwheat hit him in the eyes, and
his master paid no heed to him, a combination
of circumstances not be borne; hence, he shortly
betook himself to the woodland, where he raised
a beautiful little wild rabbit and coursed after it,
until with a final kick of its furry heels it landed
safe beneath a great pile of black walnut logs,
built up criss-cross fashion to mellow for the
market.  Rufus (named from "William the Red,
surnamed Rufus") returned to his master, not
dejectedly, but with a melancholy contempt for
rabbits that would not "run it out," but took
shelter in a sneaking way where they could not
be come at.

By this time Andrew was well on with his
work.  The sack beneath his arm was growing
limp, he himself was warm.  He paused as a
bird flew up from a turned sod at his feet, and
a little search showed the simple nest of a
grey-bird—open to the sun and rain, built guilelessly,
without defence of strategy or strength.

There is something amiss with the man or
woman whose heart is not touched by a bird's
nest—the daintiest possible epitome of love, and
home, and honest work, and self-sacrificing
patience.  Andrew had thrashed many a boy for
robbing birds' nests, and had discharged a man
in the stress of haying because he knocked down
the clay nests of the swallows from beneath the
granary eaves with a long pole.  Now he bent
above this nest with curious-tender eyes,
touching the spotted eggs lightly whilst the bird,
whose breast had left them warm, flitted to
and fro upon the furrows.  He remained but a
moment (the bird's anxiety was cruel) then, fixing
the spot in his memory that he might avoid it
in the harrowing, he was about to go on his
way, when his ears were assailed by a succession
of the sweetest sounds he had ever heard—note
after note of purest melody, flung forth unsyllabled,
full-throated to the air, inarticulate but
eloquent.  Again and again it came, liquid, rich,
and with that pathos which perfection always
touches.

At first he could not fix the direction from
whence it came.  It was as if the heavens above
had opened and showered down music upon his
heart as he had flung forth the seed upon the
earth: and indeed there were two sowings that
morning and from each harvests were garnered—first
the bloom and then the fruit thereof.
But as he listened longer he knew it issued
from the wood before him.  At the first note
some impulse made him snatch off his old felt
hat, and he stood there, bareheaded in the
sunshine, as one might stand to whom had come the
pang of inspiration.

The singer was voicing no composition, only
uttering isolated notes, or short
crescendos
,
terminating in notes of exquisite beauty, but leaving
a sense of incompleteness that was so intense
us to be almost a physical pain to him—only
forgotten when the next utterance robbed him of
retrospect and filled him with hope.  Any one
who has heard a perfect singer practising,
knows the sensation.  In such fashion the unseen
sirens sang, and men willingly risked death to
touch the lips that had been parted by such
melodious breath.

Andrew still stood, and at last silence fell—a
silence he hardly comprehended at first, so
filled was it with the dream of sound that
had passed, so instinct with expectation: but
it forced itself upon him, and then suddenly
round him there sounded all the commonplace
noises of life—the croaking of a tree toad, the
buzzing of a chance fly, the far-off shouting of
men, and the sounds of birds—all that had
been deadened to his ear by the magic of that
voice.

A voice—then whence?

In two strides he was over the ploughed
ground and in the woods.  He searched
through and through it in vain.  He looked
from its borders at his own far-off farm-house
among its trees, at the gables of the village
of Ovid clustering together, at the tin on the
Baptist Church spire glistening in the midst, at
the long low Morris homestead that nestled in a
little hollow beyond his wood: but all was as
usual, nothing new, nothing strange.  No angel's
glistening wing was to be seen anywhere.

Andrew's grain was spent, but the clearing
was not yet all sown.  So he went home leaving
his task unfinished.  From one thing to another
was the rule of his busy life.  He gave a cheery
word or two to his aunt, Miss Myers, who kept
house for him, and then he was off to town with
a waggon load of implements to be mended in
time for the summer work.

That night a group of typical Ovidians were
gathered in the kitchen of old Sam Symmons'
house.

Sam Symmons lived in a frame house, just at
the foot of the incline which led into the village
from the north.  Like many of the houses of
Ovid, his was distinctly typical of its owner.  A
new house was such a rare thing in Ovid, that
the old ones had time to assimilate the characters
of their possessors, and to assume an individuality
denied to the factors of a more rapidly
growing place.

Old Sam's house was a tumble-down, rakish,
brave-looking old house, with shutters erstwhile
painted green.  They had once given the whole
house quite an air, but their painful lapses in the
way of broken slats, and uneven or lost hinges,
now superimposed upon it a look of indecision.
One of the weather-boards at the south corner
was loose and, freed from the nails' restraint,
bent outward, as though beckoning the gazer in.
It was a hospitable old house, but wary, too, the
ornate tin tops of the rain troughs round the
roof giving it a knowing look.

The native clematis grew better over the
weather-beaten gable than anywhere else in
Ovid, and the Provence roses, without any care
whatever, bloomed better.

It was as if the house and its environs were
making a gallant but losing light against
encroaching time and adverse circumstances.
So it was with old Sam.

He was an old man.  Long before, when
Canada's farmers were more than prosperous,
when foreign wars kept the price of food grains
high, when the soil was virgin and unexhausted,
when the military spirit still animated the
country, when regulars were in barracks at the
nearest town, when every able man was an
eager volunteer, when to drink heavily and swear
deeply upon all occasions marked the man of
ease, when the ladies danced in buckled shoes
and
chéne taffetas
, and were worshipped with
chivalrous courtesy and high-flown
sobriquets
—in
those days old Sam Symmons had been
known as "Gallant Sam Symmons," and had
been welcomed by many high in the land.

He had ever been first in a fight, the last
upright at the table, a gay dancer and a courtly
flirt.  But now he was glad to get an audience of
tolerant villagers to listen to his old tales.  For
instead of garnering his money he spent it freely,
having ever a generous heart and open hand, and
of late years he had fallen upon evil times, and
gone steadily down hill.  Now he had only a
strip of barren acres heavily mortgaged.  He
married late in life the daughter of a country
doctor.

They had one child, a girl, whose mother died
when she was four years old.  Sam christened
his daughter Susanna Matilda.

In the days of his youth—oh, the halcyon
time—these two names had been the names of
the hour.  The Mabels, Lilys and Rubys of
to-day were yet unborn.

Susanna Waring had been the belle of the
county, and her lovers were willing to stake
their honour upon her pre-eminence.

Matilda Buchanan had been called "The Rose
of Canada," and when the Consul, her father,
returned to England, she footed it bravely at the
Court of St. James.  She married a nobleman
there.

They were long dead, these two beauties.
Matilda Buchanan had left all her pomp, and
Susanna Waring had passed away from all her
unhappiness, for she married an officer who
treated her brutally.  Well, well, old Sam
Symmons, gallant Sam Symmons then, had
danced with both of them, had kissed Miss
Waring's hand in a minuet, and knocked a man
down for saying Matilda Buchanan rouged.

She did—they all did in those days—but it
was not for the profane lips of man to say
so.  Thus Sam christened his daughter Susanna
Matilda, and felt he had done his duty by her.

After his wife's death, her cousin, a good
enough woman in a negative sort of way, kept
house for him, and brought up the little girl.
When Susanna was eighteen, this woman died;
so Sam and his daughter were left alone.

As has been said, quite a crowd was gathered
in old Sam's kitchen that night in the last week
of May.  There was Sam himself, Jack
Mackinnon (a neighbour's hired man and the most
noted liar in Ovid), Hiram Green, Oscar Randall,
and Susanna.  It may be said here that throughout
Ovid and its environs Susanna's proper name
was a dead letter.  She was "Sam Symmons'
Suse" to all and sundry.  The Ovidian mind
was not prone to poetry: still, this alliterative
name seemed to have charms for it, and perhaps
the poetical element in Ovid only required
developing: and it may be that the sibilant triune
name found favour because it chimed to some
dormant vein of poesy, unsuspected even by its
possessors.

The occasion calling forth the conclave in
Symmons' kitchen was simply that his old
mare was very sick; in fact, dying, as all save
Sam thought.  As every man in Ovid prided
himself upon his knowledge of veterinary
science, the whole community stirred when it
was spread abroad that there was an equine
patient to practise upon.

Oscar Randall took the dim lantern from the
table and went out.  He returned, and all
awaited his opinion.

"Well, Os?" said Jack Mackinnon.

"If that was my horse—which she ain't, of
course—I'd shoot her," said Oscar, deliberately.

"Shoot her!" said Jack Mackinnon: "shoot
her!  Don't you do it, Mister Symmons.  Why,
there was old Mr. Pierson wot I worked for in
Essex, he had an old mare, most dreadful old
and most terrible sick—sick for months.  One
day we drawed her out in a field, to die easy
and so's she'd be easy to bury.  Well, by George! she
got up, and old Mr. Pen—him wot I worked
for as has the dairy farm—he came along, and
he says to Mr. Pierson, says he, 'Wot'll you take
for the mare?'  'Twenty-five dollars,' says the
old man.  'She's my mare, then,'  says Mr Pen;
'I'll give you my note for her.'  So Mr. Pen took
her home and drove her in his milk-cart: and
that spring he sold her two colts for a hundred
dollars apiece, and in the fall he got two hundred
dollars for a little black one; and Mr. Ellis, wot
keeps tavern, he bought another pair of 'em in
winter, and gave a sorrel horse and a double
cutter for 'em.  I tell you, she was a good old
mare that, and we drug her out to die at old
Mr. Pierson's, wot I worked for in Essex, and
old Mr. Pen, wot keeps the dairy farm, he came
along, and says, 'Wot'll you take for the mare?'  And—"

"Oh, shut up!  Draw it mild, Jack," said
Oscar, irascibly.

"Sam," said Hiram Green, slowly, "have you
tried Epsom salts? and ginger? and saltpetre? and
sweet spirits of nitre? and rye? and
asafoetida? and bled her? and given her a
bran-mash? and tried turpentine and salt?"

"Yes," said Sam, "I have, and she's no better."

"Now, Sam," said Green, impressively, "did
you give her a 'Black's Condition Powder'?"

"No, I didn't," said Sam.

"I thought so," said Green, significantly.

"Do you keep them in the store?" queried
Oscar Randall, aggressively.  He felt aggrieved
with Hiram, having himself intended to ask
about the sweet nitre and turpentine.

"Do you keep them?" he asked again.

"Yes, I do," admitted Hiram, "and I've
brought one along in case Sam should like to
try it."

This rather crushed Oscar's insinuation as to
Hiram's business policy in suggesting this
remedy, so he sat silent, while old Sam and
Hiram Green went out to administer the powder.

Jack Mackinnon, to whom silence was impossible,
with the freedom of equality prevalent
in Ovid, turned to where Suse sat making
rick-rack.

"Wot are you making, Miss Suse?" he began,
and without waiting for a reply, continued:
"There was Adah Harris, daughter of old man
Harris, wot was a carpenter and had a market
garden, wot I worked for in Essex, and she was
always a-doing things.  She was busy every
blessed minute, and I tell you she
was
smart;
she married Henry Haynes wot kept a blacksmith's
shop, wot I worked for: and when I left
there, I left my clothes be, till I got a job, and
when I went back after 'em, there was a new
shirt, and two paper collars in a box, and my
mother's picture gone.  Now I knowed pretty
clost to where them things went—and I'll have
'em back if I have to steal 'em.  Why I thought
no end of mother's picture, it was took standing;
I wouldn't have lost that picture for a fifty-cent
piece, and there 'twas gone and my new shirt
and two collars I'd only had two months.  I left
them at Henry Haynes' wot married Adah
Harris.  Old man Harris went carpentering and
kept a market garden, but, pshaw!  Talk about
squashes, why we growed one squash there took
three men to get it into the waggon, and then
we rolled it up a board—why squashes—" but
just then Hiram and old Sam came in.  Old Sam
blew the long-lit lantern out.

"Well, father?" Suse asked.

"She's dead," said Sam.

"Dead's a door nail," added Hiram.

"No!" said Jack, with exaggerated incredulity.

"You don't say!" said Oscar, in a tone which
betrayed a distinct conflict between self-satisfaction
and proper sympathy.  He could not resist
adding in a lower key, "I seen as much."

Soon the trio of visitors departed.  Old
Sam was smoking a last pipe when a knock
came to the door.  He opened it to find Andrew
Cutler without.

"What's this I hear about your mare?" he
asked.  "Is she dead?"

"Yes—couldn't seem to do anything for her,"
said old Sam, and brave as he was, his tone was
somewhat disheartened.

"Well, it's too bad, she was a good beast.
Better have my little bay till you look about
for another," said Andrew.

Old Sam's face lightened.  "I'll be glad to,"
he answered.  "There's the orchard field to
plough and I'm behindhand already, but"—his
old pride forbidding him to accept too
eagerly—"don't you need him?"

"No, not a bit," said Andrew.  "Indeed, I'll
be glad if you take him awhile.  He's getting
above himself."

"Well, I'll come along for him in the morning,
then," said Sam, relieved.  "What have you
been doing to-day?"

"Sowing buckwheat in the clearing, and went
to town with some mending," replied Andrew.
"I'm just getting home."

"How does the clearing look?" asked Sam.
"Free of water?"

"Yes, it's in good condition."

"Hiram Green says that there's a boarder up
to the Morris place.  Did you see anything of
it?"

"Man or woman?" asked Andrew, with
sudden interest.

"Hiram didn't say.  I took it was a man."  (Andrew's
heart sank.)  "Suse, did Hiram Green
say 'twas a man or a woman had come to board
with old Mrs. Morris?"

"He didn't say," called Suse from an inner
room.

"Well, it's a lonely place to choose, isn't it?"
said Andrew.  "Good-night, Mr. Symmons."

"Good-night, good-night.  Thank you kindly,"
said old Sam.

The old mare was buried next day in one of
Sam's barren fields.

"Did you get the shoes off her?" Mr. Horne
asked as he encountered old Sam returning from
the obsequies with an earthy spade over his
rounding shoulders.

"No, I didn't," said Sam.

"Did you save her tail to make a fly brush?"
queried Mr. Horne.

"No," answered old Sam.  "I never thought
of it."

"Did you skin her?" asked his questioner
bending over.  "Did you skin her?"

"No," said Sam, thoroughly humiliated.

"Well," said Mr. Horne with exuberant
sarcasm, as he shook his reins over his team of
fat Clydesdales, "It's well you can afford such such waste.
I couldn't."

CHAPTER II.

"Say where

In upper air

Dost hope to find fulfilment of thy dream?

On what far peak seest thou a morning gleam?

Why shall the stars still blind thee unaware?

Why needst thou mount to sing?

Why seek the sun's fierce-tempered glow and glare?

Why shall a soulless impulse prompt thy wing?"

The next day Andrew Cutler went to complete
the sowing of the clearing.  It was somewhat
chill, and he wore an old velveteen coat whose
ribbed surface was sadly rubbed and faded to a
dingy russet.  More than that, it was burnt
through in several round spots by ashes from
his pipes and cigars.  As usual, Rufus followed
him, and a very picturesque pair the two made.

The air was very clear, the smoke from the
village curling bluely up high to the clouds, no
shred of it lingering about the roof trees.  He
could see some white pigeons flying about the
church spire; and off to the right, where the
river ran, he could see lines of white flashing a
moment in the sun, then falling beyond the
trees, and these he knew were flashes from the
shining breasts and wings of the gulls.  The
ground had not yet lost the elasticity of spring,
and the new grass had not yet quite overcome
the dead growth of the year before.

It was a buoyant day, and Andrew was in a
buoyant mood.  He had not come out without
the expectation of hearing more singing, and he
promised himself he would not wait so long
before beginning his search for the singer, whom
he took to be the boarder at the Morris house.
However, it seemed as if he was to be
disappointed, for the sun grew strong, the air
warm, and no music came to him.

His sowing was done, and he was just about
leaving, when, sweet, clear, full, the voice of
yesterday shook out a few high notes, and then
taking up the words of a song began to sing it
in such fashion that Andrew (who knew the
song well) could hardly believe that the sound
issued from mortal lips—it was so flute-like, so
liquid.

Now, Andrew's life had not been one of much
dissipation; still, there were hours in it he did
not care to dwell upon, and the memory of
every one of these unworthy hours suddenly
smote him with shame.  They say that at
death's approach one sees in a second all the
sins of his soul stand forth in crimson blazonry,
and perhaps, in that moment, Andrew's old self
died.

The singer's voice had taken up another song,
one he did not know—

"Out from yourself!

For your broken heart's vest;

For the peace which you crave;

For the end of your quest;

For the love which can save;

Come!  Come to me!"

In springing over the fence and making
towards where the sound came from, Andrew
hardly seemed as if acting upon his own
volition.  He had been summoned: he went.

After all, there is not much mystery about a
girl singing among the trees, yet Andrew's
heart throbbed with something of that hushed
tumult with which we approach some sacred
shrine of feeling, or enter upon some new
intense delight.

He soon saw her, standing with her back
against a rough shell-bark hickory.  The cloudy
greyness of its rugged stem seemed to intensify
the pallor and accentuate the delicacy of her
face.  For she was a very pale-faced, fragile-looking
woman who stood there singing: her
eyes were wide and wistful, but not unhappy-looking,
only pitiable from the intense eagerness
that seemed to have consumed her.  And, in fact,
she was like an overtuned instrument whose
tense strings quiver continually.

She was clad in a dull red gown made in one
of the quaint fashions which
la mode
has revived
of late years.  It had many
bizarre
broideries
of blues and black, touched here and there with
gold—Russian embroidery, its wearer would
have called it.  As she sang she made little
dramatic gestures with slender hands, and at the
last words of her song's refrain, she stretched
forth her arms with a gesture expressing the
infinitude of yearning.

Her face, so mobile as to be in itself speech,
seconded her words by an inarticulate but
powerful plea.  It was as though she pleaded with
Fate to manifest its decree at once, and not hold
her longer in suspense.  And it was for singing
such as this, and for acting such as this, that
the world had crowned her great—Fools who
could not see that the head they crowned was
already drooping beneath its lonely burden.
Blind fools who could not see it was the passion
of an empty heart, the yearning of a solitary
soul, the unutterable longing of a woman's nature
for love, that rendered her marvellous voice so
passionately and painfully sweet.  She herself
never suspected it; only she believed what the
doctors had told her manager and teacher, the
good man who wore such big diamonds and
used such bad language, that she must have rest,
quiet, complete and absolute change.  So she
and this man had come to Canada, and had
driven on and on into the heart of the country
till they came to this village in the valley, and
there she had elected to stay—a caprice not
nearly so extravagant, and certainly more sweet
and wholesome than the freaks indulged in by
some others of her ilk.  So here she was, lying

perdu
, whilst her picture was in every paper in
the country, with marvellous tales of her
triumphs abroad and whispers of the wonderful
treat in store for the music-lovers of America.
And her little, good-hearted manager flashed out
his biggest diamonds, swore his worst oaths,
hoped the child was getting strong, and never
dreamed he was killing her.

The "Great God Pan" was all unconscious of
his cruelty, was he not, when he fashioned the
pipe out of a river reed?  And as he blew
through it the music of the gods, doubtless
had good reason for thinking that never reed
had been honoured like unto this reed.

There are moments in real life, so exotic to
the lives into which they have entered, that one
hardly realizes the verity of them till long after,
when the meaning of his own actions struggles
through the mists and confronts him with their
consequences.  In such moments the most
absurd things in the world seem quite in order,
and the commonplace actions of life assume
grotesque importance.  So it is in dreams,
which reconcile with magnificent disregard of
possibilities, the most wonderful conditions of
person, place and time.  Well—

"Dreams are true whilst they last

And do we not live in dreams?"

This is Andrew's only excuse for accepting so
promptly the musical invitation extended with
such feeling!

"I have come," he said, half dreamily—stepping
out from the shelter of the trees.

The pale-faced singing siren changed to a
startled, blushing girl, and in swift sequence
Andrew's rapt gaze altered to one not altogether
without daring.

"Oh, so I see," she half gasped, then laughed
outright, looking at him with shy eyes, but
mutinously curving lips.  The laugh robbed the
scene of its last illusion of mystery.

Andrew advanced, raising his old felt hat
with an instinct of deference that made the
commonplace courtesy charming.

"I hope I didn't scare you," he said; "but I
was working in a field near here yesterday and
heard you singing.  To-day I made up my
mind to find you.  Do you mind?"

"Do you know who I am?" she asked.

"No," he answered; "but I suspect you are
the 'Boarder up at old Mis' Morris's.'"

"Oh, so a rumour has gone abroad in the
land?  Yes, I am the boarder; one would think
a boarder was a kind of animal."

"Yes," assented Andrew.  "Old Sam Symmons
said he wasn't sure if it was a man or a woman."

"I won't be called an 'It'; my name is Judith
Moore."

"How do you do, Miss Judith Moore.  My
name is Andrew Cutler."

He had come close to her by this time, and
as he looked down upon her he began to feel an
irritating sense of shyness creep over him.  She
was such a fantastic little figure in his eyes.
And what a queer frock she had on!  Surely
on any one else it would be horrid.  It didn't
look so bad on her, though; and what a belt for
her to wear, this great burden of metal—a
flexible band of silver with, it seemed to him,
dozens of silver ornaments hanging to it by
chains of varying lengths!  What nonsense!
It seemed to weigh her down.  (Andrew was
not up in chatelaines.)  Then her feet!  But
here his masculine horse sense and the instinct
of protection which had awakened in him at
the first startled look from her big wide eyes,
made him overstep all polite bounds and render
himself odious to Miss Moore.

"Why in the world do you wear shoes like
these?" he asked.  "And such stockings! and
standing on that damp moss!  You had better
go right into the house and get on decently
heavy shoes."

This was too much.  Miss Judith Moore
fancied her own feet, and fancied open-work
silk hose, and high-heeled wisps of shoes.  Most
of all, she liked the combination.  In fact, in a
harmless little way, she rather liked people to
have a chance to appreciate these beauties, and
at the very moment Andrew spoke, she had
noted his downward glance and felt a righteous
peace settle upon her.  To be well shod is such
moral support, and, lo, this heathen, this wretch,
this abominable, conceited, brazen young farmer,
had actually dared to suggest a change; more
than that, he had spoken of "stockings"—disgusting!

So, with a dignity that reduced Andrew to
despair, even whilst it roused his ire (she was
so slight to be such a "defiant little cat" he told
himself), she drew herself up, in a manner to do
the traditional Duchess credit, and left him,
saying:

"Since you don't approve of my feet I'll take
them out of your way."

"You mean they'll take you," said Andrew,
wrathfully conscious that she was, to use a good
old figure of speech, "turning up her nose at
him."

"You are extremely rude," she called back.

"And you are a bad-tempered little thing," he
answered.

So he and his siren, calling names at each
other, parted for the first time.

Miss Moore went into the little apple
orchard behind the Morris homestead, and
watched a tiny chipmunk gathering leaves
to line its nest—at least Judith supposed it
was for that.  At any rate, it picked out
the dry brown leaves from beneath a maple
tree near the gate, sat up on its hind legs, and
pleated the leaf into its mouth deftly.  It took
two or three at a time, and looked very comical
with the brown leaves sticking out like fans on
each side of its face.  She laughed so long and
loudly at this, that Mrs. Morris came to the door
to see if she had hysterics.

"I met a young man in the woods, Mrs. Morris,"
said Judith, going up to her; "a rude,
long-legged young man, named Cutler.  Who
is he?"

"For the land's sake!" said Mrs. Morris.  "Did
you meet Andrew Cutler?  I warrant he'd be
took down if he heard you say that.  He's
thought a good deal of by some people, being
on the school board and the council, for all he's
unmarried and young; but he's too big feeling
to suit me!  And he don't profess religion, and is
forever smokin' and shootin', and he's got a crank
on books—took that off his mother; she was a
Myers.  They was U. E. Loyalist stock; got
their farms for nothing, of course, and hung on
to them.  Andrew owns a fine place, and he's
full of cranks about college farming.  Well,
'long-legged'—that's a good one!  He is
long-legged, there's no mistake about that.  All the
Myerses are tall.  There's Hannah Myers as
keeps house for Andrew, and she's tall as my
old man, and—for the land's sake, that milk's
boiling over!" and Mrs. Morris departed indoors.
Presently, out flew two chickens, a collie dog,
and a cat, wild-eyed and spitting, from which
signs Judith diagnosed that Mrs. Morris had
made "things" fly around when she got inside—a
miracle she was an adept at performing.

Andrew went home to dinner, and came back
in the afternoon to harrow down the grain he
had sowed.  Mr. Morris came out to talk to
him.

"Who is the girl you've got boarding with
you?" asked Andrew.

"Oh," said Mr. Morris, "I don't just rightly
know, but she's a singing woman of some kind:
in the opery, she said.  She and a little
black-a-vised chap came driving up the lane one day
last week, and before I just rightly could make
out what they were, he was driving off and she
was there for keeps.  Next day there came a
whole waggon load of trunks.  Going to stay
all summer, she says.  She's greatly took up
with the country.  She wanted to tie ribbons
on the cows' horns, and is bound to learn to
make butter.  She was going to churn the other
day, and worked the dash about a dozen times,
and then she scolded right sharp at the butter
for not coming.  Then she got a spoon and tasted
the cream, and she up and says to Mother, 'Why,
Mrs. Morris, you've given me sour cream to
churn!' and she was real huffy.  She wouldn't
believe that sweet butter came off sour cream,
and she just sat, and never took her eye off that
churn till Mother was done with it.  She was
bound she wasn't going to be fooled.  She's real
smart some ways, though, only she don't eat a
mite, and Mother's dreadful afraid her religion
is kind of heathenish.  She was looking out the
door the other day, and she says, says she, 'It's
a perfect idol!'  Mother never let on, but soon
as she went away Mother came out and looked
about, and there was nothing like an idol, except
maybe them big queer-marked stones I got down
by the lime springs.  What did you call 'em?"

"Petrifactions," said Andrew.

"Yes.  Well, Mother always had 'em set up
against the door steps kind of tasty, but Mother
ain't the one to have no sich temptations around
in any one's way, if they be given to sich, so she
just rolled 'em along and dropped 'em into the
cistern."

Mr. Morris was notoriously long-winded, and
sometimes Andrew was not over-eager to
encounter him, but this day Andrew was more
than civil.

"What's she here for, anyhow?" asked he.

"Her health; she's all drug down, Mother
says, and she's full of cranks.  Yesterday she
would weed in the garden, and she started out
with as good a pair of gloves on as you ever
seen.  Well, she stayed and stayed, and Mother
she went out to see if she wanted to come in,
because Mrs. Horne was there (them Hornes are
a bad lot!) and she wanted to visit a spell.  Well,
she'd got up about
two
handfuls of chick-weed,
and then sat down and gone sound asleep.  All
wore out, Mother says."

After a bit Mr. Morris departed.  He had
detailed with great gusto all the "news" told by
Mrs. Horne, or deduced by himself from her
conversation; but Andrew's interest flagged, so
presently Mr. Morris went on his way, if not
rejoicing, at least relieved, for it was a boon to
him to get a good listener.

Andrew went home reflectively.  His last
conscious thought that night must have been in
some way relative to Miss Judith Moore, her feet
and her temper, for he muttered to himself, half
sleeping, half waking: "Her eyes didn't look
like the eyes of a bad-tempered girl:" then "They
were so little I could have held both of them in
one hand;" later still, "I was pretty bad to her
about the shoes, women are such dear little
fools."  Then this judicially-minded young man
slept the sleep of the just.

CHAPTER III.

"If thou art worn and hard beset

With sorrows that thou wouldst forget;

If thou wouldst read a lesson, that will keep

Thy heart from fainting and thy soul from sleep,

Go to the woods and hills; no tears

Dim the sweet looks that nature wears."

The village of Ovid lay in a valley hollowed
out of an otherwise level country into a shallow
basin.  It called those who dwelt to the north
of it, Mountain Hayseeds; and those to the
south of it, Swamp Angels—compliments
returned in kind, for the youths of the sections
thus flattered by Ovidian attention always
referred to the villagers as Ovid Idiots.

For the most part the houses in Ovid clustered
closely together.  Some few of them were
scattered half way up the sloping hill-sides,
but these dwellings were all built facing the
village proper, and besides being absurdly
fore-shortened always wore a deprecating look as if
mutely conscious of their invidious positions.
These hills of Ovid were not very formidable,
and from a short distance off, say, from Andrew
Cutler's clearing, one could see over their crests
the gables of the village.

There were but two long streets in the village,
denominated the Front Street and the Back
Street.

Upon the Front Street stood the two churches,
facing each other, being, however, only in physical
juxtaposition, for spiritually they were as far
as the poles apart.  The one was a Methodist
Church, and bore high above its door the
inscription,
Eva Methodist Church, A.D. 1860
.
This legend must once have been very glaring,
seemingly jet black upon a white surface, but
some painter, well disposed to mankind
evidently, had swept his brush laden with white
paint over this inscription.  The result was
grateful to the eye, even if it did give rise to some
uncertainty as to what the words actually were.
Great truths often come home to one intuitively;
perhaps that is how every one knew what was
writ above that door.

The Baptist Church was stone, and bore only
a date,
1854 A.D.
, but it rejoiced in a tin-clad
spire that glimmered gayly in the sunlight or
shone cold and chill beneath the wintry moon.

Between these two churches and the members
thereof there was no animosity, but there was a
"feeling."  A "feeling" is one of those intangible,
elusive things, of which no acceptable
definition can be given; but every new-comer
to Ovid grew into that "feeling" before he had
been there a week.  Perhaps some perception of
this peculiar condition may be gathered by
considering the various improvements which took
place in the two churches during one autumn in
Ovid.

They were inaugurated by Hiram Green, who
presented a stone tie-post to the Methodist
Church.  Hiram kept the village grocery store,
and had accepted six stone tie-posts in lieu of
certain goods supplied to the boarding-house at
the stone quarries.  The boarding-house keeper
had taken them in default of cash from his
quarryman boarders.  Hiram erected three of
the posts before his shop door, at such short
distances from each other that it precluded the
tying up of more than two horses at a time, and
then only to the end posts and facing each
other.  Having adorned the path before his
house with two others, he, at the instigation of
his wife, presented the sixth to the Methodist
Church.  This post was adorned with an iron
ring at the top and a somewhat frisky damsel
in rude carving on the side.

It was a matter of grave consideration whether
this carving should be turned to the street or
towards the sidewalk, it being debatable in
which position she would do the most harm.
She was finally turned towards the street,
upon the reasonable supposition that persons
driving past would pass more swiftly than
persons walking; hence, their exposure to evil
would be briefer.  To further mitigate the
demoralizing effect of this bit of stonework,
Solomon Ware took a chisel and carefully
obliterated the outlines of the figure, missing only
one foot, which, in terpsichorean fashion, pointed
skyward in a meaningless, disjointed way from
a chaos of chisel marks.

The week following, the Baptists put up two
wooden tie-posts, each surmounted by an iron
horse's head.

Two weeks later a block of wooden steps
appeared beside the stone tie-post, to facilitate
those driving to church in alighting from, or
mounting to, their conveyances.  This was on
Wednesday.  By the Sunday following, its
duplicate stood between the wooden tie-posts, with
the additional glory of drab paint.

A month later a new fence encircled the
Methodist temple, and the Baptist sanctuary
was re-shingled.

As the autumn advanced the Methodist
Church had sheds for its horses erected in the
rear of the church.  Ere the first snow flew, the
Baptist Church was similarly adorned, and its
shed rejoiced in elaborate scroll work brackets
at the dividing posts.

In November the Baptists held a series of
revival meetings, and the Methodists commenced
a weekly service of song.  At New Year's the
Methodists raised their pastor's salary fifty
dollars a year.  In February the Baptists held a
memorial service, and had four ministers preach
upon one Sunday.  It is true, as Hester Green
took occasion to remark, that two of them were
only students, but the Baptist Church had
vindicated the priority of its establishment, and
rested on its laurels,—besides the spring work
was coming on.

The speech of the Ovidians was not in any
sense a dialect peculiar to themselves.  There
were, of course, certain words and phrases
which were regular stand-bys, and from which
no Ovidian speech was free.  For example, when
an Ovidian was out of conversational matter, he
did not let the talk die away, or the argument
fall to pieces whilst waiting for the tardy ideas
of his friends to evolve themselves.  Far from it.
He simply said, in a tone suitable to the occasion,
"Well, it beats all!"  Closer scrutiny will reveal
the resources of this phrase.  Did an Ovidian
attend a funeral?  Then this expression formed
the chief staple of his conversation, and its
enunciation ran the gamut of emotion, from
grief to amazement.  Did an Ovidian hear a
more than usually spicy piece of gossip?  Then
he ejaculated the same phrase in a tone of
scandalized enjoyment.  Was a subject upon which
he could not, or would not, give a direct opinion
under discussion?  Then this non-committal
formula answered admirably, entailing no after
responsibility upon the speaker, and yet giving
him a pleasant sense of conversational duty
properly performed.

There were a few idioms, also, dear to the
Ovidian mind.  To be "ambitious" meant simply
to be energetic; to be "big feeling," "stuck up,"
or "toney," meant to be proud (in the sense of
despising one's neighbours); to "conjure," with
the accent strongly upon the first syllable,
meant to think over a thing.

Apart, however, from a dozen or two of these
lingual idiosyncrasies, the Ovidian speech was
the ordinary English of Canadian rural districts,
delivered in a peculiar drawling, nasal style,
with a clinging to the last syllable of a word
and the last word of a sentence.  The only
interest Ovidians had, apart from Ovid and the
dwellers therein, was in watching the progress
of the world, as shown by the trend of
Canadian politics; and as Ovid they had always
with them, and the world only when the weekly
papers came in, it was natural they should know
Ovid best—and they did.  Every one's pet hobby,
every one's worst weakness, every one's ambition,
every one's circumstances, everyone's antipathies,
every one's preferences, every one's record and
family record—all this was known and well
known, aye, even to the third generation back.

But of all Ovidians none knew so much of
his fellows' history as did old Sam Symmons.
The one attribute that assured Sam a welcome
wherever he went, was his knowledge of the
generation passed away, the fathers of the
present Ovidians: not that his stories were flattering
(far from it), but they were never ill-natured,
at least upon Sam's part.  It was true they were
illustrative of the weak points of their heroes
rather than their virtues, but then Sam did not
make history; he only repeated it, and he was
very impartial.  So where a dozen Ovidians
were gathered together, there Sam would be in
the midst.

There was a perilous stimulus about their
anticipation.  He was sure to evolve some
personal reminiscence from the chaotic mass of his
old memories, and each of the expectant auditors
felt that his forebears might be the subject of
it.  When Sam did choose a victim, and plunged
into some old tale about his grandfather or
father, then all the others drew in their breath
with swift enjoyment of the various points of
the story.  There was something Druidical and
bard-like in this oral handing down of history,
and it differed from more pretentious history in
one respect.  Sam's stories might be oft-repeated,
but he never altered a syllable, never
deepened the shading to suit some different
element in his audience, never swerved from the
first intent of the recital, never slurred the truth
to let any one off lightly.  Perhaps the reason
Sam's stories preserved their identity so well
was because they were tacitly copyrighted;
no one ever tried to tell them but himself, and
indeed they would not have sounded the same
from other lips, for Sam spoke of the past as
one having authority.

The loss of his old mare was quite a serious
one to Sam, and he went about a shade more
irresolute than he was before.  Poor old Sam!
He had had so many blows, big and little, from
fate, that it is not to be wondered at if he did
become a little haphazard in his methods of
work and business.

It is hardly worth while making plans when
some evil chance seems to thwart them every
time; even if one works till his stiff old limbs
are trembling with fatigue, it doesn't seem to
make much headway against adverse circumstances;
and when fate buffets down even the
strongest guard, how can one poor old man fend
off its blows?  But if his brave old heart was
shaken a little within him, Sam still turned a
resolute face to the foe.  The week after the
mare's death, and before he had got used to the
blind horse he had bought to replace her, he
found his way to Hiram Green's store.

The talk turned on drinking.

"Yes," said Sam, "there's many a way of
drinking"—in a reminiscent tone—"many a way!
When I was young, there were three brothers
with their three wives, doing settlement duty on
a grant of land given one of the officers, in
Bruce County.  Well, they were fine big fellows,
and their wives were big, strapping, healthy
women.  Strong, too, they were, and had good
judgment.  Why, one of them went one morning
to the wood-pile to get some wood, and when
she came back there was a wolf, lean and hungry
(for it had been a bitter winter), standing over
the cradle where her baby lay.  Now, what did
she do?  Run away and yowl?  Not she.  Hit
it a clip with a billet of wood, and killed it
where it stood.  Well, the lads used to drive off
forty miles with an ox team for provisions, and
each would bring his keg of rye back with him;
but the women always drank more than their
share, and it got to be that there was mostly no
meals ready when the lads got back from felling
the timber.  So the lads hit on the plan of tying
the kegs to the roof, where the women could not
get at them, and they went away well pleased
with themselves.  But they were finely taken
down when they got back, for the women shot
holes in the kegs, and caught the whiskey in a
washtub.  Yes, yes, there's many a way of
drinking.  There was your wife's grand-uncle,
now"—suddenly becoming personal in his
memory, and addressing Hiram—"'twas when he was
running for reeve the first time, and he came
into Fossil's tavern, and not seeing James
Lawson, the younger, and me, where we sat on the
settle by the door, he went up to the bar to get
a drink.  He called for whiskey.  He had his
drink and laid down the five cents to pay for it.
Now, 'twas his way to fill his glass very full,
and Fossil, being a close man, was very grouty
at that.  So, out of the five cents, he pushed
back a penny.  'Here,' says he, 'is your
change, Mr. Mowbray.  I don't charge as much
wholesale as I do for single drinks.'  Your
wife's grand-uncle did not like that.  'Twas just
before the polling day when he got overtaken in
liquor one night at old Squire Fraser's.  'Twas
a bright moonlight night, and some of the lads
going home late, also, heard a noise at the village
pump, which, coming at, they saw was your
wife's grand-uncle, pulling at the pump-handle,
and saying, with many oaths, 'Come home,
Jack: come home.  There will be a sore broil
for thee if Mrs. Mowbray see thee.  Come home,
Jack: come home.'  To which persuasion he put
many threats and moral advisements to Jack to
cease from liquor.  Jack was his nephew, a quiet
youth, being bred to the pulpit.  Well, the boys
got hold of both these tales, and when the
voting came on, they would seize at anything, a
tree, a post, or the fence, when your wife's
grand-uncle came by, and, straining at it manfully,
would beseech Jack to come home, using many
moral persuasions and many oaths also, as he
had done to the pump, and feigning to weep sore
over the stubbornness of Jack's heart.  Then
they would say, 'Come home, Jack, and I'll buy
thee a drink wholesale at good, generous Master
Fossil's.'  Yes, yes"—Sam's voice began to
weaken—"yes, there's many a way of drinking."

There was a pause.  No one ever commented
upon Sam's stories; there was no need.  To
deprecate them would be to stir up, who knew
what, of oblique reflection upon one's ancestors.
For any of those not immediately interested to
interfere would be to invite Sam's attention to
their cases.

"Did you hear that the school-teacher leaves
next week?" asked Hiram.

"No.  Why?" asked Jack Mackinnon, glad of
a chance of hearing his own voice.

"Because he says he can't afford to keep
himself here and his wife in Toronto on three
hundred a year."

"Then he'd better get," said old Mrs. Slick, as
she took the packet of cream of tartar Hiram
was weighing.  "He'd better get."  She hobbled
out, giving malevolent sniffs at the thought of
the teacher's extravagant ideas.

"Yes, he's going," continued Hiram.  "He's
going, and there's a school meeting to-morrow."

Andrew Cutler, Hiram Green and Ben Braddon
were school trustees, and it had occurred to
each of them that Sam Symmons' Suse would
be sure to apply for the position.  She held a
county certificate permitting her to teach for
three years.

"I wonder," Andrew said that morning to his
aunt, Miss Hannah Myers, "I wonder if Suse
will know enough to apply for the place."

"Not she! too empty-headed," said Miss Myers,
briskly.  "I'll go down this afternoon and tell
her what I think of her, and make her apply."

"Do," said Andrew, heartily.

Andrew liked old Sam, and he was a special
favourite of the old man's.  Many a long story of
election fights and tricks, secrets Sam kept even
yet, of how votes had been gained and lost,
many tales of drinking bouts and more gallant
adventures, did old Sam retell for Andrew's
benefit.

Andrew was not at all worried by Miss Myers'
brusqueness of speech.  He knew how kind she
was to everybody in her own vinegary way.
Tall, angular, hatchet-faced and sharp-tongued,
Hannah Myers had a heart full of love for every
living creature that needed help, only, 'the
beggar at her door had first abuse and then a
shilling.'

And how well the tramps knew the way up
to that quaint old kitchen door, with the uneven
flag-stones set in a little court-yard round it!
A table always covered with glistening tin milk-pans
stood outside, and many a good meal had
the gentlemen of the road had off that table;
scolded vigorously by Miss Myers whilst they
ate, the tirade only interrupted by sudden
journeys she made to find perhaps a pair of
socks, a shirt, or something else she saw they
needed: now and then a surly tramp would
answer her back, and she would laugh at him
in her grim way and say, "Hear the man!
Why, don't you see, I like to scold as
much as you like to eat; so if you enjoy
the one, why mayn't I the other?"  Upon
one memorable occasion an ungrateful tramp,
(and however much he may be idealized nowadays,
there are instances of the ingratitude of
tramps) attempted to impose upon her, thinking
her alone.  He had, unfortunately for him,
reckoned without his host.  Andrew suddenly
appeared upon the scene, seized his trampship
by the most convenient portion of his attire, and
dropped him with quiet, but forcible, precision
into a somewhat unappetizing duck pond near
by, giving him at the same time a picturesque,
but somewhat profane, bit of advice.  The fellow
took himself off, and Andrew turned his
attention to poor Miss Hannah, who was quivering
and trembling and crying as the meekest and
mildest woman might do.  Miss Myers' tongue
was a deception, and, as a matter of fact, that and
her vinegary aspect were the only defences she
had against imposition, for whilst always vaunting
her hard-heartedness, she was, in reality, the
most gullible of women.

She never could resist a pedlar: she always
bought their trashy wares.  And once, she
never forgot it, she burdened herself with a lot
of cheap brassy hairpins and extraordinary glass
breast pins.  That purchase fairly haunted her.
Get rid of it she couldn't.  Did she try to burn
it?  Some one came and caught her.  Did she
intend to throw it away?  She did not dare,
she knew some one would find it.  She did
manage finally to find a watery hiding-place for
it in the horse pond.  Even then its meretricious
sparkle assailed her from the mud when the
pond went dry.  She related this to Judith
Moore, and told her with all soberness that she
should always pity a murderer trying to get rid
of the corpse.

As Mrs. Morris had told Judith, Miss Myers
was of U. E. Loyalist stock.  She might have
added that the Cutlers were also.  Both families
had been given grants of land in Canada.  The
property in the Myers family had been divided
and sub-divided amongst a big family connection.
Miss Myers had a little fifty-acre farm as
her share of it; it lay some fifteen miles from
Ovid.

Andrew's farm at Ovid had descended to him
through his father and grandfather, old Captain
Cutler, the stern old fighter whose sword, with
its woven crimson sash, hung in the hall of
Andrew's house, with some quaint old pistols
and a clumsy musket, relics from Canadian
battle fields.  Besides the property in Ovid,
Andrew owned another fine farm and a wide
stretch of woodland in Muskoka.  These properties
accrued to him through the death of some of
his father's relatives.  So Andrew was very well
off, in a modest way.  The Muskoka property bore
much fine timber, and an enthusiastic
"prospector" assailed Andrew, month in and month
out, with tales of the "indications" of minerals he
had found beneath the ferns and mosses of his
Muskoka woods.  But Andrew was content with
them as they were, with the trees growing
solemnly upward, aspiring to the blue: the
wandering streams, a network of silver tracery,
starred here and there by broad discs where one
widened to a little placid lake or where two or
more streams, meeting, gushed together.  The
sound of their soft confluence and the soughing
of the wind, that without moving the leaves
seemed ever to sigh between the tree trunks,
blent into a soft sensation, half sound, half stir,
something perceived nowhere but in the woods,
seeming indeed as if there we were very close to
Nature's sweet and beautiful breast, hearing in
this mysterious pulsation the beating of her
kindly heart.

Andrew had grown to be in very close touch
with Nature during many solitary weeks spent
in hunting: in long tramps through the Muskoka
woods, shooting the fawn-coloured deers, and the
wild fowl that nested in the tiny lakes; and in
many a long night when he lay
perdu
watching
for lynx, forgetting his quest in the marvel of
the stars, or in wakeful watches, seeing the
resinous camp-fire die down to embers and
hearing the shrill laughing of the loon, the weird
wail of the lynx, the cry of the great owl or the
call of the coon.  Andrew was past-master of all
woodland lore.  He had hunted Muskoka through
and through.  Many a wild duck's breast and
fox's mask, and many a pair of antlers proved
his prowess.

Besides, he had spent many a winter in
northern Quebec, snow-shoeing over its silent
white wastes upon the traces of moose; the
intense cold parching his throat, his half-breed
guide padding* along at his side; sometimes
faring royally upon juicy steaks and birds,
broiled as only hunters can broil—not scorched,
yet savoured with fire; sometimes upon a long
trail with a bit of frozen bacon in one pocket
and a lump of frozen bread in the other, gnawing
a morsel off each with care, so that he might
not break off his moustache which was frozen
in a solid mass with the moisture of his breath.

* "Padding" is a term applied by hunters to the silent
flat-footed gait of Indian guides.

Andrew often heard people say that one
did not feel the intense cold in these
northern regions; he always longed to have them
there and let them try it.  He had felt pretty
cold up there, only he never remembered the
time when he couldn't hold his gun with
naked hands.  That, though, as every one
knows, is the mark of a mighty Nimrod.  So
soon as his half-breed guide discovered this, he
grunted out a guttural prophecy that the shoot
would be good.

Strange mixtures these guides were; the
combination of French suavity and redskin
cunning being a continual wonder to Andrew,
accustomed as he was to less complex types.

This man who slept sometimes rolled close in
the same blankets with him for warmth, whose
woodcraft made his less intuitive knowledge
seem absolute ignorance, whose judgment in
matters of the chase was almost flawless,
whose strength and agility would not have
shamed a Greek—this man cooked his meals,
washed the dishes, waited upon him deferentially,
and was not to be persuaded to eat at the same
time.  In the chase, a hero; in the camp, a slave.

What tramps those were through the silent
solitudes of these untrodden woods!  What
moments had been his, when, leaving his guide
preparing the camp for the night, Andrew had
gained some high ridge, and pausing, looked far
across the peaks of graduated hills, clad in
sombre cedars weighted down with snow, white,
silent, yet instinct with that mystery which
presses upon us pleading for elucidation, and
never so strongly as when we are alone with
the unblotted world before us, away from the
signs of man's desecration.  There is something
very pitiful in that mute appeal of nature to be
understood—like some sweet woman, smitten
into a spell of suffering silence, till such time as
the magic word shall release her.  A word she
knows, yet cannot, of her own power, speak.
What magical mysteries shall not be revealed
when speech is restored to her!  And how her
eyes plead and accuse at once!  Of a verity,
having ears we hear not: truly, having eyes to
see, yet are we blind!

For there is some great open secret surely in
the universe, that being deciphered will set all
our jangling dreams in chime.  It is about us,
around us, above us; the tiniest leaf tells it, the
stars of heaven proclaim it, the water manifests
it and the earth declares it, and yet we do not
see it.  When we do, it will be some simple vital
principle that we have breathed with the breath
of our lips, and handled with the familiar fingers
of the flesh.  We will be so unable to conceive
of the world moving on in ignorance of it, that
all the wisdom of the ages past will seem but as
the howling of wolves in waste places, or at best,
as the babbling of children that play with dry
sand, now letting it slip through their fingers,
leaving them with empty hands, now getting it
in their eyes to torture them, or treading on it
with vague discomfort and unease.

We have all seen these childish puzzles with
hidden faces concealed in the traceries.  How
hard it is to find these faces, although we know
they are there!  And yet, when found, it is
impossible to see anything else in the picture.
They obtrude themselves upon us, and what was
formerly the picture becomes now only the
background for what at first it completely
concealed.  So everything will but subserve to
show us how palpable the great Central Truth
has always been if we could but find it,
and some
one will
.  So let us go on bravely, each resolving
"To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield."  There
is indeed within us some spark of the
Divine Fire.  Let it but once flame fairly up
and we shall be gods indeed, moving in the
glory of our own transfiguration.

There is no destiny too great for man.

* * * * * *

The northern stars are very clear and cold,
the northern skies are very blue and chill, the
snowy plains are places meant for thought, and
in the silence of those scenes the soul awakes.

Andrew bore away with him some reflex of
their austerity and intensity, which tempered his
mind as the steel is strengthened.

His mother's story had been a sad one.  She
was Miss Myers' elder sister—Isabella Myers;
very like Miss Myers yet very unlike; with
all those resemblances which pronounce two near
of kin, yet all those variations of the type which
constitute the difference between beauty and
every-day flesh and blood.

Isabella had been engaged to a minister's son
named Harkness.  He was a young man who
justified in every respect the many pleasing
proverbs about ministers' sons: yet, in spite of all,
had a leal heart, a handsome form and face, a
tender touch, and a personal magnetism that
enabled him to wring an unwilling consent out
of stern old Abraham Myers to his betrothal
with his daughter Isabella.

These two young folk worshipped each other,
and the wedding day was set.  Isabella was to
wear a white taffeta frock and white thread
mitts.  But troublous times had come to Canada.
Young Harkness went to the war.  Isabella and
he had a sad, sad parting, for the imaginative
girl was fey of her fate, and clung to him till his
heart melted within him.  And as he rode away
with a long tress of her dark hair on his breast,
it was not the sunshine alone that made his
eyes so bright and his vision so uncertain.

It was but a puny affray that in the history
of the world's wars, but it does not take big
battles to make men brave and women's hearts
ache.  The dark braid had hardly warmed in
its place before it was soaked with the blood of
the heart on which it lay.  The real Isabella
Myers died then, too.  But a pale apathetic
woman in her shape and semblance still went
wearily on her way.

Ten years later they married her to Andrew
Cutler, a man considerably older than herself,
and as her father said, "of the old true blue
stock."  She gave him a boy and died, well rid
of the world.  Miss Hannah Myers came to keep
house for her brother-in-law.  She brought up
the baby and took charge of the little hide-covered
chest which was full of the books ("poetry
books and such," Miss Myers called them) that
young Harkness had given Isabella long before.
Andrew Cutler lived on after his wife's death to
a good old age, being killed at last by falling
through the trap-door in his hay-loft.  Then
Andrew was head of his house.

As Andrew grew up, he developed such a
strange resemblance to one long dead, that
sometimes, when a movement, gesture, or
expression of his brought it more clearly to Miss
Myers' eyes, she felt an eerie thrill creep over
her.  She described the sensation as "cold
chills."  For it was not a resemblance to his
father, or his grandfather, or even to his mother
(although he resembled her, too), but he imaged
forth the brave, handsome, devil-may-care lover
of his mother's girlhood, he who had died ten
years before Andrew's birth.  Surely the image
of that long-lost lover had been deeply graven
on that broken heart.

"The Cutler house on the hill," as the villagers
described it, was quite a pretentious one
in its way.  Old Captain Cutler, he of the sword
and sash, had not been penniless, by any means,
when he left the United States, although he
left behind him much valuable property.  So
when the Canadian Government made him a
generous grant, he promptly spent his money in
building a house.  Now, the forebears of this
Captain Cutler had come from England, and
many a tale his grandfather had told him of the
old farm homestead there, of the garden with
brick-paven walks, and brick-built walls upon
which grew the espaliered fruit, of the old
sun-dial beside the larch tree, and the oaken beams
that traversed the plaster of the ceilings, of the
flagged kitchen, and the big fire-places.  So
here on the hill-top overlooking the valley,
where later Ovid was to be built, Captain Cutler
erected his house, a big stone one with oaken
floors, stairways and doors, with heavy rafters
of the same sturdy growth, a wide-flagged
kitchen, and a hall sheathed in wood half way
to the roof, with huge open fire-places.  He put
a brick wall about his gardens, and over it
trained the sprawling branches of currant
bushes—red ones, and white and black.  Later
on, hop vines had been planted here and there
along the wall; still later, a row of grape vines
had superseded them, and clad the old bricks
with fresh festoons of leaves.  This made, when
the grapes were ripe, a beautiful Bacchanal
arabesque of purple fruit and brown stem,
twisted tendril and green leaf.

He laid down narrow brick walks, too, and by
them planted horse-chestnut trees.  He put a
sun-dial up, a grey stone column with a round
top, whereon was rudely carven the symbols of
the hours and a lob-sided hour-glass; for lack
of a larch tree he filched a linden from the
hill-side.

The garden took in the level plateau on top
of the hill, and some of the slope upon the side
farthest from Ovid.  The hill-side next the
village was laden with lindens, which in spring
were covered in blossom.  Old Captain Cutler
sent to England for English ox-heart cherry
trees, and for boxwood, and for hawthorns to
plant hedges.

The cherry trees flourished and perpetuated
themselves in generations of younger trees, the
box grew and multiplied, but the hawthorn
hedges were failures.  All that remained of
them was a few scattered hawthorns that had
long outgrown the status of the hedge row, and
become old gnarled trees.

Miss Myers was very proud of her flower
garden, which was a mass of circular, oval and
diamond-shaped flower beds, bordered by box,
spaced off by narrow bricked walks.  There
were honeysuckles growing over old-fashioned
wooden trellises; and roses, crown imperials and
lemon lilies; huge clumps of peonies, pink,
white and the common crimson; clove pinks
and thyme; lilies of the valley and violets,
with bushes of rosemary and patches of balm;
spotted tiger lilies, and a fragrant white lily
called the day lily; little shrubs of the pink
flowering almond, "snow on the mountain,"
"mist on the hill" and acacia shrubs.  And
beside these, many more old-fashioned perennial
plants, like queen of the meadow and thrift; and
every summer Andrew brought her heliotropes,
and scented geraniums, and mignonette from
town.

The barns were away down at the foot of the
hill.  Andrew's men usually all lived in the
village, unless he happened to have hired
strangers for the stress of harvest or haying, or in
winter time when they were needed about the
house.

Miss Myers, as the village phrased it, "kep'
help regular," and often had up old Mrs. Greer
from the village, for there was a deal of work to
be done in that house.

For the rest, Andrew was a practical farmer;
it had not occurred to him that he did not need
to work so hard, and the active life did him no
harm.  He was up at daylight in summer, and
by candle-light in winter.

He ploughed, sowed, reaped and threshed his
grain.  And when at the threshings he sat at the
head of the long table, lined on each side with
men "feeding like horses, when you hear them
feed," he looked like some young chief among
his serfs, albeit he wore blue jeans and flannel
shirts as they did.

He did not know himself to be so different
from his neighbours as he was, only he never
seemed to contemplate marrying one of their
women, and he pitied them.  For they did not
recognize the pathos of their own narrow lives.
They did not see their surroundings as he did—the
beauties of the skies above, and of the earth
beneath, and the marvel and mystery of the
water.

Andrew could not have said this was what
made him pity them, for he was one of the
inarticulate ones, whose speech is shackled; one
of those, too, who know their own limitations in
this way, and feel their fetters.  At times they
seemed to weigh his spirit down.

CHAPTER IV.

Andrew was eager to see Miss Moore again,—although
he felt a masculine irritation against
her for taking umbrage at well-meant and
thoroughly sensible advice.  Perhaps at the
bottom of this there lay a
soupçon
of
annoyance with himself, that he had spoken so
abruptly to her upon the subject, mingled with
a compassionate remembrance of what Mr. Morris
had told him of her delicacy.  He was
very glad to find an excuse to go up to his
woods, where they stretched past the Morris
house; and a pretence that he was looking for
suitable trees to cut down for foundations for
his hay-stacks, justified him in his own eyes for
strolling among his trees in very leisurely, but
apparently disinterested fashion.  He must,
however, have been paying some attention to the
house on his right, for when Mrs. Morris ran out
from the old orchard behind the house to the
barns, calling, "Father, Father, where are you?
Come here, quick, do, hey Father!"  Andrew
promptly responded, leaping over the fence
and speedily reaching her side.

"What's wrong?" he asked.

"Land of love!  But I'm glad you've come, if
she did call you long-legged: all the better for
her now if you be.  I hope she ain't fell by this
time.  Wonder where Father is.  I never seen
such a man; always gone when he's wanted.  I
declare it beats me where he gets to.  It's enough
to drive—"

"What is it, Mrs. Morris?" demanded Andrew,
his heart misgiving him.  "Can't I help?"

"'Deed you can!  And to think of her calling
you long-legged, and the very next day having
to depend on you for her life, may be, or to save
one of her own legs being broke—"

Mrs. Morris got no further.  A little faint cry
struck Andrew's ears, coming from the direction
of the orchard.

"For heaven's sake, come on, and show me
what's wrong," he cried.  "Don't stand there
palavering."

"Why, sakes alive!  Don't you know?  Miss
Moore got up in a tree and—"

But by this time they were in the orchard.  A
glance explained the situation to Andrew.

High up on an apple-tree branch stood Miss
Moore, clinging with both arms round a limb
above her, her face white as death, her eyes
dilated with fear.  A ladder's head was within
six inches of her feet.  Andrew was up it in an
instant.  He knew the trouble.  Only last year
a hired man of his had ascended a tree to pick
fruit.  He was seized with this ague of dizzy
fear, and flinging himself against a stout limb,
had held on like grim death.  It took two men
to get him down; his terror made him clasp the
tree convulsively.  It was days before he was
well again.

Miss Moore had evidently not seen him, nor
heard his coming.  As he slipped his arms about
her, she gave a great start, and turned to look at
him with eyes which seemed to expect some
tangible shape of horror, evolved out of her
illogical and intangible fear.

When she saw who it was, her eyes filled and
her lips trembled.

"Oh, take me down.  Do take me down."

"Yes, indeed, I will," said Andrew, with quiet
assurance.  "Let go of the branch."

She shuddered.  The spell of the vertigo was
yet upon her.  Her arms tightened upon the
bough.

"Do take me down," she pleaded childishly.
"I'm frightened."

"My dear, you must loose your hold," said
Andrew, steadily.

Then, with one arm about her, he reached up
and one by one undid the clinging fingers, gathering
them into his palm as he did so.  With a force
that seemed cruel, he pulled down the slender
wrist and placed her hand upon his shoulder.
Her face expressed the agony of dizziness.  With
blind instinct she put her other arm about his
neck and clasped it close.  He felt her form
relax, and braced himself in time to sustain her
dead weight as she fainted.

The descent of the ladder was easy enough.
Andrew had carried many a bag of wheat up
and down his steep granary stairs.  The principle
of balancing an inert woman is much the
same.  He carried her into the house and laid
her down upon the broad home-made couch,
covered with dark brown calico, that stood in
the kitchen.  Mrs. Morris had talked volubly
during these proceedings, but only after he laid
Judith down, did Andrew begin to hear what
she was saying.

"She does look gashly!" said Mrs. Morris.
"Whatever would I do if she was to be took!
And this minute she looks fit for laying out."

"Goodness alive," said Andrew.  "Can't you
do anything to bring her to?  Bathe her face, or
something?"

Mrs. Morris flew for water and brought it,
trembling.  "I say, Andrew, can't you do it?
I'm so shook—I never could bear to touch
corpses, and—"

Andrew gave her a venomous look, dipped his
handkerchief in the water, and began clumsily
to bathe the girl's brow.  Her senses were already
reasserting themselves.  She put up her hands
to her face: they fluttered nervously.  Andrew
caught one of them and held it between his own
brown ones, noting that her wrists were red,
almost bruised, creased in rough outline of the
apple-tree's bark.

"Will you give me some water?" she asked.

Mrs. Morris brought a blue and white cup.
Andrew, kneeling on the braided mat before the
couch, slipped his arm under Judith and put the
cup to her lips.  She took a mouthful, and fell
into a shivering fit of cold.

Mrs. Morris rose to this emergency.  Ague
was an old familiar friend; "shakes" had no
terrors for her.  In a moment she had found a
thick coverlet and placed it over Judith.

"You stay by her," she said to Andrew,
"and I'll make her a draught of hot elderberry
syrup in two shakes."

Then she was off to the lean-to kitchen, and
they heard her rattling among her kettles.
Andrew still knelt upon the mat holding Judith's
hand with praiseworthy absent-mindedness.

"Are you better now?" he asked.

"Yes," she said, her chin quivering as she
tried to keep her teeth from chattering.  "It
was so good of you to take me down.  So awfully
good.  I'm very stupid, but I couldn't help it."

"Of course you couldn't.  I had a man who
behaved much worse than you did in the same
situation.  Ever so much.  Indeed, you behaved
very well."

There was silence; then Judith began: "Mr. Cutler,
I—er—called you a name to Mrs. Morris
the other day."

"Did you?  What did you call me?"

"Will you forgive me?"

"Tell me what you called me first."

"Oh!"

"Forgiveness is worth that, isn't it?"

"Oh, yes.  I called you—long-legged,
and—I think, I said you were rude."

Andrew suppressed an inclination to laugh,
being minded not to belittle the value of his
absolution.

"Well," he said, "I'll forgive the first part of
it because you see it's so awfully true, and as for
the second, well—I think you meant 'sensible';
anyhow, I forgive you for it all."

Miss Moore experienced a mental sensation
she would have called "curling up."  A pretty
cool specimen, this young farmer!  She had
thought he would have fallen into faltering
excuses.  She was really ill, though faint—cold.
Mrs. Morris came in with the steaming cup of
black syrup.  Judith had forgotten till that
moment that Andrew held her hand: of course,
Andrew had been unconscious of it all along.
But as Mrs. Morris appeared in the door a swift
intuition of the state of affairs came to Judith.
She gave a little gesture of withdrawal, and
Andrew released her lingers slowly, rising with
praiseworthy calmness to get himself a chair.

While Judith tried to drink the hot syrup,
Mrs. Morris explained that Miss Moore had never
seen a bird's nest with eggs in it, and there being
an oriole's nest in the apple-tree, "Father" had
put up the ladder for her to see it, and—Andrew
knew the rest.

"Tree fright is a lot worse than stage fright,"
said Miss Moore: oracularly, but this was a dark
saying to both her listeners.  Mrs. Morris talked
and talked.  Miss Moore had long since lain
back on the big brown pillow; her face was
flushed, her eyes sleepy.  Andrew would have
listened to Mrs. Morris forever, provided he could
have watched Miss Moore at the same time.
But at length Mrs. Morris rose and moved
towards her summer kitchen, intimating that
her chores needed tending to, so Andrew
perforce had to take his leave.

"Good-bye, just now," he said.  "May I come
back and take you to see some birds' nests nearer
the ground?"

"Oh, do," she said.  "And I haven't thanked
you half enough for helping me to-day."

"Indeed you have.  Good-bye, just now."

"Good-bye," she said softly.

He was just at the door, when a soft but
interrogative "Ahem" from the couch attracted
his attention.  He turned.  Miss Judith Moore
did not look at him, but with cautious precision
she drew the dark blue coverlet up a tiny bit.
His eyes became riveted upon the point of a
bronze slipper that gradually grew from the
shadow of the covering until a whole foot was
revealed—a foot at a defiant pose and wearing
a little bronze slipper with an exaggeratedly
high heel.  Andrew's eyes grew daring, and he
half turned.

Miss Moore seemed to telescope, for head and
foot disappeared beneath the coverlet at once.
He paused a moment, and then departed.

As he went across the fields he thought of the
little scene he had left, and, more shame to him,
his thoughts were not concerned wholly with the
bad effects of wearing high heels, nor yet of the
impropriety of Miss Moore's retaliation for his
high and mighty granting of forgiveness.
Indeed, as he sat for a moment kicking his heels
on the top bar of the first fence, he was
speculating solely as to whether "they" were
open-work or not!  He was thinking he would have
given his best gun to be able to tell, and summed
up his reflections with a dissatisfied little growl,
"Of all the mean, miserable, stingy glimpses!"

As he walked along, his face changed.  After
climbing the hill-side to his garden wall, he
passed an apple-tree in hill bloom at the gate.
He paused beneath it.  His face was pale and
serious, his eyes tender.  He thought of Judith's
russet head as it had leaned upon his shoulder:
he looked down at his old velvet coat, where it
had rested, and fancied some vague perfume rose
from it to his face.  He remembered he had held
her in his arms, and recalled the red marks upon
her delicate wrists.  Those wrists had been curved
about his neck.

He could not realize the full height and depth
of what had come to him, but his whole being
groped for the truth even as he stood beneath
the tree.

As he walked slowly up the narrow bricked
walk to the house, he noticed how the chestnut
roots and the frost together had heaved up the
bricks and rendered the walk irregular.  He
wondered anxiously if she could walk over it in
those shoes, and as he reached his door, which
stood open under its old-fashioned porch,
revealing a dusky cool vista beyond, he suddenly saw,
as in a vision, a woman's shape stand between
the lintels, waiting for him!—a woman with
slender hands outstretched in welcome, grave
grey eyes, soft hair, tender lips: the woman he
loved:
his own
.  As this last thought, the
sweetest thought man's heart holds, formulated itself
in his mind, Andrew knew the truth.  He turned
down the path, past the apple-tree, through the
lindens again, and across his fields, until once
more he looked upon the house wherein she
rested.  He looked at it long from the shelter
of his trees, his whole existence resolved into
a chaos of uncertain self-communings, until a
voice like an angel's seemed to whisper of
comfort and to sing of hope.

Then he went home, and at four o'clock betook
himself to the school-house to attend the
meeting in regard to appointing a new teacher.

The village school-house stood at the end of
the street farthest away from the Cutler
homestead.  It was a bleak, stone building, with a
wooden porch—a gaunt, bare, uninviting-looking
building, with none of those picturesque adjuncts
of climbing vines and overarching trees, associated
so often with thoughts of a country school.

It had a perky, self-satisfied little bell-house
on top, and its date, 1865, was rudely carved on
a big stone in the peak of the north gable.  It
had eight windows—three at each side, two at
one end.  In winter, the wood for the box stove
was always piled up outside before these.  There
were always complaints of the school-house
being dark in winter, yet it never occurred to
any one to select a different site for the wood-pile.

The interior of the school-house corresponded
in dinginess to the outside.  The plaster walls
were sadly soiled, particularly beneath the broad
window seats, where the children sat kicking
their heels whilst they ate their lunches at noon,
for the scholars were drawn principally from
the outlying farm-houses.  A long length of
irregularly jointed pipes led the smoke from the
box stove at the end to an exit over the teacher's
desk.  Little tin pails were hung at intervals
along this, to catch the black liquid distilled
from the soot.  The other adornments of the
room consisted of a long blackboard, a globe,
and some big lettered tablets, round which the
teacher was wont to gather the infant class and
teach them their letters.

In the politics of a little village like Ovid, the
smallest public measures became magnified to
grotesque importance.  The usual custom was
for the school trustees to sit in private session
first, when any particular business was to be
arranged, say, the selection of a teacher, and
when this was arranged the doors were flung
wide and the meeting was "open."  These open
school meetings were always well attended.
They were the classes in which embryotic
statesmen acquired the political alphabet, the ABC
of political procedure, the manner of putting a
motion, taking a vote, making a nomination,
and the correct order of precedence governing
the motions and amendments.  There too, was
acquired the first great requisite of a
politician,—the art of saying non-committal things in a
most convincing tone of voice, and of treating
with much politeness those whom one held in
secret abhorrence.

There were two offices, those of school trustee
and pathmaster, and these two were equal in
power and glory.  True, they were barren
honours, but they ofttimes led to better
things.  The school trustee had the higher
position in one respect: he was chosen by the
people at first hand.  The pathmaster, upon the
contrary, was appointed by the Council.  It is
needless to say the school trustee smiled in calm
superiority at the pathmaster, and the latter in
turn felt the making of the roads wherein the
whole community walked, was as holy an office
as the task of guiding the juvenile wanderers
into the school, and seeing that when there, they
trod the common road to knowledge, it being
well known that there is no royal road thereto.

When Andrew arrived at the school-house,
the other two trustees, Hiram Green who kept
the village store, and Hen Braddon, were
present.  They immediately entered upon a
discussion of the teacher question.  The application
of Sam Symmons' Suse lay upon the table,
written out upon foolscap paper, in big round
hand, with many flourishing capitals, rejoicing
in "shaded" heads and beautifully involved
tails.

"I tell you Suse is a good list with a pen,"
said Hen Braddon, with conviction, and the
other two agreed.  "She ain't no slouch at
spelling either," said Hiram Green.  The other
two agreed with this also.  Then Andrew took
up his parable.

"Yes," he said, "Suse is quite smart, and being
bred right here in Ovid seems to give her a
claim to the school.  I suggest we just appoint
her."

"Well, it's as well to be cautious," said Hiram
Green.

"It'll save advertising," said Hen Braddon.

"Suppose we just decide on it then," said
Andrew.

"Well," said Hiram Green, "well, I ain't got
no objections to Suse as Suse, but what I think
is, two hundred and fifty is enough to pay a
woman for what a man got three hundred."

Andrew sneered.  He didn't have a sweet
expression when he did that.

"Don't you think," he said, gravely—"don't
you think Suse might include cleaning the
school-house and lighting the fires in winter for
the two-fifty, being she's a woman?"

"No," said Hiram, reflectively; "old Mrs. Slick
has done it so long."

"But it would save twenty-five dollars,"
argued Andrew, with meek persuasion.

"Well," said Hiram, "Mrs. Slick needs that.
She's owin' already, and she might's well draw
the money off the school taxes as off the
council."

"Oh, Mrs. Slick is owing, is she?" queried
Andrew, with solicitude.  "I hope she pays you
all right.  Well, about Suse.  Being she's a
woman, don't you think you could fix it so's
she'd chop the wood for winter?  That would
save twelve dollars."

A nasty red flickered up to Hiram's face.
He had thought Andrew's proposition about the
taking care of the school thoroughly genuine.

"Oh," he said, "I ain't particular whether she
gets the three hundred or the two-fifty, though
I hope you won't deny when nomination comes
round that you deliberately threw away fifty
dollars of the people's money."

"You maybe quite sure I won't deny anything
that's true," said Andrew, hotly.  "And
as for throwing away the people's money, well—some
of the teachers, so far as I can recollect,
got their salaries raised pretty frequently.  Of
course, I wasn't on the School Board then, so I
only
heard
why it was done.  I can't say of my
own knowledge."

The fact was that Mr. Hiram Green had
several unappetizing daughters, and, as he had
been school trustee almost ever since any one
remembered, it seemed good in his sight that
the teachers, over whom he wielded such
paternal authority in such a parental way, should
return the compliment by adopting a filial
rôle
,
and become sons not only in spirit but in name.
But, alas, for the vanity of human wishes! the
perfidious teachers had accepted all Hiram's
kindness, had slept in the best bedroom and
partaken of his best fruit, had ridden by him to
town and accompanied the Misses Green to
tea-meetings and festivals, had abode in the Green
household over Sundays, had gone with them to
church, and at choir practice had faithfully served
them, and then, with the extra money they had
been able to save through Hiram's hospitality
and the fortuitous "raise" in their salaries, they
had shaken the dust of Ovid from off their feet,
and departed to fresh fields and pastures new, to
marry the girls they had been engaged to all
along or to study for one of the higher professions.
Never a one of them all left a love gauge
with a Miss Green, and in the bosom of the
Green family many were the revilings cast upon
those teachers, who, with a goodly countenance
and a better appetite, had devoured Mrs. Green's
layer cakes and preserves, feasted upon Hiram's
peaches and driven his horses upon the false
pretences of "intentions."  However, in fairness
to the teachers, one must remember that "some
have greatness thrust upon them."  Foolish,
indeed, would be the man who deliberately
offended his trustees, and Hiram's hospitality
was usually somewhat pressingly proffered.

This last teacher—bad luck to him!—had
described himself in his application as a single
man, when at the beginning of the summer
vacation he sent in his certificates for
consideration in response to Hiram's advertisement,
and before these holidays had passed he
married and came alone to Ovid to take up
school in the autumn, and had eaten five
teas and two dinners at Hiram Green's before
he asked the eldest daughter, with whom he
frequently found himself alone, where she
thought he could rent a suitable house for
himself and wife.

"This is very sudden," murmured Miss Green.

"Well, I don't know," he said, in a practical
tone of voice, "I've been nearly two weeks away
from her now, and I can't stand it much longer."

Miss Green gathered his meaning then, and
never another tea did that teacher sit down to
in Hiram Green's, and indeed the atmosphere of
Ovid had been made so frigid for the little
smooth-haired, blue-eyed girl he had married,
that he soon sent her away, and finding he could
not do without her, finally sent in his own
resignation.  The Greens had a big family
connection, and Ovid was made a cold place for those
whom they did not like.  The Cutler house on
the hill and poor old Sam's stubborn door
were about the only portals in Ovid that an
enemy of the Greens might pass.

Henry Braddon acted as a soft, effective buffer
between Hiram and Andrew, who both always
wanted their own way, and wanted it at once.

"Best let Suse have the three hundred," said
he: "old Reilly will be foreclosing on Sam soon
if he don't raise the money somehow."  Now,
Reilly was the local usurer, the one hard-hearted,
close-fisted old Shylock so often found in rural
districts; the one man within a radius of twenty
miles who had made a fortune.  He was
reputedly worth seventy or eighty thousand dollars;
possibly he was worth fifty thousand.  But
when that is divided into mortgages, ranging
from two or three hundred dollars up to, perhaps,
one or two of five thousand, one can realize
what a power he was in the country side; how
many heart-strings he had tangled in his
grasping fingers; from how many couches his
shadowy outstretched hand banished sleep; at
how many tables his hollow, gaping palm was
seen, as the children put out their hands for
food; before how many hearths his spectral
presence ever sat with a look of anticipatory
proprietorship.  He was as cruel as the grave,
and as relentless as time.  Not one ten minutes
of grace did ever any one get from old Reilly.
The children looked at him with awe as he
drove past in his old-fashioned buggy, a
hatchet-faced old man, thin, cold-blooded, with big
knuckly hands holding the reins.  Hen Braddon
knew what he was doing when he referred to
him.  The week before, Hiram Green's brother
had been turned neck and crop out of his farm
by this same Reilly.  No fear that Hiram would
let him get another "haul" off old Sam if he
could help it.

"That's so," said Hiram, with alacrity.  "Andrew,
you just make out the appointment, will
you? and you post it, Hen, when you go home."

Andrew having gained his point, was generously
sorry that he had twitted Hiram about
the salary matter, so in the subsequent open
meeting he let Hiram do all the talking, looking
the while at a dark stain on the ceiling, which a
coat of whitewash, put on yearly since he was a
boy, had failed to obliterate.  He would never
forget how that ink went up, and that might be
the very same old box stove over in the corner,
the one upon which he set that tightly corked
bottle of frozen ink to thaw, taking precaution
at the same time to be out of the road when it
exploded.  It had been a particularly brilliant
"go off" that—straight up to the ceiling and
down in a shower of black spatters.  Andrew
could see the fun of it yet, and found himself
involuntarily looking at his palms, as though
some traces of the blisters the teacher's rawhide
had raised might still be there.  Andrew recalled
many other such like exploits, and looked at his
smooth, brown palms, thinking how many
thorough thrashings he had had, when suddenly a
line of poetry he had read some days before,
came into his head:

"Lay thy sweet hands in mine, and trust to me."

He sat through the meeting quite oblivious of
what was going on, missing what was one of the
finest oratorical flights of Hiram Green's career.
He was speaking of the departing teacher, and
he made many scathing remarks anent the
legends and pictures upon the walls, which, as
he brilliantly put it, "indicated an entire and
deplorable lack of discipline upon the part of the
present teacher."  The said teacher smiled and
said nothing.  Had Hiram looked closely at the
pictures he would have found that a good many
of the drawings were caricatures of himself and
his family.  In one rude picture the four Misses
Green were represented as having hold of a
man, who struggled in the midst.  By means
of certain facial peculiarities, exaggerated as
only a genius or a school-boy would dare
exaggerate, any one in Ovid could have identified
the Misses Green and their victim, a former
teacher.  One of the ladies held a coat sleeve she
had rent off; another a portion of a coat-tail; and
over this group the artist had printed in fair
round script, "For his garment they cast lots."  Under
the circumstances the applicability of this
would have been a credit to Du Maurier, and be
it said in defence of the school-boy artist, it was
probably written with no thought of being
impious.  Your school-boy caricaturist catches
the spirit of the times.

The participants in the school meeting were
just departing from the school-house doors, when
to them came old Sam Symmons.  He had just
been told by Suse of her application, and an
almost stifling eagerness was filling his heart.
If she got it, it meant so much: but he
presented his usual suave, smiling old face to Hen
Braddon and Hiram Green, and said nothing.
As Andrew passed the old man looked at him.
That look of age to green manhood, how pitiful
it is!  Andrew paused a moment.  "We're going
to have an Ovid teacher this time," he said.
"You'll tell Suse, won't you, Mr. Symmons, that
her appointment is in the mails?"

Poor old Sam!  It was harder for him to
carry off good fortune with nonchalance than it
was to remain impassive in the face of bad.  He
had had so much more practice in the latter
form of self-control.  He drew his breath deeply,
and his lips quivered a little.  Andrew saw this.

"Don't forget to tell her, Mr. Symmons," he
added, and went on his way.

Forget!

"Meeting over, Mr. Braddon?  Meeting over?"
Sam queried, falling into the irregular ranks of
the moving men.  "Well, well I remember the
time your grandfather and I were school
trustees, and he was a shoemaker, and a better
man with lasts than letters.  In his young days
he used to go about from house to house making
the shoes.  He had regular places for calling;
two pairs a year was the allowance—well, that
custom has long gone by.  Anyhow, we were
both trustees, and one day we went out to the
Beechwood School, section No. 6 now.  Well,
the minister was there, too, and Squire
Harkness—both long dead now—brothers they were.
One of the children handed up her slate for
your grandfather to look at, and he, holding it
in front of him at arm's length, said, with
consideration seemingly to its merits, 'Fair, very
fair,' which was right enough truly; but when
your grandfather held it over to the rest of us,
'twas plain to be seen he had had the slate
upside down.  Yes, he was ambitious, too, your
grandfather was, and got on well in the world;
he even bought him a big silver watch.  Watches
weren't so plentiful in those days.  You didn't
get a watch in the pocket of every suit of
clothes you bought then, as the papers would
show you do now.  And when we asked your
grandfather what time it was, as we would
frequently do, being minded to please him, he
would take out his watch, look at it with
consideration, and hold it out to us saying, 'Who'd
ha' thought 'twas that time o' day,' in surprise
seemingly, which was right smart, for he never
learned to read time, your grandfather didn't.
But a good business man he was, and a good
neighbour, as many a poor body knew."

Old Sam and his following straggled in twos
and threes up the street, past Bill Aikins' house,
where Bill stood in the doorway smoking, having
just helped his wife Kate,
née
Horne, hang
up the day's washing, school meetings being in
his wife's opinion too provocative of idleness,
the idleness which the devil improves, to be
indulged in by Bill.

Bill's house, albeit small, had a particularly
aggressive look.  It had a door in the centre,
and a window with red-painted sash on either
side.  These windows always shone effulgently
clean.  Whether this brilliancy of pane or the
vermilion paint produced the effect, it is
difficult to say, but certain it is that Bill's house
always looked as though it were about to spring
on the road, which was, figuratively, much the
same as the attitude of Bill's wife towards him.

Bill Aikins had originally been a boy brought
out by one of the benevolent English societies,
which gather up the scum of their own cities
and trust to the more sparkling atmosphere of
the New World to aerate it into "respectable
and useful citizens."  Bill Aikins had taken
French leave of the minister with whom the
Horne had placed him.  A plenitude of prayers
and a paucity of what Bill had called "hot
wittles," decided him upon this step.  He
wandered to Ovid, and for many years had been
"hired man" to the various farmers within ten
miles of the village.  He was a good worker,
but lacked ballast, and was rapidly degenerating
into a sot when Kate Horne married him, and,
as the boys expressed it, "brought him up
standing."

The men greeted Bill pleasantly, and Bill
responded genially, trying to look as if he
was unconscious of Kate's criticisms upon the
men passing—a somewhat difficult thing to
accomplish, as Kate spoke so loudly from the
room behind that her remarks were perfectly
audible to the subjects of them.

One by one the crowd dwindled away, and
then old Sam "putting his best foot foremost,"
as he would have said, hurried home and told
Suse of her good fortune.  She was very elated,
was Suse, and kept murmuring to herself, "I'll
just show them Greens what's what."

* * * * * *

Long after the last light had twinkled out in
the village, a shaft of light streamed across the
old garden of the house on the hill.  For all the
calm of Andrew's heart was gone.  The peace
of the first acceptance of the fact that he loved
this stranger girl had vanished.  He got down
on his knees, reached under the bed and pulled
out an old, old-fashioned little chest, covered
with untanned cowhide, whose brown and white
patches were studded with rows of big brass
nails.  It held the books over which his mother's
pretty dark head had bent so often, close by
that other proud one, which soon lay humbly
enough in its kindred dust.  It was no unusual
thing for Andrew to spend half the night poring
over these books.  There was a fat little copy
of Shakespeare, with ruinously small print; a
quaint little leather volume of Francis Quarles,
George Herbert's poetry; Suckling's and a
subscription copy of the Queen's Wake, "dedicated
to the Princess Charlotte by a shepherd in the
Highlands of Scotland."  These, with a few
others, had formed his mother's library.  Getting
them out, he looked for certain passages he
knew well—passages that had wrung his heart
before this with their description of unattainable
sweetness and love—passages that had
almost made him despair, and yet, not wholly, for
he had dreamed a dream of one day going forth
to seek and
find
a Beatrice, a Juliet, a
Desdemona, a Rosalind—all in one divine
combination of womanhood, worthy to have been
addressed in the immortal sonnets.  And,
lo! the spring had brought her—would the summer
give her to him?  The kindly summer that
gives the flower to the bee, the sun to the flower,
the blue sky to the sun, and all the earth to joy.
Surely—and but a mile away Judith slept,
dreaming, but not of song.  And over the
waters that quickened with insect life, through
the air all astir with the scents and savours of
spring, athwart the earth that was quivering
with the growth of all things green—summer
came one day nearer.

CHAPTER V.

"Sweet Spring, full of sweet days and roses,

A box where sweets compacted lie,

My Musick shows ye have your closes,

And all must die."

Judith Moore, the operatic singer, was not
an ailing woman usually.  In fact, she had very
sweet and well-balanced health, but in her
make-up the mental and physical balanced
each other so well, and were so closely allied
that any joy or grief—in short, any
emotion—reacted strongly upon her physical organism.
Heart and brain, sense and spirit were close
knit.  Delicately strung as an Æolian harp,
she vibrated too strongly to the winds that
swept over her.  As strings grow lax or snap
from being over-taut, so her nerves had failed
under the tension of excitement, and effort, and
triumph.  Two years before she had made her

début
upon the operatic stage in Germany,
stepping from the strictest tutelage to an instant
and unquestioned success.  Even yet when she
thought of that night her cheeks would flush,
her eyes dilate, her head poise itself more
proudly.  She recalled it so well.  Her manager's
eagerness, that made his dark face almost
livid: her own fright: the mascot thrust hastily
into her hand by an old
attaché
of the
play-house.  She remembered all the details of this
performance better than any other—the orchestra
and the people: the peculiar, loving droop of
the shoulder with which one of the 'cello
players bent above his sonorous instrument.
Then came her effort, and it seemed the next
moment the thunderous applause, the flowers,
the deep-throated Hoch! Hoch! and the joyous
cursing of her manager behind the scenes.

Yes, that was life.

And as she lived her triumphs over again,
she felt the supreme exaltation of a genius in a
great gift, the God-like thrill of mastery, the
glorious certainty of capacity, the birth-pang
of creation.  There is no gift so marvellous, so
maddening, so divine as the gift of song—none
so evanescent, none so sad.

This woman inhaled the common ether of a
prosaic world, mingled it with her breath and
sent it forth glorified as sound—sound such as
nothing made with men's hands in all the world
can produce.  She created something divine,
which died even as it was born, and passed into
the silence—silence that has absorbed so many
sweet and terrible things.  She sang; she sent
forth her heart, her being, her soul from her
lips, like a beautiful unseen dove seeking a sign;
and there returned to her—silence.  From all the
glorious "choir invisible" that had gone before
there came back no word.  And the wonder,
and triumph, and pity of it grew upon her, so
that she began to eat her heart out with loneliness.

Her voice lifted her up to the gods; when
she returned to earth, there was no loving
breast for her to rest upon, no strong hands to
sustain her, no lips to kiss the pain of music
from her own, none to seal the bliss of singing
into abiding joy.

Two years of this, and Judith Moore left it
all, and came, in the summer preceding her
American
début
, to this little Canadian village.
She had told her manager, the only person she
knew well enough to write to, that he was not
to write.  He knew where she was: she would
let him know if she needed him.  Let her rest,
for just a little, she pleaded.  And he agreed.

She owed everything she was to this man,
who had been a friend of her father's.
Passing through the little town where they were,
he had come to visit them.  He found his old
friend's funeral leaving the house.  He came
back to see the desolate girl.  Then followed the
discovery of her voice, and his investment in
her as a good speculation.  It was going to
prove one, too, though the anxiety of it had
given him a grey hair or two in his black
head.  Yes, it had been a good speculation
already, for the two years' singing abroad had
recouped him for all his outlay of money.  The
American season would repay his patience, and
the South American tour, and the winter in
Russia—the
impresario's
plans stretched far
into the future through golden vistas of profit.
That Judith might have other dreams he never
considered.

She herself had no well-defined thought but
to excel in her art.  She did not in the least
understand what was amiss with her.  Not but
what in many dreams by night, and visions by
day, she had thought of a passion that was to
transfigure her life; but so used was she to
passing from the reality of life to the dream on
the stage, that the visions and the verities
became sadly confused, and so she grew day by
day more eager to attain, more anxious to
achieve the highest in her art, more unsparing
of her own efforts, always trembling just on the
threshold of the unknown, always feeling one
more upward effort of her wings would take
her to the very pinnacle of song.  There surely
grew the balm of sweet content, of satisfaction,
of peace.  Poor Judith!  For her the real content
lay in a green valley, far, far below these
perilous peaks upon which she tottered; whereon
no woman may safely stand, it seems, without
a stronger soul beside her to sustain in time
of need.  Her happiness lay in a valley where
love springs and happiness flows in streams
about the feet, and as she aspired higher and
higher, and rose farther and farther into the
rarefied air which solitary success breathes, she
left the Happy Valley farther and farther
behind.

Had she been less evenly balanced, had her
soul been less true, her heart less tender, she
might in time have frozen the woman completely,
and crystallized into the
artiste
only—or—but
to think of Judith Moore sullying her wings is
sacrilege.

She was full of womanly tenderness and
womanly vanities.  She had a thousand little
tricks of coquetry and as many balms to ease
their smart.  She took a good deal of satisfaction
out of her pretty gowns and her finger
nails, and the contemplation of her little feet
becomingly shod had been known to dry her
tears.  She was essentially the woman of the
past, the woman who created a "type" distinct
from man: the womanly woman, not the hybrid
creature of modern cultivation; the woman of
romance.  To balance this (for nowadays this
doubtless needs excuse) she had a fund of
sympathy great enough to endow every living thing
that suffered with pity.  She had certainly that
charity without which all other virtues are as
"sounding brass."  She sent away those who
came in contact with her the better for their
meeting, and from her eyes there shone a purity
of soul that had abashed some men whose eyes
had long forgotten shame.

Such was Judith Moore.

When Andrew approached the Morris house,
the next day after the apple-tree episode, he saw
from afar a figure in white sitting perched
upon the weather-beaten rail fence which
separated his woodland from the Morris farm.  He
hastened his steps, his heart beating hotly.
Judith was in a repentant and somewhat
shame-faced mood.  Upon reflection it had occurred to
her that her behaviour the day before had
been little less than bold.  Judith had felt
badly over it, and had even cried a bit, as
foolish women will.  She was, of course,
prepared to make Andrew suffer for her misdeeds
if he in any way showed a recollection of the
incident, and had decided to assume a very
haughty mien if he dared say "feet."

Andrew's intuitions were not slow, even if he
was only a farmer, and when he greeted her, and
she suddenly, sweetly, strangely blushed and
looked up at him half inquiringly, he interpreted
it aright.  He had been amused, perhaps
aroused, by her impertinence; he was touched
by her unexpressed penitence.

Miss Judith had on an artful frock: most of
her frocks were artful and well put on, too,
which is this great thing.  Judith never
considered time thrown away that was spent
adorning her "perishing person."  This particular
frock was of sheer white wool, and because she
had a waist of the unhygienic type (and rejoiced
thereat exceedingly, be it told, for she was
thoroughly unregenerate), she had it girdled
with a ribbon, wound round and round her.  It
had huge loose sleeves of a kind not known in
Ovid.  "Sort of night-gowny looking," Andrew
said afterwards, in describing her appearance to
his aunt.  How Miss Moore would have raged
at that!  Paquin, no less, had made those
sleeves.

She was careful to keep her very toes out of
sight this morning, and when she thought
Andrew was not looking, she gave anxious little
tugs at her skirt to cover them yet more
securely.  Every one of these tugs Andrew saw,
and they raised within him a spirit of deep
indignation.  "I wish that skirt would come off in
her hand—serve her right if it did," he said to
himself, aggrievedly, whilst apparently listening
to Miss Moore's prophecies regarding the
weather.

"Going to rain in three days?" he said.  "How
do you know?"

"Oh," said Miss Moore, with an indescribable
look of wisdom, "there was a big ring round the
moon last night, enclosing three stars.  That
means in three days it will storm—of course,
rain—you'd hardly expect snow, would you?"  Miss
Moore spoke a little resentfully as she
concluded, for Andrew did not look impressed.

"Well, no," agreed Andrew.  "Did Mr. Morris
tell you that?"

"Yes: we're going to shear sheep to-morrow."

"What?" Andrew was amused at the "we."

"
That
," said Judith, who in spite of her air of
knowledge was somewhat nervous and not quite
certain whether she had put it rightly or not.
("Shear sheep" did sound queer.)

"Oh, you are.  What else?"

"I'm going to learn to make butter.
Mrs. Morris says I have real 'butter hands.'  They're
so cool.  Feel."  She laid her hand on his.

"Yes, lovely," said Andrew, fervently: "but
don't you think you ought to get well before
you do all this?  Stick to prophesying for a
while.  It's easier."

"Oh, if you're going to laugh at me—"

"No, indeed."  (Miss Moore's brows were
knitted.)  "I'm not really, honestly: never
thought of such a thing."  Then, persuasively,
"Don't you want to come and see a bird's
nest?"

Miss Moore's attempt at bad temper collapsed.

"I should think I did," she said.

"Come on, then," said he.

"Oh, is it on that side?  How do I get over?"

"Let me lift you."

"No, indeed!  Turn your back, and I'll jump."

"Let—"

"No!"

Andrew wheeled on his heel.  There was a
soft thud and a scramble.  He turned like a flash,
but Miss Moore had regained her feet, and stood
waiting with an expression of exaggerated
patience on her face.

"Are you ready?" he asked.

"Oh, waiting," she answered, with emphasis.

That walk was the first they ever had
together.  Neither of them ever forgot it.  At
the moment, it seemed to pass in light-hearted
chatter: but beneath all this there was a
substratum of eagerness—Judith trying to get in
touch with this new creature at her side, this
strong, unconventional, natural soul, so different
from the artificial creatures she had known;
and Andrew feeling his heart going out beyond
control to this girl who walked so unsteadily at
his side, stumbling every now and then from the
unaccustomed roughness of the way.  These little
feet had evidently had all paths smoothed to
them.  (He could not guess how chill those
carven pathways were.)  How tender her eyes
grew over the wild flowers, and how sweet her
lips when, for a moment, a serious thought came
to her!

The wild flowers were in full luxuriance, and
Judith gathered an armful.  They passed a
dogwood tree that stood sheeted in its white
blossoms, their petals of the texture of white kid.
Andrew got her some great branches of it, and
she insisted upon carrying it herself, holding all
her spoil against her breast with one hand, using
the other to lift her gown now and then, or to
pluck more flowers.

Her face looked out from the flowers with
a kind of rapt eagerness upon it that illumined
it like a light.   Her enjoyment was so intense
as to be almost painful.  They had gone quite
a distance from the Morris house, half the length
of Andrew's woods, when they came to a little
hollow.  A stream ran through it, but so blocked
was its way by the burrows of moles that it
zigzagged across and across the hollow, seeming
almost to form loops at some points.  All along
its course grew the tall, pale-mauve water-flag,
its spikes of bloom rising from clumps of
sword-like leaves that grew in the stream's edge.  At
the farther side of the hollow a mass of wild
crab-apple trees were covered with their fragile
pink blooms, and heaped up at one end of the
hollow was a great mass of loose stones, piled
there as they had been gathered from the fields.
Dog-tooth violets, which love moisture, grew
thickly about their feet, their yellow and brown
blossoms springing from between pairs of spotted
leaves.  Where the leaves grew singly, there
were no flowers.  Here and there could be seen
a blossom of the rarer white variety, the back of
its recurved petals delicately tinged with pink.
Close by the roots of some stumps there were
velvety cushions of the thick green moss so often
found in Canadian woods; bryony vines strayed
over these, making a rich brocade in tones of
green.  Tufts of coarse ferns grew in the clefts
of the stumps, their last year's fronds withering
beside them, the fresh ones just beginning to
uncurl.  And framing all this in, there was the
curtain of trees in the first freshness of foliage.

For a moment, in Judith's mind dream and
reality became confused.  The little glade so
exactly simulated a well-set scene.  There was
something artificial in the piled-up stones: in the
stream which made so much of itself in going
such a short distance.  It was so usual for her
to stand before the footlights with her arms
full of flowers.  And the man at her side—she
looked at him, and in a moment realized how
completely and artistically he was in accord with
his environment.  His strong, bronzed face, his
lithe, tall form, his expression, his dress, the look
of utter comprehension with which his eyes took
in the scene, over which her eyes lingered in
detail—all this was apparent to her at once.
She was well used to considering the "value"
of this or that upon the scene, and she told
herself the unities were surely satisfied now.

"Are you pleased?" he asked.

"I'm simply charmed," she said.  "It is too
beautiful to be real."

"Ah," he said, "that's where you make a
mistake.  It is only beautiful enough to be
real."

She looked at him.

"You are tired," he went on, without waiting
for an answer.  "I've brought you too far.  Will
you sit down?"

"Yes, I think so.  I really am awfully strong,
only I soon get tired."

"Exactly; one of the signs of great strength.
Oh, come, don't get cross."

"I hate being laughed at; you're bad to me,"
she said pettishly.

Andrew was smitten to the heart.  He began
to think he'd been a brute.

He took off his coat, making no apology
therefor.  It did not occur to him that there was
anything wrong in shirt sleeves.  He spread it
at the foot of a stump.

"You sit down there and rest," he said, "and
I'll go get you some more flowers."

"Don't you want to rest?" she inquired
solicitously.

"No, I'm not tired," he answered gravely.  He
wouldn't laugh at her again in a hurry!

"Well, hurry back."

So she watched him pick his way across the
little hollow to the twisted and gnarled crab trees.
And as she watched there stole over her eager
spirit the first whiff of that peace which was
soon to settle so sweetly upon her heart—a
restful recognition of the joy of calm; and
all was blended with the bitter sweet scent of
the crab blossoms and the ineffable savour of
spring woods.

Andrew was soon back at her side with a sheaf
of flag lilies and big branches of apple blooms;
and Judith for the first time held real
crab-apple blossoms in her hands, with their perfume,
that mingling of Marah and myrrh, rising to her
as incense from a censer.  She had long known
the distilled perfume; how different this living
fragrance was.  Something of this she told
Andrew.

"Yes," he said, "I understand you exactly.
You won't like the manufactured stuff any more.
I never could eat canned salmon after eating the
real article fresh from the stream where I'd
caught it."

Miss Moore looked at him.

He laughed outright at her expression of
disgust.

"Was it very awful to liken crab blooms to
salmon?  They're much of the same colour."

"Don't dare say another word," said Miss
Moore.  "You're horrid."

Andrew reddened and looked a little stiff.

Miss Moore eyed him furtively.  "Mr. Cutler?"

"Yes."

"Would you like me to sing to you?"

Like a child Miss Moore proffered her biggest
bribe first.

"Rather," said Andrew, with emphasis, forgetting
his dignity.  "I should think I would."

Seeing him so eager, Miss Moore was minded
to postpone his pleasure a bit.  "What shall I
sing?" she asked.

"Anything—your favourite, anything you
like, only sing."  And she sang a song by
Rosetti, beginning—

"A little while, a little love

The hour yet bears for thee and me

Who have not drawn the veil to see

If still our heaven be lit above."

And which ends—

"Not yet the end; be our lips dumb

In smiles a little season yet,

I'll tell thee, when the end is come,

How we may best forget."

When it was over he turned and looked at
her as at a marvel.  What manner of woman
was this?  The one moment a curious child, the
next a proud woman; again, a poor, little tired
girl, and then—how should he name this singing angel.

Miss Moore was used to homage and applause,
and wont to see people moved by her singing,
but never a tribute had been more sweet to her
than the look in this countryman's eyes.

"I will sing again," she said, and began a little
Scotch song.

Afterwards Miss Moore was sorry about this,
and thought bitterly that she could not, even for
an hour, put aside the
rôle
of the opera singer
seeking to play upon her public.  For she had
been taught the value of appealing to sentiment
as a factor towards success, and many a night,
after singing the most intricate operas, she had
responded to the
encore
by singing "Home,
Sweet Home" or "Annie Laurie," or some other
simple peasant ballad that touches the heart.
It is a trick
prima donnas
all have.

The song she sang Andrew was "Jock o' Hazeldean":
the story of the high-born girl who loved
Jock o' Hazeldean.  Who was he, we wonder.
This fascinating Jock, of Hazeldean, smacks more
of the Merrie Greenwood than of broad domains.
But at any rate he must have been right worthy
to be loved, else such a leal, brave-hearted,
beautiful girl had not loved him.  Torn, too, she was
between two thoughts—her family, her plighted
troth, riches and—Jock—so that

"Whene'er she loot

The tears doon fa'

For Jock o' Hazeldean."

For she had made up her mind evidently to
give him up, but these treacherous tears betrayed
themselves whenever she bent her head, and
when a woman's heart is breaking she cannot
always hold her head high.  And in the end
they nearly married her to the "Lord of
Errington."  But—

"The kirk was decked at morning tide,

The tapers glimmered fair,

Both priest and bridegroom wait the bride,

And dame and knight were there.

They sought her then by bower and ha';

The lady wasna seen—

She's ower the border, and awa

With Jock o' Hazeldean."

Well Judith Moore sang the words of the
song, but she did more.  Her vibrant voice
expressed all the pathos, the romance, the
tenderness, that lives between the words; and in the
last two lines there was a sort of timorous
triumph, as of one who has gained victory over
the world, her family, her own fears, and won
to her lover's breast, and yet trembles in her
triumph.  Women do not give themselves even
to their best beloved without tears.

This was in reality the great charm of Judith's
singing—a charm no perfection of method, no
quality of tone could have produced.  She felt
the full significance of everything she sang, and
had that sympathetic magnetism which creates
its own moods in others.  That is fascination.
That is the secret of these women at whose
power the world has wondered, whose loves
have been the passions of history, whose whims
have legislated the affairs of kingdoms.

"Don't sing any more," Andrew said when
she finished.  "I've had enough for one day.
I—"

"You feel my music as I do myself," she said
softly.  "It is almost pain."

Presently they went back through the woods,
more silently than they had come, and yet
happier.  Judith looked up at him once or twice
with no veil of laughter on her eyes.  He was
thrilled with the expression he found there;
now it seemed a steadfast ray of unselfish
resolution, again a yearning so poignant that it
almost unnerved him.  He showed her the nest
on the furrows.

"In a little while there will be birds in the
nest," he said.

"Oh, I'll come and watch it every day."

"You must not come too often or stay too
long," he said, "or the bird will get frightened
and forsake her nest—fly away and never come
back."

"Oh, surely not fly away from that nest,"
Judith cried.  To her that rough little wisp of
coiled grass and horsehair represented the
perfection of bird architecture.

"If you would only come to the house—my
house over there on the hill," said Andrew,
flushing a little and very eager; "my aunt
would like you to so much, and I would show
you a lot of nests.  We have more birds there"
(suddenly feeling very proud of this fact) "than
anywhere else in the county."

"Oh, I'd like to ever so much," said Judith.
"Your aunt?"

"Suppose I send my aunt over to see you?"
said Andrew, quite ignorant of the etiquette of
calls, but hitting it off well in his ignorance.
"She'll come to visit Mrs. Morris, and then, of
course, if you care to see her, she'll be so glad to
ask you to come over."

"Does your aunt visit the Morrises?" asked
Judith, with some surprise.

"Why, of course: we only live a mile away,"
said Andrew, entirely oblivious of the compliment
to himself.

"Oh, yes, of course," said Judith, hastily,
feeling mean.

Finally they said "Good-bye."  Andrew had
gone but a few steps when she called him.

"Wait a moment.  When do you think your
aunt will come?"

"Soon; not to-morrow, she's going to town.
Perhaps next day.  Why?"

"Oh, I want to put on a pretty frock," she
said candidly.

"Well," said Andrew, with conviction, "you
can't beat that one."

Miss Moore went back to the house.  A weather-beaten
frame house it was, with a weather-vane
in the shape of a horse on top.  When the horse's
nose pointed over Judith's window, the wind was
east; when it seemed to gallop in the direction
of the kitchen, it was west; when it made for
the village, it was south, and when it looked with
a longing eye, apparently, at the stables, it was
north.  Mr. Morris explained this to Judith on
an average once a day, but she always got it
mixed.

Mrs. Morris was vigorously making pies when
Judith entered.

"Baking?" said Judith.

"Yes," said Mrs. Morris, breaking the crisp
stalks of rhubarb into little pieces.  "Yes, I'm
sure I'm going to have company" (she broke the
last piece of rhubarb with a snap and commenced
rolling out her paste with soft thuds).  "Yes,
company's coming sure.  I dropped my dishcloth
three times this morning, and then the old
brahma, he just stood on that doorstep and
crowed for all he was worth.  I never knowed
that bird to crow on that doorstep without
strange feet soon stood on it."

Mrs. Morris covered her pie, and then holding
the pie plate upon the fingers of one hand,
dexterously ran a knife around the edge, trimming
off a ring of paste that fell on her arm; then
she dabbed it with a fork and put it in the oven.

"I want something to put my flowers in,"
said Judith. "May I take some of those big
earthen jars out there?" pointing to the open
door of the pantry, within which stood some
old-fashioned, rough, grey crocks.

"Yes," said Mrs. Morris, absent-mindedly, as
she carefully "tried" a cake with a straw from
the broom to see if it was done; "yes"—then
coming back to sublunary matters as she shut
the oven door, "But sake's alive, child, you don't
want them things to put them in!  I'll get you
the scissors and some string so you can cut the
blows off them apple branches and make good
round bunches, and there's some posy pots I
bought in town one day.  I'll get them to put
them in."

Judith's heart sank.  She was too afraid of
hurting Mrs. Morris' feelings to say anything,
but when that busy woman appeared with some
hideous blue and green and gilt atrocities, a
bright thought struck her.

"Oh, Mrs. Morris," she said, "those are too
nice altogether.  Just let me use the jars; those
might get broken."

"Well," said Mrs. Morris, pausing in the
door of the sitting-room, "they be only wild
crabs and dogwood blows.  It would be a pity
to risk it, maybe."  So she took back the vases
and replaced the bouquets of everlastings in
them, feeling she had done her duty to her
boarder, but glad that matters had arranged
themselves as they had.

So Judith got out the jars and filled them
with great bunches of the dogwood, which gives
such a Japanesque effect of blossom on bare
branch, and with the apple blossoms, the wild
iris mingling its dainty mauve equally well
with each.  Then she leaned back against the
door jamb (she was sitting on the doorstep), and
dreamily listened to Mrs. Morris.

What a strange medley of criticism, information,
prophecy and humour the talk of such a
woman is, all given forth with no coherence, no
sequence of ideas, the
disjecta membra
of a
thousand gossipy stories, the flotsam and jetsam
of the slow-flowing stream of country life; now
and then hitting off, as if by chance, a word or
two which is a complete characterization of a
person or place; now and then piercing to the
heart of some vital human truth; now and then
sowing a seed of scandal to bring forth
bitterness; now and then by a pause, a sigh or a
word revealing the griefs of a homely heart, and
always perpetuating a hundred harmless conceits
of fancy, signs, warnings, and what Mrs. Morris
called, "omings that mean something."

Mrs. Morris was popularly considered the
most talkative woman in Ovid, always excepting
Bill Aikins' wife who had so far distanced
the others as to fairly outclass them.  Sometimes
Mrs. Morris wearied Judith to death with
her tongue, but out of the resources of her
generous heart, which always could furnish
excuses for everybody, Judith found palliation
for Mrs. Morris' fault.  There was a certain
plot in the unkempt little graveyard in Ovid,
wherein were five tiny graves; over each
was a coverlet of straggly clove pinks, and
each of the little sleepers had been borne
away from the farm-house by the woods.  Now
and then, but rarely, Mrs. Morris spoke of
these babies.  Their united ages would not
have numbered half a dozen years; but Mrs. Morris,
with the strange divination of motherhood,
had seen in their infantile ways the
indications of distinctive character, so that each
of these dead children had as individual a place
in her memory as though it had worked and
wept and wearied itself into old age.  And to
Judith this seemed excuse enough for poor
chattering Mrs. Morris.  All the breath other
mothers use in speaking to their children, all
the time they spend in silent thought about
them and for them, was barren to this lonely
old woman.  "Who could wonder then that
she wants to talk a bit?" Judith one day said
to Andrew, wistfully, when he was laughing
at Mrs. Morris' tongue.  Indeed, Judith's tender
eyes pierced deep down into the depths
of these people's hearts.  The ugly gossip, the
sneering spite, the malignant whisperings she
heard, filled her with a pity divine enough to
drown the disgust which their backbiting and
meanness awakened.  The pity of it! she
thought, looking at the miracle of the summer
fields beneath the summer sky: the upward
aspiration of every blade of grass, of every tiny
twig, of every little Morning Glory seedling,
striving to lift itself up, stretching forth its
tendrils towards anything that would bear it
higher: everything reaching towards the light.
And these people, surrounded by the strong
silent stimulus of nature, going with their eyes
fixed upon the clods, or at most raised but to
the level of their own heads, striving to grasp
some puny self-glorification, letting the real
gold of life run through their fingers like sand,
whilst with eager palms they snatched at the
base alloys which corroded their hands!

When Judith heard one woman say of another,
"She's a most terrible nice woman.  She works
like a horse," she did not feel as much like
laughing at the narrowness of the vision which
pronounced such judgment, as weeping, that life
had ways which people trod wherein brutish
physical exertion seemed the highest good.  It
will be seen that Judith had a tender and
discerning eye to penetrate the pains and sorrows
of others, but she could not decipher her own
heart yet.  It is hard to get one's self in true
perspective.  It would indeed be a gift from the
gods if we could see ourselves.

CHAPTER VI.

"He who sings

To fill the highest purpose, need not soar

Above the lintel of the peasant's door."

Before the Morris house there stretched a
space of unkempt grass, broken by three or
four irregular flower beds, upon which the grass
encroached, from which the flowers sometimes
strayed afield.  In these beds were clumps of
jonquils—"yeller petticoats," Mrs. Morris called
them—and there were heavy headed daffodils,
which, to Judith's delight, she dubbed daffdowndillies.
There were patches of purple iris, too,
and through one of the beds the sturdy roseate
stems of the common pæony were pushing their
way.  A big bush of flowering currant was
covered with its yellow flowers, murmurous
with hundreds of bees, for they are very sweet.
The stems of the florets are bitten off by children
to get a drop of honey in each, just as in the
florets of a clover bloom.

Up and down the sanded pathway leading to
Mrs. Morris' front door paced Judith Moore,
two days after Andrew's visit.  She had on a
brown frock, girdled with a filigreed belt of
silver gilt; a bunch of jonquils at her bosom
caught together the folds of some soft old lace;
her heels added a good two inches to her stature,
and she felt herself to be very well turned out.

It was warm: the robins were building nests.
Presently one flew by with a scrap of brilliant
red wool, and in a moment or two flew down
from the gable of the house, and regaled itself
with a long worm which it had spied from afar.
It despatched its lunch with gusto, cocked its
head on one side, preened the feathers of its
wings with its foot, as one would run the hand
through the hair, and then started in on its
house-building again.  "From labour to
refreshment," thought Judith.

She herself was in a state of tremulous happiness;
her being, freed from all artificial restraints,
released from all conventional bonds, was unfolding,
as naturally as the flower buds to the sunshine;
her thoughts no longer bent exclusively
upon her art, no longer dwelling upon the next
triumph, found for themselves new and
unexpected pathways.  For the first time she gave
herself up to the perilous pleasure of introspection.
In "sessions of sweet silent thought"
her fragmentary dreams and ideals of life, love
and nature, were attuning themselves to a true
and eager aspiration to be worthy the best gift
of each.  Her heart—well, her heart had not
been awakened yet.  Like the great white lilies
in Miss Myers' garden, it was yet half asleep,
but stirring within it was the sweetness of
spring, of springing life, and love, and the first
poignant sweetness of self-consciousness.  The
lilies were yet only putting forth feeble leaves,
as if to test what manner of upper world wooed
them to put forth a blossom.  So the little
tender impulses of Judith's heart were yet
very timorous.  But the lilies would bloom in
good time—and the heart?

Judith was still pacing back and forth when a
tall, angular figure, in a black cashmere gown and
a broad black shade hat, appeared in the gateway,
followed decorously by a melancholy red setter,
whose melancholy and good manners vanished
simultaneously as a cat, walking speculatively
round the corner of the house, caught his eye.
Rufus vanished, with the cat in a good lead.
Rufus' acceptance of the possibilities of the
situation had been so prompt, the cat's transition
from a dreamer to a fugitive had been so sudden
that Judith forgot the propitiatory smile with
which she had intended to greet Miss Myers,
and gave a regular peal of laughter.

Miss Myers had come to call, or, as she herself
put it, had "come to visit a spell with Mrs. Morris."

"Oh, the poor cat!" said Judith, not knowing
very well what to say, and getting rather red.

"Is it your cat?  I'm real sorry.  Rufus is
always hard on cats.  There's one cat in the
village though—but there, you must be the
boarder.  I'm real glad to see you."

"Yes," said Judith, "I'm Judith Moore, and
you must be Miss Myers; I know you by the dog."

Then a quick sense of the vision she had just
had of Rufus, the eager outstretched nose, the
flying heels whisking past the side of the house,
the cat's hysteric spitting as she turned and
fled—this made Judith catch her breath.

Miss Myers laughed grimly.  It was her
fortune always to look grim, even when she
wept.  Afterwards, Judith knew that Miss
Myers had thoroughly appreciated the humour
of the situation, and had loved Judith "from
the minute I set eyes on her," as Miss Myers
said.  Perhaps, out of loyalty to Andrew, Miss
Myers exaggerated a little her first feeling
toward Judith, but for that kindly exaggeration
one could gather her in one's arms.

Great indeed must be the love of that woman
who is willing to accept, nay, even help, to win
the woman who is to displace her in the
affections of one with whom she has from babyhood
been first.  And that is the doom of all women
who rear children, whether their own or not; to
nurse them, watch them, pray for them,
painfully perhaps: keep them as pure as may be;
make them as true as possible: and then some
day have them bring a stranger, a boy or girl,
of whom they have bereft some other woman,
and say, "Look, this is my best beloved."  Is
not that a great reward for which to fast, and
thirst, and labour?  And yet that is the good
guerdon gained by many a woman whose name,
if but granted the right meed of praise, would
be written in letters of gold on a silver sky.

Recognizing this; what tenderness should not
be felt towards such women, what gratitude
accorded them for the good gift they have
rendered up?

Mrs. Morris came fussily to the door.  "Miss
Myers, let me make you acquainted with Miss
Moore.  Come right in; sit down.  Won't take
off your things?  Well, now, that's real mean!
I quite expected you'd come for a good visit.
Whatever be these dogs a-yelping at?  Well, it
beats all!  Just look at 'em," pointing out at
the sitting-room window, which gave a view of
the orchard.

In the cleft of an apple-tree, just beyond the
reach of the dogs' leaps, sat the cat, an insulting
indifference expressed in every line of her
crouching shape, turning a calm countenance to
her impotent foes.  The collie, seduced by the
example of Rufus, had cast aside the veneer of
amity overlying his natural instinct, and now
careered round and round the tree trunk, making
futile leaps at the cat; whilst Rufus stood
uttering the characteristically mournful bark of
his breed, and waving his feathery tail as if
courtesy might induce the cat to descend and
be worried.  However, the cat was an old-stager.
Her narrowed eyes gleamed venomously,
and she thought evil thoughts, but that was all.

"Old Tab 'll tire them dogs out before they
get through with her," said Mrs. Morris, placidly;
and sometime later, when the ladies looked forth
again, the cat was delicately walking along the
top of the board fence, and the two dogs were in
full cry after a squirrel.  It is probable that
those dogs, before they slept that night,
wondered many a time and oft what trees were
created for, if not specially intended to deprive
decent dogs of a little legitimate sport.

Mrs. Morris, when she had no company,
occupied her spare time in "teaming" the wool
shorn from the sheep, preparatory to sending it
to the woollen mill; but she did not bring this
work into the sitting-room.  She brought in her
braided mat.  First she sewed strips of cloth
together, and when she had three differently
coloured balls made, she braided them into a flat
strand, then she sewed that round and round,
till it grew into a mat.  All the rag carpets in
Mrs. Morris' house were bestrewn with these
mats, placed at irregular intervals, but practice
and instinct so guided Mrs. Morris' feet, that she
never, by any chance, no matter how engrossed
she might be in other matters, stepped upon a
space of carpet.  There was something very
interesting about this.  She did it so unconsciously,
so accurately, like an erratic automaton.
It is true this practice did not conduce to a
Delsartean evenness of step: and indeed,
Mrs. Morris, when walking through the fields, or
along the road, carried in her gait the
replica
of
the floor plan of her first three rooms.  Through
the front room, the sitting-room, the kitchen,
that was the course she mapped upon the road
she travelled again and again.  The wily Vivien
would not have won readily the secret of
Mrs. Morris' woven paces.

Miss Myers took off her shade hat and held it
on her lap.  Judith sat prettily erect, bending
forward now and then, as if alert to answer Miss
Myers' commonplaces—a flattering attitude that.
Mrs. Morris braided her strands firmly, looking
benignantly over her spectacles, which, having
slipped down to the very point of her nose, by
some miracle preserved a tentative hold.  Their
precarious position gave Miss Myers "nerves."  She
clasped her thin hands tightly "to stiddy
herself up."

They talked of the every-day incidents of
their homely lives.  The first question that
came up was house-cleaning, a very vital matter
to the country housewife in spring and autumn.
Of course, these two women, being notable
house-keepers, had theirs done long ago, but
there were others—well, neither of these ladies
wished to make remarks, least of all about their
neighbours, still—

Then they discussed the proper time for picking
the geese (that is, denuding the live geese of
the feathers they would otherwise lose), and
both had often noticed the wilful waste of the
Greens, in letting their geese go unplucked, so
that the village street was snowed with wasted
feathers which floated about in the air, or sailed,
the most fragile of crafts, in the little
water-cressed stream.  This led naturally to the
mysterious disappearance of Hiram Green's
twelve geese, a story retold for Judith's benefit.

Once when Hiram Green was breaking in a
colt in his barn-yard, the dogs frightened it, and
between Hiram's shouts, the dogs' barks and the
colt's plunging, the geese, twelve in number,
took unto themselves wings and flew away.  The
fact that they were able to do this reflected
directly upon Hiram's management, and
pronounced it poor, for, of course, he should have
taken the precaution of clipping the feathers of
one wing, as every one did, to prevent just such
losses.  However, the geese flew away.  In the
excitement of the moment the direction of their
flight was unnoted, but willing volunteers spread
the news, and defined the ownership of any stray
geese which might be found.  The Hornes lived
in a house very near the crest of the hill upon
the south; so near to the top was it, that it
gave the impression of wanting to sneak away
out of sight of the village.  It seemed to
withdraw itself from the village gaze, and had a
secretive and uncommunicative look.  Perhaps
the house did not really deserve this description,
but popular opinion accorded it.  The Hornes
were aliens to Ovid: no one knew much about
them, and that in itself is a grievance in such a
place as Ovid.  Well, a zealous searcher for the
geese inquired of Mrs. Horne for tidings of them.
Mrs. Horne, standing upon her doorstep, regretted
Hiram's loss and deplored not having seen them.
The messenger departed.  But "people talked" as
people will when such coincidences occur—when
on the next market day Mr. Horne sold twelve
fine fat geese, whilst his own pursued the even
tenor of their way unmolested.

There was no proof of mal-appropriation, for
a dead goose does not usually bear many
distinctive marks of individuality—still, people
talked.  And the next day, when Mrs. Horne
bought ticking in Hiram's store, to make a couple
of pillows, Hiram felt aggrieved as he tied
it up, and vaguely wondered if this was not
"seething the kid in its mother's milk."  Neither
Miss Myers nor Mrs. Morris committed herself
to any definite expression of opinion as to the
Hornes' responsibility in the matter, for neither
of them wished to give the other the opportunity
of quoting her verdict, but they shook their
heads at each other, and raised their eyebrows
and pursed up their lips, and then abruptly
branched off to another question, which happened
to be whether or not it was advisable to soak
carrot seeds in water before planting—the
implied decision in the goose question amounting
practically to the "Not Proven" verdict of
the Scotch courts, than which nothing is more
damning.

At last Mrs. Morris' spectacles did fall off, and
Miss Myers' nervous start had a good deal of
relief in it.  A crisis is best over.

Old Mr. Morris came in, and began to discuss
the death of Sam Symmons' mare.  Not having
been present at the consultation regarding her,
he was absolutely certain that she had not been
accorded the proper treatment.  "Might have
been the right treatment for an ellefung, but not
for a hoss, no, not for a hoss, not by no
means."  Then he gave a long and critical dissertation
upon the merits of each remedy used, proving
conclusively, at least to himself, that in the case
of Sam's mare they were all so much poison.
Miss Myers must come out and see his sorrel
filly.  "There was a filly like a filly, not such
another in the country!"  So they all strolled
out to the board fence, and looked at the clean-limbed
little sorrel, whilst Mr. Morris dilated
upon her good points.  A man is always frankly
and irrepressibly egotistical upon two
subjects—his horses and his judgment.

Miss Myers did not go back to the house, and
Mrs. Morris and Judith strolled with her to the
gate.  They bade each other good-bye there,
Miss Myers sniffing at a twig of lemon balm
which she had gathered.  Judith and Mrs. Morris
were to visit Miss Myers two days later.

Little had been said about Andrew, but enough
to show Judith that he was the very apple of
Miss Myers' eye.

"Sarah Myers thinks a powerful sight of
Andrew Cutler," said Mrs. Morris.  "It seems
sort of heathenish to be so set on any one.  I
don't hold with it.  Well, if you hain't got no
children to laugh with, you hain't got none to
cry over."  The yearning of her empty mother-heart
had taught her this pitiable philosophy.

* * * * * *

It was three o'clock when Mrs. Morris and
Judith reached the Cutler house on the hill.

Mr. Morris had driven them as far as the
village in the democrat waggon.  He stopped at
the blacksmith shop, and they alighted, to walk
through the village to their destination, whilst
he went on an errand to town.  There were very
few people to be seen on the village streets.

Tommy Slick and his dog Nip met them.
Tommy looked very guileless, with round face,
beautifully tinted white and pink, big clear eyes
and "lips depressed, as he were meek."  In his
hands he carried a horse's halter and a tin pail.
Nip followed, with limply hanging tail, lowered
nose and hunched up shoulders, but an expression
not so wholly deprecating as his attitude.
When Tommy looked meek, and Nip innocent,
it behooved the village to be wary; there was
some mischief afoot.

"There's that Slick limb," said Mrs. Morris.
"I'll be bound he ain't up to no good: and that
dog of his, look at it!"

"It looks hungry," said Judith.

"Then I'll go bail there's no vittles in the
village if that dog's going empty," said
Mrs. Morris.  (Some memory seemed struggling for
utterance.)

Judith changed the subject and took up
Tommy's case.

"He looks a nice little chap, and he's got a
lovely complexion," said she.

"It don't matter how he's complected.  He's a
Slick," said Mrs. Morris, with decision.  "And
being a Slick ain't no recommend for a church
member; he's got brothers that has been in
gaol, that young one has; there's Indian blood
in the Slicks.  Did you hear any noise when
Tommy passed?  No, nor you never will.  He
goes pad, pad along, regular flat-footed Indian
fashion—all the Slicks do—no good honest
heel-and-toe about them.  One of his sisters, the one
married over Kneeland way, is just like a squaw
for all the world.  They say it was the
great-great grandmother on the Slick side was a
squaw—she came from near Brantford."

"I thought Indians were all dark-skinned,"
ventured Judith, "and that boy certainly—"

"Well, if his face ain't complected like them,
you can depend on it his heart is," interrupted
Mrs. Morris, in a tone suggestive of rising
temper.

"There's the Slick house now," she said in a
voice which indicated that the name of Slick
was malodorous to her.  She pointed to a
rickety, rough plaster house which they were
passing.  In the doorway stood a frowsy woman,
her arms akimbo, her fingers and palms stained
a deep purple.

"Good afternoon, Mrs. Slick.  Been dyeing?"
said Mrs. Morris, affably, as they came abreast
of her.

"Good day.  Yes," said the woman, curtly.

Upon the clothes-line at the end of the house
some garments, dipped in purple dye, hung
drying.

"Them 'll streak when they dry," said Mrs. Morris,
in the discriminating tone of one who
knows.

Judith wondered vaguely where she had seen
that peculiar purple colour; later she
remembered that the outside of the tin pail Tommy
Slick carried, had been smeared with it.

Hiram Green greeted them from his shop
door as they passed, and Bill Aikins' wife gave
them a brisk salutation, without pausing in her
work of "sweeping up" her door steps.  They
passed the school-house; the children were out
at recess.  Mrs. Morris' brow contracted, and her
voice was a little querulous when she spoke next.

"Seems to me children grow powerful noisy
these times," she said.  "I disremember that they
used to be so when I was little."

They turned the corner.  Hiram Green's
house was the last one in the village.  It was a
brick house, built flush with the street.  It had
six windows in front, and these windows had
been considered very original and genteel,
when Hiram had them put in.  For, instead of
being the ordinary oblong windows, the tops of
these were semicircular.  Hiram had intended
at first to have the semicircle filled with glass,
but decided, from economic reasons, to substitute
wood.  These wooden tops conveyed the impression
of the windows having eyebrows, and gave
a supercilious air to the whole house, which was
a very good indication of the attitude of Hiram
Green and his daughters to their neighbours.
There
was
a Mrs. Green, but she was one of those
hard-worked nonentities, never considered in
the polity of the household save as a
labour-saving agent.  The Misses Green were usually
to be seen on a fine afternoon either on the
"stoop," or by the open parlour windows.
Mrs. Green was never visible; she was obliterated
beneath the burden of work she bore upon her
patient shoulders.

The Misses Green were out in force as Judith
and Mrs. Morris went by.  Enshrined in their
midst was a sallow young Methodist clergyman,
somewhat meagre-looking, but with a countenance
full of content.  He fairly gaped after
Judith.  Mrs. Morris greeted the Misses Green
coldly.  She did not like them.  Their mother
and Mrs. Morris had been friends in girlhood,
and Mrs. Morris had a poor opinion of her old
friend's daughters.  "Hester Green's got no spunk
or she would not stand it," she said with
asperity, and added, "Poor thing!"

Mrs. Green's wistful eyes looked at them from
the kitchen window, where she was frying
crullers for the minister's tea.  But she did not
think of her own lot as being harder than
Mrs. Morris'—far from it.

"Poor Jane, trapesing along with a strange
girl, and me got four daughters," she said to
herself, and dropped a bit of potato into the
bubbling fat to see if it was at the proper
temperature.

Perhaps Mrs. Green's daughters as well as
their "ways" were rocks of offence to Mrs. Morris,
yet they were truly a poor possession to
covet.

A short walk, and then Judith and Mrs. Morris
were at the foot of the hill-side.  They
entered Andrew's domain; and found, as they
closed the gate, that Miss Myers and Andrew
had come to meet them.

Andrew had longed intensely during the four
days just gone to see Judith again.  So extravagant
had his desire for this been, that when he
saw her coming afar off, he felt almost a regret.
The anticipation had been so satisfying that he
felt a stifled fear, lest the vision he found to
surpass the real.  But when she gave him her
hand, and looked at him, straight from her
honest eyes into his—well, then he knew no
dream could be so dear as the sweet reality.
And from that moment the world put on a
different countenance to those two—the sky, the
water, the clouds, and the earth's bloom-scented
face all changed.

As they turned to follow Miss Myers and
Mrs. Morris they were a little silent.  A quieting
hand seemed to have been laid in benediction
upon their hasty pulses.  An awe, not of each
other, but of the holy realm they felt they were
entering, fell upon them.  From the portals of
that Promised Land there seemed to issue a
gentle but compelling voice, bidding them tread
gently, for the place whereon they stood was
holy ground.  In Andrew's heart there surged a
new strength, a strong tide of resolution.  In
Judith's heart there sprang to life many sweet
hopes, savoured and sanctified almost to pain, by
a new sweet fear.

Their voices softened.  Andrew's tones seemed
informed with a new meaning.  Judith's accents
held a hint of appeal.

But this transformation was unacknowledged
by each of them.  Judith's eyes still met his
bravely, and he constrained himself to self-control.
But what a glorified place that linden-laden
hill-side had become!

Judith laughed out happily.

"I am happy!" she said, out of sheer
light-heartedness.  "Are you?"

Andrew drew his breath in swiftly, and closed
his lips firmly a moment, as to repress some
words that strove for utterance.

"Yes, I should think I am," he said.

They passed under the apple-tree by the garden
gate.  Its petals seemed almost spent—the life
of the apple blossom is short.  But how much
sweeter the spot, and the tree, when she stood
beneath it, than ever it had been before in all
its glory and bloom!  They were in the garden;
the old sun-dial with the linden tree beside it
stood in the sunshine.  Judith's eyes filled with
happy tears, which Andrew did not see; he
only thought her eyes were bright.  It seemed
to her that her spirit had found its natal place
here on the hill.  These aromatic breaths from the
box, the perfume of the violets, the odour of the
cherry blossom, the sound of the birds, the rustle
of the leaves—surely these were the scents and
sounds of home.

"Do you know what Mrs. Browning says of
such a tree?" she asked.

"No: tell me."

"I do not know if I can remember it.  I'll
try.  I—" (She was nervous—she who had
sung to the Kaiser!) Then she repeated, her
voice trembling a little—

"Here a linden tree stood, bright'ning

All adown its silver rind;

For as some trees draw the lightning,

So this true, unto my mind,

Drew to earth the blessed sunshine

From the sky where it was shrined."

"I think it is you who have drawn down the
sunshine," he said.  "Anyhow, it is always
sunshine where you are."

She was amazed at the joy which flooded her
heart at this commonplace compliment.  They
loitered about the garden until Miss Myers
summoned them to tea.  Judith came in almost
shyly before these two country women, who, to
tell the truth, had felt the freer to enjoy
themselves in her absence.

Miss Myers took her into a bedroom to lay off
her hat.  It was cool, quiet, large, with corners
already growing dusky in the fading light.  A
huge bed heaped high with feathers was covered
with a snowy coverlet.  Some tall geraniums
with fragrant, fern-like leaves stood in the
windows: a dark, polished table filled one angle.
The mirror, a little square of dim glass, was set
in a polished mahogany frame, and placed upon
a high chest of drawers of the same rich dusky
wood.

There was something pure, still, almost ascetic,
in the large bare room.  Its spotlessness seemed
to diffuse a sense of restful peace.  One would
have said no weary eyes had ever held vain
vigil here, that no restless heart had here
sought slumber without finding it.

Judith somehow felt like lowering her voice.
She took off her hat and patted her hair
solicitously as every normal woman does.  She
could only see her face in the mirror, nothing
more, not even the purple and yellow pansies in
the breast of her yellow frock.  She touched
them gently.  Andrew had picked them for her
in the garden.

"Am I right?" she asked, looking at Miss Myers.

"Couldn't be improved," said Miss Myers,
heartily, upon whom Judith's interest in the
garden and evident desire to please had made
quite an impression in the last few minutes.

So they went back to the sitting-room
together, when Miss Myers excused herself for a
few minutes whilst she went to give the finishing
touches to her table—to see that the girl
had set it properly, get out the best china and
the silver teapot, the richest fruit-cake, the finest
canned peaches, and fill the cream ewer with
the thickest of cream.

Andrew was leaning against a window casement
as Judith entered the room.  The broad
window-sills were full of flowers; the heavy old
red curtains were pushed far back to the sills,
making a dusky background for Andrew's tall
figure in its rusty velveteens.  Judith advanced
toward him, her yellow frock looking almost
white in the waning light, the purple heartsease
a dark blot upon her breast.

"Isn't that plant pretty?" she asked
Mrs. Morris, feeling a nervous desire to include her
in the conversation—she felt so much alone with
Andrew.

"Which?" asked Mrs. Morris, joining them at
the window.  "The 'Aaron's Beard' or the
'Jacob's Ladder'?"

"I mean this hanging plant," said Judith.

"Oh, the 'Mother of Millions'; yes, it's real
handsome," said Mrs. Morris, looking at the
luxuriant pot of Kenilworth Ivy over which
Judith was bending.

"What a funny name!" said Judith.

"Oh, it don't make much difference about the
names of 'em," returned Mrs. Morris.  "Only so
long as you know 'em by 'em."

Miss Myers entered, and they followed her to
the dining-room.

Miss Myers was reputedly the most forehanded
house-keeper in Ovid, and supposed to set the
best table of any one in the village, "and no
thanks to her for it; she's got plenty to do
with"—as her neighbours often said.  But in
spite of her liberal house-keeping, Miss Myers
"looked well to the ways of her household";
there were no small channels of waste permitted
under her
régime
.

Judith was charmed with everything—the
chicken and ham, which Andrew deftly
dispensed; the huge glass dish of peaches,
preserved whole, and with a few long green
peach-leaves put with them to flavour them; the
snowy white cream-cheese set on a bed of
parsley: the young lettuce fresh gathered from
the garden (of which Mrs. Morris said later, "It
was just murdering them lettuce to pick 'em so
young"): the black fruit cake: and the bread
browned in Miss Myers' brick oven.

A cat sprang upon the sill of the open window,
and after some pretence of surprise (at which
Andrew raised his eyebrows and looked at
Judith), Miss Myers gave it a saucer of milk on
the window-ledge.  Strangely enough there
happened to be an extra saucer handy.  Judith
sat demurely, feeling that there never had been
such a joke as she and Andrew perceived in
Miss Myers' poor pretence of astonishment at
the cat's daring.  The cat finished her milk, and
sat washing her face industriously.

Rufus sat sedately beside his master's chair,
with a look almost of sanctity in his big hazel
eyes.  Rufus never begged, but he shifted his
forepaws uneasily and swept his banner of a
tail along the floor, mutely importunate.  Later
on Judith learned this was the regular
performance of these two favourites.  There were
other dogs about the place, and barn cats in
plenty, but these two chosen ones had the high
seats in the synagogue.

There were antlers between the windows, and
over the side table, and above the doors; a
trophy of wild ducks and water fowl was
mounted upon a beautiful hard-wood panel;
foxes' masks grinned from the corners.  And
when they passed out to the hall, there was the
old musket, the sword with its crimson sash, a
pair of rusty spurs and a cartridge belt, all
hung upon the huge horns of the one moose
which Andrew's gun had brought down.

An incident at the table had disturbed Judith
very much.  In response to a request for salt,
she had handed Andrew some, and Mrs. Morris
promptly said:

"Well, you shouldn't have done that.  That's
a bad oming.  'Help one to salt, help them to
sorrow.'  That's terrible unlucky."

"Oh, Mr. Cutler," said Judith, "do you think
I've given you sorrow?"

"No," said Andrew.  "No, indeed; I don't
believe any of those old sayings."  Miss Myers
was silent.

"Well," said Mrs. Morris, "I don't know;
them things seems bore out sometimes.  There
was young Henry Braddon; he keeps post-office
now" (this to Judith) "and one day his mother
gave him some salt to salt the cattle.  'Help
one to salt, help one to sorrow,' says he, and off
he went, and when he come back his mother lay
in the porch, took with the stroke she died of."

Judith's face was pale and startled.

"Seems to me," said Andrew, dryly, feeling as
if he would like to choke Mrs. Morris—"seems
to me the brunt of that bad luck fell on her."

"I wish I'd never seen salt," said Judith.  "Do
you think any bad luck will come of it?"

"Nonsense," said Andrew, and somehow his
manlike scorn did much to reassure Judith, but
when the others were not looking, she pushed
the offending salt as far as possible from her.

Mr. Morris was to call for them, and he
arrived very soon, but in the meantime the
evening had grown a little chill, and Judith had
no wrap.  She denied feeling cold, but as they
stood in the porch she shivered.  Andrew ran
in and brought out a huge homespun shawl and
bundled her up in it; her face, in contrast to its
heavy rough folds, looked very delicate and
white.

She was seated alone in the second seat of the
democrat waggon.  Andrew came to her side;
his eyes were nearly on a level with hers.

"You never showed me the birds' nests!" she
said.

"Oh, you must come back and see those," he
said eagerly.  "You will come back?"

"As often as Miss Myers will let me," said
Judith, unaffectedly.  "And"—she coloured a
little—-"you'll come and see my bird's nest in
the field?"

"Yes, to-morrow," said Andrew.

Mr. Morris shook the reins over the old sorrel.
Judith bent over giving Andrew her hand.

"Mr. Cutler," she said hastily, "you don't
think I gave you sorrow?"

"No," he said, some deep feeling making his
voice intense in its quiet strength.  "No, you
give me—"  The old sorrel was eager to get back
to her slim-fetlocked daughter, and she sprang
forward.  Judith's hand seemed torn from him;
his sentence was left incomplete.

"Good-night," he said.

"Good-night, good-night," called Judith in
return.

CHAPTER VII.

"Yet love, mere love, is beautiful indeed,

And worthy of acceptation."

Next day the village was stirred to its depths
when Hiram Green passed through the streets,
bringing from his pasture his white horse,
striped with purple paint, or dye, until it looked
like an exotic zebra.

With this horse he brought his groceries from
town; behind it many a school-teacher had
driven in vainglorious ease.  Hiram had gone
for it that day with intent to do the little
Methodist parson honour, by taking him for a
drive, a plan necessarily postponed by the
hilarious appearance of the horse, which looked
out from a pair of artistically drawn purple
spectacles upon the excitement which its
appearance created.

Hiram was furious, the Misses Green were
rampant, the parson piously indignant, and even
meek Mrs. Green lifted up her voice in wrath.

The horse was escorted to the barn-yard, to be
subjected to such a course of scrubbing as never
fell to the lot of an Ovidian horse before; but
aniline dyes are hard to eradicate.  That day,
and for many days after, the horse went about
contentedly in a pale purple coat.

There was no direct evidence to convict any
one of the prank; but Hiram had refused to
give the Slick family any further credit at his
store, and from the clothes-line of the Slick
house, some garments, dipped in purple dye,
flaunted derisively in the breeze.  Tommy Slick
and Nip went about looking as if butter wouldn't
melt in their mouths; and all Mrs. Slick was
ever heard to say about the matter was:

"Let 'em come to me and just as much as hint
that Tommy done it!  I'll—but just let 'em
once, that's all."

And whilst nobody showed a disposition to
hinder any one else from making the accusation,
still no one volunteered to voice the general
opinion regarding the matter to Mrs. Slick.
Besides, secretly, every one felt a sort of sneaking
satisfaction over the matter.

Andrew and Judith, to confess the truth,
thought it a huge joke, and at Judith's instigation,
they made a long journey across the fields
to Hiram's pasture lot, to see the horse; and
when they beheld him placidly purple, munching
away in supreme content, they laughed till their
voices rang out through the wood.

Judith recalled the purple smears on Tommy's
pail the day she had met him, and felt an
unholy joy of participation in the plot.  Judith
didn't like the Greens.  As she and Mrs. Morris
passed them going to Andrew's, one sentence
had rung out clearly to Judith's ears: "My!
Ain't she pinched!"  That was enough.  The
Greens never found favour in the eyes of
Judith.

Andrew, as he had promised to do, went to
see Judith's bird's nest the day after her visit to
his farm.  At that meeting, and in many more
such sweet hours which followed, Judith and
Andrew lived in the joy of the moment.  Their
hearts were young, the world was fresh and
fair; the one loved deeply, and the other—well—for
the time she had forgotten her ambition,
forgotten the marvellous gift that made holy
the air she breathed, or only remembered it for
the pleasure it gave this young countryman;
she had forgotten that her name was famous,
whispered from lip to lip throughout the musical
world; she had forgotten the intoxication of
success, the wine of applause; she had forgotten
the great debt she owed the man who had made
her what she was, a debt that she could only
requite in one way, by singing.  So surely she
must have sipped some Nepenthe of present
happiness or future hope!  Lotos lands are very
sweet, but rarely so satisfying as these two
found them.

It seems to outrage our sense of proportion,
to think of a young farmer aspiring to the hand
of one who showed every promise of being the
world's
prima donna
.  To us it seems grotesque
almost, and Andrew seems ridiculously egotistical
in hoping that this song-bird would abide
in his love-woven cage of rushes, when the doors
of so many golden nets were open to her.  But
Andrew's daring was perhaps excusable.

It is true, her voice had led him to her first,
and he always heard it as a devotee might hear
the voices of angels strike through his prayers;
but after that first meeting, Andrew had always
seen the
woman
in her, not the songstress.  He
did not love her for her singing, her beauty, nor
her gentle breeding.  He loved her for herself—the
truest love of all.  For a love founded upon
any gift is a frail thing, a banner hung upon a
reed.  The reed may break, and the banner no
longer lifted up may not care to enwrap the
broken stem which before upheld it.  What does
England's greatest woman poet say?

"If thou must love me, let it be for naught

Except for love's sake only."

"For love's sake only"—that should be the
supreme reason of every passion.  Love, "the
fulfilling of the law," the beginning and end of
all things.

And thus, inasmuch as this great justification
was his, Andrew was justified.

Nor did he seek with rude hands to snatch
his happiness hastily.  As one pauses with
hushed heart, when he comes in woodland
places upon some new sweet flower, or sees
through a cleft of the mountains the glory of
the sun, or gathers to his breast some
soul-satisfying truth, so Andrew paused ere raising
the cup of this great joy to his lips.  He felt
he must purify his hands ere he advanced to
stretch them forth for the draught.  And should
it be denied him?

Thought ceased there—beyond was chaos.

And Judith gathered the flowers of the hour
with eager fingers, trembling with new joy,
finding in their perfume complete satisfaction,
looking neither before nor after, as a butterfly
revels in the sunshine, forgetting the chill of
by-gone days, unrecking of the bitter blasts to
come.

The days became weeks, and the earth grew
glad with fruits and flowers and growing grain.
During all this time Judith was learning of the
people about her, prying with her tender eyes
into the pathos of their narrow lives,
appreciating keenly the unconscious humour
displayed in their processes of thought, marvelling
at their stolid disregard of the Beautiful.

Rufus and the grey cat knew her well, and
Miss Myers was devoted to her.

Mrs. Morris and Miss Myers had grounded
her thoroughly in the family history of the
villagers, and she knew as much about them as
about the others, for Miss Myers told her about
Mrs. Morris, and
vice versa
.

And Judith had developed a keen interest in
all the doings of the village people, of whom
old Sam Symmons was her favourite, the
redoubtable Tommy Slick being a good second.
Old Sam liked her, and prophesied freely that
she would soon be mistress of Andrew Cutler's
house.  Suse pretended not to be much
impressed with Judith; it was not to be expected
that any marriageable girl in the neighbourhood
would particularly admire the strange
woman who had led away captive the most
eligible man for miles around, and, besides,
Suse had a love affair of her own upon her
hands.  The rest of the village girls contented
themselves with giggling when Andrew and
Judith passed, whispering among themselves
that "There didn't seem to be much sign of
Miss Myers moving out, and if she was going
to live with Andrew and his wife, it was as well
he hadn't chosen any of
them
, for
they
wouldn't
stand
that
"—reflections which consoled them
very much evidently, and which, being entirely
harmless to any one else, were quite admissible.

Judith thought this rustic life very quaint
and idyllic to look at—like one of Hardy's
stories, only hearing the same relation to a
story that a game of chess, played as they play it
sometimes in the East, with living pawns, does
to the more prosaic pastime pondered over upon
a table.

The village appealed to her as a skilfully set
scene, begirt by a beautiful background of
changing fields and sky—a stage whereon was
enacted an interminable drama, in whose scenes
all the constituents of humble life were blended.

It never occurred to her that she was the
heroine of the story—the queen of the animated
chess board, an actress in the life play.  Poor
Judith!  She thought herself only a spectator,
and, as such, deemed herself secure from all the
pains and penalties of the play.

Judith always laughed, though sometimes
for shame she strove to hide the laughter when
Tommy Slick was before the footlights.  Tommy
had been making a hilarious record for himself
at school.  To begin with, Tommy was nearly
ten years old, and had been allowed to run
wild at home, hence he was utterly ignorant
of the world of letters, but wide awake to the
vital facts in the world of men: for Tommy's
intellect was precocious and practical.

Tommy's father was wont to say of this, his
youngest hope, "Tommy hain't much of a letter
sharp, but he'd be good on a horse trade," and
his judgment was about correct.  His mother,
as a preliminary to Tommy's appearance, called
upon Suse, and informed her that "Tommy was
a right smart young un, but delikit."  Of the
first fact Suse was well aware: of the truth of
the latter statement she never could convince
herself.  Did she not, in common with the rest
of the village, remember well the day when
Tommy and his father furnished forth
entertainment for the whole community?  The
fashion of it did not suggest any extreme
debility upon Tommy's part.  It was in this wise:

One day Tommy, having incited his irascible
father even more than usual, perceived blood
in his parent's eye, and concluded to run.  The
chase led up the village street, to the vacant
lot where the old store had been burned down.
The fleet and flying Tommy, turning here, had
perceived his father in full pursuit, and,
evidently doubting his own staying powers, had
taken to a tree, shinning up a tall, slender,
swaying poplar with precocious celerity.  He
climbed to the very top, and, undaunted by the
slenderness of his perch (for the tree bent
beneath his weight as a stalk of grain beneath a
bird), clung comfortably there, whilst his father,
unable to follow up the slender stem, stood at
the foot, and alternately threatened, cajoled
and cursed.  When he resorted to swearing as a
safety valve for his wrath, Tommy exchanged
oaths genially and freely with him, until Slick,
Sen., in a paroxysm of rage, shook the tree
continuously and violently, so that Tommy took
an earthward flight, fortunately for him landing
on a pile of old straw.

His father, somewhat cooled down by the
spectacle of Tommy shooting through the air,
approached him, and as a preliminary, asked him
if he was hurt.  This gave Tommy an opportunity
which he at once improved.  He made no reply.

And thereupon Suse and the rest of the
Ovidians were regaled by seeing Tommy's father
carrying his son home tenderly, stepping
carefully so as not to jar the presumably broken
bones.

This progress Tommy rendered as arduous as
possible, by lying perfectly limp in his father's
arms; in fact, making himself dead weight, and
letting his long legs dangle helplessly down, to
meet his father's knee-caps, or shins, at every
step, with the brass toes of his heavy boots.  It
was not reported that Tommy suffered much
from this experience.

Tommy had a fine fund of profanity, which
served as a spicy garnish to his deep sense of
humour, a genial and easy self-possession,
unfailing confidence in his own powers, and a dog
he was willing to back against any other in the
village, except Hiram Green's brindle bull pup.

The first day Tommy went to school, Suse had
the "infant" class up before one of the alphabet
tablets by the window, and Tommy, affable and
completely at ease, came with them.  Most
children—Ovidian children—when they came to
school for the first time, were somewhat abashed
by the novelty of their surroundings, given to
starting at every sound, stumbling over the legs
of desks, and getting hopelessly entangled with
the other pupils, in their efforts to obliterate
themselves from the teacher's notice.  Not so,
Tommy.  No teacher ever born had terrors for
him; the legs outstretched to trip him on his
way up the aisle, were withdrawn, tingling from
the kicks of Tommy's brass toes.  When he was
half-way up the aisle, it occurred to him to take
a short-cut, so he wriggled between two desks,
and landed with a slide over the third, to find
most of the class assembled.  A sharp pinch of
an arm, his elbow applied vigorously to a side,
a vicious kick upon a shin, cleared his way of
three boys.  Then he planted himself at the
head of the class, next Suse, and prepared to
receive the seeds of knowledge.

But his eyes wandered, first with a look all
about, then abstractedly to the window.  But
the abstraction vanished, and a look of intense
eagerness made his eyes bright, as they bent in
absorbed interest upon one spot, where his
disreputable dog, who had followed him to school,

à la
Mary's sheep, was harassing the life out of
a fat and grunting pig, which he had, in his own
proper person, surrounded: for, heading off the
pig in whatever direction she turned, he seemingly
converted himself into twenty disreputable
dogs.  Having bewildered the pig with a few
lightning rushes round it, with a sharp nip at
its tail, ears, or nose, as he could best get in a
flying bite, he planted himself like a lion in the
way, and yelped red-mouthed derision and insult
at the impotent foe, who was too fat to follow,
either mentally or bodily, the gyrations of its
agile tormentor.

"Tommy!" said Suse.  (Tommy paid no
heed.)  "Tommy!" repeated she, more imperatively.  (No
sign from Tommy.)  "Tommy Slick!!" accentuating
her voice by a sharp rap of her pointer on
a desk.  Just then the owner of the pig came
along, kicked Nip, and Tommy came back to
sublunary affairs.

"All right, Suse," he said obligingly, "I'm yer
man."

At that Suse felt the foundations of her
throne tottering.

In the afternoon, mindful of the temptations
of the window, she had Tommy's class up before
the blackboard, where, printing the alphabet a
letter at a time, she made the class name them.
Tommy kept his attention pretty closely fixed
until N was reached; then he became
absent-minded.  He was meditating his revenge upon
the pig's owner for kicking Nip.  The only step
he had decided upon was to try conclusions,
immediately after school, with the man's son.
The latter was two years older than Tommy,
and a good half-head taller, but Tommy never
considered such paltry details when an affront
to Nip was to be wiped out.

Tommy's mind was engrossed with further
plans when Suse, after elaborately executing a
capital S upon the blackboard, addressed him,
not without some trepidation.

"Tommy, that's S."  (No response.)

"Tommy," she said with angry dignity, "you
must look at the blackboard.  That letter is S."

"Oh, is it?" said Tommy, in a pleasantly
interested tone, "I always did wonder what the
little crooked devil was."  For the remainder of
Tommy's first day at school Suse felt that her
glory was a delusion and a snare.

Judith carefully concealed from Mrs. Morris
her enjoyment of Tommy's pranks, the former
having no patience with "them two imps," as
she designated Tommy and Nip.  For, once,
Mrs. Morris had been expecting company, and
the better to entertain them, had baked a batch
of pumpkin pies, it being the season when such
delicacies were in order.  She set them out on a
bench in the front porch to cool, taking the
precaution to make sure that the collie and the
cat were safe in the kitchen.

When Mrs. Morris returned, some half-hour
later, she found a row of empty pie plates, and
sitting beside them, looking at them with the
dissatisfied expression of a dog still hungry,
was Tommy Slick's dog Nip.  Nip fled from
the face of Mrs. Morris towards Andrew's
woods, where Tommy was gathering hickory
nuts, sped upon his way by an earthen flower
pot flung with a vigorous but inaccurate hand.
Ever since that day Mrs. Morris had cherished a
deep hatred of Tommy and his dog.

Judith, as the days passed, was very happy;
but happy in a blind, unreasoning fashion.
With persistent self-delusion she put behind
her the fact that this dream-like summer was
but an interlude in her life.  True, at first
she persistently took short views, and only
interested herself in matters a day or two
beyond the present, but gradually she slipped
into the habit of speaking and thinking as if
she were to be there always.

Now and then there were times when the
colder light of reason showed her plainly how
factitious this evanescent happiness was.  These
moods came upon her like so many physical
shocks, leaving her feeling much older, much
quieter, robbing her life of radiance and giving
her almost a distaste for the simple scenes which
had created delusions which bade fair to cost
her so dear.  Sometimes when the clear radiance
of the moon shone in upon her at night, she lay
and thought of the brilliant scenes, the
well-nigh certain triumphs which awaited her—for,
immature as she might be in some things, she
was mistress of her art and
knew
it, but her
cheeks no longer flushed as they had wont to
do, her eyes no longer kindled at the dream:
instead, her face set into a cold dignity and her
eyes looked out in the moonlight, out into the
future with a look of prescient martyrdom—the
martyrdom of lonely Genius!  The look of
those whose brows smooth themselves for the
crown of solitary success, that coronal which
has so often crushed its wearer, so often obscured
the eyes it overshadowed, so that they no longer
beheld peace and joy!

But at the first sound of Andrew's footsteps,
always eager, hasty, hopeful as they approached
her, these shadows vanished, and in their place
shone the dawn of a newer light.

She had never before been considered as a
woman, but always as a singer; and her womanhood
recognizing the tribute paid to it, stirred
into life, responded to the feeling which evoked
it, and demanded right of way.

There is something dominant in the woman-heart
when roused.  Judith's nature held deeper
depths than she herself wot of—sweet springs
for the lilies of love to grow in; reservoirs of
feeling, long unsuspected, but now brimming to
the brink, threatening to break every barrier,
and flood their way over the ruin of her life
schemes, her painfully constructed temple of
Art, the airy fabric of her ambition; but one
obstacle could not be swept aside—the benefits
received.  When Judith thought of what she
owed her manager, then her heart grew faint
within her; but, as excessive pain at length
numbs sensation, so this thought became one of
the accepted facts of her life, the life she was
enjoying so much.

And the days were so long, and so sweet, that
it seemed impossible that the end would ever
come.  But it was already midsummer, the
harvest fields were brightening beneath the
sun, the little school-house was closed for the
summer holidays; from the orchards came the
odour of ripe harvest apples, and the
sun-bonneted women gathered wild raspberries from
the fences, or picked currants in the garden.

And Judith had herself grown infinitely
charming; for she was not letting all the
sunshine slip from her.  As the ruby crystal
holds the rays which gives it its roseate charm,
so Judith was absorbing the beauties about her,
and giving them forth in a gentle radiation of
womanly graces.

When one part of a nature is nurtured to the
exclusion of the rest, it is not strange that the
whole suffers somewhat.  Judith, taught only
to sing, to look well, to win applause by merit,
or clever finesse, had known perhaps too little of
real womanliness, save the intuitional impulses
of her strong, sweet nature.  She was wont to
be a little petulant, a little self-absorbed, and a
little, just a little, arrogant.  These blemishes
had been chastened into a sweet womanliness,
capricious perhaps, but charming.  Not but what
there were tempests in her summer.  As the
summer showers swept across the fields, so
tears crossed her happy dream.

The interest she took in every detail of
his daily occupation amused and touched
Andrew very much, but now and then he, in a
measure, misunderstood her, which was not
wonderful, considering how widely severed their
modes of life and methods of thought had been.
Once he laughed at some views she was
expressing, grave conclusions she had arrived
at after long thought and minute observation.
Andrew laughed outright.  Her remarks related
to one of the simplest facts of outdoor life,
always so well known to Andrew that he hardly
apprehended the marvel of it.  At his laugh the
colour flooded her face, tears sprang to her
eyes, she was wounded to the quick.  She tried
to disguise her feelings as bravely as possible,
fighting off a burst of hysteric tears, making
commonplace remarks in a tone strained and
muffled by reason of the lump in her throat.
Andrew's heart ached with regret.  He wanted
to take her in his arms, and holding her to his
breast win from her a silent pardon, offer her a
mute but eloquent apology.  He dare not yet.
A quick sense of her childishness in some
matters came to him, a knowledge that if ever
he won her, he must be prepared to be patient,
prepared to learn much, to teach her many
things.  Judith saw that he had noticed her
distress, knew he was sorry, and tried in an
unselfish woman's way, to make him think that
she had not minded.  The very tenderness which
Andrew's voice and manner assumed, pressed
home the sting of that laugh.  As they parted
that night, the tears were heavy beneath Judith's
lids.  For a fleeting moment as they said
good-night, she looked at him.  She was standing
within the shadow of the porch, but the
star-shine revealed those tears.

"My poor little girl, I'm so sorry," said
Andrew, his dark face pale in the dusk.

"It doesn't matter, really.  I think my head
aches—I mean—good night," she said.

"You are not angry?"  Andrew's voice was
chill with despair, regret.

"No, no—oh, I'm not angry, not a bit, I—"  He
caught her hands, her composure was failing
her.

"Oh,
do
let me go," she half whispered, "you
are bad to me."  Then she fled.  Andrew turned
away, white to the lips.

When they met again, the joy of seeing each
other made them happy.  Judith was so lovingly
eager to make him forget her last words to him,
he was so tenderly anxious not to wound her,
and each was a little in awe of the other.  For
they had learned one of the most sacred lessons
of love, learned what a terrible power to inflict
suffering each held over the other.  But their
love was sanctified by this dual illumination,
and as their eyes met, a little shyly, now and
then, there seemed to pass between them a
two-fold message, a promise and a plea.

And they parted again, with definite words of
love still unspoken.

But the time was not far off.  Andrew's arms
were yearning for their birthright, and Judith's
head was weary for his breast.

Yet fears assailed her, too.  One's head may
be sore aweary for the pillow, yet the thought
of frightsome dreams may make one tremble
on the verge of rest, and hesitate ere yielding
to the sweetest slumber.

CHAPTER VIII.

"Ho, ye who seek saving,

Go no further.  Come hither, for have we not found it?

Here is the House of Fulfilment of Craving;

Here is the Cup with the roses around it,

The world's wound well healed, and the balm that

hath bound it."

"I'm going to church next Sunday," said
Judith to Andrew, as they walked through the
chestnut woods.  It was evening.  Far away
beyond the level fields an after-glow opulent in
gold was streaming up over the sky—a radiance,
living, like the memory of love, long after its
source had vanished from the view.  The day
had been intensely warm, and the wood was full
of the pungent odours of leaves, mingled with
the sweeter scent of dying wild roses.

Coming to them faintly from far-off fields
they could hear the lowing of thirsty cows,
eager to be let out of their pastures to the
ponds.  And from the grass meadow which
bordered the chestnut woods came the crop,
cropping of Andrew's horses grazing greedily,
now that the heat of the day had declined.

Judith wore a white frock, and had a bunch
of somewhat limp-looking ferns in her hand.  It
was impossible for her to leave the woods
without some spoil.  Andrew walked by her side,
tall and brown, his cap pushed far back upon
his head, a measureless content within his eyes.
Rufus followed sedately, keeping a wary lookout
from the corner of his eye for squirrels and
rabbits.

Sleepy, white-winged moths were fluttering
aimlessly hither and thither amid the grasses,
and now and then a bird's call rang through the
trees.

"Going to church?" said Andrew.  "Isn't
that a new idea?"

"Yes," said Judith, a little wistfully.  "Mrs. Morris
wants me to, and—I wish I was good."

Andrew's face was very tender as he turned
towards her.  "I don't think you are such a
great sinner."

She looked at him half happily, half doubtfully.
"Well, I'm going anyhow; Mrs. Morris
seems so anxious about it."

"I'll go, too, then."

"Oh, will you?"

"Yes."

They walked on a few moments in silence;
then Andrew said:

"Will you sing in church?"

"Oh," said Judith, "they'll have singing!  I
hadn't thought of it.  Yes, I'll sing with the
rest."

Andrew chuckled.

"What is it?" demanded Miss Moore, drawing
her level brows together in interrogation.

"Oh, nothing," said Andrew.

"Yes, it is something."

"No, really."

"You were laughing at me."

"No, honestly, I wasn't."

"Certain?"  Miss Moore looked at him suspiciously.

"Come and look at the horses," said Andrew.

So they crossed from the path, through the
narrow belt of trees to the pasture fence, and
presently, in answer to Andrew's calls, the
horses came trotting up one by one, standing
shyly and sniffing with outstretched noses at
Andrew's hand.  He crossed the fence into the
field and fed them with bunches of grass.
Judith looked on longingly.

"Could I come over?" she asked doubtfully.

"Yes, indeed," he said.  "Do."

"Turn your back, then."

Andrew obeyed promptly, and Miss Moore
mounted slowly to the top rail, where she stood
uncertainly a moment.  It slipped, she gave a
little cry, and the next instant Andrew had
lifted her lightly down.  He held her for a
second in his arms; each felt the tremour of the
other's heart, and then she was released and was
standing trembling by his side.  The horses
pricked their ears and eyed her nervously, and
Andrew gazed down at her with his heart in his eyes.

She held out one of her ferns to the horses,
shrinking a little closer to Andrew as they
drew near to sniff at it with their velvety
muzzles.  One after another lipped at the fern,
but would not take it.

"They won't eat that," said Andrew, and his
voice was very gentle.  "Offer them this."

So Judith held out the grass he gave her,
catching hold of his sleeve like a child for
protection when his big Clydesdale colt stretched
out his head towards her.  And presently the
horses left them one by one, till all were gone
except Andrew's clean-limbed bay, upon whose
back the wet mark of the saddle was yet visible,
for Andrew had ridden into town that afternoon.
And Judith grew bolder and patted its soft
nose and beautiful neck, and Andrew watching
her thought that nowhere, surely nowhere, in
all the wide world was there a sweeter woman
than this.  And he longed to question the
universe, if within all its realm there was
anything so lovely as the fragile hands which
showed so white against Rob Roy's arching
neck.

The twilight deepened.  A little wistful wind
rippled through the long meadow-grass.

"We must go," said Andrew, "or the dew will
wet you."

"Oh, it wouldn't hurt me," said Judith.

"Better not risk it," said Andrew.  So they
walked along within the meadow to the gate,
Rob Roy following them, every now and then
touching Andrew's shoulder with his
outstretched nose.  He stood whilst the bars were
taken down, and whinnied softly as they left
him.  "What a dear fellow he is," said Judith.

They soon reached the Morris house, where
Mr. Morris was mending a bridle on the
doorstep, and Mrs. Morris in the fading light was
busy carrying out a plan to frustrate the
assaults of the chickens upon her flower beds:
for every chicken in Mrs. Morris's possession
seemed inspired with an evil desire to scratch
up her seedlings so soon as she transplanted
them from the boxes in the kitchen to the beds
in front of the house.  So between the rows of
balsams and marigolds and amongst the
ruby-stemmed seedlings of the prince's feather, Mrs.
Morris had stuck in bits of shingles.

"There," said Mrs. Morris, straightening herself
after plunging her last piece into the earth.
"There!  I guess them chickens has got their
work cut out for them before they root out
them plants.  They do seem to be possessed by
evil speerits, them chickens!  That's the third
planting of marigolds, and what prince's feather
there is left is only what sowed itself last year
and came up late.  My sakes! wasn't it hot in
town to-day, Andrew?"

"Yes," said Andrew, from where he stood
leaning against the porch.

Judith was standing by Mrs. Morris, looking
at the flower beds where each little seedling was
surrounded by a palisade of narrow strips of
shingle.

Mrs. Morris brought out some chairs, and they
sat talking in the dusk while the summer moon
grew out of the horizon, and slowly, slowly
sailed aloft, paling as it attained its height, till
from a glowing disk of yellow it changed to a
shadowless silver shield.

"Won't you sing to us, Miss Moore?" asked
Andrew.

"Yes, do," urged Mrs. Morris.

"What will I sing!" asked Judith, but
without waiting for an answer began.  She sang an
Italian love-song, a masterpiece of passion and
pain—sang it as perhaps no living woman could
sing it, making music in such fashion that the
hearts of her hearers were melted within them,
voicing in it all the timorous new joy, the
half-happy fears that filled her heart, with
somewhat of the poignant pathos of renunciation.
Some one says, "Music is the counterpart of life
in spirit speech," and it would seem that in one
perfect song there may be condensed all the
emotion of life and love, all the pathos of pain
and parting.  As the song died away Andrew
gave a long sigh.  The pleasure of such music
ofttimes prolongs itself to pain.  Perhaps it was
some recognition of the great value of Judith's
gift of song, perhaps it was because she sang
familiarly an unknown tongue that made
Andrew suddenly feel the chill of a great gulf
fixed between them.  The arms which had held
her for a moment in the pasture-field yearned
with ineffable longing for a joy denied them.

But Judith was singing again, "The Angels'
Serenade," one of the loveliest things ever
written.  When she finished there was a silence.
Mrs. Morris' hard-worked hands were clasped
tremblingly together, tears were streaming over
her face, her heart was yearning towards the
little mounds in the unkempt churchyard.

"Hannah," said her grey-haired husband,
laying his hand upon her shoulder.  Their eyes
met.  That was all; but dumbly they had
shared the cup of their sorrow.  A bitter
communion, one would say, yet good to make strong
the spirit, as the bitter barks strengthen the
body.

And a few minutes later Mrs. Morris slipped
away into the house, perhaps to open that shrine
where were hidden some tiny half-worn
garments, perhaps out of sympathy for the two
young people who might wish to be alone; and
when Judith began to sing again, she and
Andrew were alone, for Mr. Morris, with
lumbering attempts at caution, had followed his
wife.

Andrew's heart was aching with inexplicable
pain.  Judith was singing an old theme,
composed long since by some frocked and cowled
musician, whose rigid vows and barren life
could not quite suppress the dream of music
within his soul.  It was a simple and austere
melody, yet endued with a peculiar pathos, the
yearning of a defrauded life for the joy that
should have crowned it, the regret of a barren
present for a fruitful past, the wail of the must
be for the might have been.

And as she sang, the gulf which Andrew had
perceived between them widened into a great
black sea, across which her voice came to him
where he stood alone forever upon the shore;
and just as the pain grew too poignant to be
borne, a bat darted near them, Judith gave a
frightened cry and fled to his side, and the gulf
was bridged in a second by a strong strand knit
of a woman's foolish fear and a man's reassuring
word.

And soon a light shone down from an upstairs
window.  Judith started up.  "You must go
straight away home," she said, "Mrs. Morris has
gone to her room."

"Come as far as the gate with me," said
Andrew, and she went.  But after they had
talked a moment Judith remembered the bats,
so, of course, Andrew had to take her back to the
porch in safety.

At length he was forced to go, so with a last
"good-night," and a last long look into her eyes,
he strode away to his home on the hill.

The leaves of the chestnut trees were rustling
in uncertain flaws of wind; the crickets were
creaking eerily from out the darkness; the fields,
all pearled with dew, shimmered in the moonlight.

It was a solitary hour.  But Andrew's heart
was light within his breast; Judith's eyes had
been very sweet when she said "Good-night."

And Judith climbed the blue-painted wooden
stairs to her little corner-room, and lay long
awake, forgetting the promise of her great
future, forgetting the efforts of the past,
forgetting the debt she owed her manager, only
knowing that she loved and was beloved again,
only recalling the eyes this brown young
farmer had bent upon her, only remembering
the tender strength of his arms, as, for a moment,
they had encircled her.  A simple dream this?
Perhaps.  But let such a vision once weave
itself into the fabric of a life, and all else will
seem poor and mean beside it.

It was a beautiful sunshiny Sunday as Judith
stood in the porch waiting for Mrs. Morris, who
presently appeared, clad in a black calico with
white spots on it, black silk gloves and a bonnet
with a purple flower.

Judith had dressed herself in a little frock of
pale green linen, and her face bloomed like a
rose above it.  Her hat and parasol were of the
same cool tint as her frock, and as the walk in
the sunshine flushed her cheeks with
unaccustomed colour, she looked much like a sweet
pink flower set in green leaves; at least, so
Andrew thought when he saw her entering the
church beside Mrs. Morris.

The Methodist church was slowly filling with
women and children.  Sam Symmons' Suse had
just gone in, and the Misses Green were but a
few yards behind.  The men in Ovid had an
evil habit of standing along the sides of the
churches talking whilst the first hymn was
being sung; and frequently, if there was any
particularly interesting topic on hand, till the
first prayer was offered.  In winter the sunny
side was chosen; in summer they availed
themselves of the scanty shade afforded by the
slanting eaves, standing, their heads and shoulders
in shadow, their freshly polished shoes glistening
in the sun, their jaws moving rhythmically
as they chewed their wads of "black strap."  A
remark made at one end of the row percolated
slowly to the other, each man judicially
revolving it in his mind and voicing his opinion
in deliberate nasal tones.

"Lord, a little band and lowly,

We have come to worship thee,

Thou art great and high and holy,

Oh! how solemn we should be."

So the women and children sang inside,
accompanied by a wheezy melodeon.  They
heightened the effect by emphasizing the adjectives
strongly and singing "soll
um
" with great
unanimity in the last line.

Andrew listened for Judith's voice, but
evidently she had concluded not to sing.
Andrew was disappointed.  He had been looking
forward in high glee to watching the amazement
of his neighbours when they heard that marvellous
voice.  The truth was, Judith had not seen
him where he stood beside the church, and was
too busy looking about surreptitiously to see if
he had fulfilled his promise about coming, to
think of the singing either one way or the other.
And when she saw Miss Myers sitting stiffly
alone in the corner of a pew near the front, her
heart sank like lead, and all her happy eagerness
over the service departed.  She was piqued, too,
and began to feel a nasty heartache stirring
within her breast.

The singing was over.  An interspace of quiet
betokened to those outside that the prayer was
in progress, and a rustling of leaves and settling
of dresses proclaimed the fact that the preacher
and his congregation wore ready for the serious
business of the day, the proceedings up to this
point being tacitly regarded as the preliminary
canter before the weekly contest with Original
Sin, that dark horse which, ridden by that
knowing jockey, Opportunity, wins so many
races for the Evil One.  At this juncture the
men came in one by one, each trying to look as
uninterested in his neighbours as possible, to
give the impression that this influx of the male
element was purely accidental and not the result
of concerted movement.

It is somewhat doubtful if this impression
was conveyed to the preacher, as the same
circumstance had occurred every Sunday since
he had been there; and certainly it deluded
none of the women, who, well aware of the
gossiping tendencies of their men, never held
themselves at the approved "attention" attitude
till this stage in the proceedings, but who then
waxed marvellously stiff as to posture, and
marvellously meek as to expression.

When Judith looked up next time, it was to
meet two eager, grey eyes looking at her from
Miss Myers' pew, and all at once the incipient
heartache vanished, a calm of sweet content
fell upon her spirit.  She looked around, and
apprehended all the poignant blending of pathos
and absurdity about her.  Her eyes softened as
they fell upon old Sam Symmons' hard-wrought
hands resting on the top of his stout stick, and
lighted as she saw Tommy Slick's rose and white
face and impish eyes showing above the door of
a centre pew.  Her tender eyes sought out and
read the story of the deep-lined faces about her,
and a great pity for their narrow lives filled
her.

The sermon was just begun when the green
baize door swung back a little, and an investigating
dog entered.  He was one of those nosing,
prying, peering dogs which seem to typify so
exactly the attitude of some people towards
their neighbours' affairs.  He peregrinated
through the pews, around the melodeon, up
and down the aisle, and then turned his canine
attention to the preacher's reading desk.  The
preacher became manifestly uneasy; all his
sensitiveness slowly centred in his heels, round
which the dog sniffed.  Judith, whose sense of
the humorous was painfully acute, gave one
glance at Andrew, and then became absorbed
in trying to control her laughter.  The dog still
lingered where he was.  The preacher's face was
flushed; his words faltered.  Every one felt that
some one else should do something.

At length, after many significant gestures
and nudges from his wife, Hiram Green rose
and approached the dog with outstretched hand,
rubbing his fingers together in the manner which
we imagine impresses a dumb animal with a
deep sense of pacific intentions.  The dog backed
away.  Hiram followed as the dog retreated.  It
paused, wagging its tail doubtfully.  Hiram
sat down on his toes and patted his knee in
a wheedling manner with one hand, whilst with
the other he made ready to grasp his prey.  The
dog came a little nearer.

Hiram grasped—but grasped short; his fingers
met on empty air, and he nearly overbalanced.
For the moment he had the wild feeling a
person experiences when a rocking-chair goes
over with him—a sort of gasping clutch at

terra firma
.

Judith was nearly in tears from agonies of
suppressed laughter, knowing, as she did, that
Andrew was waiting to catch her eye.  That,
she felt, would finish matters so far as she was
concerned; a sense of companionship makes
one's appreciation of a joke painfully intense.

Hiram was conscious that the Sunday School
in the gallery was red with suppressed excitement;
that his neighbours' interest in the sermon
was purely perfunctory; he even had a horrible
thought that the preacher himself was laughing
at him.  In this he was wrong; the preacher
was nearly distracted, having lost the thread of
his sermon, and was maundering wildly on,
hoping to disentangle his argument before
Hiram caught the dog.

Hiram, grown desperate, added to his alluring
gestures the blandishment of half-voiced words,
which sounded like "Poor dog," "Good dog,"
but which meant, "You infernal brute."  The
dog succumbed at length, its last suspicions
allayed by this specious use of the gift it did
not possess, and presently the congregation was
edified by seeing Hiram, flushed, but with an
expression of great loving-kindness, carry the
dog gently down the aisle.  Slowly and softly
Hiram carried him until near the door, when
circumstances made him accelerate his speed,
for the dog was Tommy Slick's Nip, a shiny,
smooth-coated dog, and Hiram's hold was gradually
slipping.  He had an unpleasant but confident
premonition that the dog would reach for
him, as dogs are prone to do, when his fingers
got to the tender spot beneath the forepaws.
However, he reached and passed the baize door
in safety, and in the second which followed,
the congregation, with the sigh with which one
relinquishes an acme of intense and pleasurable
excitement, turned its attention to the preacher.
At that moment there came a shrill and
ear-splitting yelp.  Hiram had taken the dog to
the top of the steps, and applied his foot in
the manner most likely to speed the parting
guest.  Hiram entered and took his place with
a very red face.  He felt dimly that the yelp
was a criticism upon the smile with which he
carried the dog out.  To Hiram that sermon
did not tend to edification.

That particular Sunday was a memorable one
in Ovid.  The congregation had just gathered
itself together after the incident of the dog,
when the preacher announced the hymn.  It
was one of the few really beautiful hymns,
"Lead, kindly Light."

Judith rose to sing with the rest, and with
the second word her voice joined with the others,
dominating them as the matin song of the lark
might pierce through the chatter of sparrows
along the eaves.  When Judith opened her lips
to sing, music possessed her, and, a true artiste
to her finger-tips, she never sang carelessly.
Absorbed in her book—for she did not know
the words—she sang on.  The people looked and
wondered, and one by one the voices died away,
the wheezy notes of the melodeon faltered forth
from beneath the second Miss Green's uncertain
fingers, and Judith sang on serenely, standing
erect, her head held high, her soft throat
throbbing like a bird's.  Outside the air was golden
with yellow sunshine, within it was cool and
darkened.  A rift of light slanted through the
closed shutters of the window near which
Judith stood; thousands of little motes danced
in it, specks and gleams of gold.  Through the
open windows there came the odour of dried
grass, and every now and then a flaw of wind
brought a whiff from Oscar Randall's field of
white clover.  Andrew had laughed in the
meadow as he thought of Judith's voice
electrifying the people in the church, but he had
forgotten that he himself was not secure against
its charm.  Laughter was far from his thoughts
now.

"Lead, kindly Light, amid the encircling gloom,

Lead thou me on.

The night is dark, and I am far from home;

Lead thou me on."

The words, upborne upon the wings of
matchless song, seemed to soar far beyond the
confines of the little church, taking with them
the inarticulate trust and hope and confidence
of all these humble folk.

The preacher sat looking at her, pale and
entranced.  This singing seemed suddenly to
open a long-closed door in his life, so that once
more he looked down that chimerical vista from
out the misty distances of which illusive hands
beckoned him on to brighter things.  He had
once dreamed of a loftier destiny than the life
of a Methodist preacher, but that was long past;
still it was sweet to recall so vividly the season
when his spirit had wings.  He sat before his
congregation, a tall, spare man, large of bone
and awkward, with a countenance upon which
self-denial had graven deep cruel lines, a brow
that had weathered many bitter blasts.  In
type he was near allied to the people before
him, the last man, one would fancy, whom
dreams would visit.  And yet, as he listened to
this stranger girl, singing alone in the midst of
his congregation, there fell deeply upon him
the trance of dead delight; the simple panorama
of his past spread itself before his eyes, blotting
out the faces before him as a shimmering mist
obscures an unlovely scene.

It was a very simple vision, a "homespun
dream of simple folk."  He saw a rosy-cheeked
village girl, for whose sake he as a village lad
had worked and toiled and slaved.  He had
fought for education and success that he might
lay them at her feet.  He had kept her waiting
long.  She was only a poor, pretty girl, and she
had other lovers.  One night, when her lover in
a garret in the city was poring over his books,
his head aching, his heart faltering, yet
persevering as much for her sake as for the sake of
his faith, she, driving home from a dance through
dewy lanes and softly-shadowed country roads,
promised to marry the farmer's son who was
taking her home.

The news reached him in his garret, and something
flickered out of his face which never shone
there again.  But with the tenacity of his race
he stuck to his work.  His heart was in the
green fields always, and he had come from a
long line of country men and women.  He had
no inherited capacity for learning, but he got
through his course somehow, and became an
accredited minister, and the day he was ordained
the news of her death reached him, and that
was all.  He had never censured her; in his
thoughts she had ever been an angel of sweetness
and goodness, and as Judith sang, all these
things rushed back upon his heart.  It was with
a very white face and a very soft voice that he
rose to address his people, and he spoke home
to their hearts, for he knew whereof he spake
when he dealt with the pains and trials and
troubles of their lives.  He was only the height
of his platform removed from them, and he had
paid dearly for his paltry elevation, but from its
height he saw, far off perhaps, but clear, the
shining of a great light, and with ineloquent,
slow speech he strove to translate its glory and
its promise to the people before him.

Church was over; the people pressed slowly
along the aisle into the palpitant warmth of
the summer afternoon.  Miss Myers came up to
Judith when she stood for a moment at the
door, and invited her to go home with them to
the house on the hill, and Judith, nothing loath,
consented.  So presently she and Andrew, with
Miss Myers, were walking through the slumberous
little streets of the village.

As they drew near the house of Bill Aikins,
they caught sight of him sitting on the doorstep
peeling potatoes, beads of perspiration upon
his brow, for he was suffering sorely from Kate's
weekly infliction of a white shirt.

Bill had "a little wee face, with a little yellow
beard, a Cain-coloured beard," and usually wore
a deprecatory smile upon his countenance.  He
was possessed of a perfect temper, and whatever
his lot might seem to others, to himself it was
all that could be desired.  To be the husband of
such a woman, could man desire a better fate?
And, indeed, Kate Aikins was a fine-looking
woman, tall and straight.  Old Sam Symmons
often said she was a "gallant figure of a woman."

As they passed the house they heard Kate's
voice sounding shrilly from within:

"He did
what
!  Weighed the paper with the
cheese?  And you stood by and never said a word?
I'll be bound!  Well, 'a fool and his money is soon
parted.'  There's truth in them old sayings yet.
The idea of you being scared to speak to
Hi. Green and him cheating you before your very
face!  Land sakes!  What's he I wonder?  Next
time you go to buy cheese you take paper with
you.  He asks enough for the cheese without
paying for paper."

As they got beyond hearing, Judith's face
burned out of sympathy for Bill's embarrassment.
However, Bill was in nowise troubled.
He knew his wife would be quite as ready to
express herself towards any one else in the
village as to himself, and a philosophy born of
that reflection entirely prevented Bill from
feeling in any degree abashed by strangers enjoying
his wife's eloquence.

It was only two days since she had announced
to him with much satisfaction that she had "just
told Sarah Myers what she thought of her," and
she had expressed a longing desire of late to
have a five minutes' talk with Andrew Cutler,
relative to some supposed slight he had put
upon her.  The whole village was well aware of
many instances of Bill's discomfiture when Kate
first married him and undertook his reformation.

There was the day when Bill, well on towards
being thoroughly drunk, was returning home
down the village street, walking carelessly
through the deep slush of early spring.  Kate
met him.  She, if truth be told, was on the
lookout for him, having despatched him more
than two hours before to get some starch from
the store.

Between waiting for the starch and waiting
for Bill, Kate was wroth when she opened the
door to begin her search.  By an unlucky
chance, her first step took her over the ankles in
icy slush, which, strange to say, instead of
cooling her wrath, raised it to white heat.
Therefore, when she, carefully picking her way up
one side of the street, beheld Bill advancing
down the other, regardless of mud and slush,
she paused in disgust, until he was nearly
opposite to her, and then ejaculated in a tone of
deepest disbelief in her own vision—"Bill! is
that you?"

"No," promptly replied Bill, "nor nobody
like me either;" with which the valiant Bill
had resumed his way, feeling proud that he
had not only dismissed certainty but even
suspicion of his identity from Kate's mind.

Before long he was a sadder and for the
nonce, a wiser man, for Kate reached home as
soon as he did, and thereupon gave him to
understand in a very unmistakable way that he was
her property and she knew it.

All Ovid remembered this, and indeed could
not well forget it, for every wash-day, when
starch naturally cropped up as one of the
circumstances attendant upon the event of washing,
Kate might have been heard by any passer-by
giving Bill a full and dramatic account of the
occurrence, with preface upon drunkenness in
general, and appendix upon Bill's phases of the
vice in particular, and copious addenda, of
contempt, contumely and vituperation.  Bill listened,
marvelling and admiring, for her flow of language
was a great source of pride to Bill, albeit directed
at himself.

Indeed, he sacrificed his comfort willingly to
enjoy the mental treat her angry eloquence
afforded him.  There had been times, however,
when Kate's lessons had taken a more practical
and infinitely less entertaining form.  It was
one of these which effected Bill's final
reformation.  The memory of it brought smiles to the
lips of Ovidians, young or old, whenever they
met Bill.

With all good managers in Ovid, it is the
custom to salt down a small barrel of herrings in
autumn.  These they buy from their fisherman
neighbours for a dollar per hundred.  Now Kate,
who was certainly, as even her enemies admitted,
a forehanded woman, sent Bill with a silver
dollar, to get her a hundred herrings, one day
when the proper season came around.  With
this Bill duly proceeded to the fishermen, paid
his dollar and got his herrings.  As he turned to
go, Sam Turner shouted an invitation to him
to come down at night and have a share of the
beer which was to be on tap at the Upper
Fishing Station.  Bill assented and went his way.

After his six o'clock supper, he told Kate he
was going to get his saw sharpened at the
blacksmith shop, and so set out.  He left the
saw at the blacksmith's, then smartened his pace
along the street, down the steep incline to the
river's edge, carefully along the river path until
he disappeared into the fisherman's little hut.

The door was closed, then Bill, Sam Turner,
and some half-dozen others gathered round the
keg of smuggled beer, and all went merry as
the traditional wedding bell.

About half-past eleven, Bill and the others
emerged.  The cask was empty—their condition
the antithesis of the cask's.  Lurching,
stumbling, falling, sliding along the river path;
scrambling, crawling, climbing up the banks to
the level, then along the street to Bill's home.
All this took time, and it was the hour when
ghosts do walk ere they neared Bill's door.  A
dim light gleamed in the window.  "Beacon
tha' lights me home, boys," said Bill, who, having
passed the transitory phases of moroseness and
pugnaciousness, to the higher state of tears and
courage, had now reached the acme of sentiment
and drunkenness simultaneously, and was ready,
as he expressed several times on the way up the
bank in a voice which came from different attitudes,
as the speaker stood upright, crept, or lay
flat, "To kish Kate and fight for the country
b'gosh."  Bill and his friends approached the door.
Bill gently tried it.  It was locked, so Bill said.
They each tried it in turn, and each pronounced
it locked in a voice betokening a strange and
new discovery.  They each knocked in
turn—silence.  They each kicked in turn—silence.
Then Bill said in a lordly way, "Kate, open the
door!" adding in an aside to his fellows, "I'll
forgive her, kish her, make her happy."  Then
again, "Kate, open the door!"

Kate did open the door, with such abrupt and
unexpected suddenness that Bill, standing before
it, balanced back on his heels and raised his
outspread hands.  His
confreres
were preparing to
make back-stays of themselves to brace Bill
up, when Kate's hand and arm reached forth,
and, with one single movement, as Sam Turner
afterwards graphically described her action,
"yanked" Bill into the house and slammed
the door.

There was silence for a moment, followed by
a slow sliding sound.  His late companions
surrounded the two uncurtained windows and
prepared to watch events.

Bill had slowly slid down, until he was now
in a sitting posture on the floor, with his back
against the door.  Kate had vanished; she soon
entered from the back of the house bringing
two pails of water, with which she proceeded
deliberately to give Bill a cold bath.  Bill said
several times in a weak voice, "Kish me, Kate,"
but Kate, preserving an admirable silence,
continued the deluge until Bill, with some show of
sobriety and nimbleness, arose.  By this time
the water was pouring out beneath the door,
and the watchers outside were shivering
sympathetically.  As Bill rose, he certainly looked
miserable enough to excite pity, even in Kate's
heart; but the worst was not yet.

Disregarding the water streaming on the floor,
Kate proceeded to arrange two chairs, with an
accompaniment of cloths, knives, salt, and a
small keg.  Lastly, she produced two baskets
of herrings.  It was now evident to the horrified
watchers that her dire purpose was to make Bill
clean, wash, and salt down the hundred herrings
then and there.  And such was the case.  The
watchers stayed until eyes and limbs were
weary, and then crept away awe-struck at the
terrors of matrimony, and deeply impressed by
Kate's moral supremacy.

And Bill worked and worked.  His hand was
unsteady, and his blood flowed freely from
numerous cuts to mingle with the herrings.
He scraped and scraped, and bedaubed himself
with scales.  He salted and salted, and the salt
bit his many cuts.  But Kate was inexorable.
Every herring was cleaned, scaled, washed, salted
and packed, and the
débris
thoroughly cleaned
up before the miserable, white-faced, repentant
Bill was allowed to rest, and during it all
Kate talked and talked and talked.  From that
night Bill was a changed man, and his admiration
for Kate became more than ever pronounced.

Every time one of those herring appeared on
the table, Kate gave Bill a
résumé
of the whole
affair, with variations upon her theme, which
her vivid and fertile imagination suggested.
After the herrings were finished, she revived
the subject whenever the names of any of those
with him that night, fish, the river, or the fishing
station were mentioned.  These were the regular
cogent subjects.  But any reference to salted
meats, cold water, late hours, etc., was very apt
to draw forth a like narration, so that a day
rarely passed without Bill's memory being
refreshed thus, which was indeed a work of
supererogation, for Bill never forgot it.

Andrew and Miss Myers recited many such
tales for Judith's edification as they walked up
to the Cutler house, and whilst they sat at
table.

But later on, when Miss Myers hastened off
to count the eggs which had been brought in, to
see if her chickens were properly fed, and to
generally look after the ways of her household,
the talk fell into other channels.

Andrew and Judith talked seriously, looking
into each other's eyes with no veil upon their
own, each drinking deeply of the peaceful
rapture of the hour.  The scents from the old
garden filled their nostrils, the breath from the
box diffused through the other odours a thread
of fresh bitterness, savouring them from satiety.

A great clematis hung at one side of the
porch, the deep green of its leaves set close
with purple stars.  Upon the other side a
Tartarean honeysuckle was covered with
coral-coloured buds.  Far off in one corner they could
see a blur of gold where the thorny Scotch roses
were a mass of bloom.

They sat long talking, and presently Miss
Myers came round the corner of the house
with her dress tucked up about her and the
servant girl following with water pails; and
soon the scent of fresh moist earth was mingled
with the fragrance of the flowers.

Rufus lay at their feet, looking up at them
with wistful, hazel eyes.  It was a simple scene,
yet in it was being enacted a drama of delight.

There is no sweeter time in a woman's life
than the first hours of a mutual love ere speech
has profaned it.  Judith was having her halcyon
hour now, and she rejoiced in it with sweet
natural happiness.  The memory of her greatness
had all but faded from her memory; now and
then from sleep's horizon it pointed a
threatening finger at her; now and then in morning
dreams she recalled it vaguely, the wraith of a
not unhappy season.  But she had no fear of it.
Her only apprehension was that she had misread
the message in Andrew's ardent eyes, and
that fear only lived when they were apart, for,
as she welcomed him upon the old weather-beaten
doorstep, where the spent petals of the
loose-leaved climbing roses lay, blots of crimson
on the grey, or bade him farewell at the gate
where the white syringas surrounded them with
the odour of orange blossoms, she found in his
eyes the strength and blessing of a deep and
perfect love.

CHAPTER IX.

"Now, if this earthly love has power to make

Men's being mortal, immortal; to shake

Ambitions from their memories, and brim

Their measure of content: what merest whim

Seems all this poor endeavour after fame."

One day Judith, who had been in the village,
went up to see Miss Myers.  It was intensely
warm.  To the eye the air seemed to quiver
with heat; a brazen sun shone in a cloudless
sky; the birds were still; nature was dumb;
the only sounds which broke the stillness were
echoes of enforced toil.  As Judith walked
along the lanes, now grown deep in grass, the
fragrance of over-ripe clover came to her in
waves of satiating sweetness.  The birds she
startled uttered no cry, but flew heavily to
some near perch and sat there languidly, with
feathers ruffled on their little heads, their tiny
bills apart as if they gasped for breath, their
wings drooping loosely with parted feathers at
their sides.

When she reached the house on the hill, she
went straight through the hall to the kitchen,
for she had long ago been given the liberty of
the house.

Miss Myers bustled up with grim kindness,
took away her hat, made her sit by the window,
and brought her a great cool goblet of raspberry
syrup in water.  It was very cool in this big
kitchen.  The windows were heavily hung with
Virginian Creeper, and the stove was in the
summer kitchen.  Rufus lay stretched in one
corner, his ears flapping as he snatched irascibly
at a tormenting fly.

Miss Myers had been a little upset when
Judith entered, and she proceeded to tell Judith
her worries.  She had come out to inspect the
kitchen work, and found her milk pans set out
without their bunches of grass.

"A silly notion of Sarah Myers," the Ovid
women called it, but it was a dainty one
nevertheless—one Miss Myers' mother and mother's
mother had always observed, since ever the
first Myers left the meadows of Devon.  This
notion was that all summer long Miss Myers
insisted that the polished milk pans, when set
out to sweeten in the sun, should each have a
bunch of fresh grass or clover put in it, to
wither in the pan.  She declared it gave
sweetness and flavour to the milk.

Miss Myers had many dainty ways in her
house-keeping.  The glossy linen sheets were laid
away with clusters of sweet clover in their folds.
Her snowy blankets were packed with cedar
sprigs.  Her table linen was fragrant all
summer with the stolen perfume of violets or rose
leaves strewn with them in the linen drawer.
And in the winter there were twigs of lemon
thyme and lemon verbena there, carefully dried
for that purpose.  "All notions," the villagers
said contemptuously, adding something about
old maids.  Nevertheless, these notions savoured
the whole household with sweetness, and seemed
to add beauty to the more prosaic details of
every-day work.

Since Judith had come so frequently to the
house, there had always been flowers upon the
dining table and in the parlour, and in the big
dim bedroom.

Hot as it was, Miss Myers was ready to go
out and patrol the garden, which, subdued
beneath the sun's caresses, lay exhaling a
hundred varied scents.  The tall white lilies were
in bloom at last, ineffably lovely, with golden
hearts and petals whose edges were silvery in
the sunshine.

When Andrew returned at night from his
fields, his strong face a little weary, his eyes
restless and eager, the first sight that met his
vision was Judith Moore,—Judith, in a simple
dark blue frock, standing in the doorway of
his home, and looking—he dared hope—for
him.  She looked so consonant with the old
house and the flowerful garden that Andrew
felt no other presence in the world would have
completed the picture so well.

How sweet to see a woman waiting there for
him!  Even as he had dreamed.  He stood
some time and watched her, himself unobserved.
How sweet and calm her face was—yet anticipative,
content—yet eager!  He looked at her
long across the narrow space from where he
stood, and in after days recalled her untroubled
beauty very clearly.

He tried to note in detail the form of her
features, but he could only think of her faithful
eyes, the beauty of her honest smile, the promise
of her mouth, with the deep hollow between the
lower lip and the dimpled hillock of her chin,
which is, they say, the truest indication of a
woman's capacity for real love, just as heavy
eyelids denote modesty, and thin nostrils delicacy
of the senses.

Some sympathy, some subtle mental influence,
made Judith flush and look about her.  Andrew
slipped around the corner of the house, to come
behind her in a few minutes rid of the day's
dust.  He touched her gently on the shoulder.
She started, yet laughed.  "I knew you were
coming," she said; "I did not hear you, but I
was certain of it."

After tea, they three (for Judith felt shy of
Andrew to-night, and clung to Miss Myers, and
gently compelled her to step forth with them)
walked up and down the garden walks.

The flowers, their fragrance freshened by
the dew, flung forth their odours royally.  The
birds, revived by the coolness, were singing their
deferred songs.  An oriole's liquid note was
answered from the lindens; the robins were
flying about from tree to tree with happy
confidence; some Phoebe birds were fluttering about
the porch; sparrows were wrangling in the box;
a humming-bird was darting from bed to bed;
emerald-throated, ruby-crested, it vibrated from
flower to flower, itself like an animated vagrant
blossom; the swallows were darting in long,
graceful flights high in air, or soaring in
slanting circles over the barns, where their nests
were; now and then, flying slowly homeward, a
crow crossed their vision, a shadow on the sky.

The heavy toads hopped lumberingly forth
from their hiding-places to search for slugs; a
tree toad gave its shrill call from a cedar tree.
Andrew had once shown Judith one, clinging like
a lichen to the bark, and of much the same
greyish-green colour.  The crickets sang shrilly
and sweetly, like boy sopranos in a vestured
choir; the frogs, in a far-off pond, added their
unfinished notes to Nature's vespers; bats flew
silently and weirdly overhead.

"Do you know what the frogs say?" asked
Andrew of Judith.

"No; what?" she asked, looking up so
eagerly, so trustingly, that a smile twitched the
corners of his mouth, even as he longed to
gather her in his arms.

"The little frogs with the shrill voices say,
'Cut across! cut across! cut across!'  The wise
old frogs, the big ones, with the bass voices, say,
'Go round! go round! go round!'"

Judith listened, her eyes big with interest.
"Why, so they do," she said, and looked at him
as at a wizard revealing a mystery.

Miss Myers laughed, her grimness tempered
by a tear.  "Tell her about the mill-pond frogs,
Andrew," she said.

"Oh, well, the frogs in the mill-pond over
beyond Ovid, used to say, 'Old Andy Anderson
is a thief!  Old Andy Anderson is a thief!' and
no one paid any attention; but after a while
people found out he was cheating them, not
giving them the proper weight of flour, and so
on, for their grists.  Then they found the frogs
were telling the truth."

"Mr. Cutler," said Judith, "did people know
what the frogs said before they found out that
the miller stole?"

"Well," admitted Andrew, laughing a little,
"I don't believe they did."

In the instance of the mill-pond frogs the
oracle was fitted to the event, as it has been in
other cases.

Later the dusk fell, and the moon slowly
soared aloft; a midsummer moon, indescribably
lovely; such a moon as is seen once in a
lifetime—pale, perfect, lustrous as frosted silver,
white as unsmirched snow, seeming to be
embossed upon the sky.  Such a moon haunted
Keats, inspired Shelley, whispered a suggestion
of kinship to Philip Sidney, and long, long ago,
shone upon the Avon.

And beneath this moon, intense as white
flame, pure as a snow crystal, Judith Moore and
Andrew Cutler began their walk to the
farmhouse by the wood.  Judith held her skirts
gathered up about her from the dew; she was
bareheaded, her broad hat hanging on her arm.
They had to pass along a path deep shadowed
in trees.  Judith started nervously at some
sound; that start vibrated to Andrew's heart.
He drew her arm within his, and Judith walked
dreamily on, feeling secure against the world
and all its fears.  They emerged into the
moonlight, and stopped where Andrew had constructed
a rude stile over the rail fence, for Judith's
convenience.  Their eyes met in the moonlight,
each knew the hour had come, and the heart of
each leaped to its destiny.

"Judith," said Andrew, very softly.

"Yes," she whispered.

"What is the sweetest time in all the world?"

She paused a moment; then, as a flower bends
to the sun, as a flame follows the air, she swayed
slowly towards him.  "Now," she breathed, her
heart in the word.

And the next moment she was in his arms;
their lips had met.

From the shadows of the wood they had
passed came the silvery call of the cat-bird that
sings to the moon—and they two had drunk of
"life's great cup of wonder;" only a sip perhaps,
but their mouths had touched the golden brim,
their lips had been dipped in its priceless nectar
(the true nectar of the fabled gods!) and their
nostrils had known the sweets of its ineffable
perfume.

So they stood, heart to heart.  All that the
world comprehended for Andrew was now in
the circle of his arms.  And Judith?  All her
world throbbed in Andrew's breast.

And for both there was no other universe
but the heaven of their mutual love,—a heaven
shut in and hedged about by two strong tender
arms; a heaven sustained by two hands that
fluttered pleadingly upon Andrew's breast.  Not
strong hands these, but strong enough to hold
in safe-keeping the treasure-trove of a good
man's love!

And their talk?  Well, there are some sacred
old-fashioned words, tender words, such as our
fathers whispered to our mothers long ago, such
as
their
fathers, and their fathers' fathers,
wooed and won their wives with, such as their
wives whispered back with trembling lips—these
words passed between Andrew and Judith.  We
all dream these words.  Some few happy ones
hear them; some brave true souls have spoken
them; and from some of us even their echo has
departed, to be merged in unending silence.  So
we will not write them here.

And at last they parted.  Andrew strode
slowly homeward, his face glorified, stopping
now and then to fancy he held her once more
against his breast, feeling again the fragrance of
her hair, hearing in the happy throbs of his
heart her trembling words saying that she
loved him.

Loved him
!  The mystery and magic of its
meaning wrought into his heart, until it seemed
too small to hold its store of joy.  He took off
his cap in the moonlight, and looked to the
heavens a voiceless aspiration to be worthy.

And well might Andrew Cutler bare his brow,
for there had been given into his hands the
holiest chalice man's lips know, the heart of a
good woman!  Well might Judith Moore, in a
burst of happy tears, vow vows to be worthy,
resolving to be better, stronger, nobler, for she
had been given that great gift for which, we are
told, thanks should be rendered, fasting—the
gift of a good man's love!

* * * * * *

"MY DEAR MASTER,—After all, you see, I am
the one to write first, and I am afraid you will
be very angry when you read my letter.  But I
hope you will forgive me.  I will tell you now,
at once, what it is, and while you read my
letter try to forget I am Judith Moore the opera
singer, and remember only that I am a woman
first and foremost.  And a woman needs love,
and I have found it, and cannot bear to give it
up, as I must, if I come back to you—to the
stage.  So, will you set me free?  Will you let
me stay here?  Will you let me stop singing
and be forgotten?  I know how dreadful this
will seem to you, how ungrateful I will appear,
how ignoble to give up my art for what you
will call 'a passion'; but oh, dear master! you
cannot know all this is to me, this love.  It is

everything
, health, happiness, hope, all.  And it
is not that I have forgotten your gifts; indeed,
indeed, no.  It is that I am so sure of your great
generosity, that I want you to be still more
generous; to add one more gift, the supreme
one.  For in spite of what I've said it all rests
in your hands.  I know what you have spent
on me, in money alone, besides your continual
thought for me.  I know how patient you have
been, letting me save my voice till it was mature
and strong.  I know you will have horrible
forfeits to pay on the lease of the opera house,
and then all the chorus on your hands, and the
terrible advertising for this American season.  I
know the horrible
fiasco
it will seem to the
public, and how your jealous rivals will make
capital out of the mythical
prima donna
who
did not materialize.  But all this is the price of
a woman's whole life, the purchase money of a
life's happiness.  Will you help pay it?  For I
will do what I can.  There is the money you
gave me after the Continental season.  It is
untouched; take that.  And there are my jewels—all
these gifts, you know—in the vault.  I send
you the order for those.  And the man I love
may be richer yet, and I will say to him, 'I owe
a dear friend a debt,' and you shall have, year
by year, all we can send.  Does it not seem that
in time I might make it up?  And the artistic
disappointment you feel, oh, master!  To lose
my art seems indeed a crucifixion to me, but in
that there is hope of resurrection.  To lose my
love would be unending death.

"I know myself well now.  I am a woman
full-grown within these last weeks, and even as
I write I know that I will have many bitter
regrets, many sad hours thinking of my music;
but what are these hours compared with an
unceasing pain such as will be mine if you
say no to my dream?  Of course, I know I am
bound to you by no contract; but the confidence
you have shown in me binds me with a firmer
bond, and if you feel you cannot release me I
will do my best, my very best to realize your
hopes.  You know I am honourable enough for
that.  But one thing, dear master, I lay upon
you.  If you come for me, taking me away from
my happiness, remember never to speak to me of
it, never refer to this letter, never tell me your
reasons for refusing the boon I crave from you
on my knees.  If I see you I shall know I have
asked too much, and that it has been denied me.
There is but one thing more.  The man, my
man, is utterly ignorant of my money value.
He sees in me only a woman to love, take care
of, and work for.  He does not know that I can
earn more in a week than he in years.  He
realizes most keenly the beauty of music, but
he does not know what it brings in the markets
of the world.  I would ask him to let me sing,
but I know well that such singing as mine
demands the consecration of all; when I sell
my voice, the body, the heart, the soul
goes with it, all subordinated to the voice.
That would not do.  He has given all, he must
and shall have all in return, all I have to give,
or nothing.  He knows me only as a woman
who came here for rest, quiet and health; he
does not dream my name is billed about the
city on coloured posters, talked of as a common
possession by every one—does not know the
papers are full of my doings or intentions.  So
you see it is myself he loves.  And now, master,
this is good-bye.  Good-bye to you and the old
life, which, before I knew any better, seemed the
best of all.  I hope I may some time see you
again, but not till I can greet you without too
great joy in my release, without too keen pain
for my music.

"Send me a line and tell me I am free, and
believe me, ever and ever, Judith Moore, your
own grateful little girl.

"P.S.—I have said nothing of my gratitude to
you, but this letter means that or nothing.
Means that I am so sensible of what I owe to
you that I will give up my very life showing
you that I do not forget your long-continued
kindness.  J. M."

This was the letter the post took away from
Ovid next morning, a letter written not without
tears.

* * * * * *

After the music of the gods has once been
breathed through a Pipe, it is never quite
content to echo common sounds, not even if its
heart be given back to it, and it be born again a
growing reed among its fellows; even if it echoes
back the soughing of the summer wind, and is
never torn by the tempest; even if it grows
continually in the sunshine, and never bends its
head beneath the blast; even if it be crowned
with brown tassels, and all men call it beautiful.
It still has the hungry longing, the dissatisfied
yearning, the pain that comes of remembered
greatness, even if that greatness was bought at
bitter cost.  The true gods may well

"Sigh for the cost and pain,

For the reed which grows never more again

As a reed with the reeds in the river."

For that pain is poignant, and perhaps more of
us endure it than is imagined.  It may be, these
inexplicable yearnings of our souls for some
vague good, these bitter times when not even
life seems sweet, these regrets for what we have
not known, for what we think we have never
been, for what is not, these may be dim memories
from ages back, from the times when the voices
of the gods spake through men, and men gave
heed to them, and, unmindful of their own
personal pain, proclaimed to man the messages
of the gods.  And though this birthright brings
pain with it, yet we, growing like other reeds,
and proud as they of our brown tassels, or
sorrowing, like them, for our lack, are proud also
to know that of our kind the gods chose their
instruments for the making known of their
music to men.  The yearning for the divine
breath may be better borne than the cruel

afflatus
it imparts, and yet we are glad that
once we were not unworthy to be so tried, and
not all rejoiced that the keener pain, the
higher honour, is taken from us.

* * * * * *

Sometimes before a great storm an illusive
hush holds sway, a perilous peace falls upon
the face of nature.  With it, a mysterious light
irradiates the sky; a solemn sunshine, prophetic
of after rains, the forerunner of tempest—a
luminous warning of wrath to come.  In some
such fashion surely the face of the angel shone
when he, as the writers of tales tell us, drove our
parents out of Paradise.

It was this illusory illumination that gilded
the lives of Judith Moore and Andrew Cutler at
this time.  How few of us read the rain behind
the radiance!

They were both happy.  As a parched plant
vibrates in all its leaves, stirs and quickens
when given water that means life to it, so
Judith Moore's whole being trembled beneath
its baptism of love.  For she seems to have
had no doubt that her manager—her "master,"
as she lovingly called him—would grant her
request.  Already her past life, with all its
work, and waiting, and triumph, seemed but
a dim dream, her present hope the only reality.
She ran about the Morris house so lightly that
it seemed to Mrs. Morris she heard the patter
of children's feet, the sweetest sound that ever
wove itself into this simple woman's dreams.

Judith's heart was ever across the fields with
her lover, and she "sang his name instead of
a song," and found it surpassing sweet.  And
Andrew's heart and head were both busy with
loving plans for Judith.

The Muskoka woods might go, and their green
mosses be torn for minerals!  No more long,
lonely hunts for him!  He must reap golden
harvests wherever he might for Judith, now.
He knew all her insufficiencies as a housewife,
which poor Judith felt very humble in confessing;
and it gave Andrew great joy, in a modest
way, that he would be able to let her be quite
free of them.

And he had higher dreams.  Politics offers
a wide arena for ambition.  Its sands may have
been soiled by the blood of victims, trodden by
the feet of hirelings, defiled by the struggles of
mercenaries; but there are yet some godlike
gladiators left, who war for right; there are yet
noble strifes, and few to fight them; and Andrew,
in whose heart patriotism was as a flaming fire,
resolved to dedicate himself for the fray.  To
win glory for Judith, to do something to savour
his life that it might be worthy of her acceptance,
that it might leave some fragrance upon
the tender hands that held it—that was his aim,
and he felt he would not fail.

No inherent force can be very great and not
give its possessor a thrill of power.  Andrew
felt within him that which meant mastery of
men.  And in spite of difficulties and obstacles,
Andrew at last won the wreath to which he had
aspired in the first flush of his hope and joy.

But that was after.

* * * * * *

One day, a week after Judith had sent the
letter, a group of Ovidians were in Hiram Green's
store.  There was old Sam Symmons, Jack
Mackinnon, Oscar Randall (who, together with his
hopes of political preferment, aspired to the hand
of Sam Symmons' Suse), and Bill Aikins.  The
latter would "catch it," as he well knew, when
he got home, for loitering in the store, and
therefore, with some vague thought of palliating his
offence, forbore to make himself comfortable,
but stood uneasily by the door, jostled by each
person who came in, pushed by each who went out.

Jack Mackinnon was speaking, his thin dark
face wreathed in smiles.

"How d'ye like the blind horse, Mr. Symmons?
I tell ye blind horses are smart
sometimes!  There was one Frank Peters, wot I
worked for in Essex, owned, and he never
would eat black oats.  Critters has their likes
and dislikes same as people.  I once knowed a
dog—but that blind horse—well, he'd never eat
black oats when he had his sight—went blind
along of drawing heavy loads—doctored him all
winter—t'wasn't any use, sight gone, gone
complete—well, as I said, he wouldn't eat black oats
when he had his sight, and when, the horse was
blind, sir, he knowed the difference between
black oats and white, yes, just the same as
when he had his sight.  You couldn't timpt that
horse to eat black oats, then or no time, he
wouldn't so much as nose at 'em, no sir.  You
couldn't fool that horse on oats.  But
pshaw! blind horses! why Henry Acres wot I worked
for in Essex—"

"Oh, shut up, Jack!" said Hiram, and Jack
accepted his quietus good-naturedly, quite
unabashed.

The village arithmetician had once taken the
trouble to calculate how long Jack Mackinnon
must have worked in Essex, deducing the
amount from Jack's account of the number of
years he had worked for different people there.
The result showed Jack must have spent some
hundred and sixty years in Essex if all his tales
were true; and Jack always repudiated with
scorn any question of his veracity, hoping, with
great fervour and solemnity, that he "drop
down dead in his tracks" if he was lying, a
judgment which never overtook him.

The talk turned upon politics, as it always
did if Oscar Randall was there, and old Sam
Symmons was soon holding forth.

"Yes," he said, "yes, the old elections were
wont to be rare times.  I do remember at one
election, near the close of the polls, beguiling
Ezra Thompson to a barn, and there two of us
held him, by main strength and bodily force, till
the polls were closed.  Truly he was an angry and
profane man when we set him free"—here came
a reminiscent chuckle, cut short to answer Oscar
Randall's tentative question.

"Trouble?  Get us into trouble?  Yes, of a
private kind.  Ezra Thompson and I fought
that question with our fists some seventeen
times, and the lad with me had much the same
number of bouts over it.  But we neither of us
begrudged him satisfaction.  In those days a
man took satisfaction out of his enemy's skin;
he didn't sneak away to lawyers to bleed him in
his pocket.  No, no.

"Yes, 'twere a great election that!  Twas the
time Mr. Brown ran against Mr. Salmon.  Now,
it was told of Mr. Salmon, that though of good
presence, and very high and mighty towards his
neighbours, yet he was ignorant; and when his
election came on, it was told of him how he met
an English gentleman on the train once, who,
wishing to learn of Canada, spoke at length
with Mr. Salmon, and in the course of the talk
(during which Mr. Salmon was much puffed up),
the English gentleman said to him: 'And have
you many reptiles in Canada?'  'No,' said
Mr. Salmon (and a pompous man he was, very)—'No,
we have very few reptiles, only a few
foxes.'  It was Mr. Salmon, too, who once
refused when he was J.P. to look into the case
of a poor man whose horse's leg had been
broken in a bad culvert.  And the man cried in
a gust of rage: 'What! did you not swear to
see justice done? and now you won't consider
this?'  'Swear,' said Mr. Salmon, 'I did no such
thing.  I only took my affidavit.'"  Old Sam's
voice died away.

Hiram spoke from behind the counter.  "The
roadmasters do bring the country into terrible
expenses.  Look at the bill of costs that's been
run up in that case at Jamestown."

"Yes," said Oscar Randall, as one having
authority, "the people's money is wasted in
this country with an awful disregard of the
public welfare."

"You're right there, Os."  "Now you bet your
head's level."  "Don't you mistake yourself, it's
level!"  "I tell you, you just hit the nail on the
head that time!"

When this chorus subsided, Mr. Horne, who
had just entered, said:

"What do you think of that concession, Os, out
back of Braddon's?"

"There is no doubt," said Oscar, promptly,
"but that is a question which must be adjusted.
It is such internal disputes as these which
weaken and destroy the unity of the country,
and lay us open to an unexpected attack from
the States, which we, by reason of disunion and
strife, would be unable to cope with."

The house, composed of Hiram on his sugar
barrel, Sam in the one chair, Jack Mackinnon
on a cracker box, and a row of men braced
against the counters on each side, fairly rose at
this.  Clearly Oscar Randall had the makings
of a great speaker in him!

But Mr. Horne was a man of slow mental
methods, who always decided one point before
he left it for another.  He waited till the chorus
of "That's so; that's the ticket," "Bet your life;

that's
the way to talk," "Let 'em try it; we'd be
ready for 'em" (this last from Jack Mackinnon
who was a volunteer) had died away, when he
said:

"That's right, Os; you're right there, right
enough; but what do you think—ought it to be
closed or should it be opened?"

"I think," said Oscar, slowly, and with confidential
emphasis—"I think, as every patriotic
and honest man thinks, that the rights of the
people must be preserved."

A diversion occurred here.  A shout from the
roadway took them all out.  Before the door
stood a carriage with a little black-a-vised man
in it; and behind that, an express waggon,
beside the driver of which sat a perky-looking
woman, different from anything ever seen in
Ovid, for French maids of the real Parisian
stripe were not apt to visit this village often.

"The way to old man Morris'? yes," said
Oscar Randall, and proceeded to give minute
directions.

The little cavalcade started again, the
gentleman leaning back in the carriage, murmuring
to himself:

"Now, I wonder which of these specimens
he was."

* * * * * *

And at that moment Andrew Cutler and
Judith Moore were taking farewell, for a few
hours as they thought, beneath the shadows of
Andrew's chestnut trees.

"Darling," he whispered, holding her gently
to him, "my arms seem always aching for you
when we are parted; my heart cries for you
continually.  Judith, dear little girl, you won't
make me wait too long?"

She clung to him silently, hiding her face on
his arm.  A tremour shook her; after all he
was a man, the dominant creature of the world.
True, he trembled at her voice and touch now—but
then, after?

"Andrew," she whispered, "will you be good
to me?"

"Trust me, dear, and see," he whispered back.

"You know I have no one but myself," she
said, putting back her head and looking at him
with pale cheeks and tear-rilled eyes.  "If you
are cruel to me or harsh to me: if you make
love a burden, not a boon, I will have no one to
turn to.  I—" she stopped with quivering lips.

"My own girl," he said, "trust me.  I know
I am rough compared to you, but I will be
tender.  I know my man's ways frighten you,
but it shall be all my thought to make you
trust me.  Give me your presence always, that's
all I ask—to see you, feel you near, hear you
about the house, have your farewells when I
go away, your welcome when I return, your
encouragement in what I undertake, your
sympathy in what I do.  That means heaven to me,
but only when you are happy in it.  Dearest,
you don't think I would be bad to you?"

And Judith, in a storm of sobs that seemed to
melt away all the icy doubts and fears that had
assailed her, laid her head upon his breast, and
promised that soon, very soon, she would go to
the house on the hill never to leave it; and,
when she had grown calmer with a deeper
peace than she had yet known, he left her—there,
in the shadow of the trees—to return in
a few hours.

And Judith stole into the kitchen door and
up to her room, to find her French maid packing
her trunks and be told that "Monsieur awaited
her in the
salon
."

* * * * * *

Her vow had been required of her—that was
all she could think, and she prepared herself to
keep it.

The manager was clever and adroit in his way.
He kept Mrs. Morris busy with him, so that
she did not see Judith till she entered to say
she was ready; and then, as Mrs. Morris told
afterward, she got a "turn."  For the Judith
who came to say "good-bye," was the same
Judith who greeted her at first, gracefully
languid, pale, self-composed, and somewhat
artificially, if charmingly, courteous.

"There was some difference," Mrs. Morris said,
"but I can't just say what."

The difference was that Judith had come a
girl, and left a woman.

So for the last time Judith crossed the little
garden, feeling strangely unfamiliar with the
homely flowers she passed.  In the meantime
the drivers of the conveyances had conferred
with Mr. Morris, and the shorter road they took
to the railway station was directly away from
the village, away from the house on the hill.

They caught a glimpse of it as they turned
a corner, and suddenly Judith seemed to feel
the scent of white lilies, and hear an evening
chorus of nature's composition.  Her hand
held tightly a little envelope, in which she had
hurriedly slipped something before she left her
room.

She was thinking how she could drop it
unobserved, when from the shadow of some
wild plum trees there issued a disreputable
dog—Nip—with Tommy Slick behind him, a
basket of wild plums in his hand.

She interrupted the manager's flow of news
to say—

"Do stop the man a minute, I want to speak
to that boy."

"I'll call him."

"No, no; I'll get out," she said.

So without more ado he stopped the carriage;
the whims of a
prima donna
must needs be
respected.

She got out and ran back to Tommy, who
greeted her with a grin.

"Tommy," she said, "you like me, don't you?
And you like Andrew Cutler?  Now, will you
do something for me that no one else in the
world can do?"

"I'll do it," said Tommy, with business-like
brevity.

"And you will not breathe it to any living
soul?"

"I kin keep my mouth shut," said Tommy.
"Often had to."

"Then," said Judith, "I'll trust you.  Give
this to Andrew Cutler; if you run you will
catch him in his chestnut woods.  Try to get
there quickly, and meet him before he gets near
Morris'.  Give him this, and say: 'She has
gone away! she sends all her love and this.'"

Tommy's impish face had a look of concern
beyond his years.  Tears were running down
Judith's face.

"Say, be you never coming back?"

"Never, never, Tommy!" said Judith.  "Good-bye."

* * * * * *

So in due time Andrew Cutler received from
Tommy Slick's fruit-stained hand an envelope
containing one long bright lock of hair, and a
message sent with it; and was told also of the
few other words that passed, and of Judith's tears.
And Tommy having delivered his message, and
seen the look on Andrew's face, dug his knuckles
into his eyes, and with a veritable howl of grief
fled away back as he had come; and Andrew
suddenly looked about and found life emptied
of all joy.

Judith seemed so very calm as the weeks
went by, that her manager told himself he had
been a fool to worry so that night—after he
returned her letter to the post-office, and decided
to go and fetch her from Ovid.  He had sent it
back, so that if she had refused to come,
or—yes! he had thought of that, being so imbued
with stage ways—if she had hinted at killing
herself, he might declare with clean hands
that he was guiltless, that he had never had
her letter, that some one else had got it and
sent it back to the Dead Letter office.  But,
after all, how foolish he was, he thought,
watching Judith smile, and reply prettily
to the courtesies of some guests whom he had
just introduced to her.  But then, her letter
had seemed full of meaning!  Well, that letter
was doubtless a manifestation of the stage-craft
with which she was thoroughly saturated!  So
he comforted himself.  And meanwhile, Judith
was learning that "Face joy's a costly mask to
wear," and asking wearily of each day that
dawned, "
Is not my destiny complete?  Have
I not lived?  Have I not loved?  What more?
"

And the time for her American
début
drew on.

CHAPTER X.

"Glory itself can be, for a woman, only a loud and
bitter cry for happiness."—
Madame de Stael
.

Judith Moore made a triumphant success of
her first American season.

She was lauded to the skies.  An ocean of
praise was poured in libations before her; its
ripples spread across the Atlantic, to break in
an ominous wave at Patti's feet, and Patti
seeing it, perhaps feeling the chill of its
encroachment, determined immediately upon
another American tour.

There is a picture of Judith Moore painted at
this time by one of the deftest masters of facial
portraiture.  Sittings were given for this whilst
past applause was echoing in her ears, with
newer shouts awaiting her in an hour or two;
but the woman pictured upon this canvas is
neither hearkening to past applause, nor
anticipating new honour.  She is absorbed in the
dream of some sweet past, silent in the face of
some unachieved joy, the whole face illumined,
by an after-glow from some light of other days—a
first radiance of a morn that never breaks.
It shows a woman with wide, wistful, grey eyes—eyes
which had wept, and lips that denied and
defied the tears, a brow whereon triumph and
grief had warred for mastery and merged at
length into patient endurance; but the head is
proudly poised, as a head should be that bears
a crown.  Even a thorny one confers and demands
honour.  If this woman bore a cross, she did not
flaunt it in the face of men; she bore it hidden
in her heart, and drew it out in secret places to
wash her heart's blood from it with her tears.
Tears are the salt of love that savour it to time
everlasting.

It was the fashion to say that Miss Moore
dwelt upon the heights to which her genius of
song raised her, that from the peaks of success she
looked down contemptuously upon all beneath.
Alas!  They could not tell how icy these
pinnacles were!  The roseate glow cast upon the
"eternal snows" may look very beautiful, but
the humblest hearth where love lights the fire
is warmer.

She felt, indeed, the exaltation of genius, but
upon every side she looked forth into the void.
She was possessed again by that agony of
vertigo that had seized her among the apple
blooms; now, as then, she stood among blossoms;
now, as then, her heart sickened within
her.  But there was one deadly difference; there
was no strong arm to take her down.  Indeed, it
seemed to her even the ladder was gone.  Could
any man forgive the perfidy of which she had
been guilty?  Many a hand was outstretched to
her, some that would have soiled her own had
she clasped them, others she might have met
honestly, palm to palm.  She brushed gently
past them all; if some of them tugged at her
skirts, it only gave her some discomfort and
pity for their pleading, but no pain.

Her manager was most enthusiastic over her.
He remembered guiltily a letter he had opened
and read, a letter he sent back to the post-office
with apologies—"he was sorry, the letter was
not for him"—a letter which even now was
slowly threading its way back through the
Dead Letter office pigeon-holes to an undreamed
destination.

He was working her too hard, though—so
musical people whispered among themselves.
She had always needed the curb and not the
spur.  Of course, it was a great thing to get
such a hold upon the public in one's first season,
with the sure knowledge that she would have
to bid against Patti in her next one; still, all
these encores, and Sunday concerts and extra
musicales were felt to be too much.  And one
or two men, whose souls were sensitive, ceased
going to hear Miss Moore.  There was something
of agony, personal agony, mingling with
the passion of her voice.  One of these men
shuddered, when some one, using a hackneyed
simile, spoke of her as a human nightingale.
There came to his fanciful imagination the old
myth of the nightingale that sings with her
breast against a thorn.  It seemed somehow to
him that this woman had grown delirate with
the pain, and pressed sorer and sorer upon her
thorn.  He thought, too, of the birds whose eyes
they blind that they may sing better; of the
dove that bears

... "thro' heaven a tale of woe,

Some dolorous message knit below

The wild pulsation of her wings."

He thought of the swan's song of death, and
of the reed that the "Great God Pan" wrenched
from its river home to fashion forth a Pipe.
The American papers laughed a good deal at
this man, caricaturing him as the poet of soulful
lilies and yearning souls, hinting that he would
like to inaugurate a pre-Raphaelesque era in
America
à la
Burne Jones.  He read these
things sometimes.  They flushed his thin cheeks,
but did not trouble his eyes—those eyes that
mirrored forth the soul of the mystic.  He was
right about Judith Moore.

She bowed her head to accept the last
accolade of Genius—grief.  She had partaken of
pain—that chrism which, laid upon poetic lips,
sanctifies their words to immortality, but which
savours the breath they breathe with the bitterness
of death.  Byron, Shelley, Keats, Rossetti
(how many we might name!) have partaken of
that sacrament.  But what matter for the Pipe,
so that the world, when it has time to listen,
may hear sweet singing?  The world, in its
way, was very good to Judith Moore.  It gave
her the sweet smile of its approval right royally;
it gave her all its luxuries, all its praise, and
this Judith did not pretend not to enjoy.  But
she enjoyed it as one does who drinks what he
knows will kill him, yet continues the draught,
that in its intoxication he may forget the doom
it brings.

Judith was seen everywhere, for she availed
herself of all the privileges which her genius, her
beauty, her untarnished fame won for her.  She
was pointed out wherever she went; sometimes
when a crush of carriages held her own imprisoned,
she would hear a whisper from lip to lip,
"Look! look!  There is Judith Moore."  Nothing
further was needed; every one knew Judith
Moore.  And Judith treated the world as it
deserved of her.  She dressed herself beautifully
for it, and smiled and sang to it, and
exhibited herself to it everywhere.  Everywhere,
for she was striving to so tire her spirit that
when she was alone it might at least be numb,
if not at rest.  In vain!  That ardent, tender
spirit was yet indomitable.  The body, the
slender, beautiful body it animated, might be sore
aweary, but so soon as Judith was alone her
spirit fled far away, back to the place of its
rejoicing; back to the village in the valley,
where it was always spring or summertide;
back to the old rail fences with the tangled
weeds about them; back to the apple blooms;
back to the brown furrows where the grey
birds nested; back to the lindens and the
chestnuts, and there, hour after hour, her spirit
held voiceless commune with that other.  Her
spirit well might be comforted, but Judith
strained listening ears to hear one tender word,
wearied her eyes searching for the semblance of
a face, stretched forth trembling hands for
comfort, and, overcome at last, let them fall,
empty.

The opera season closed, and an incident that
made some talk put the period to Judith's first
American season.  Judith had sung as she never
sang before.  Her voice seemed to transcend
the limits of human capability, and become
something independent of her lips, something
sentient, springing ever higher and higher.

The man in whose heart she was likened to
the pierced nightingale, the blinded lark, the
mourning dove, the dying swan, had come to
listen to her.  At her last appearance there was
a roar of applause, a wave of laudation that
seemed as if it might carry her off her feet.
There is something thrilling, inspiring, almost
weird in the union of human voices, something
that stirs the imagination, something that never
grows old to us, for it never becomes familiar.
Usually they jar and jangle across each other as
children babble, each fretting for his own toy,
so that we almost forget what the power of
union is.  In praise or blame it makes the world
tremble.

She made no pretence of retiring for the
encore.  She made no sign to the musicians.
She did not assume the pose, familiar to them,
for any of her songs.  They sat silent,
spellbound with the audience.  She stepped slowly
forward, stretched forth her arms, and sang
unaccompanied, what seemed an invocation to
the better Ego of every soul present, a song she
had been wont to sing to Andrew:

"Out from yourself!

Out from the past with its wrecks and contrition,

Out from the dull discontentment of now,

Out from the future's false-speaking ambition,

Out from yourself!

For your broken heart's rest;

For the peace which you crave;

For the end of your quest;

For the love which can save;

Come!  Come to me!"

Those who heard that song never forgot it.
And one man, at least, never forgot the
expression upon the woman's face as she sang.
Rapt as of a sibyl who conjures away an
evil spirit; winning as a woman who promises
all things; informed with the intensity of one
who bids her will go forth to accomplish her
desire—she held her last pose a moment.  The
house "rose at her."  Even as they cheered a
change overspread her face.  It grew glorified,
exultant, tremulously eager, as of one who feels
the pinions of his soul stirring for flight—for
flight to longed-for shores.  With that look
upon her face she fell.

* * * * * *

Far away from New York, in the silent
spaces of a virgin forest, a man was lying on the
snow, his gun beneath his arm ready for use.
But he was keeping no lookout for game.  His
eyes were fixed upon an open space amid the
tree tops, where a solitary star twinkled
desolately.  His face was thin; his eyes burned;
the snows, the silence, nor the solitude could
calm that throbbing at his heart, could cool
the fever in his veins.  He thought of Judith,
and, thinking of her, loved her.  It was true
she had left him, left him with his kisses warm
upon her lips, but—he loved her.  It was hard
for him to imagine a force strong enough to
constrain her to go.  It was difficult, having no
clue, to conceive of circumstances that would
justify her silent desertion, but somehow
Andrew, out of the depths of his steadfast heart,
found excuses for her.  Sometimes the fantastic
thought that she was bound in loveless marriage
came to him, but he put it by.  He remembered
her eyes, the misgivings that had assailed her,
the tender abandon of her trust in him.  No,
she was not married.  Where was she?  It was
not her wish that he should know.  He hoped
her little feet trod pleasant paths.  Oh, Judith,
Judith!  Then, explain it as we may, or leave
it still a mystery, there came to him, faint, aëry,
bodilessly, the words of a song—a song that
ended in a plea, "Come!  Come to me," and when
it died away, Andrew Cutler sprang to his feet
with a cry that echoed far between the icy tree
trunks of the forest, "I come, I come."  And
that same night, at the same hour, at the same
pulse of the hour, Judith Moore, with a look of
ineffable joy upon her face, fell fainting upon
the stage.

"So may love, although 'tis understood

The mere commingling of passionate breath,

Produce more than our searching witnesseth."

Next day Andrew started back to Ovid,
arriving in a state of feverish expectancy.  No
tidings of Judith there; and he knew not where
to seek.  That pleading voice still rang in his
ears; by night, by day, it urged the message it
had brought to him in the depths of far-off
Muskoka, and by day and night he promised it
peace, if he could only, only know where to go.

Time passed.

* * * * * *

The voice was dumb now.  Only an acme of
surpassing love can wing the will through space,
and then only perhaps once in a lifetime does
such a supreme moment come, and the will
behind this love was shattered, for Judith Moore
lay sick unto death, was tossing in the delirium
of fever, or lying for days sunk in an apathy
which words could not pierce.  The papers were
filled with accounts of her strange illness, daily
bulletins of her condition appeared, her manager
was showered with opprobrium for overworking
her.  She was dying.  The best doctors said
that the miracle was that she had lasted so long.
Her little dark-faced manager went about
feeling like a murderer, a Shylock, and a Judas, in
one.  The more so, as he felt he had given her
the death-blow in one stroke—when he disregarded
that letter.  If he had only overworked
her, he told himself he would have had no
regrets.  He would have made any reparation
he could, but how on earth was he to find the
yokel she was in love with?  And what a battle
she was having; and yet it was not such a very
long one—from latest winter to spring.

Andrew was half crazed with love, which,
since that winter night, had become almost
unendurable through anxiety.

Now it was spring, and as he walked through
his woods to the Morris house, he passed the
crab-apple-trees in full bloom.  He often went
up to talk to garrulous Mrs. Morris.  The little
details she let fall about Judith were pearls of
great price to him.

This day he was hardly within the door
before Mrs. Morris said:

"Land sakes! but you're just the very person
I was wanting to see.  There's a gov'iment
letter come to Miss Moore yesterday, and I
thought you'd maybe know where to send it."

"Yes," said Andrew, feeling that the sign had
come at last.  "Give it me, and I'll see she
gets it."

He took it, and with scarce a word went away,
leaving Mrs. Morris considerably upset by his
abruptness.

He only waited to get within the shadow of
his woods before he tore it open.  One reading
of her pleading letter to her manager sufficed.
Judith was his again.  He knew where to find
her.  New York!—that was not so very far off.
He knew when the trains started, and rapidly
made his plans.  She was such a child! and she
liked his old velveteen coat and the big, battered
felt hat; he would wear them; she would be
pleased; and as he came within sight of the
crab-apple-trees a happy thought came to him.
He took his knife and cut a huge bundle of
flowers, taking off the branches where the
flowers were only in bud.

Then he went home.

His aunt heard his hurried explanation, and
bound a great roll of wet moss about the ends
of the branches.

"They'll look queer, Andrew," she said.

"Never mind how they'll look," said Andrew,
happily; "she'll like 'em."

He was soon on the train, a picturesque figure
in tweed, with an old velveteen coat, a wide
shabby felt hat, and an enormous bunch of pink
flowers.  Andrew was entirely oblivious of, and
indifferent to, comment.  He got hold of a train-man,
gave him a dollar and got a pailful of water
from him, arranged his flowers in it, put it in
the baggage-car and sat by it all night.  "A
queer duck," the trainmen said.

As the Canadian trains reach New York, the
morning papers come aboard.  Andrew bought
one of each, and sat down turning them over
with tremulous hands to search for a sign.  He
had not far to seek—"JUDITH MOORE DYING,
THE END APPROACHING."  That was what he
read in big "scare head" type; that, and its
narrations in the other papers, with the usual
platitudes telling of the "short but bright
career," and so on.  With the calm of despair
he searched for definite information as to where
she was.  It seemed every one knew so well
that definite detail was superfluous.  But at
last, in a different part of the paper, he found:
"In the corridors of the Brittany Hotel last
night, Miss Moore's manager, who had just left
her bedside, said all hope was gone."  The train
was in New York, slowing up in the Grand
Central station by the time he found this.  He
wrapped a couple of handkerchiefs round the
stems of his flowers, got into the first carriage
he came to, saying only "the Brittany
Hotel."  He thought the cabman might know where to
go.  The cabman, of course, did, and ere many
minutes he was in the office of the magnificent
hotel.

He knew nothing of conventional procedure,
and if he had, it would not have mattered to
him then.  He went straight to the desk.

"Is Miss Moore alive?" he asked.

"Yes, I think so, but—"

"I want to go to her at once."

The clerk comprehended, and a bell-boy raced
before Andrew to a door whose handle was
muffled.  He knocked very softly.  "Go," said
Andrew, and he stood alone waiting for the door
to open.  It would be impious to speak of the
agony which knit his soul and heart to
endurance, whilst he waited the word from within.

The door opened.  A miserable little man
stood there.  When he saw Andrew, he said
without astonishment:

"You're in time to speak to her.  Go in."

Andrew advanced to an open door.  The
little man followed through the outer room.
He beckoned to two others within the
sick-room, a white-capped woman and a doctor.
They saw, understood, and Andrew went up to
the bed alone with the door closed behind him.

"Judith," he said, "my own little girl."

A long tremour shook the slight form under
the coverlets, and then—then he was on his knees
with the flowers flung all across the bed and his
arms about her.  And Judith?  Poor Judith's
eyes were wide and frightened, for she thought
the change had come that she had waited for,
expected, even longed for; she thought this was
Death, and even although the crab blooms were
there, and Andrew, still it was awesome.  Yet
Death should have brought white flowers, not
apple blooms such as grew in Andrew's woods.
And were Death's arms ever so sustaining, so
tender, so warm as these?  And surely Death
did not come garbed in shabby, smoky velveteen,
nor bend above his victims a brown
passionate face wet with tears?

"Andrew, it's you, and you're crying," and
then followed a faint whisper of delight—from
her—for Andrew's courage and calm were gone
at last.  He could not speak.  And once more
she smiled at him the old womanly smile, from
the old honest eyes, and stretched forth feeble
fingers striving to reach about his neck.

CHAPTER XI.

L'ENVOI.

"Fair love that led home."

Judith Moore did not die.  She had fallen
asleep that day with her fingers trembling about
Andrew's sunburnt hair.  He held her tenderly
till a deeper sleep weighted down those clinging
hands, and they fell.

He watched by her, without movement, almost
without breathing, with the look on his face as
of one who battles with Death, pitting all the
splendid vitality of his being against the enemy,
casting the mantle of his brave soul, strong will
and perfect love about the trembling will and
failing heart that were so nearly vanquished.

Indeed, so completely did Andrew identify
himself during those silent hours with the
woman he loved, that ever after she had some
fleeting touches of his courage, and he had
always an intuitional tenderness towards a
woman's illogical weakness.

The fusion of these two natures took place
not in those sweet after hours of passion, lint
in that silent room, into which now and then
there peeped a white-capped nurse or a
black-a-vised little man, who saw always a great
mass of fading pink blooms, a pair of broad
shoulders in shabby velveteen bent tenderly
over the shadowy outline of a little head sunk
deep in the pillow.

After this supreme crisis there came a week
or two of slow convalescence, and then a wedding
that no one thought much of, regarding it
merely as one of the prescribed formalities, like
the buying of the railroad tickets, necessary
before Andrew could take her away—away
back to the village in the valley, to the old
stone farm-house, to the homely flowers, the
lindens on the hill, to Rufus and Miss Myers,
where, for a time, she was not a wife at all,
only a poor little wind-tossed song-bird blown
to their bosoms for a refuge.

But that all changed.

Andrew wooed again a charming, capricious
woman, walking by her adoringly over the old
bricked walks beneath the horse-chestnuts, his
very soul trembling with the love her voice and
touch awakened: and she was playfully proud
of her power, until suddenly some quick sense of
the dominance of the love she aroused frightened
her, and she turned to hide from him in his arms,
tremblingly afraid, no longer asking love, but
pleading against it.

Time passes with them.  The old farm-house
has had some architectural additions—a tiny
conservatory, a long dining-room, with quaint
porches and latticed windows: for Andrew and
his wife appreciate too keenly the beauties of
their home to mar its character by modernizing
it.  Andrew has learned to wear evening clothes
as easily as he does his old velveteens, and—
O
si sic omnia!
—himself often buys the little
high-heeled shoes in which Judith's heart
delights, for Judith never put off the old Eve of
her harmless vanities.

Every winter Andrew and his wife go to town
for a while, and visitors come to the farm-house
who fairly electrify the village with their
"cranks."

The best known of these is a little
black-a-vised man with big diamonds, a profane
tongue and a guilty but "thankful 'eart."  He
cherishes, so he says, a hopeless passion for Miss
Myers, and indeed Miss Myers likes the new

régime
very well, for she was never ousted
from the house-keeping department, and if it
was a glory and a credit to manage well for
Andrew and herself, how much greater it is to
cast honour over a board where such fine people
as Judith's friends sit daily.

Andrew is secretly very proud that all these
fine folk should come and see how happy Judith
is.  Only once did he have any difference with
any of them.  That was when Judith first
regained her strength and her old manager came
to see her.  He had a brand-new scheme for
Judith's benefit in his brain.  She was to sing
in grand concerts, and he had all her tour
mapped out.  He was good enough to say
Andrew could come along.  Andrew held brief
and bitter speech with him, and then went to
Judith.  He could see how strong the old
glamour yet was.  He took her in his arms, and
after a long, tender discussion she gave him the
promise he was pleading for, never more to sing
in public, a decision which made Andrew her
slave forever, although it wrung his heart to see
what this renunciation cost her.  He felt it was
right.  Poor, high-strung Judith needed a steady
hand upon the rein of her eager spirit, else it
would have soon carried her beyond her strength.
And so, ringing about an old farm-house, or
through the chestnut woods, or below the
lindens on the hill-side, there often sounds a
voice once echoed by the
bravos
of the world.
Perhaps the aspiration it awakens in one strong
soul is better applause.

So Andrew and Judith live on, they two and
Miss Myers, as nearly happy as mortals may be.
Heaven would be entirely illogical if such as
they two had no heartaches.

Sometimes Judith steals away from Miss
Myers and Andrew and thinks of the old days,
the first efforts, the hopes, the fears, the strife
and the success—the glorious success that might
have been many times repeated: that might, as
base metals might be transmuted into gold, have
become fame.  A nasty heartache gnaws in her
breast, her face pales, her eyes grow wide and
eager.  At such times Andrew knows well the
struggle that rends her tender heart, and he
soon searches her out: and upon his breast,
beneath the spell of his worship her restless
spirit quiets itself to peace.  What might be a
tragedy of distrust is made a bond of stronger
union by perfect confidence.  But Judith's face
will always bear the traces of these times.

When a coal is carried from the Divine Fire
and laid upon mortal lips, it must be blown into
a flame to illumine the world, or it sears the lips
it touches.  The gods will not have their gifts
disregarded.  They care little that the mortal
breath may be too weak to sustain the flame,
though it perish in the effort.  Indeed, the gods
forgive that, and sometimes spare a little of
their glory to gild a grave.  But let the breath
they demand be stolen for our own sighs or
sobs, or stifled by dear-bought kisses, and they
give swift recompense of pain.  Judith had
borne that smart.

Andrew, too, has unfulfilled dreams, as Judith
knows when she sees his eyes grow wistful as
they rest upon the faces of children.  And
Judith goes to him then, and lays her head upon
his arm with an apology so poignant, a love so
perfect in her grey eyes, that he forgets
everything in the marvel that this woman is his.
And thus with each of them, the little shadows
only serve to enhance the sunshine.  Their life
is a glorious reality; their love a poem.
Together they know no pain from the past, no
regret for the present, no fear for the future.
They sometimes even dare to dream that their
love will bestow upon them its own immortality—that
through eternity they will be as they
are now, together and happy.

End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Judith Moore; or, Fashioning a Pipe, by
Joanna E. Wood

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JUDITH MOORE ***

***** This file should be named 58876-h.htm or 58876-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/8/8/7/58876/

Produced by Al Haines
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.