Project Gutenberg's Voyage to Jupiter, by David Morrison and Jane Samz

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Voyage to Jupiter

Author: David Morrison
Jane Samz

Release Date: February 19, 2019 [EBook #58915]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VOYAGE TO JUPITER ***

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

A special color reconstruction of the eruption of the volcano Loki on the Jovian
satellite Io. The picture was taken by Voyager 1 from a range of about half a million
kilometers. [P-21334C]

NASA SP-439

Voyage To Jupiter

David Morrison

and Jane Samz

Scientific and Technical Information Branch
1980

National Aeronautics and Space Administration

Washington, DC

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents

U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 20402

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 80-600126

v

FOREWORD

Few missions of planetary exploration have provided such rewards of insight
and surprise as the Voyager flybys of Jupiter. Those who were fortunate enough to
be with the science teams during those weeks will long remember the experience; it
was like being in the crow’s nest of a ship during landfall and passage through an archipelago
of strange islands. We had known that Jupiter would be remarkable, for
man had been studying it for centuries, but we were far from prepared for the torrent
of new information that the Voyagers poured back to Earth.

Some of the spirit of excitement and connection is captured in this volume. Its
senior author was a member of the Imaging Team. It is not common that a person
can both “do science” at the leading edge and also present so vivid an inside picture
of a remarkable moment in the history of space exploration.

April 30, 1980

Thomas A. Mutch

Associate Administrator

Office of Space Science

vii

INTRODUCTION

The two Voyager encounters with Jupiter were periods unparalleled in degree
and diversity of discovery. We had, of course, expected a number of discoveries
because we had never before been able to study in detail the atmospheric motions on
a planet that is a giant spinning sphere of hydrogen and helium, nor had we ever
observed planet-sized objects such as the Jovian satellites Ganymede and Callisto,
which are half water-ice. We had never been so close to a Moon-sized satellite such
as Io, which was known to be dispersing sodium throughout its Jovian
neighborhood and was thought to be generating a one-million-ampere electrical current
that in some way results in billions of watts of radio emission from Jupiter.

The closer Voyager came to Jupiter the more apparent it became that the scientific
richness of the Jovian system was going to greatly exceed even our most optimistic
expectations. The growing realization among Voyager scientists of the
wealth of discovery is apparent in their comments, discussions, and reports as recounted
by the authors in their descriptions of the two encounters.

Although many of the discoveries occurred in the few weeks around each encounter,
they were, of course, the result of more than those few weeks of effort. In
fact, planning started a decade earlier, and the Voyager team of engineers and scientists
had been designing, building, and planning for the encounters for seven years.
The Pioneer spacecraft made the first reconnaissance of Jupiter in 1973-1974, providing
key scientific results on which Voyager could build, and discoveries from continuing
ground-based observations suggested specific Voyager studies. Voyager is
itself just the second phase of exploration of the Jovian system. It will be followed
by the Galileo program, which will directly probe Jupiter’s atmosphere and provide
long-term observations of the Jovian system from an orbiting spacecraft. In the
meantime, the Voyager spacecraft will continue their journey to Saturn, and
possibly Uranus and Neptune, planets even more remote from Earth and about
which we know even less than we knew of Jupiter before 1979.

As is clearly illustrated in this recounting of the voyage to Jupiter, scientific
endeavors are human endeavors; just as Galileo could not have foreseen the
advancement in our knowledge initiated by his discoveries of the four Jovian moons
in 1610, neither can we fully comprehend the scientific heritage that our exploration
of space is providing future generations.

April 1980

Edward C. Stone

Voyager Project Scientist

ix

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The authors are grateful to the many members of the Voyager Project team
who not only made this historic mission of exploration possible but also took time
from their busy schedules to offer us assistance, information, and encouragement in
the preparation of this book. Among many too numerous to name individually, we
particularly thank E. C. Stone, A. L. Lane, C. H. Stembridge, R. A. Mills, E. Montoya,
M. A. Mitz, and B. A. Smith, L. Soderblom, and their colleagues on the
Voyager Imaging Team. We are grateful to F. E. Bristow, D. L. Bane, L. J. Pieri
and especially J. J. Van der Woude for their assistance in obtaining optimum versions
of the photographs printed here. C. B. Pilcher and I. de Pater kindly made
available their groundbased pictures of the Jovian magnetosphere. Many colleagues
have read and provided helpful comments on parts of the manuscript, among them
G. A. Briggs, S. A. Collins, S. Cruikshank, J. Doughty, A. L. Guin, A. L. Lane,
R. A. Mills, E. Montoya, E. C. Stone, J. L. Ward, and especially C. R. Chapman.

xi

CONTENTS

Foreword
v

Introduction
vii

Acknowledgment
ix

Chapter 1. The Jovian System
1

Chapter 2. Pioneers to Jupiter
11

Chapter 3. The Voyager Mission
23

Chapter 4. Science and Scientists
33

Chapter 5. The Voyage to Jupiter—Getting There
47

Chapter 6. The First Encounter
63

Chapter 7. The Second Encounter: More Surprises From the “Land” of the Giant
93

Chapter 8. Jupiter—King of the Planets
117

Chapter 9. Four New Worlds
139

Chapter 10. Return to Jupiter
169

Appendix A. Pictorial Maps of the Galilean Satellites
177

Appendix B. Voyager Science Teams
195

Appendix C. Voyager Management Team
197

Additional Reading
199

xii

Jupiter is the largest planet in the solar system—a gaseous world as large as 1300 Earths, marked by alternating bands of
colored clouds and a dazzling complexity of storm systems. The Voyager mission gave us our first close look at this spectacular
planet. [P-21085]

1

CHAPTER 1

THE JOVIAN SYSTEM

Introduction

In the Sun’s necklace of planets, one gem
far outshines the rest: Jupiter. Larger than all
the other planets and satellites combined,
Jupiter is a true giant. If intelligent beings exist
on planets circling nearby stars, it is probable
that Jupiter is the only member of our planetary
system they can detect. They can see the
Sun wobble in its motion with a twelve-year
period as Jupiter circles it, pulling first one
way, then the other with the powerful tug of its
gravity. If astronomers on some distant worlds
put telescopes in orbit above their atmospheres,
they might even be able to detect the sunlight
reflected from Jupiter. But all the other
planets—including tiny inconspicuous Earth—would
be hopelessly lost in the glare of our star,
the Sun.

Jupiter is outstanding among planets not
only for its size, but also for its system of orbiting
bodies. With fifteen known satellites, and
probably several more too small to have been
detected, it forms a sort of miniature solar
system. If we could understand how the Jovian
system formed and evolved, we could unlock
vital clues to the beginning and ultimate fate of
the entire solar system.

Ancient peoples all over the world recognized
Jupiter as one of the brightest wandering
lights in their skies. Only Venus is brighter, but
Venus, always a morning or evening star, never
rules over the dark midnight skies as Jupiter
often does. In Greek and Roman mythology the
planet was identified with the most powerful of
the gods and lord of the heavens—the Greek
Zeus; the Roman Jupiter.

As befits the king of the heavens, the
planet Jupiter moves at a slow and stately pace.
Twelve years are required for Jupiter to complete
one orbit around the Sun. For about six
months of each year, Jupiter shines down on us
from the night sky, more brightly and steadily
than any star. During the late 1970s it was a
winter object, but in 1980 it will dominate the
spring skies, becoming a summer “star” about
1982.

Early Discoveries

Even seen through a small telescope or pair
of binoculars, Jupiter looks like a real world,
displaying a faintly banded disk quite unlike the
tiny, brilliant image of a star. It also reveals the
brightest members of its satellite family as starlike
points spread out along a straight line extended
east-west through the planet. There are
four of these planet-sized moons; with their
orbits seen edge-on from Earth, they seem to
move constantly back and forth, changing their
configuration hourly.

In January 1610, in his first attempt to
apply the newly invented telescope to
astronomy, Galileo discovered the four large
satellites of Jupiter. He correctly interpreted
their motion as being that of objects circling
Jupiter—establishing the first clear proof of
celestial motion around a center other than the
Earth. The discovery of these satellites played
an important role in supporting the Copernican
revolution that formed the basis for modern
astronomy.

A few decades later the satellites of Jupiter
were used to make the first measurement of the
speed of light. Observers following their
motions had learned that the satellite clock
seemed to run slow when Jupiter was far from
Earth and to speed up when the two planets
were closer together. In 1675 the Danish
astronomer Ole Roemer explained that this
change was due to the finite velocity of light:
The satellites only seemed to run slow at large
distances because the light coming from them
took longer to reach Earth. Knowing the

2

dimensions of the orbits of Earth and Jupiter
and the amount of the delay (about fifteen
minutes), Roemer was able to calculate one of
the most fundamental constants of the physical
universe—the speed of light (about 300 000
kilometers per second).

Galileo’s notes summarizing his first observations of the
Jovian satellites Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto in
January 1610 were made on a piece of scratch paper containing
the draft of a letter presenting a telescope to the
Doge in Venice. These observations were the result of
Galileo’s first attempt to apply the telescope to astronomical
research.

The four great moons of Jupiter are called
the Galilean satellites after their discoverer.
Their individual names—Io, Europa, Ganymede,
and Callisto—were proposed by Simon
Marius, a contemporary and rival of Galileo.
(Marius claimed to have discovered the
satellites a few weeks before Galileo did, but
modern scholars tend to discredit his claim.) Io,
Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto are names of
lovers of the god Jupiter in Greco-Roman mythology.
Since Jupiter was not at all shy about
taking lovers, there are enough such names for
the other eleven Jovian satellites, as well as for
those yet to be discovered.

In the century following Galileo’s death,
improvements in telescopes made it possible to
measure the size of Jupiter and to note that it
bulged at the equator. The equatorial diameter
is known today to be 142 800 kilometers, while
from pole to pole Jupiter measures only
133 500 kilometers. For comparison, the diameter
of the Earth is 12 900 kilometers, only
about one-tenth as great, and the flattening of
Earth is also much smaller (less than one percent).
By measuring the orbits of the satellites
and applying the laws of planetary motion discovered
by Johannes Kepler and Isaac Newton,
astronomers were also able to determine the
total mass of Jupiter—about 2 × 10²⁴ tons, or
318 times the mass of the Earth.

Once the size and mass are known, it is
possible to calculate another fundamental
property of a planet—its density. The density,
which is the mass divided by the volume, provides
important clues to the composition and
interior structure of a planetary body. The density
of Earth, a body composed primarily of
rocky and metallic materials, is 5.6 times the
density of water. The mass of Jupiter is 318
times that of Earth; its volume is 1317 times
that of Earth. Thus Jupiter’s density is substantially
lower than Earth’s, amounting to 1.34
times the density of water. From this low density,
it was evident long ago that Jupiter was
not just a big brother of Earth and the other
rocky planets in the inner solar system. Rather,
Jupiter is the prototype of the giant, gas-rich
planets Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune.
These giant planets must, from their low density,
have a composition fundamentally different
from that of Mercury, Venus, Earth, Moon,
and Mars.

Jupiter Through the Telescope

Jupiter is a beautiful sight seen with the
naked eye on a clear night, but only through a
telescope does it begin to reveal its magnificence.
The most prominent features are alternating
light and dark bands, running parallel to
the equator and subtly shaded in tones of blue,
yellow, brown, and orange. However, these
bands are not the planet’s only conspicuous
markings. In 1664 the English astronomer
Robert Hooke first reported seeing a large oval
spot on Jupiter, and additional spots were
noted as telescopes improved. As the planet
rotates on its axis, such spots are carried across
the disk and can be used to measure Jupiter’s
speed of rotation. The giant planet spins so fast
that a Jovian day is less than half as long as a
day on Earth, averaging just under ten hours.

During the nineteenth century, observers
using increasingly sophisticated telescopes were

3

able to see more complex detail in the band
structure, with wisps, streaks, and festoons that
varied in intensity and color from year to year.
Furthermore, observations revealed the remarkable
fact that not all parts of the planet
rotate with the same period; near the equator
the apparent length of a Jovian day is several
minutes shorter than the average day at higher
latitudes. It is thus apparent that Jupiter’s surface
is not solid, and astronomers came to realize
that they were looking at a turbulent kaleidoscope
of shifting clouds.

Although the face of Jupiter is always
changing, some spots and other cloud features
survive for years at a time, much longer than do
the largest storms on Earth. The record for
longevity goes to the Great Red Spot. This
gigantic red oval, larger than the planet Earth,
was first seen more than three centuries ago.
From decade to decade it has changed in size
and color, and for nearly fifty years in the late
eighteenth century no sightings were reported,
but since about 1840 the Great Red Spot has
been the most prominent feature on the disk of
Jupiter.

This ground-based photograph of Jupiter showing the
Great Red Spot in the southern hemisphere was taken with
the Catalina Observatory’s 61-inch telescope in December
1966.

It was not until the twentieth century that
the composition of the atmosphere of Jupiter
could be measured. In 1905 spectra of the
planet revealed the presence of gases that
absorb strongly at red and infrared wavelengths;
thirty years later these were identified
as ammonia and methane. These two poisonous
gases are the simplest chemical compounds of
hydrogen combined with nitrogen and carbon,
respectively. In the atmosphere of Earth they
are not stable, because oxygen, which is highly
active chemically, destroys them. The existence
of methane and ammonia on Jupiter demonstrated
that free oxygen could not be present
and that the atmosphere was dominated by
hydrogen—a reducing, rather than oxidizing,
condition. Subsequently, hydrogen was identified
spectroscopically. Although much more
abundant than methane or ammonia, hydrogen
is harder to detect.

In the 1940s and 1950s the German-American
astronomer Rupert Wildt used all the
available data to derive a picture of Jupiter that
is still generally accepted. He noted that both
the low total density and the observed presence
of hydrogen-rich compounds in the atmosphere
were consistent with a bulk composition similar
to that of the Sun and stars. This “cosmic composition”
is dominated by the two simplest
elements, hydrogen and helium, which together
make up nearly 99 percent of all the material in
the universe. Wildt hypothesized that the giant
planets, because of their large size, had succeeded
in retaining this primordial composition,
whereas the hydrogen and helium had
escaped from the smaller inner planets. He also
used his knowledge of the properties of
hydrogen and helium to calculate what the interior
structure of Jupiter might be like, concluding
that the planet is mostly liquid or gas.
Wildt suggested that there probably was a core
of solid material deep in the interior, but that
much of Jupiter is fluid—extremely viscous and
compressed deep below the visible atmosphere,
but still not solid. The atmosphere seen from
above is just the thin, topmost layer of an ocean
of gases thousands of kilometers thick.

Recent Earth-Based Studies of Jupiter

In the past, a great deal of planetary
research was basically descriptive, consisting of
visual observations and photography. Beginning
in the 1960s, a new generation of planetary

4

scientists began to apply the techniques of
modern astrophysics and geophysics to the
study of the solar system. Inspired in part by
the developing space programs of the United
States and the Soviet Union, scientists began to
ask more quantitative questions: What are the
surfaces and atmospheres made of? What are
the temperatures and wind speeds? Exactly
what quantities of different elements and
isotopes are present? And how can these new
data be used to infer the origin and evolution of
the planets?

The major features of Jupiter are shown in schematic form. The planet is a banded disk of turbulent clouds; all its stripes are
parallel to the bulging equator. Large dusky gray regions surround each pole. Darker gray or brown stripes called belts
intermingle with lighter, yellow-white stripes called zones. Many of the belts and zones are permanent features that have been
named. One feature of particular note is the Great Red Spot, an enigmatic oval larger than the planet Earth, which was first
seen more than three centuries ago. During the years the spot has changed in size and color, and it escaped detection entirely
for nearly fifty years in the 1700s. However, since the mid-nineteenth century the Great Red Spot has been the most prominent
feature on the face of Jupiter. [2935]

N

North polar region

North north north temperate belt

North north temperate zone

North north temperate belt

North temperate zone

North temperate belt

North tropical zone

North equatorial belt

Equatorial zone equatorial band

South equatorial belt

N. component

S. component

South tropical zone

Great Red Spot

South temperate belt

South temperate zone

South south temperate belt

South south temperate zone

South polar region

S

Wildt had already suggested the basic gases
in the atmosphere of Jupiter: primarily
hydrogen and helium, with much smaller quantities
of ammonia and methane. Undetected but
possibly also present were nitrogen, neon,
argon, and water vapor. The abundance of
helium was particularly a problem; although it
was presumably the second-ranking gas after
hydrogen, it has no spectral features in visible
light and its presence remained only a
hypothesis, unconfirmed by observation.

Although the presence of a gas can usually
be inferred from spectroscopy, solids or liquids
cannot normally be detected in this way. Thus
the composition of Jupiter’s clouds could not
be determined directly. However, the presence
of ammonia gas provided an important clue. At
the temperatures expected in the upper atmosphere
of the planet, ammonia gas must freeze
to form tiny crystals of ammonia ice, just as
water vapor in the Earth’s atmosphere freezes
to form cirrus clouds. Most investigators
agreed that the high clouds covering much of
Jupiter must be ammonia cirrus. But ammonia
crystals are white, so the presence of this
material provides no explanation for the many
colors seen on Jupiter. Additional materials
must be present—perhaps colored organic compounds,
produced in small amounts by the action
of sunlight on the atmosphere.

Because Jupiter is five times farther from
the Sun than is the Earth, a given area on
Jupiter receives only about four percent as
much solar heating as does a comparable area
on Earth. Thus Jupiter is colder than Earth;
even though it may be warm deep below its
blanket of clouds, Jupiter presents a frigid face.

5

These blue filter photographs of Jupiter were taken at Mauna Kea Observatory, Hawaii. They show changes on Jupiter’s
surface between 1973 and 1978, with the dates of the observations.

July 25, 1973

October 5, 1974

October 2, 1975

November 20, 1976.

January 28, 1978.

December 19, 1978.

6

The development of a new science, infrared
astronomy, in the 1960s made it possible
to measure these low temperatures directly. In
the case of a cloudy planet like Jupiter, the infrared
emission evident at various wavelengths
originates at different depths in the atmosphere.
It is a general property of any mixed,
convecting atmosphere that the temperature
varies with depth; the rate of variation depends
only on the composition of the atmosphere, the
gravity of the planet, and the presence or
absence of condensible materials to form
clouds. On Jupiter it is about 1.9° C warmer
for each kilometer of descent through the
atmosphere. Thus, although the ammonia
clouds are very cold, a little above -173° C, if
one goes deep enough one can reach temperatures
that are quite comfortable. With a variation
of 1.9° C per kilometer, terrestrial “room
temperature” would be reached about 100
kilometers below the clouds.

To measure the total energy radiated by a
planet, it is necessary to utilize infrared radiation
at wavelengths more than one hundred
times longer than the wavelengths of visible
light. Even when detectors were developed that
could measure such radiation, it was impossible
to observe celestial sources such as Jupiter
because of the opacity of the terrestrial atmosphere.
Even a tiny amount of water vapor in
our own atmosphere can block our view of
long-wave infrared. To make the required
measurements, it is necessary to carry a
telescope to very high altitudes, above all but a
fraction of a percent of the offending water
vapor.

In the late 1960s a Lear-Jet airplane was
equipped with a telescope and made available
by NASA to astronomers to carry out long-wave
infrared observations from above 99 percent
of the terrestrial water vapor. In 1969
Frank Low of the University of Arizona and his
colleagues used this system to make a remarkable
discovery: Jupiter was radiating more heat
than it received from the Sun! Repeated observations
demonstrated that between two and
three times as much energy emanated from the
planet as was absorbed. Thus Jupiter must have
an internal heat source; in effect, it shines by its
own power as well as by reflected sunlight.
Theoretical studies suggest that the heat is
primordial, the remnant of an incandescent
proto-Jupiter that formed four and one-half
billion years ago.

Images of Jupiter in visible light (below) and
five-micrometer infrared light show the planet’s characteristic belts and
zones. The infrared image reveals areas that emit large amounts
of thermal energy. The source of the energy is thought to be
breaks in the Jovian cloud cover, which allow investigators
a glimpse of the deep regions of the atmosphere. One of the
mysteries of Jupiter concerns its heat balance: The planet
appears to radiate more heat than it receives from the Sun.
[P-20957]

At the same time that the internal heat
source on Jupiter was being revealed with long-wave
airborne infrared telescopes, a new
discovery was being made from short-wave infrared
observations. The clouds of Jupiter are
too cold to emit any detectable thermal radiation
at a wavelength of 5 micrometers (about
ten times the wavelength of green light). Nevertheless,
images of Jupiter at 5 micrometers
revealed a few small spots where large amounts
of thermal energy were being emitted. The
sources of the energy appeared to be holes or
breaks in the clouds, where it was possible to
see deeper into hotter regions. The discovery of
these hot spots opened the possibility of probing

7

deep regions of the Jovian atmosphere that
had previously been beyond the reach of direct
investigation.

The Jovian Magnetosphere

The discovery of planetary magnetospheres
began in 1959 when the first U.S. Explorer
satellite detected the radiation belts
around the Earth. Named for James Van Allen
of the University of Iowa, whose geiger-counter
instrument aboard Explorer 1 first measured
them, these belts are regions in which charged
atomic particles—primarily electrons and protons—are
trapped by the magnetic field of the
Earth. They are one manifestation of the terrestrial
magnetosphere—a large, dynamic
region around the Earth in which the magnetic
field of our planet interacts with streams of
charged particles emanating from the Sun.

At almost the same time that the terrestrial
magnetosphere was being discovered by artificial
satellites, astronomers were finding
evidence to suggest similar phenomena around
Jupiter. Radio astronomy is a branch of science
that measures radiation from celestial bodies at
radio frequencies, which correspond to wavelengths
much longer than those of visible or infrared
light. All planets emit weak thermal
radio radiation, but in the late 1950s investigators
found that Jupiter was a much stronger
long-wave radio source than would be expected
for a planet with its temperature. This radiation
bore the signature of higher-energy processes.
Physicists had seen similar emissions produced
in synchrotron electron accelerators, huge
machines in which electrons are whirled around
at nearly the speed of light so that they can be
used for experiments in nuclear physics. The
Russian theorist I. S. Shklovsky identified the
Jovian radio radiation as also resulting from
the synchrotron process, due to spiraling electrons
trapped in the planet’s magnetic field.
From the intensity and spectrum of the observed
synchrotron radiation, it was clear that
both the magnetic field of the planet and the
energy of charged particles in its Van Allen
belts were much greater than was the case for
Earth.

Using radio telescopes of high sensitivity,
astronomers determined the approximate
strength and orientation of the magnetic field
of Jupiter. Although they were able to measure
synchrotron radiation only from the innermost
parts of the Jovian magnetosphere, they could
infer that the total volume occupied by the
magnetosphere was enormous. If our eyes were
sensitive to magnetospheric emissions, Jupiter
would look more than twice the diameter of the
full moon in the sky.

All four Galilean satellites orbit within the
magnetosphere of Jupiter; in contrast, our
Moon lies well outside the terrestrial magnetosphere.
Striking evidence of the interaction of
the satellites and the magnetosphere was provided
when it was found that the innermost
large satellite—Io—actually affects the bursts
of radio static produced by Jupiter. Only when
Io is at certain places in its orbit are these strong
bursts detected. Theorists suggested that electric
currents flowing between the satellite and
the planet might be responsible for this effect.

The Jovian Satellites

For nearly three centuries after their discovery
in 1610, the only known moons of
Jupiter were the four large Galilean satellites.
In 1892 E. E. Barnard, an American astronomer,
found a much smaller fifth satellite orbiting
very close to the planet, and between 1904
and 1974 eight additional satellites were found
far outside the orbits of the Galilean satellites.
The outer satellites are quite faint and
presumably no more than a few tens of kilometers
in diameter, and all have orbits that are
much less regular than those of the five inner
satellites. Four of them revolve in a retrograde
direction, opposite to that of the inner satellites
and Jupiter itself.

In 1975 the International Astronomical
Union assumed the responsibility for assigning
names to the non-Galilean satellites of Jupiter.
Following tradition, they named the inner satellite
Amalthea for the she-goat that suckled the
young god Jupiter. The outer eight were named
for lovers of Jupiter: Leda, Himalia, Lysithea,
Elara, Ananke, Carme, Pasiphae, and Sinope.
For the non-Galilean satellites, the “e” ending
is reserved for satellites with retrograde orbits;
those with normal orbits have names that end in
“a.”

Because they are so large, the Galilean
satellites have attracted the most attention from
astronomers. More than fifty years ago large
telescopes were used to estimate their sizes, and
a careful series of measurements of their light
variation showed that all four always keep the
same face pointed toward Jupiter, just as our
Moon always turns the same face toward Earth.
Also, the subtle gravitational perturbations
they exert on each other were used to determine
the approximate mass of each.

8

The pattern of the Galilean satellites changes from hour to
hour, as seen from Earth. Viewed edge-on, the nearly circular
orbits produce an apparent back and forth motion
with respect to Jupiter. These images recreate the kinds of
observations first made by Galileo in 1610.

Callisto, the outermost Galilean satellite, is
larger than the planet Mercury. It also has the
lowest reflectivity, or albedo, of the four, suggesting
that its surface may be composed of
some rather dark, colorless rock. Callisto takes
just over two weeks to orbit once around
Jupiter.

Ganymede, which requires only seven days
for one orbit, is the largest satellite in the
Jovian system, being only slightly smaller than
the planet Mars. Its albedo is much higher than
that of Callisto, or of the rocky planets such as
Mercury, Mars, or the Moon. In 1971 astronomers
first measured the infrared spectrum of
reflected sunlight from Ganymede and found
the characteristic absorptions of water ice, indicating
that this satellite is partially covered
with highly reflective snow or ice.

Europa, which is slightly smaller than the
Moon, circles Jupiter in half the time required
by Ganymede. Its surface reflects about sixty
percent of the incident sunlight, and the infrared
spectrum shows prominent absorptions
due to water ice; Europa appears to be almost
entirely covered with ice. However, its color in
the visible and ultraviolet part of the spectrum
is not that of ice, so some other material must
also be present.

Io, innermost of the Galilean satellites, is
the same size as our Moon. It orbits the planet
in 42 hours, half the period of Europa. Like
Europa, it has a very high reflectivity, but,
unlike Europa, it has no spectral absorptions
indicative of water ice. Before Voyager, identification
of the surface material on Io presented
a major problem to planetary astronomers.

When the sizes and masses of these
satellites were measured, astronomers could
calculate their densities. The inner two, Io and
Europa, both have densities about three times
that of water—nearly the same as the density of
the Moon, or of rocks in the crust of the Earth.
Callisto and Ganymede have densities only half
as large, far too low to be consistent with a
rocky composition. The most plausible alternative
to rock is a composition that includes ice as
a major component. Calculations showed that
if these satellites were composed of rock and
ice, approximately equal quantities of each
were required to account for the measured density.
Thus the two outer Galilean satellites were
thought to represent a new kind of solar system
object, as large as one of the terrestrial planets,
but composed in large part of ice.

In 1973 the attention of astronomers was
dramatically drawn to Io when Robert Brown

9

of Harvard University detected the faint yellow
glow of sodium from the region of space surrounding
it. It seemed that this satellite had an
atmosphere, composed of the metal sodium!
Continued observations showed, however, that
this was not an atmosphere in the usual sense of
the word. The gas atoms were not bound gravitationally
to Io, but continuously escaped from
it to form a gigantic cloud enveloping the orbit
of the satellite. Fraser Fanale and Dennis Matson
of the Caltech Jet Propulsion Laboratory
suggested that bombardment of Io by high-energy
particles from the Jovian Van Allen
belts was knocking off atoms of sodium by a
process called sputtering, releasing these atoms
and allowing them to expand outward to form
the observed sodium cloud. No one anticipated
then that powerful volcanic eruptions on Io
might also be contributing to this remarkable
gas cloud.

The Galilean satellites in orbit around Jupiter, along with the outer satellites, constitute a miniature solar system. Here they
are shown relative to the size of Mercury and that of the Moon. The portrayal of their internal and external composition is
based on theoretical models that preceded the Voyager flybys. [PC-17054AC]

This image of Io’s extended sodium cloud was taken February 19, 1977, at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s Table Mountain
Observatory. A picture of Jupiter, drawings of the orbital geometry, and Io’s disk (the small circle on the left) are included
for perspective. The sodium cloud image has been processed for removal of sky background, instrumental effects, and the
like. This photograph demonstrates that the cloud is highly elongated and that more sodium precedes Io in its orbit than
trails it. [P-20047]

This picture of the satellites was developed
just as the first space probe reached the Jovian
system. In the next chapter we describe the
Pioneer program by which scientists reached
out across nearly a million kilometers of space
to explore Jupiter, its magnetosphere, and its
system of satellites.

10

Pioneer 10 was launched on March 2, 1972, at 8:49 p.m. from Cape Canaveral, Florida. A powerful Atlas-Centaur rocket
served as the launch vehicle, which propelled the space probe to its goal nearly a billion kilometers away. The beauty of the
night launch was enhanced by the rumbling thunder and flashing lightning of a nearby storm.

11

CHAPTER 2

PIONEERS TO JUPITER

Reaching for the Outer Planets

Since the beginning of the Space Age, scientists
had dreamed of sending probes to Jupiter
and its family of satellites. Initially, robot spacecraft
were limited to studying the Earth and its
Moon. In 1962, however, the first true interplanetary
explorer, Mariner 2, succeeded in escaping
the Earth-Moon system and crossing 100 million
kilometers of space to encounter Venus, studying
Earth’s sister planet at close range using half
a dozen scientific instruments. By the mid 1960s
a U.S. planetary spacecraft had also flown to
Mars, there had been a second flyby of Venus,
and an ambitious program was under way for
two more flybys of Mars in 1969, followed by a
Mars orbiter in 1971. Based on this success with
the inner planets, NASA scientists and engineers
began to plan seriously to meet the challenge of
the outer solar system.

Not only Jupiter, but Saturn and even
Uranus and Neptune, were considered as possible
targets. However, the distances between
the outer planets are so vast that many years of
flight would be required for a spacecraft to reach
them, even using the most powerful rocket
boosters then contemplated. If a cautious exploration
program were followed, investigating
one planet at a time before designing the next
mission, it would be well into the twenty-first
century before even a first reconnaissance of the
solar system could be achieved. A way to bridge
the space between planets in a more efficient,
economical manner was needed.

In the late 1960s celestial mechanicians—scientists
who study the motions of planets and
spacecraft—began to solve problems posed by
the immensity of the outer solar system. If a
spacecraft is aimed to fly close to a planet in just
the right way, it can be accelerated by the gravity
of the planet to higher speeds than could ever be
obtained by direct launch from Earth. If a second,
more distant planet is in the correct alignment,
the gravity boost given by the first encounter
can speed the craft on to the second.
Jupiter, with its huge size and strong gravitational
pull, could be used as the fulcrum for a
series of missions to Saturn, Uranus, Neptune,
and even distant Pluto. In addition, the early
1980s would offer an exceptional opportunity,
one repeated only about once every two centuries.
At that time, all four giant planets would
be in approximate alignment, so that gravity-assist
maneuvers could be done sequentially. A
single spacecraft, after being boosted from
Jupiter to Saturn, could use the acceleration
of Saturn to continue to Uranus, and in turn
could be accelerated all the way out to Neptune.
Such an ambitious, multiplanet mission was
named the Grand Tour.

The first essential step in the Grand Tour
was a flyby of Jupiter. However, this planet is
ten times farther away from Earth than Venus or
Mars. In addition, there were two potentially
lethal hazards that had not been faced before in
interplanetary flights: the asteroid belt and the
Jovian magnetosphere.

The first danger was presented by the
many thousands of asteroids that occupy a belt
between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter. The
largest asteroid, Ceres, was discovered in 1801
and was initially thought to be the “missing
planet” sometimes hypothesized as lying between
Jupiter and Mars. However, Ceres is
only 1000 kilometers in diameter, too small to
deserve the title of planet. Hundreds more of
these minor planets were discovered during the
nineteenth century, and by the 1960s more than
3000 had well-determined orbits. Most were
only a few tens of kilometers in diameter, and
astronomers estimated that 50 000 existed
that were 1 kilometer or more in diameter. Any
spacecraft to Jupiter would have to cross this
congested region of space.

Even 50 000 minor bodies spread through
the volume of space occupied by the asteroid

12

belt would present little direct danger, although
a chance collision with an uncatalogued object
was always possible. Much more serious was
the possibility that these larger objects were
accompanied by large amounts of debris, from
the size of boulders down to microscopic dust,
that were undetectable from Earth. Collisions
with pebble-sized stones could easily destroy a
spacecraft. The only way to evaluate this
danger was to go there and find out how much
small debris was present.

A second danger was posed by Jupiter
itself. In order to use the gravity boost of
Jupiter to speed on to another planet, a spacecraft
would have to fly rather close to the giant.
But this would mean passing right through the
regions of energetic charged particles surrounding
the planet. Some estimates of the number
and energy of these particles indicated that the
delicate electronic brains of a spacecraft would
be damaged before it could penetrate this
region. Again, only by going there could the
danger be evaluated properly.

The Pioneer Jupiter Mission

In 1969 the U.S. Congress approved the
Pioneer Jupiter Mission to provide a reconnaissance
of interplanetary space between Earth
and Jupiter and a first close look at the giant
planet itself. The Project was assigned by
NASA to the Ames Research Center in Mountain
View, California. The primary objectives
were defined by NASA:

Explore the interplanetary medium beyond
the orbit of Mars.

Investigate the nature of the asteroid belt,
assessing possible hazards to missions to
the outer planets.

Explore the environment of Jupiter, including
its inner magnetosphere.

The Pioneer spacecraft was designed for
economy and reliability, based on previous experience
at Ames with Pioneers 6 through 9, all
of which had proven themselves by years of
successful measurement of the interplanetary
medium near the Earth. Unlike the Mariner
class of spacecraft being used to investigate
Venus and Mars, the Pioneer craft rotated continuously
around an axis pointed toward the
Earth. This spinning design was extremely
stable, like the wheels of a fast-moving bicycle,
and required less elaborate guidance than a
nonspinning craft. In addition, the spin provided
an ideal base for measurements of
energetic particles and magnetic fields in space,
since the motion of the spacecraft itself swept
the viewing direction around the sky and allowed
data to be acquired rapidly from many
different directions. The only major disadvantage
of a spinning spacecraft is that it does not
allow a stabilized platform on which to mount
cameras or other instruments that require exact
pointing. Thus the spacecraft design was optimized
for measurements of particles and fields
in interplanetary space and in the Jovian magnetosphere,
but had limited capability for
observations of the planet and its satellites.

As finally assembled, the Pioneer Jupiter
spacecraft had a mass of 258 kilograms. One
hundred forty watts of electrical power at
Jupiter were supplied by four radioisotope thermoelectric
generators (RTGs), which turned
heat from the radioactive decay of plutonium
into electricity. The launch vehicle for the flight
to Jupiter was an Atlas-Centaur rocket,
equipped with an additional solid-propellant
third stage. This powerful rocket could accelerate
the spacecraft to a speed of 51 500 kilometers
per hour, sufficient to escape the Earth
and make the billion-kilometer trip to Jupiter in
just over two years. The specific scientific investigations
to be carried out on Pioneer were
selected competitively in 1969 from proposals
submitted by scientists from U.S. universities,
industry, and NASA laboratories, and also
from abroad. Eleven separate instruments
would be flown, in addition to two experiments
that would make use of the spacecraft itself.

Three complete Pioneer spacecraft, with
their payloads of 25 kilograms of scientific instruments,
were built: one as a test vehicle and
two for launch to Jupiter. One of these—the test
vehicle—is now on display at the National Air
and Space Museum in Washington. The first
opportunity to launch—the opening of the
“launch window”—was on February 27, 1972.
However, it was not until shortly after dark on
March 2 that all systems were ready, and
Pioneer 10 began its historic trip to Jupiter.

Pioneer 10 was the first human artifact
launched with sufficient energy to escape the
solar system entirely. Fittingly, the craft carried
a message designed for any possible alien astronauts
who might, in the distant future, find the
derelict Pioneer in the vastness of interstellar
space. A small plaque fastened to the spacecraft
told the time and planet from which it had been
launched, and carried a symbolic greeting from
humanity to the cosmos.

13

Two identical Pioneer spacecraft were designed and fabricated
by TRW Systems Group at their Redondo Beach,
California facility. Each weighed only about 260 kilograms,
yet carried eleven highly sophisticated instruments capable
of operating unattended for many years in space. Data
systems on board controlled the instrumentation, received
and processed commands, and transmitted information
across the vast distance to Earth.

The second Pioneer was to wait more than
a year before launch. By following far behind
Pioneer 10, its trajectory—in particular how
deeply it penetrated the radiation belts during
Jupiter flyby—could be modified, depending
on the fate of the first spacecraft. At dusk on
April 5, 1973, Pioneer 11 blasted from the
launch pad at Cape Canaveral and followed its
predecessor on the long, lonely journey into the
outer solar system.

Flight to Jupiter

Within a few hours of launch, each Pioneer
spacecraft shed the shroud that had protected it
and unfurled booms supporting the science
instruments and the RTG power generators.
After each craft had been carefully tracked and
precise orbits calculated, small onboard rockets
were commanded to fire to correct its trajectory
for exactly the desired flyby at Jupiter. Pioneer
10 was targeted to fly by the planet at a minimum
distance of 3 Jupiter radii (R
J
) from the
center, or 2 R
J
(about 140 000 kilometers)
above the clouds. This close passage, inside the
orbit of Io, allowed the craft to pass behind
both Io and Jupiter as seen from Earth, so that
its radio beam could probe both the planet and
its innermost large satellite. Pioneer 11 was intended
to fly even closer to Jupiter, but the
exact targeting options were held open until
after the Pioneer 10 encounter.

On Pioneer 10, all instruments appeared to
be working well as the craft passed the orbit of
Mars in June 1972, just 97 days after launch. At
this point, as it headed into unexplored space, it
truly became a pioneer. In mid-July it began to
enter the asteroid belt, and scientists and engineers
anxiously watched for signs of increasing
particulate matter.

Pioneer 10 carried two instruments designed
to measure small particles in space. One, with
an effective area of about 0.6 square meters,
measured the direct impact of dust grains as
small as one-billionth of a gram. The other
looked for larger, more distant grains by measuring
sunlight reflected from them. To the surprise
of many, there was little increase in the
rate of dust impacts recorded as the craft penetrated
more and more deeply into the belt. At
about 400 million kilometers from the Sun,
near the middle of the belt, there appeared to be
an increase in the number of larger particles
detected optically, but not to a level that posed
any hazard. In February 1973 the spacecraft
emerged unscathed from the asteroid belt, having
demonstrated that the much-feared concentration
of small debris in the belt did not exist.
The pathway was open to the outer solar
system!

On November 26, 1973, the long-awaited
encounter with Jupiter began. On that date, at a
distance of 6.4 million kilometers from the
planet, instruments on board Pioneer 10
detected a sudden change in the interplanetary
medium as the spacecraft crossed the point—the
bow shock—at which the magnetic presence
of Jupiter first becomes evident. At the bow
shock, the energetic particles of the solar wind
are suddenly slowed as they approach Jupiter.
At noon the next day, Pioneer 10 entered the
Jovian magnetosphere at a distance of 96
R
J
from the planet.

As the spacecraft hurtled inward toward
regions of increasing magnetic field strength
and charged plasma particles, the instruments
designed to look at Jupiter began to play their
role. A simple line-scan camera that could build

14

up an image from many individual brightness
scans (like a newspaper picture transmitted by
wire) obtained its first pictures of the planet,
and ultraviolet and infrared photometers
prepared to observe it also. By December 2,
when the spacecraft had crossed the orbit of
Callisto, the outermost of the large Galilean
satellites, the line-scan images were nearly equal
in quality to the best telescopic photos taken
previously, and as each hour passed they improved
in resolution. Near closest approach,
Pioneer 10 transmitted partial frames of Jupiter
that represented a threefold improvement over
any Earth-based pictures ever taken.

The asteroid belt is a region between Mars and Jupiter that is populated by thousands of minor planets, most only a few
kilometers in diameter. Before 1970, some theorists suggested that large quantities of abrasive dust might damage spacecraft
passing through the asteroid belt. Pioneer 10 proved that this danger was not present, thus opening the way to the outer solar
system.

Earth at encounter

Earth at launch

Jupiter at encounter

Jupiter at launch

Asteroid belt

Tension increased as the spacecraft plunged
deeper into the radiation belts of Jupiter.
Would it survive the blast of x-rays and gamma-rays
induced in every part of the craft by the
electrons and ions trapped by the magnetic field
of Jupiter? Several of the instruments measuring
the charged particles climbed to full scale
and saturated. Others neared their limits but, as
anxious scientists watched the data being sent
back, the levels flattened off. Meanwhile, the
spacecraft itself began to feel the effects of the
radiation, and occasional spurious commands
were generated. Several planned high-resolution
images of Jupiter and its satellites were lost
because of these false signals. But again the system
stabilized, and no more problems occurred
as, just past noon on December 3, 1973, Pioneer
10 reached its closest point to Jupiter, 130 000
kilometers above the Jovian cloud tops.
Pioneer had passed its most demanding test
with flying colors, and at a news conference at
Ames, NASA Planetary Program Director
Robert Kraemer pronounced the mission “100
percent successful.” He added, “We sent
Pioneer off to tweak a dragon’s tail, and it did
that and more. It gave it a really good yank,
and it managed to survive.” The Project Science
Chief pronounced it “the most exciting
day of my life,” and most of the hundreds of
scientists and engineers who participated in the
encounter probably agreed with him.

Pioneer 11 continued to follow steadily,
emerging from the asteroid belt in March 1974.
Based on the performance and findings of

15

Pioneer 10, it was decided to send Pioneer 11
still closer to Jupiter, but on a more inclined
trajectory. On April 19 thrusters on the spacecraft
fired to move the Pioneer 11 aimpoint just
34 000 kilometers above the clouds of Jupiter.

In using the Pioneer 10 data to assess the
hazard to Pioneer 11, scientists had to consider
three aspects of the charged particle environment.
First was the energy distribution of the
particles: The most energetic presented the
most danger. Second was the flux, the rate at
which particles struck the craft. Third was the
total radiation dose. One can make an analogy
with a boxing match. The energy distribution
tells you how hard the blows of your opponent
are. The flux is a measure of how many times a
minute he hits you, and the total dose measures
how many blows land. The spacecraft reacts
just like a boxer; the crucial question is how
much total dose it absorbs. Enough radiation
blows, and the system is knocked out. The trajectory
chosen for Pioneer 11 resulted in higher
flux, since the craft probed more deeply into
Jupiter’s inner magnetosphere than had Pioneer
10. But by moving at a high angle across the
equatorial regions where the flux is highest, the
total dose could be kept below that experienced
by Pioneer 10.

Pioneer 11 entered the Jovian magnetosphere
on November 26, 1974, just a year after
its predecessor. Closest approach took place on
December 2. As with Pioneer 10, the radiation
dose taxed the spacecraft to its limit. Again
spurious commands were issued, this time
affecting the infrared radiometer more than the
imaging system. The craft flew at high latitude
over the north polar region of Jupiter, an area
never seen from Earth, and returned several excellent
high-resolution pictures. Once more the
little Pioneers had succeeded against the odds in
opening the way to the giant planets.

Pioneer 10 and 11 encounters with Jupiter are shown as viewed from the celestial North Pole. Pioneer 10 swung around the
giant planet in the counterclockwise direction, while Pioneer 11 followed a clockwise approach. In this view, Jupiter rotates
counterclockwise.

Pioneer 11

Pioneer 10

Callisto

Ganymede

Europa

Io

Amalthea

Following their encounters with Jupiter,
both Pioneer spacecraft returned to their normal
routine of measuring the interplanetary
medium. Pioneer 10 had gained speed from the
gravity field of Jupiter and became the first
craft to achieve the velocity needed to escape
from the solar system. Pioneer 11, however,
had used the pull of Jupiter to bend its trajectory
inward, aiming it across the solar system

16

toward Saturn. Following the successes at
Jupiter, NASA announced that Pioneer 11
would be targeted for a close flyby of Saturn
five years later, which was successfully carried
out in September 1979. In early 1980, far beyond
their design lifetimes, both spacecraft
were still performing beautifully.

In this view of Jupiter, the Great Red Spot is prominent and the shadow of Io traverses the planetary disk. The gross morphology
of the belts and zones, with structures showing turbulence and convective cells in the middle latitudes, is clearly
seen. The small white spots surrounded by dark rings, seen mainly in the southern hemisphere, indicate regions of intense
vertical convective activity, somewhat similar to cumulonimbus or thunderclouds.

Jupiter Results

The scientific results of the Pioneer flybys
of Jupiter were many and varied. As is always
the case, some old questions were answered and
new problems were raised by the spacecraft
data. Highlights of these results are summarized
below.

Photographs of Jupiter.

The line-scan imaging
systems of Pioneer returned some remarkable
pictures of the planet during the two encounters,
showing individual features as small
as 500 kilometers across. In addition, the
Pioneers were able to look at Jupiter from
angles never observable from Earth.

One of the discoveries made from these
pictures was the great variety of cloud structures
near the boundaries between the light
zones and dark belts. Many individual cloud
patterns suggested rising and falling air. The
convoluted swirls evident in these regions appeared
to be the result of dynamic motions;
unfortunately, with only the few “snapshots”
obtained during the hours of the flyby, the
actual motions of these clouds could not be
followed.

Thermal Emission.

In the year the Pioneer
Project was begun, astronomers on Earth had
measured that Jupiter emitted more heat than it
absorbed from the Sun. From the Earth these
measurements could be made only of the sunlit
part of the planet; neither the night side nor the

17

poles could be seen. One of the main objectives
of the Pioneer flybys was to determine the heat
budget accurately from temperature measurements
at many points on both the sunlit and the
night sides.

The Pioneer data confirmed the presence
of a heat source in Jupiter and supplied a quantitative
estimate of its magnitude. The global
effective temperature was found to be -148° C,
to a precision of ±3 degrees. This temperature
implies that Jupiter radiates 1.9 times as much
heat as it receives from the Sun. The corresponding
internal heat source is 10¹⁷ watts. Surprisingly,
the poles were as warm as the
equator; apparently, the atmosphere is very
efficient at transferring solar heat absorbed
near the equator up to high latitudes, or
perhaps the internal component of the heat
comes preferentially from the polar regions.

Helium in the Atmosphere.

The Pioneer infrared
experiment made the first measurement
of the amount of helium on Jupiter. The ratio
of the number of helium atoms to the number
of hydrogen atoms was found to be He/H₂ =
0.14 ± 0.08. This is consistent with the known
solar ratio of He/H₂ = 0.11. Measurements of
helium in the upper atmosphere were also made
by the ultraviolet experiment.

One of the best Pioneer images of Jupiter was obtained at a
range of 545 000 kilometers by Pioneer 11. Structure within
the Great Red Spot and the surrounding belts and zones can
be seen. There was much less turbulent cloud activity
round the spot at the time of the Pioneer flybys than was
seen five years later by the Voyager cameras.

Pioneer 10 confirmed theoretical models of Jupiter that
suggest the planet is nearly all liquid, with a very small core
and an extremely deep atmosphere. The liquid interior
seethes with internal heat energy, which is transferred from
deep within the planet to its outer regions. The temperature
at the center may be 30 000 K. Since the temperature at the
cloud tops is around -123° C, there is a large range of
temperatures within the planet.

Distance (km)

Visible clouds

Hydrogen gas

Cloud tops

Ammonia crystals

Ammonium hydrosulfide crystals

Ice crystals

Water droplets

-123° C

Transparent atmosphere

Hydrogen/Helium gas

70 000

Transition zone

1980° C

60 000

Liquid hydrogen

50 000

11 000° C

Transition zone

3 million atmospheres pressure

40 000

Liquid metallic hydrogen

30 000

20 000

Possible “sea” of helium

10 000

30 000 K

Possible solid core

0

18

PIONEER SCIENCE INVESTIGATIONS

Project Scientist: J. H. Wolfe, NASA Ames

Investigation
Principal Investigator
Primary Objectives

Magnetic fields
E. J. Smith, JPL
Measurement of the magnetic field of Jupiter and determination of the structure of the magnetosphere.

Magnetic fields (Pioneer 11 only)
N. F. Ness, NASA Goddard
Measurement of the magnetic field of Jupiter and determination of the structure of the magnetosphere.

Plasma analyzer
J. H. Wolfe, NASA Ames
Measurement of low-energy electrons and ions, determination of the structure of the magnetosphere.

Charged particle composition
J. A. Simpson, U. Chicago
Determination of the number, energy, and composition of energetic charged particles in the Jovian magnetosphere.

Cosmic ray energy spectra
F. B. McDonald, NASA Goddard
Measurement of number and energy of very high energy charged particles in space.

Jovian charged particles
J. A. Van Allen, U. Iowa
Measurement of number and energy distribution of energetic charged particles and determination of magnetospheric structure.

Jovian trapped radiation
R. Walker Fillius, UC San Diego
Measurement of number and energy distribution of energetic charged particles and determination of magnetospheric structure.

Asteroid-meteoroid astronomy
R. K. Soberman, General Electric
Observation of solid particles (dust and larger) in the vicinity of the spacecraft.

Meteoroid detection
W. H. Kinard, NASA Langley
Detection of very small solid particles that strike the spacecraft.

Celestial mechanics
J. D. Anderson, JPL
Measurement of the masses of Jupiter and the Galilean satellites with high precision.

Ultraviolet photometry
D. L. Judge, U. Southern California
Measurement of ultraviolet emissions of the Jovian atmosphere and from circumsatellite gas clouds.

Imaging photopolarimetry
T. Gehrels, U. Arizona
Reconnaissance imaging of Jupiter and its satellites; study of atmospheric dynamics.

Jovian infrared thermal structure
G. Münch, Caltech
Measurement of Jovian temperature and heat budget; determination of helium to hydrogen ratio.

S-Band occultation
A. J. Kliore, JPL
Probes of structure of Jovian atmosphere and ionosphere.

19

Atmospheric Structure.

Several Pioneer investigations
yielded information on the variation
of atmospheric temperature and pressure
in the regions above the ammonia clouds. Near
the equator, at a level where the atmospheric
pressure is the same as that on the surface of the
Earth (1 bar), the temperature is -108° C.
About 150 kilometers higher, where the
pressure drops to 0.1 bar, is the minimum atmospheric
temperature of about -165° C.
Above this point the temperature rises again,
reaching about -123° C near a pressure level
of 0.03 bar. Presumably this temperature rise is
due to absorption of sunlight by a thin haze of
dust particles in the upper atmosphere of
Jupiter.

Internal Structure.

The measurements of the
amount of helium, of the gravitational field,
and of the size of the internal heat source on
Jupiter greatly clarified scientists’ understanding
of the deep interior of the planet. Calculations
showed that the core of Jupiter must be
so hot that hydrogen cannot become solid, but
must remain a fluid throughout the interior.
Even at great depths, therefore, Jupiter does
not have a solid surface. The theory that the
Great Red Spot was the result of interactions
with a surface feature below the clouds thus
became untenable. Whatever its exact nature,
the Red Spot must be a strictly atmospheric
phenomenon.

Magnetic Field.

Pioneer data showed that the
magnetic field of Jupiter has a dipolar nature,
like that of the Earth, but 2000 times stronger.
The calculated surface fields measured about 4
gauss, compared to a field of about 0.5 gauss
on the Earth. The axis of the magnetic field was
tilted 11 degrees with respect to the rotation
axis, and it was offset by about 10 000
kilometers (0.1 R
J
) from the center of the
planet.

Pioneers 10 and 11 did not obtain very detailed pictures of the satellites
of Jupiter. The best view was of Ganymede,
which showed a surface of contrasting light and dark spots
of unknown nature.

A less detailed image of Europa clearly reveals the illuminated crescent but
supplies little information about the surface of this ice-covered satellite.

Satellite Atmospheres.

Two experiments yielded
exciting new information on possible atmospheres
of the Galilean satellites. First was
an occultation, in which the Pioneer 10
spacecraft was targeted to pass behind Io as
seen from Earth. At the moments just before
the spacecraft disappeared, and just after
reemergence from behind the satellite, the radio
signal was influenced by a thin layer of ionized
gas, in which the electrons had been stripped

20

from the atoms by absorbed sunlight or by
other processes. The ionosphere thus discovered
had a peak density of about 60 000
electrons per cubic centimeter. In addition, a
very extended far-ultraviolet glow, probably
due to atomic hydrogen, was found near the orbit
of Io by the ultraviolet photometer.

Masses of Jupiter and Its Satellites.

Precise
radio tracking of the Pioneers as they coasted
past Jupiter and its satellites revealed that
Jupiter is about one percent heavier than had
been anticipated, and several satellites were
found to have masses that differ by more than
ten percent from values determined previously.
These improvements in knowledge of the
masses were required to achieve the close
satellite flybys being planned for later missions.

The Pioneer spacecraft carried this plaque on the journey beyond the solar system, bearing data that tell where and when the
human species lived and that convey details of our biological form. When Pioneer 10 flew by Jupiter it acquired sufficient
kinetic energy to carry it completely out of the solar system. Some time between one and ten billion years from now, the
probe may pass through the planetary system of a remote stellar neighbor, one of whose planets may have evolved intelligent
life. If the spacecraft is detected and then inspected, Pioneer’s message will reach across the eons to communicate its
greeting.

The Inner Magnetosphere.

A great deal of the
scientific emphasis of the Pioneer missions was
directed at characterizing the particles and
fields in the inner magnetosphere, the region in
which charged particles are trapped in stable orbits.
The Pioneers found that it extended to
about 25 R
J
, well beyond the orbit of Callisto.
Within this region, instruments on the spacecraft
recorded the numbers and energy of electrons,
protons, and ions. The electrons reached
a maximum concentration near 3 R
J
, and their
numbers remained almost constant from there
in toward the planet. The maximum concentration
of protons observed by Pioneer 10 was at
3.4 R
J
, a little inside the orbit of Io. Pioneer 11
penetrated deeper and found another maximum,
about twenty times higher, at 1.9 R
J
; at this
distance, 10 million energetic protons hit each

21

square centimeter of the spacecraft every second.
It was believed that the gap between these
two peaks was due to tiny Amalthea, the innermost
satellite, which orbits at 2.5 R
J
. Apparently
this satellite sweeps up the particles as it
circles Jupiter. Another large dip in the proton
distribution was attributed to sweeping by Io,
with smaller effects seen near the orbits of
Europa and Ganymede. There was an additional
small effect at 1.8 R
J
, later found by
Voyager to be due to Jupiter’s ring and its fourteenth
satellite.

The Outer Magnetosphere.

From about 25 R
J

outward to its boundary near 100 R
J
, the Jovian
magnetosphere is a complex and dynamic
place. Beyond about 60 R
J
, both Pioneers
found the boundary to be highly unstable, apparently
blown in and out by variations in the
pressure of the solar wind, which consists of
charged particles flowing outward from the
Sun. In this region concentrations of Jovian
particles are sometimes seen that rival the inner
magnetosphere in intensity. Between 60 R
J
and
25 R
J
, a region sometimes called the middle
magnetosphere, the particle motions are more
ordered, and for the most part electrons and
protons are carried along with the planet’s rotation
by its magnetic field. Near the equatorial
plane, the flow of these particles produces an
electric current circling the planet, and this current
in turn generates its own magnetic field,
which approaches in strength that of Jupiter
itself. Occasionally the outer magnetosphere
collapses down to about 60 R
J
, and energetic
particles are squirted from the middle region into
space; these bursts of Jovian particles can
sometimes be detected as far away as Earth.

At the same time that Pioneer scientists
were analyzing their results and developing new
concepts of the Jupiter system, a new team of
investigators had been selected for the next mission
to Jupiter. From about 1975 on, attention
shifted from Pioneer to its successor—Voyager.

22

The Voyager spacecraft are among the most sophisticated, automatic, and independent robots ever sent to explore the
planets. Each craft has a mass of one ton and is dominated by the 3.7-meter-diameter white antenna used for radio communication
with Earth. Here Voyager undergoes final tests in a space simulator chamber. [373-7162AC]

23

CHAPTER 3

THE VOYAGER MISSION

Genesis of Voyager

Voyager had its origin in the Outer Planets
Grand Tour, a plan to send spacecraft to all the
planets of the outer solar system. In 1969, the
same year in which the Pioneer Project received
Congressional approval, NASA began to
design the Grand Tour. At the same time, the
Space Science Board of the National Academy
of Sciences completed a study called “The
Outer Solar System,” chaired by James Van
Allen of the University of Iowa, which recommended
that the United States undertake an
exploration program:

1. To conduct exploratory investigations of
the appearance, size, mass, magnetic properties,
and dynamics of each of the outer
planets and their major satellites;

2. To determine the chemical and isotopic
composition of the atmospheres of the
outer planets;

3. To determine whether biologically important
organic substances exist in these
atmospheres and to characterize the lower
atmospheric environments in terms of
biologically significant parameters;

4. To describe the motions of the atmospheres
of the major planets and to
characterize their temperature-density-composition
structure;

5. To make a detailed study for each of the
outer planets of the external magnetic
field and respective particle population,
associated radio emissions, and magnetospheric
particle-wave interactions;

6. To determine the mode of interaction of
the solar wind with the outer planets, including
the interaction of the satellites
with the planets’ magnetospheres;

7. To investigate the properties of the solar
wind and the interplanetary magnetic field
at great distances from the Sun at both
low and high solar latitudes, and to search
for the outer boundary of the solar wind
flow;

8. To attempt to obtain the composition,
energy spectra, and fluxes of cosmic rays
in interstellar space, free of the modulating
effects of the solar wind.

The report also noted that “exceptionally
favorable astronomical opportunities occur in
the late 1970s for multiplanet missions,” and
that “professional resources for full utilization
of the outer-solar-system mission opportunities
in the 1970s and 1980s are amply available
within the scientific community, and there is a
widespread eagerness to participate in such missions.”

An additional Academy study, chaired by
Francis S. Johnson of the University of Texas
at Dallas and published in 1971, was even more
specific: “An extensive study of the outer solar
system is recognized by us to be one of the
major objectives of space science in this decade.
This endeavor is made particularly exciting by
the rare opportunity to explore several planets
and satellites in one mission using long-lived
spacecraft and existing propulsion systems. We
recommend that [Mariner-class] spacecraft be
developed and used in Grand Tour missions for
the exploration of the outer planets in a series
of four launches in the late 1970s.”

Thus the stage was set to initiate the Outer
Planets Grand Tours. NASA’s timetable called
for dual launches to Jupiter, Saturn, and Pluto
in 1976 and 1977, and dual launches to Jupiter,
Uranus, and Neptune in 1979, at a total cost
over the decade of the 1970s of about $750
million.

A necessary step was to obtain from the
scientific community the best possible set of
instruments to fly on the spacecraft. Following
its initial internal studies, NASA turned for its
detailed scientific planning to an open competition

24

in which any scientist or scientific organization
was invited to propose an investigation.
In October 1970 NASA issued an “Invitation
for Participation in the Mission Development
for Grand Tour Missions to the Outer Solar
System,” and a year later it had selected about
a dozen teams of scientists to formulate specific
objectives for these missions. At the same time,
an advanced spacecraft engineering design was
carried out by the Caltech Jet Propulsion Laboratory
(JPL), and studies were also supported
by industrial contractors. In fiscal year 1972,
plans called for an appropriation by Congress
of $30 million to fund these developments,
leading toward a first launch in 1976.

Even as the scientific and technical problems
of the Grand Tour were being solved,
however, political and budgetary difficulties intervened.
The Grand Tour was an ambitious and
expensive concept, designed in the enthusiasm
of the Apollo years. In the altered national
climate that followed the first manned lunar
landings, the United States began to pull back
from major commitments in space. The later
Apollo landings were canceled, and in fiscal
year 1972 only $10 million of the $30 million
needed to complete Grand Tour designs was appropriated.
It suddenly became necessary to
restructure the exploration of the outer planets
to conform to more modest space budgets.

The original plan for the Outer Planets Grand Tour envisaged dual launches to Jupiter, Saturn, and Pluto in the mid-1970s,
and dual launches to Jupiter, Uranus, and Neptune in 1979. However, political and budgetary constraints altered the plan,
and the Voyager mission to Jupiter and Saturn, with an optional encounter with Uranus, was formulated to replace it. Here
the original Grand Tour trajectories from Earth to the outer planets are shown. [P-10612AC]

Redesign of the Mission

The new mission concept that replaced the
Grand Tour dropped the objectives of exploring
the outer three planets—Uranus, Neptune,
and Pluto. In this way the lifetime of the mission
was greatly shortened, placing less stringent
demands on the reliability of the millions
of components that go into a spacecraft. Limiting
the mission to Jupiter and Saturn also
relieved problems associated with spacecraft
power, and with communicating effectively
over distances of more than 2 billion kilometers.
The total cost of the new mission was
estimated at $250 million, only a third of that
previously planned for the Grand Tour. Because
it was based on the proven Mariner spacecraft
design, the new mission was initially
named Mariner Jupiter Saturn, or MJS; in 1977
the name was changed to Voyager. In January
1972 the President’s proposed fiscal year 1973
budget included $10 million specifically designated
for Voyager; after authorization and

25

appropriation by Congress, the official beginning
of Voyager was set for July 1, 1972.

With approval of the new mission apparently
assured in the Congress, NASA issued an
“Announcement of Flight Opportunity” to
select the scientific instruments to be carried on
Voyager. Seventy-seven proposals were received;
31 from groups of scientists with
designs for instruments, and 46 from individuals
desiring to participate in NASA-formed
teams. Of these 77 proposals, 24 were
from NASA laboratories, 48 were from scientists
in various U.S. universities and industry,
and 5 were from foreign sources. After extensive
review, 28 proposals were accepted: 9 for
instruments and 19 for individual participation.
The newly selected Principal Investigators and
Team Leaders met for the first time at JPL just
before Christmas, 1972. To coordinate all the
science activity of the Voyager mission, NASA
and JPL selected Edward Stone of Caltech, a
distinguished expert on magnetospheric physics,
to serve as Project Scientist.

The team assembled in 1972 by JPL and its
industrial contractors included more than a
thousand highly trained engineers, scientists,
and technical managers who assumed responsibility
for the awesome task of building the
most sophisticated unmanned spacecraft ever
designed and launching it across the farthest
reaches of the solar system. At the head of the
organization was the Project Manager, Harris
(Bud) Schurmeier. Later, Schurmeier was succeeded
by John Casani, Robert Parks, and Ray
Heacock. This team had only four years to turn
the paper concepts into hardware, ready to
deliver to Kennedy Space Center for launch in
the summer of 1977.

Project Scientist
Edward C. Stone

Project Manager
Harris (Bud) Schurmeier

The Objectives of Voyager

Voyager is one of the most ambitious
planetary space missions ever undertaken.
Voyager 1, which encountered Jupiter on
March 5, 1979, was to investigate Jupiter, its
large satellites Io, Ganymede, and Callisto, and
tiny Amalthea; Saturn, its rings, and several of
its satellites—including Titan, the largest satellite
in the solar system. Voyager 2, which arrived
at Jupiter on July 9, 1979, was to examine
Jupiter, Europa, Ganymede, Callisto, and
Saturn and several of its satellites, after which it
was to be hurled on toward an encounter with
the Uranian system in 1986. Both spacecraft
were also designed to study the interplanetary
medium and its interactions with the solar
wind.

Scientific objectives as well as the orbital
positions of the planets and satellites influenced
the choice of spacecraft trajectories, which
were designed to provide close flybys of all four
of Jupiter’s Galilean satellites and six of
Saturn’s satellites—featuring a very close approach
to Titan—and occultations of the Sun
and Earth by Jupiter, Saturn, Titan, and the
rings of Saturn. However, all these objectives
could not be accomplished by a single spacecraft.
No single path through the Jupiter system,
for instance, can provide close flybys of all
four Galilean satellites. Specifically, a trajectory
for Voyager 1 that included a close encounter
with Io precluded a close encounter
with Europa and did not allow the spacecraft
the option of being targeted from Saturn to
Uranus without having to travel through the
rings of Saturn. On the other hand, a trajectory
that would send Voyager 2 on to Uranus precluded
not only a close encounter with Io, but
also a close encounter with Titan and with
Saturn’s rings. The alignment of the planets
and their satellites was such that encounter with
Jupiter on or before April 4, 1979 was necessary
for optimum investigation of Io, but encounter
with Jupiter after June 15, 1979 was
mandatory for a trajectory that would maintain
the option to go on to Uranus. The latter trajectory
also allowed Voyager 2 to maintain a
healthier distance from Jupiter, avoiding the
full dose of radiation that would be experienced
by Voyager 1.

Although the two Voyager trajectories do
have certain fundamental differences, they also
have a great deal in common: Both spacecraft

26

were designed to study the interplanetary
medium, and both would investigate Jupiter
and Saturn and have close flybys with several of
their major satellites. Also, if it were decided
not to send Voyager 2 on to Uranus, this spacecraft
could be retargeted to a Saturn trajectory
similar to that of Voyager 1, providing a close
flyby of Titan and a closer look at the rings.
The flight paths of Voyager 1 and Voyager 2
complement each other—allowing the planets
and some of the satellites to be viewed from a
number of angles and over a longer period of
time than would be possible with only one
spaceprobe—yet the trajectories were also
designed to be more or less capable of
duplicating each other’s scientific investigations.
This redundancy helps to ensure, so far
as is possible, the success of the mission.

The redundancy built into the mission is
evident, not only in the design of the trajectories,
but in the spacecraft themselves.
Voyagers 1 and 2 are identical spacecraft. In
addition, many crucial elements are duplicated
on each: For example, the computer command
subsystem (CCS), the flight data subsystem
(FDS), and the attitude and articulation control
subsystem (AACS)—which function as onboard
control systems—each have multiple
reprogrammable digital computers. In addition,
the CCS, which decodes commands from
ground control and can instruct other subsystems
from its own memory, contains duplicates
for all its functional units. The AACS, which
controls the spacecraft’s stabilization and orientation,
has duplicate star trackers and Sun sensors.
The communications system contains two
radio receivers and four transmitters, two each
to transmit both S-band (frequency of about
2295 megahertz) and X-band (frequency of
about 8418 megahertz).

Project Manager
John Casani

The Spacecraft

The Voyager spacecraft are more sophisticated,
more automatic, and more independent
than were the Pioneers. This independence is
important because the giant planets are so far
away that the correction of a malfunction by
engineers on Earth would take hours to perform.
Even at “nearby” Jupiter, radio signals
take about forty minutes to travel in one direction
between the spacecraft and Earth. Saturn
is about twice as far away as Jupiter, and
Uranus is twice as far as Saturn, slowing communication
even more.

About the same size and weight of a subcompact car, the Voyager spacecraft carry instruments for eleven science investigations
of the outer planets and their satellites. Power to operate the spacecraft is provided by three radioisotope thermoelectric
generators mounted on one boom; other booms hold the science scan platform and the dual magnetometers.

High-gain directional antenna

Magnetometer

Extendable boom

Planetary radio astronomy and plasma wave antenna

Radioisotope thermoelectric generators

Plasma detector

Cosmic ray detector

Wide angle TV

Narrow angle TV

TV electronics

Ultraviolet spectrometer

Photopolarimeter

Infrared interferometer spectrometer and radiometer

Low energy charged particles

Thrusters

Electronic compartments

Science instrument calibration panel and shunt radiator

Propulsion fuel tank

Planetary radio astronomy and plasma wave antenna

Perched atop the Centaur stage of the
launch rocket, each Voyager spacecraft has a
mass of 2 tons (2066 kilograms), divided about
equally between the spacecraft proper and the
propulsion module used for final acceleration

27

to Jupiter. The Voyager itself, with a mass of
815 kilograms and typical dimensions of about
3 meters, is almost the size and weight of a subcompact
car—but enormously more complex.
A better analogy might be made with a large
electronic computer—but no terrestrial computer
was ever asked to supply its own power
source and to operate unattended in the
vacuum of space for up to a decade.

Each Voyager spacecraft carries instruments
for eleven science investigations covering
visual, infrared, and ultraviolet regions of the
spectrum, and other remote sensing studies of
the planets and satellites; studies of radio emissions,
magnetic fields, cosmic rays, and lower
energy particles; plasma (ionized gases) waves
and particles; and studies using the spacecraft
radios. Each Voyager has a science boom that
holds high and low resolution TV, photopolarimeter,
plasma and cosmic ray detectors, infrared
spectrometer and radiometer, ultraviolet
spectrometer, and low energy charged particle
detector; in addition, each spacecraft has a
planetary radio astronomy and plasma wave
antenna and a long boom carrying a low- and a
high-field magnetometer.

Communication with Earth is carried out
via a high-gain antenna 3.7 meters in diameter,
with a smaller low-gain antenna as backup. The
large white dish of the high-gain antenna
dominates the appearance of the spacecraft,
setting it off from its predecessors, which were
able to use much smaller antennas to communicate
over the more modest distances that
separate the planets of the inner solar system.
Although the transmitter power is only 23
watts—about the power of a refrigerator light
bulb—this system is designed to transmit data
over a billion kilometers at the enormous rate
of 115 200 bits per second. Data can also be
stored for later transmission to Earth; an onboard
digital tape recorder has a capacity of
about 500 million (5 × 10⁸) bits, sufficient to
store nearly 100 Voyager images.

Project Manager
Ray Heacock

During the early assembly stage, technicians at Caltech’s
Jet Propulsion Laboratory equip Voyager’s extendable
boom with low- and high-field magnetometers that measure
the intensity and direction of the outer planets’ magnetic
fields. [373-7179BC]

Radioisotope thermoelectric generator
(RTGs), rather than solar cells, provide electricity
for the Voyager spacecraft. The RTG
use radioactive plutonium oxide for this purpose.
As the plutonium oxide decays, it gives
off heat which is converted to electricity, supplying
a total of about 450 watts to the spacecraft
at launch. This power slowly declines as
the plutonium is used up, with less than 400
watts expected at Saturn flyby five years after
launch. Hydrazine fuel is used to make mid-course
corrections in trajectory and to control
the spacecraft’s orientation.

Since the Voyagers must fly through the
inner magnetosphere of Jupiter, it was imperative
that the hardware systems be able to
withstand the radiation from Jovian charged
particles. The electronic microcircuits that form
the heart and brain of the spacecraft and its
scientific instruments are especially susceptible
to radiation damage. Three techniques were
used to “harden” components against radiation:

1. Special design using radiation-resistant
materials;

2. Extensive testing to select those electronic
components which come out of the
manufacturing process with highest reliability;
and

28

3. Spot shielding of especially sensitive areas
with radiation-absorbing materials.

VOYAGER’S GREETINGS TO THE UNIVERSE

The Voyager spacecraft will be the third and fourth human artifacts to escape entirely from
the solar system. Pioneers 10 and 11, which preceded Voyager in outstripping the gravitational
attraction of the Sun, both carried small metal plaques identifying their time and place of origin
for the benefit of any other spacefarers that might find them in the distant future. With this
example before them, NASA placed a more ambitious message aboard Voyager 1 and 2—a kind
of time capsule, intended to communicate a story of our world to extraterrestrials.

The Voyager message is carried by a phonograph record—a 12-inch gold-plated copper disk
containing sounds and images selected to portray the diversity of life and culture on Earth. The
contents of the record were selected for NASA by a committee chaired by Carl Sagan of Cornell
University. Dr. Sagan and his associates assembled 115 images and a variety of natural sounds,
such as those made by surf, wind and thunder, birds, whales, and other animals. To this they
added musical selections from different cultures and eras, and spoken greetings from Earthpeople
in sixty languages, and printed messages from President Carter and U.N. Secretary
General Waldheim.

Each record is encased in a protective aluminum jacket, together with a cartridge and
needle. Instructions, in symbolic language, explain the origin of the spacecraft and indicate how
the record is to be played. The 115 images are encoded in analog form. The remainder of the
record is in audio, designed to be played at 16⅔ revolutions per second. It contains the spoken
greetings, beginning with Akkadian, which was spoken in Sumer about six thousand years ago,
and ending with Wu, a modern Chinese dialect. Following the section on the sounds of Earth,
there is an eclectic 90-minute selection of music, including both Eastern and Western classics and
a variety of ethnic music.

Once the Voyager spacecraft leave the solar system (by 1990, both will be beyond the orbit
of Pluto), they will find themselves in empty space. It will be forty thousand years before they
come within a light year of a star, called AC + 79 3888, and millions of years before either might
make a close approach to any other planetary system. As Carl Sagan has noted, “The spacecraft
will be encountered and the record played only if there are advanced spacefaring civilizations in
interstellar space. But the launching of this bottle into the cosmic ocean says something very
hopeful about life on this planet.”

LANGUAGES ON VOYAGER RECORD

Sumerian

Akkadian

Hittite

Hebrew

Aramaic

English

Portuguese

Cantonese

Russian

Thai

Arabic

Roumanian

French

Burmese

Spanish

Indonesian

Kechua

Dutch

German

Bengali

Urdu

Hindi

Vietnamese

Sinhalese

Greek

Latin

Japanese

Punjabi

Turkish

Welsh

Italian

Nguni

Sotho

Wu

Korean

Armenian

Polish

Netali

Mandarin

Gujorati

Ila (Zambia)

Nyanja

Swedish

Ukrainian

Persian

Serbian

Luganada

Amoy (Min dialect)

Marathi

Kannada

Telugu

Oriya

Hungarian

Czech

Rajasthani

SOUNDS OF EARTH ON VOYAGER RECORD

Whales

Planets (music)

Volcanoes

Mud pots

Rain

Surf

Crickets, frogs

Birds

Hyena

Elephant

Chimpanzee

Wild dog

Footsteps and heartbeats

Laughter

Fire

Tools

Dogs, domestic

Herding sheep

Blacksmith shop

Sawing

Riveter

Morse code

Ships

Horse and cart

Horse and carriage

Train whistle

Tractor

Truck

Auto gears

Jet

Lift-off Saturn 5 rocket

Kiss

Baby

Life signs—EEG, EKG

Pulsart

VOYAGER RECORD PHOTOGRAPH INDEX

Calibration circle

Solar location map

Mathematical definitions

Physical unit definitions

Solar system parameters

The Sun

Solar spectrum

Mercury

Mars

Jupiter

Earth

Egypt, Red Sea, Sinai Peninsula and the Nile

Chemical definitions

DNA structure

DNA structure magnified

Cells and cell division

Anatomy (eight)

Human sex organs

Diagram of conception

Conception

Fertilized ovum

Fetus diagram

Fetus

Diagram of male and female

Birth

Nursing mother

Father and daughter (Malaysia)

Group of children

Diagram of family ages

Family portrait

Diagram of continental drift

Structure of Earth

Heron Island (Great Barrier Reef of Australia)

Seashore

Snake River and Grand Tetons

Sand dunes

Monument Valley

Forest scene with mushrooms

Leaf

Fallen leaves

Sequoia

Snowflake

Tree with daffodils

Flying insect with flowers

Diagram of vertebrate evolution

Seashell (Xancidae)

Dolphins

School of fish

Tree toad

Crocodile

Eagle

Waterhold

Jane Goodall and chimps

Sketch of Bushmen

Bushmen hunters

Man from Guatemala

Dancer from Bali

Andean girls

Thailand craftsman

Elephant

Old man with beard and glasses (Turkey)

Old man with dog and flowers

Mountain climber

Cathy Rigby

Sprinters

Schoolroom

Children with globe

Cotton harvest

Grape picker

Supermarket

Underwater scene with diver and fish

Fishing boat with nets

Cooking fish

Chinese dinner party

Demonstration of licking, eating and drinking

Great Wall of China

House construction (African)

Construction scene (Amish country)

House (Africa)

House (New England)

Modern house (Cloudcroft, New Mexico)

House interior with artist and fire

Taj Mahal

English city (Oxford)

Boston

UN Building, day

UN Building, night

Sydney Opera House

Artisan with drill

Factory interior

Museum

X-ray of hand

Woman with microscope

Street scene, Asia (Pakistan)

Rush hour traffic, India

Modern highway (Ithaca)

Golden Gate Bridge

Train

Airplane in flight

Airport (Toronto)

Antarctic expedition

Radio telescope (Westerbork, Netherlands)

Radio telescope (Arecibo)

Page of book (Newton,
System of the World
)

Astronaut in space

Titan Centaur launch

Sunset with birds

String quartet (Quartetto Italiano)

Violin with music score (Cavatina)

MUSIC ON VOYAGER RECORD

Bach Brandenberg Concerto Number Two, First Movement

“Kinds of Flowers” Javanese Court Gamelan

Senegalese Percussion

Pygmy girls initiation song

Australian Horn and Totem song

“El Cascabel” Lorenzo Barcelata

“Johnny B. Goode” Chuck Berry

New Guinea Men’s House

“Depicting the Cranes in Their Nest”

Bach Partita Number Three for Violin; Gavotte et Rondeaus

Mozart Magic Flute, Queen of the Night (Aria Number 14)

Chakrulo

Peruvian Pan Pipes

Melancholy Blues

Azerbaijan Two Flutes

Stravinsky, Rite of Spring, Conclusion

Bach Prelude and Fugue Number One in C Major from the Well Tempered Clavier, Book Two

Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony, First Movement

Bulgarian Shepherdess Song “Izlel Delyo Hajdutin”

Navajo Indian Night Chant

The Fairie Round from Pavans, Galliards, Almains

Melanesian Pan Pipes

Peruvian Woman’s Wedding Song

“Flowing Streams”—Chinese Ch’in music

“Jaat Kahan Ho”—Indian Raga

“Dark Was the Night”

Beethoven String Quartet Number 13 “Cavatina”

30

Each Voyager carries a message in the form of a 12-inch gold-plated phonograph record. The record, together with a cartridge
and needle, is fastened to the side of the spacecraft in a gold-anodized aluminum case that also illustrates how the
record is to be played. [P-19728]

THE BRAINS OF THE VOYAGER SPACECRAFT
[1]

The Voyager spacecraft had greater independence from Earth-based controllers and greater
versatility in carrying out complex sequences of scientific measurements than any of their predecessors.
These capabilities resulted from three interconnected onboard computer systems: the
AACS (attitude and articulation control subsystem); the FDS (flight data subsystem); and the
CCS (computer command system). Operating from “loads” of instructions transmitted earlier
from Earth, these computers could issue commands to the spacecraft and the science instruments
and react automatically to problems or changes in operating conditions.

The complex sequence of scientific observations and the associated engineering functions
were executed by the spacecraft under the control of an updatable program stored in the CCS by
ground command. At appropriate times, the CCS issued commands to the AACS for movement
of the scan platform or spacecraft maneuvers; to the FDS for changes in instrument configuration
or telemetry rate; or to numerous other subsystems within the spacecraft for specific actions.
The two identical (redundant) 4096-word memories within the CCS contained both fixed routines
(about 2800 words) and a variable section (about 1290 words) for changing science sequencing
functions. A single 1290-word science sequence load could easily generate 300 000 discrete commands,
thus providing significantly more sequencing capability than would be possible through
ground commands. A 1290-word sequencing load in the CCS controlled both the science and
engineering functions of the spacecraft for a period lasting for ¾ day at closest approach and
for up to 100 days during cruise.

Each 1290-word program (or load) was built from specific science measurement units called
links. Some links were used repeatedly in a looping cyclic (like a computer DO loop) to perform
the same observation numerous times; other links that involved special measurement geometry or
critical timing occurred only once. About 175 science links were defined for the Voyager 1
Jupiter encounter. It took almost two years to convert the desired science objectives and measurements
first into links, then into a minute-by-minute timeline for the 98-day encounter period,
and finally into the specific computer instructions that could be loaded into the CCS memory for
that portion of the encounter time represented by a particular load. The total Voyager 1 Jupiter
encounter period used eighteen sequence memory loads, supplemented by about 1000 ground
commands to modify the sequences because of changing conditions or calibration requirements.

For the Voyager 2 encounter, concern about the ailing spacecraft receiver limited the
number of loads that could be transmitted, particularly while the spacecraft was deep within the
Jovian magnetosphere, where radiation effects caused the receiver frequency to drift unpredictably.
However, a careful redesign of the planned sequences permitted the accomplishment of
very nearly the original set of observations even with these constraints.

31

All three approaches were required on the
Voyager craft, especially after Pioneer 10 and
11 demonstrated that the radiation at Jupiter
was even more intense than had been assumed
in early design studies.

The steady streams of engineering and scientific
data received on Earth are transmitted
from the receiving stations of the Deep Space
Network (DSN) to JPL, where the Voyager
control functions are centered. There, dozens
of technicians check and recheck every subsystem
to search for the slightest hint of malfunction.
In case of problems, there are thick
notebooks of instructions and racks of precoded
computer tapes ready to be used to correct
any apparent malfunction.

Normally Voyager runs itself. Detailed instructions
are programmed into its onboard
computers and command systems for dealing
with such potential emergencies as a stuck valve
in the fuel system, loss of orientation in the star
trackers, erratic gyroscope functions, failure of
radio communications, or a thousand and one
other nightmares. The instructions for operating
the scientific instruments are also stored on
board, with new blocks of commands sent up
once every few days to replace those for tasks
already completed. Whether in the calm of
cruise mode or the intense excitement of a
planetary encounter, the Voyager craft is alone
in space, continuously sensing and reacting to
its environment, tied by only a tenuous thread
of radio communication to the anxious
watchers back on Earth.

Project Manager
Robert Parks

NASA PLANETARY MISSIONS

Spacecraft
Launch Date
Destination
Encounter Date
Type of Encounter

Mariner 2
8/26/62
Venus
12/14/62
flyby

Mariner 4
11/28/64
Mars
7/14/65
flyby

Mariner 5
6/14/67
Venus
10/19/67
flyby

Mariner 6
2/25/69
Mars
7/31/69
flyby

Mariner 7
3/27/69
Mars
8/05/69
flyby

Mariner 9
5/30/71
Mars
11/13/71
orbiter

Pioneer 10
3/03/72
Jupiter
12/04/73
flyby

Pioneer 11
4/06/73
Jupiter
12/03/74
flyby

Saturn
9/01/79
flyby

Mariner 10
11/03/73
Venus
2/05/74
flyby

Mercury
3/29/74
flyby

Viking 1
8/20/75
Mars
6/19/76
orbiter

7/20/76
lander

Viking 2
9/09/75
Mars
7/07/76
orbiter

9/03/76
lander

Voyager 1
8/20/77
Jupiter
3/05/79
flyby

Voyager 2
9/05/77
Jupiter
7/09/79
flyby

Pioneer Venus
5/20/78
Venus
12/04/78
orbiter

8/8/78
Venus
12/09/78
probe

32

The Voyager scan platform contains sophisticated instruments that gather data for Voyager’s remote sensing investigations.
Five of the remote-sensing instruments—two TV cameras, the infrared spectrometer, the ultraviolet spectrometer, and the
photopolarimeter—are mounted together on the scan platform, which can be pointed to almost any direction in space,
allowing exact targeting of the observations. [373-7146BC]

33

CHAPTER 4

SCIENCE AND SCIENTISTS

Introduction

There are many reasons for sending spacecraft
to the planets, but in the final analysis, we
send our robot messengers across the vastness
of space for the sake of scientific exploration.
Science and exploration have always gone hand
in hand, whether in the transcontinental
journey of Lewis and Clark or the Pacific
voyages of Captain James Cook. In this century,
as exploration has become more and more
dependent on advances in technology, the scientific
element has attained increased prominence.
The greatest legacy of the NASA Planetary
Program is the knowledge it has provided of the
other worlds that share our corner of the
universe.

Despite the central role of science in
motivating missions to the planets, specific
scientific considerations are not dominant during
most of the development of a mission such
as Voyager. The problem of building a spacecraft
and getting it to the outer solar system is
too demanding. Of the ton of mass in a
Voyager spacecraft, the scientific instruments
make up only 115 kilograms (about eleven percent).
Similarly, the cost of these instruments
amounts to only about 10 percent of the cost of
the spacecraft and launch vehicle. Unless the
launch and operation of the spacecraft are
nearly perfect, there can be no scientific return
in any case; even the most sophisticated
package of scientific instruments will not tell
much about Jupiter if, following launch, it rests
at the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean. But it is
equally true that the ultimate purpose of the
mission is scientific discovery, and NASA
makes every effort to ensure that the very best
instruments are flown and that a broad scientific
community is given the opportunity to participate
in each mission.

A decade before the 1977 launch, many
astronomers and space scientists began their involvement
with the Voyager mission through
participation in study groups convened by
NASA and by the National Academy of
Sciences. They came primarily from universities,
but also in significant numbers from
NASA laboratories, from industry, and from
abroad. In 1971 the Outer Planets Grand Tours
mission definition group carried out a one-year
final study of the mission that was to become
Voyager. A competition was held in 1972 to
select the Voyager flight instruments and
science teams, and a third review stage followed
a year later to confirm this selection. Out of this
process emerged eleven science investigations,
with which more than one hundred scientists
were associated. In this chapter we look at the
instruments and the persons who designed them
for this challenging task.

Direct and Remote Measurements

The diverse measurements made by
Voyager of a planet and its environment can be
divided into two broad categories, usually called
direct or
in situ
measurements and remote
sensing measurements. A direct measurement
involves the analysis of the immediate environment
of the spacecraft; remote measurements
can be made by analyzing radiation from distant
objects.

The direct measurement instruments on
Voyager measure cosmic ray particles, low
energy charged particles, magnetic fields,
plasma particles, and plasma waves. Their
activity began immediately after launch, monitoring
the Earth environment and then interplanetary
space until the magnetosphere of
Jupiter was reached a few days before the actual
flyby. Long after the flybys of Jupiter and

34

Saturn are completed, particles and fields data
can continue to be acquired by the Voyagers as
they speed outward into previously unexplored
regions of space.

The remote sensing investigations are
essentially astronomical in nature, measuring
the light reflected from or emitted by the planet
and its satellites. On Voyager, however, these
instruments far outstrip their terrestrial counterparts
in capability. Primarily, they derive
their advantage from their proximity to what
they observe—at its closest, Voyager was more
than a thousand times nearer to Jupiter than
are Earth-based telescopes; and for the still
closer satellite encounters, Voyager was nearly
ten thousand times nearer than astronomers on
Earth. In addition, Voyager provided perspectives,
such as views of the night side of Jupiter,
that are impossible from Earth. Finally, these
instruments could exploit the full spectrum of
electromagnetic radiation without concern for
the opacity of the terrestrial atmosphere, which
restricts ground-based astronomers to certain
spectral windows and blocks all observation at
other wavelengths.

Five of the remote sensing instruments—the
two TV cameras, the infrared
spectrometer, the ultraviolet spectrometer, and
the photopolarimeter—are mounted together
on a scan platform. This platform can be
pointed to almost any direction in space, allowing
exact targeting of the observations.

One remote sensing instrument, the planetary
radio astronomy receiver, is not on the
scan platform. It measures long-wave radio
emission without requiring special pointing.

The fully deployed Voyager spacecraft is capable of a wide variety of direct and remote sensing measurements. The
instruments and their objectives were selected many years before the first Jupiter encounter. Because of the exploratory
nature of the Voyager mission, every effort was made to fly versatile instruments that could yield valuable results no matter
what the nature of the Jovian system. [P-18811AC]

Narrow angle TV

Wide angle TV

Steerable platform

Science instrument boom

Plasma detector

Cosmic ray detector

High-gain antenna

Low-gain antenna

Extendable magnetometer boom

Photopolarimeter

Low energy charged particles detector

Infrared interferometer spectrometer and radiometer

Ultraviolet spectrometer

Thrusters

Star trackers

Radioisotope thermoelectric generators

Science instrument calibration panel and shunt radiator

Thrusters

Planetary radio astronomy and plasma wave antenna

35

The science instrument boom supports the plasma particle detector, the cosmic ray detector, and the low energy charged
particle detector. These instruments began collecting data immediately after launch, monitoring the Earth environment and
then interplanetary space until the magnetosphere of Jupiter was reached a few days before the actual flyby. [353-2992BC]

A final Voyager investigation did not fit
into this pattern of direct versus remote sensing
instruments. In fact, it required no special
instrument at all. This investigation deals with
radio science, and it utilizes the regular communications
link between the spacecraft and
Earth to derive the masses of Jupiter and its
satellites, to probe the atmosphere of Jupiter,
and to study properties of the interplanetary
medium.

The Voyager Imaging Science Team

Imaging

The eyes of Voyager are in its imaging system.
Two television cameras, each with a set of
color filters, look at the planets and their

36

satellites and transmit thousands of detailed
pictures to Earth. The imaging system is probably
the most versatile and therefore the most
truly exploratory of the Voyager instruments.
No matter what is out there, the imaging system
will let us see it and hence, we hope, begin to
understand its nature.

VOYAGER SCIENCE INVESTIGATIONS

Project Scientist: E. C. Stone, Caltech

Investigation
Principal Investigator or Team Leader
Primary Objectives at Jupiter

Imaging science
B. A. Smith, U. Arizona
High resolution reconnaissance over large phase angles; measurement of atmospheric dynamics; determination of geologic structure of satellites; search for rings and new satellites.

Infrared radiation (IRIS)
R. A. Hanel, NASA Goddard
Determination of atmospheric composition, thermal structure, and dynamics; satellite surface composition and thermal properties.

Ultraviolet spectroscopy
A. L. Broadfoot, Kitt Peak Observatory
Measurement of upper atmospheric composition and structure; auroral processes; distribution of ions and neutral atoms in the Jovian system.

Photopolarimetry
C. F. Lillie/C. W. Hord, U. Colorado
Measurement of atmospheric aerosols; satellite surface texture and sodium cloud.

Planetary radio astronomy
J. W. Warwick, U. Colorado
Determination of polarization and spectra of radio frequency emissions; Io radio modulation process; plasma densities.

Magnetic fields
N. F. Ness, NASA Goddard
Measurement of plasma electron densities; wave-particle interactions; low-frequency wave emissions.

Plasma particles
H. S. Bridge, MIT
Measurement of magnetospheric ion and electron distribution; solar wind interaction with Jupiter; ions from satellites.

Plasma waves
F. L. Scarf, TRW
Measurement of plasma electron densities; wave-particle interactions; low-frequency wave emissions.

Low energy charged particles
S. M. Krimigis, Johns Hopkins U.
Measurement of the distribution, composition, and flow of energetic ions and electrons; satellite-energetic particle interactions.

Cosmic ray particles
R. E. Vogt, Caltech
Measurement of the distribution, composition, and flow of high energy trapped nuclei; energetic electron spectra.

Radio science
V. R. Eshleman, Stanford U.
Measurement of atmospheric and ionospheric structure, constituents, and dynamics; satellite masses.

Unlike other Voyager instruments, the
imaging system is not the result of a competition
among proposals submitted by groups of

37

scientists. NASA assigned the development of
the cameras directly to JPL, to be integrated
from the beginning with the design of the
Voyager spacecraft and its subsystems. The
members of the Voyager Imaging Science Team
were selected, as individuals, on the basis of the
scientific studies they proposed to carry out.
Initially, ten members of the Imaging Science
Team were selected, but by the time of the
Jupiter encounters, the team had been expanded
to 22 scientists.

Bradford A. Smith, imaging science Team Leader

The Team Leader is Bradford A. Smith, a
professor in the Department of Planetary
Science at the University of Arizona. Smith was
involved in imaging science on several previous
missions, including Mariners 6 and 7 and Viking.
He was also active in ground-based photography
of Jupiter at both New Mexico State
University and University of Arizona, and he is
a member of the team developing a planetary
camera for the Space Telescope, scheduled for
operation in Earth orbit in the mid-1980s.

Originally, the Deputy Team Leader was
Geoffrey A. Briggs, a young British-born
physicist from JPL. However, in 1977 Briggs
took a position at NASA Headquarters in
Washington and was replaced by geologist
Laurence A. Soderblom of the U.S. Geological
Survey in Flagstaff, Arizona. An energetic and
articulate scientist, Soderblom, with his interest
in satellite geology, complemented Smith,
whose personal scientific interests are directed
more toward the atmosphere of Jupiter.

The objectives of imaging involved multicolor
photography of Jupiter and its satellites.
Both wide- and narrow-angle cameras were
needed to obtain the highest possible resolution
while retaining the capability to study global-scale
features on Jupiter and the satellites. In
normal photographic terms, both cameras used
telephoto lenses. For the wide-angle camera, a
focal length of 200 millimeters was selected,
giving a field of view of about 3 degrees. This
field is similar to that obtained with a
400-millimeter telephoto lens on a 35-millimeter
camera. The narrow-angle Voyager camera
has a focal length of 1500 millimeters and field
of view of 0.4 degrees. The camera optics are
combinations of mirrors and lenses, designed
for extreme stability of focus and for freedom
from distortion.

Each camera has a rotating filter wheel
that can be used to select the color of the light
that reaches the camera. For the wide-angle
camera, these colors are clear, violet, blue,
green, orange, and three special bands for selective
observation in sodium light (589-nanometer
wavelength), and in methane spectral
lines at 541 nanometers and 618 nanometers.
For the narrow-angle camera, the filters are
clear, ultraviolet, violet, blue, green, and
orange. To create a color picture, the cameras
are commanded to take, in rapid succession,
pictures of the same area in blue, green, and
orange light. These three pictures can then be
reconstructed on Earth into a “true” color
image. Other combinations of colors are used
to investigate particular scientific problems and
to determine the spectrum of sunlight reflected
from features on Jupiter and its satellites.

The detector in the cameras is not photographic
film but the surface of a selenium-sulfur
vidicon television tube, 11 millimeters
square. Unlike most commercial TV cameras,
these tubes are designed for slow-scan readout,
providing 48 seconds to acquire each picture.
The shutter speed can be varied from a fraction
of a second (for Jupiter and Io) to many
minutes (for searches for faint features, such as
aurorae on the night side of Jupiter).

Each picture consists of many numbers,
each of which represents the brightness of a
single picture element, or pixel, on the image.
There are 640 000 pixels in each Voyager

38

image, representing a square image of 800 ×
800 points. This information content is more
than twice that of an ordinary television picture,
which has only 520 lines. For each pixel,
eight binary numbers are required to specify
the brightness; the total information in a single
image is thus 8 × 640 000 = 5 120 000 bits.
Even at a transmission of one frame per 48
seconds, the “bit rate” is more than 100 000
bits per second. For comparison, the bit rate
from the first spacecraft to Mars (Mariner 4)
was about 10 bits per second, requiring a week
to transmit 21 pictures, with a total information
content equivalent to a single Voyager picture.
Altogether, Voyager took nearly 20 000 pictures
at each Jupiter encounter, representing
10¹¹—a hundred billion—bits of information.

Rudolph Hanel, infrared spectrometer Principal Investigator

Infrared Spectrometer

The infrared investigation on Voyager is
based on one of the most sophisticated instruments
ever flown to another planet. In the past,
most infrared instruments on planetary spacecraft
measured at only a few wavelengths, but
Voyager carries a true spectrometer, capable of
measuring at nearly 2000 separate wavelengths,
covering the spectrum from 4 to 50 micrometers.

Twelve scientists, led by Principal Investigator
Rudolph Hanel of the NASA Goddard
Space Flight Center at Greenbelt, Maryland,
proposed this infrared instrument. Hanel is
an acknowledged world leader in infrared
spectroscopy from space. With his co-workers
at Goddard, he has pioneered in adapting the
extremely complex art of interferometric spectroscopy
to the rigors of space flight. His spectrometers
have made many studies of the
Earth’s atmosphere from meteorological satellites,
and a Hanel interferometer flew successfully
to Mars on Mariner 9.

The primary goals of the infrared spectrometer
investigation are directed toward
analysis of the composition and structure of the
atmosphere of Jupiter. Among the molecules to
be searched for on Jupiter were hydrogen (H₂),
helium (He), methane (CH₄), ammonia (NH₃),
phosphine (PH₃), water (H₂O), carbon monoxide
(CO), simple compounds of silicon and
sulfur, and a variety of organic compounds
consisting of atoms of carbon and hydrogen
(e.g., C₂H₂, C₂H₄, C₂H₆). In addition to indicating
the abundance of these constituents of
the atmosphere, the infrared spectra also contain
information on atmospheric structure, that
is, on the variation of temperature and pressure
with altitude. The presence of clouds or dust
layers can also be inferred from the shapes of
spectral lines.

In addition to its spectroscopy of Jupiter,
the Voyager instrument could be used as a heat-measuring
device to map the temperatures of
both the satellites and the atmosphere of Jupiter.
Particularly interesting for the satellites are
measurements of the surface cooling and
heating rates, since these rates reveal the
physical compactness of the surface, easily
distinguishing between rock and sand or dust.

The infrared instrument is a Michelson interferometer
at the focus of a gold-plated
telescope of 51-centimeter aperture. The spectrum
is not obtained directly, by moving a prism
or grating, but indirectly through the interference
effects of light of different wavelengths:
hence its name, an interferometer. The complex
interference pattern generated by the motion of
one of the mirrors in the light path is transmitted
to Earth, where computer analysis is required
to transform it into a recognizable spectrum.
The entire instrument, which has a mass
of 20 kilograms, is called IRIS, for infrared interferometer
spectrometer.

The development of the infrared system
for Voyager posed many problems. IRIS was
designed to cover the optimum spectral region
for studies of the atmospheres of Jupiter and
Saturn. However, when it was decided in 1974

39

that an extended Voyager mission might also
allow a visit to Uranus, Hanel and his colleagues
realized that their instrument had serious
deficiencies for investigation of that colder
and more distant planet, and they proposed
that a modified IRIS (MIRIS) be substituted
for the original design. A crash program was
authorized to develop MIRIS in parallel with
IRIS, and in early 1977, as launch approached,
it appeared that the improved instrument would
be ready. Problems occurred during testing,
however, and for several weeks in June and
July the decision hung in the balance. Unfortunately,
there simply was not enough time to
solve all the problems; both Voyagers were
launched carrying the original IRIS, and the
final flight qualification of MIRIS came in October,
about six weeks after launch. With no
other missions planned beyond Saturn, no
alternate use for MIRIS has been found; it remains
“on the shelf,” one of the rare cases
where a technological gamble by NASA did not
pay off.

Lyle Broadfoot, ultraviolet spectrometer Principal Investigator

Ultraviolet Spectrometer

A second spectroscopic instrument on the
Voyager scan platform examines short-wave, or
ultraviolet, radiation. The Principal Investigator
for the ultraviolet spectrometer (UVS) is
A. Lyle Broadfoot of Kitt Peak National Observatory
in Tucson, Arizona. Broadfoot’s expertise
lies in instrumentation for atmospheric
research, and he was previously the Principal
Investigator for a similar ultraviolet instrument
on the Mariner 10 mission to Venus and Mercury.
Associated with Broadfoot in the Voyager
investigation are fourteen other scientists from
the United States, Canada, and France.

In the upper atmosphere of a planet, the
lighter gases tend to diffuse, rising above their
heavier neighbors, and unusual chemical reactions
take place as the action of sunlight breaks
some chemical bonds and stimulates the formation
of others. The study of these tenuous
regions of planetary atmospheres is called
aeronomy. Many of the exotic chemical processes
that occur can best be studied by examining
radiation of very short wavelength, and it is
to these problems that much of the work of the
UVS team is directed.

The observations are also sensitive to
special processes in the Jovian atmosphere
resulting from the magnetosphere. At the very
top of the atmosphere, energetic charged particles
interacting with the atmospheric molecules
produce ultraviolet aurorae that indicate
the location and nature of the bombarding electrons
and ions. Emissions from atoms in the extended
gas clouds around Io and possibly
around other satellites were also expected to be
observable.

The ultraviolet instrument is a relatively
straightforward optical spectrometer, adapted
for use in space. A diffraction grating disperses
the light into a spectrum, and the other optical
elements are gold-coated mirrors. The field of
view is rectangular, about 0.1 degrees × 0.9
degrees. An array of sensitive electronic detectors
provides simultaneous measurements in
128 wavelength channels over a wavelength
range from 50 to 170 nanometers.

Photopolarimeter

The fourth scan-platform instrument is
designed to measure the brightness and polarization
of light with high precision. Unlike the
imaging system, however, it can look at only a
single point (one pixel) at a time; thus it sacrifices
spatial capability in favor of precision of
measurement. The prime objectives of this
photopolarimeter are related to study of the
clouds of Jupiter.

During the development stage for this instrument,
the Principal Investigator was
Charles F. Lillie of the Laboratory for Atmospheric
and Space Physics of the University of
Colorado at Boulder. Later, the Principal
Investigator’s role was assumed by Lillie’s colleague,

40

Charles W. Hord, a physicist with considerable
experience in space missions, primarily
with ultraviolet instruments. Four other
scientists are Co-Investigators on the photopolarimeter.

The instrument itself is essentially a small
Cassegrain reflecting telescope of 15-centimeter
aperture. Two consecutive filter wheels select
the color and polarization of the light, which is
then detected and measured by a photomultiplier
tube. The entire photopolarimeter weighs
just 2.5 kilograms.

In spite of their apparent simplicity, however,
the Voyager photopolarimeters were
plagued with troubles almost from the moment
of launch. A succession of mechanical failures
on Voyager 1 led to the sticking first of the
polarization wheel and then of the filter wheel.
Even when repeated commands from Earth
managed to free the wheels, their behavior was
erratic. Ultimately an electronic failure also
took place, leading to the reluctant decision to
shut down the Voyager 1 photopolarimeter. On
Voyager 2, similar mechanical problems greatly
restricted the ability of the instrument to carry
out its observations. The photopolarimeter thus
was unable to contribute its share to unraveling
the mysteries of Jupiter and its satellites.

Charles W. Hord, photopolarimeter Principal Investigator

James W. Warwick, planetary radio astronomy Principal
Investigator

Planetary Radio Astronomy

The final Voyager remote sensing instrument
is designed to measure radio emission
from Jupiter and Saturn over a wide range of
frequencies. These emissions, which sound like
hiss or static if played through an audio
receiver, result from interactions of charged
particles in the magnetospheres and ionospheres
of the giant planets. The planetary
radio astronomy (PRA) Principal Investigator
is James W. Warwick, an astronomer in the
Department of Astro-Geophysics of the University
of Colorado at Boulder. Eleven colleagues
from the United States and France participate
as Co-Investigators. Warwick has been
studying Jupiter longer than any other Voyager
Principal Investigator. He has monitored its
radio emissions since the 1960s, and he played a
central role in the discovery that Io influenced
these emissions.

Jupiter emits many kinds of radio radiation,
ranging from bland thermal emission at
short (centimeter) wavelengths, to synchrotron
emission from energetic electrons at intermediate
(decimeter) wavelengths, to erratic, extremely
intense bursts at long (meter and decameter)
wavelengths. The origin of these latter,
nonthermal emissions constitutes one of the
major unsolved problems of the Jovian system,

41

and, more generally, of the physics of plasmas.
One of the most important advantages of the
Voyager PRA for studying Jovian radio emission
lies in its proximity to Jupiter and hence its
ability to locate the sources of different kinds
of radio bursts.

The PRA instrument consists of an antenna
and a radio receiver. The antenna is made
up of two thin metal poles, each 10 meters long,
extended from the spacecraft after launch at an
angle of 90 degrees to each other. These are
electrically connected to two receivers of extremely
high sensitivity and broad frequency
response: from 1.2 kilohertz to 40.5 megahertz.
The PRA can operate in a number of modes,
depending on the measurements desired. At its
lowest level of activity, it monitors intensity in
all 198 bands and transmits the data at 266 bits
per second. In its highest mode, where searches
are made for variations with very short time
scales, the data rate goes up to 108 000 bits per
second, essentially the same as that required by
imaging. In fact, the high-rate PRA data actually
use an imaging frame as a display form,
and occasionally throughout the mission an unfamiliar
looking “image” was transmitted that
was actually a block of PRA data—a portrait
of electrical events in the Jovian atmosphere
and magnetosphere that only Warwick and his
colleagues could interpret.

Norman F. Ness, magnetometer Principal Investigator

Voyager’s 13-meter-long magnetometer boom is shown fully extended. In space, under zero gravity conditions, the triangular
epoxy glass mast spirals from its housing and provides a rigid support for two magnetometer instruments—one at the end of
the boom and another at about the midpoint. [260-181]

Magnetometer

The first of the direct sensing instruments
to be discussed is the magnetometer, designed
to measure the magnetic fields surrounding the
spacecraft. Such measurements can be interpreted
to yield the intrinsic fields of Jupiter and
its satellites and to characterize, in conjunction
with data from particle and plasma instruments,
the processes taking place in the
magnetosphere of the planet. The Principal
Investigator for this instrument is Norman F.
Ness of the NASA Goddard Space Flight Center.
Ness is an intense, competitive scientist

42

with a great deal of previous experience in
spacecraft magnetometers, primarily on board
Earth satellites. Ness is also the only Voyager
Principal Investigator who has previous experience
at Jupiter; he was Principal Investigator
on one of the two magnetometer instruments
flown on Pioneer 11. For the Voyager investigation,
Ness is joined by four colleagues from
Goddard and one from Germany.

The magnetometer instrument consists of
two systems: a high-field magnetometer and a
low-field magnetometer. Each system contains
two identical three-axis magnetometers that
measure the intensity and direction of the
magnetic field. The low-field system requires
isolation from magnetic fields induced by electric
circuits in the spacecraft itself. To achieve
this isolation, it is mounted on the largest component
of Voyager—a 13-meter boom, about as
long as the width of a typical city house lot.
This boom was coiled tightly in a canister during
launch; later, when the package was
opened, it uncurled and extended automatically.

By using two magnetometers, Ness and his
colleagues are able to correct for the residual
artificial magnetic fields that reach even 13
meters from the main spacecraft. The dynamic
range extends from a maximum field of 20
gauss down to 2 × 10⁻⁸ gauss—a factor of one
billion. The fields can be measured as frequently
as 17 times per second. The total mass,
exclusive of the 13-meter boom, is 5.6 kilograms.

Herbert S. Bridge, plasma particle Principal Investigator

Plasma Particles

Plasma is the term given to a “gas” of
charged particles; the electrons and protons are
separate, yet there are equal numbers of each,
producing a zero net charge. If the velocities of
the electrons and protons are less than about
0.1 percent of the speed of light, they can be
measured by the Voyager plasma instrument; if
their energies are higher, they are measured by
one of the other two particle instruments—the
low energy charged particle (LECP) detector or
the cosmic ray detector. The plasma instrument,
like the magnetometer, was designed to
provide basic data on the particles and fields
environment of Voyager.

The Principal Investigator for the plasma
instrument is Herbert S. Bridge of the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology in Cambridge,
Massachusetts. An experienced space physicist,
Bridge has flown similar instruments on many
Earth satellites and planetary probes. He also
holds the position of Director of the Laboratory
for Space Experiments at MIT. On the
Voyager experiment, he is joined by one German
and ten U.S. Co-Investigators.

The objectives of the plasma investigation
are directed toward study of both the interplanetary
medium and the Jovian magnetosphere.
At Jupiter, Bridge expected to determine
the plasma populations and processes in
the inner and outer regions of the magnetosphere
and in the plasma tail that extends
beyond Jupiter, much as a comet tail is blown
outward by the solar wind. The densities and
temperature of electrons were measured, and
their origins determined: Some originate near
Jupiter and diffuse outward through the magnetosphere;
others derive from the solar wind.

The plasma instrument, with a mass of 9.9
kilograms, was designed to view in two directions:
one toward the Earth and Sun, primarily
to study the solar wind, and the other sideways,
looking toward the direction plasma would
flow if it were caught up in the rotating Jovian
magnetic field. If it is desired to look in other
directions, the entire spacecraft must be tipped,
a maneuver that was carried out several times
near Jupiter. The detectors directly sense the
flow of electrons, protons, and alpha particles
(helium nucleii, made up of two protons and
two neutrons each). Analysis of the energy
spectra can also yield data on positive ions of
higher mass.

43

Frederick L. Scarf, plasma wave Principal Investigator

Plasma Waves

The plasma wave investigation on Voyager
was a late addition to the scientific payload.
It was selected to broaden the capability of
the mission to study a wide variety of plasma
processes. Because of the electrically charged
nature of the plasma, it responds to energy
inputs in ways that ordinary gas cannot. One
of these modes of response yields plasma
waves, which are oscillations in density and
electric field that generally cover the audio
range of frequencies. Measurement of such
waves characterizes the density and temperature
of the local plasma surrounding the spacecraft,
and it also allows remote sensing detection
of distant events from the plasma waves
they produce.

The plasma wave Principal Investigator is
physicist Frederick L. Scarf of the TRW
Defense and Space Systems Group of Redondo
Beach, California—he is the only Voyager
Principal Investigator to come from industry.
Scarf has been associated with many particles
and fields investigations in the terrestrial magnetosphere,
although he is better known as a
theorist than as an experimenter. A member of
the Space Science Board of the National
Academy of Sciences, he is familiar in Washington
as an eloquent advocate of space physics—the
study of plasma-physical processes in the
space environment.

The plasma wave instrument shares with
the planetary radio astronomy investigation a
pair of 10-meter-long antennas. Whereas the
PRA uses these as electric antennas to detect
radio radiation, the plasma wave system uses
them to detect directly the oscillations in the
plasma near the spacecraft. Waves are measured
over a broad frequency range, from 10
hertz (a bit deeper than the lowest bass note we
can hear) to 56 kilohertz (about three times
higher than the highest pitch to which the
human ear responds). The instrument electronics
have a total mass of only 1.4 kilograms.

Low Energy Charged Particles

Charged particles with energies greater
than a few thousand electron volts are not easily
measured by a plasma instrument such as that
designed by Herb Bridge. Instead, these faster
moving particles, with speeds up to a few percent
the speed of light, are the subject of a pair
of Voyager instruments called collectively the
LECP, or low energy charged particle instrument.
Like the other particles and fields investigation,
the LECP is designed to provide basic
data on plasma-physical processes in the Jovian
magnetosphere and the solar wind, and on their
interactions.

The Principal Investigator for the LECP
investigation is Stamatios Mike Krimigis, a
Greek-born physicist from Johns Hopkins
University. Krimigis has participated in a
number of satellite studies of the terrestrial
magnetosphere, and he now serves as Head of
Space Physics and Instrumentation at the Johns
Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory. He is
joined in this investigation by one German and
five U.S. Co-Investigators.

The LECP instrument consists of two subsystems.
The first, called the low energy magnetospheric
particle analyzer, is optimized for
measurement of particles within the Jovian
magnetosphere, with high sensitivity over a
broad dynamic range. Measurements of electrons,
protons, and other positive ions can be
carried out, determining the energy and composition
of individual particles. The total
energy ranges covered are 10 kiloelectron volts
(keV) to 11 million electron volts (MeV) for
electrons and 15 keV to 150 MeV for protons
and ions.

44

Stamatios Mike Krimigis, low energy charged particle Principal
Investigator

The second LECP subsystem is a low
energy charged particle telescope, designed to
operate where the density of charged particles is
low, such as in interplanetary space or the outer
magnetosphere of Jupiter. For protons and
positive ions, the energy range is from 50 keV
to 40 MeV per nucleon. The energy and species
resolution is again sufficient to determine the
composition, both chemical and isotopic, of
many ions encountered. In order to provide
directional discrimination even on a spacecraft
of fixed orientation, both LECP subsystems are
mounted on a moving platform that steps
through eight positions in a time that can be
commanded to vary from 48 seconds to 48
minutes. The mass of the instrument and its
platform is 6.7 kilograms.

Cosmic Rays

The solar system is constantly bombarded
by extremely energetic charged particles. These
are called cosmic rays, although they are particles,
not photons—“rays” are only produced
when the particles strike something, such as the
molecules of the Earth’s atmosphere, and give
up their energy in a flash of x-rays and gamma-rays.
One of the Voyager instruments is
designed to study these galactic cosmic rays,
particularly to look from beyond the orbit of
Saturn, where the cosmic ray particles will be
less affected by the solar magnetic field and
solar wind than they are near Earth.

The cosmic ray Principal Investigator is
Rochus E. Vogt of the California Institute of
Technology. Vogt has measured cosmic rays
from the ground, from balloons, and from
spacecraft for many years. During 1977 and
1978 he served as Chief Scientist at JPL, and
then assumed the job of directing the physics,
mathematics, and astronomy programs at
Caltech. Among his six Co-Investigators is Ed
Stone, the Voyager Project Scientist.

Because the cosmic ray instrument was not
directed principally toward measurements of
the Jovian system, it is described only briefly.
Like the LECP, it is designed to determine the
energy and composition of individual electrons
and positive ions. For electrons, the energy
range is from 3 to 110 MeV, and for ions from 1
to 500 MeV per nucleon; the corresponding
velocities are from about 10 percent to 99 percent
of the speed of light. For the positive ions,
composition can be determined for elements
from hydrogen to iron. At Jupiter, this system
could be used to determine the nature of the
rare particles accelerated to very high energies
in the Jovian magnetosphere.

Radio Science

The final Voyager science investigation is
in the field of radio science. No special instrument
was required for this study; rather, NASA
selected members of a Radio Science Team who
proposed investigations that could be carried
out using the already existing spacecraft telecommunication
system.

The radio science Team Leader is Von R.
Eshleman of the Center for Radio Astronomy
at Stanford University. Eshleman is a radar
physicist who has been interpreting spacecraft
radio occultation data since the first such probe
was carried out when Mariner 4 passed behind
Mars in 1964. The Deputy Team Leader is G.
Leonard Tyler, a colleague of Eshleman’s at
Stanford. There are five other radio team members,
four of them from JPL.

The radio science investigations are
divided into two groups. The first deals with the
atmosphere of Jupiter. During the Voyager flybys,
the spacecraft passed behind the planet as
seen from Earth, and the radio signal was
dimmed by the atmosphere before it was finally
extinguished. During an occultation, the propagation
of the radio waves is slowed down by
passage through the neutral atmosphere and is
speeded up by passage through the electrically
charged ionosphere. Because of the extreme

45

stability of the ground-based and spacecraft
radio transmitters, it is possible to measure
these shifts in the signal with high precision.
The shifts are proportional to electron density
for the ionosphere, and to gas density for the
atmosphere. From a careful study of the interactions
of the transmitted beam with the Jovian
atmosphere, Eshleman and his colleagues can
reconstruct a temperature-pressure profile of
the ionosphere and the upper atmosphere of
Jupiter. The same approach can be used to
search for tenuous atmospheres on the satellites.

The second area of study is in the field of
celestial mechanics. The frequency stability of
the communications system permits measurements
of the speed of the spacecraft, relative to
Earth, to a precision of one part in several
million. By careful tracking, gravitational perturbations
on the spacecraft can be detected
and used to measure the gravitational fields,
and hence the masses, of Jupiter and its
satellites.

Rochus E. Vogt, cosmic ray Principal Investigator

Von R. Eshleman, radio science Team Leader

These scientific instruments and their
objectives were selected many years before
the first Jupiter encounter in March 1977.
Because Voyager was an exploratory mission,
every effort was made to fly versatile instruments
that could yield valuable results no matter
what the nature of the Jovian system. In
addition, the Voyager spacecraft control system
permitted the instruments to receive commands
from Earth to adjust their sensitivities and
observing sequences in response to new information.
By the spring of 1977, all the instruments
were completed, ready to be installed in
the Voyager spacecraft for testing and launch.

46

The first picture to capture crescent Earth and crescent Moon in the same frame was taken by Voyager 1, the second-launched
spacecraft, on September 18, 1977, at a distance of 12 million kilometers from Earth. On the Earth eastern Asia,
the western Pacific, and part of the Arctic can be seen. Since the Moon is much less reflective than the Earth, JPL image
processors brightened the lunar image by a factor of three to ensure that both Earth and Moon were visible on this print.
[P-19891C]

47

CHAPTER 5

THE VOYAGE TO JUPITER—GETTING THERE

Launch

On August 20, 1977, exactly two years
after the launch of the Viking spacecraft to
Mars, the first of the Voyagers—actually
Voyager 2—was boosted into space at 10:29
a.m. EDT, less than five minutes after the
launch window opened on the first day of the
thirty-day launch period. Sixteen days later, at
8:56 a.m. EDT on Labor Day, September 5,
1977, Voyager 1 was hurled into space on a
shorter, faster trajectory than its twin, zipping
past the orbit of the Moon only ten hours after
launch. Ultimately, Voyager 1 earned its title by
overtaking Voyager 2 as both spacecraft journeyed
through the asteroid belt, to arrive at
Jupiter four months ahead of Voyager 2.

The Voyagers lifted off from Launch
Complex 41, Air Force Eastern Test Range,
Kennedy Space Center, Cape Canaveral,
Florida, atop the giant Titan III-E/Centaur
rocket. It was the last time such a launch vehicle
was scheduled to be used, as, according to plan,
the Space Shuttle would take over in the 1980s.
Thus the launching of the two Voyagers signified
both an end and a beginning: a once-in-a-lifetime
opportunity to explore, in only 8½
years’ time, perhaps fifteen major bodies of the
outer solar system.

But long before even the first Voyager was
to make its closest approach to Jupiter—in
fact, even before Voyager 2 was off the launch
pad—there were problems to overcome.

In early August 1977, about three weeks
before launch, failures in the attitude and articulation
control subsystem (AACS) and the
flight data subsystem (FDS), two of the spacecraft’s
three main computer subsystems, prevented
the VGR77-2 spacecraft, originally
scheduled for launch on August 20, from
becoming Voyager 2. Instead, the “spare”
spacecraft VGR77-3 was substituted, becoming
Voyager 2 upon launch August 20, and
VGR77-2, after proper repairs, became
Voyager 1. Minor problems continued right up
to launch. The low energy charged particle instrument
failed and had to be replaced, and as
late as T minus five minutes there was a halt in
the countdown to check on a stuck valve. Unlike
a jinxed dress rehearsal, which is said to
“assure” an opening-night success, Voyager 2’s
prelaunch problems were a portent of difficulties
to come.

The Voyager 2 launch was witnessed by
thousands as the spacecraft ascended gracefully
into the blue Florida sky, accompanied by the
deep-throated rumblings of its rocket, echoing
for miles across the beaches and scrub forests
of Cape Canaveral. The Titan-Centaur performance
was nearly flawless, and Voyager 2
quickly achieved an accurate trajectory toward
Jupiter. However, even while the engines were
still firing, the spacecraft began to experience a
baffling series of problems that would absorb
the attention of hundreds of persons from
Pasadena to Washington, D.C., for the next
several weeks until they were brought under
control.

During the first minutes of flight, there
seemed to be two difficulties with the AACS.

48

The first was a problem with one of the three
stabilizing gyroscopes, but fortunately, the
gyroscope began operating normally without
intervention from the ground. The other problem
appeared to be with one of the AACS computers;
the spacecraft switched to a backup
computer during the Titan burn, and initial
data transmissions were incomplete. Early
analysis seemed to indicate that an event during
the launch itself, rather than a faulty spacecraft
computer system, was the cause of the data
loss. At first, on August 23, officials suspected
that perhaps the spacecraft had been bumped
by the rocket motor one hour after liftoff and
again about seventeen hours later, when
telemetry signals indicated that the spacecraft
had been jolted. However, by the next day,
flight engineers determined that electronic gyrations
in the AACS seemed to have caused the
difficulty.

The Titan-Centaur rocket used to launch Voyager stood as
tall as a 15-story building and weighed nearly 700 tons.
Here the rocket waits for launch at Kennedy Space Center,
with the Voyager spacecraft enclosed in the white protective
shroud at the top. [P-19471A]

Within an hour after launch, Voyager 2’s
science scan platform boom was to have been
fully extended and locked. Instructions to
deploy were given, and the boom moved outward;
however, there was no signal to indicate
that the boom was actually locked in place. Efforts
to command the boom to move into the
locked position were thwarted by the spacecraft.
The first maneuver designed to try to lock
the boom was aborted by the computer command
subsystem (CCS) when the AACS erroneously
indicated that it was in trouble. Three
days later another maneuver was scheduled to
reprogram the faulty computer in the AACS, to
align the Sun sensors, and to try to lock the
science boom. To provide a direct check of the
boom position, the scan platform was turned so
that the TV cameras could see the spacecraft.
Careful measurement of these pictures verified
that the boom was within ½ degree of full
deployment, but still there was no indication
that it was locked into place. Ultimately, it
was decided that the sensor to signal actuation
of the lock was at fault, and that the boom
itself was almost certainly fully extended and
operational.

Because of the postlaunch problems of
Voyager 2, the launch of Voyager 1 was delayed
twice—from September 1 to September 3 and
then to September 5—in order to inspect
Voyager 1’s science boom and to try to prevent
a repetition of Voyager 2’s problems. An extra
spring was attached to the science boom to
assure its full extension. Finally, as if to make
up for the troubles of the first launch, Voyager
1’s launch was both “flawless and accurate.”
All launch and postlaunch events went
smoothly. The launch window opened at 8:56
a.m. EDT, and Voyager took off promptly at
8:56:01. The booms and antennas deployed and
locked in the first hours after launch; all instruments
scheduled to be on were on and

49

working well.

THE TITAN/CENTAUR LAUNCH VEHICLE

The two Voyager spacecraft were carried into space and accelerated toward Jupiter by the
Titan III-E Centaur rocket, the largest launch vehicle in the NASA arsenal after the retirement of
the Saturn rockets in 1975. The Titan and Centaur vehicles were originally developed separately
and have been used with other rocket stages for many NASA launches. They were first combined
for the two Viking launches to Mars in 1975, and this powerful four-stage launch vehicle was
used again in 1977 for Voyager.

The Titan/Centaur stands nearly 50 meters tall, about the height of a fifteen-story building.
Fully fueled, it weighs nearly 700 tons. At takeoff, the thrust of the two solid-propellant Stage-0
motors is about 10.7 million newtons. These motors, which burn for 122 seconds, use powdered
aluminum as fuel and ammonium perchlorate as oxidizer. Together, they have a mass of 500
tons.

The first stage of the liquid propellant core of the Titan rocket ignites about 112 seconds
after takeoff. The propellant is hydrazine as fuel and nitrogen tetroxide as oxidizer. The first
stage is 3 meters in diameter and 20 meters tall. Fueled, it has a mass of 130 tons. The motor provides
a thrust of 2.5 million newtons for a duration of 146 seconds.

About 4.3 minutes after takeoff the Titan Stage II liquid propellant motor begins to fire,
and the first stage is separated and falls back into the Atlantic. The second stage is 3 meters in
diameter and more than 7 meters long, with a fueled mass of 35 tons. The single liquid fuel motor
burns for 210 seconds with a thrust of half a million newtons. During the second stage burn, the
shroud covering the Voyager spacecraft is jettisoned.

The Centaur and Titan vehicles separate 8 minutes into the flight, and the Centaur main
engine begins its burn. The Centaur is nearly 20 meters tall and 3 meters in diameter, with a mass
of 17 tons. The motors have a thrust of almost 200 000 newtons, operating on the most powerful
chemical fuels known: liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen. The Centaur burns for only 1 minute
and 36 seconds as it attains Earth parking orbit; the engine then shuts down as the vehicle begins
a half-hour coasting period that carries it nearly half way around the Earth. During this time,
careful tracking of the spacecraft supplies the data needed for Earth-based computers to calculate
the proper time to leave parking orbit and start the long trip toward Jupiter.

About 50 minutes after liftoff, from a position high above the Indian Ocean, the second
burn of the Centaur main engine begins. Six minutes of additional thrust provides enough energy
to break out of Earth’s orbit. The Voyager then separates from the Centaur for a final boost
toward Jupiter. The solid rocket motor in the spacecraft propulsion module (acting as final stage
of this five-stage launch sequence) fires for 45 seconds at a thrust of 68 000 newtons. Just an
hour after liftoff, the Voyager spacecraft is on its way, coasting on an orbit toward Jupiter at a
speed of more than 10 kilometers per second.

The Voyager spacecraft is dominated by the large 3.7-meter-diameter
antenna used for communication with
Earth. Here the spacecraft undergoes final tests before
launch. The science instrument scan platform is folded
against the spacecraft on the right; the three cylinders on
the left are the RTG power sources. [260-108BC]

50

Voyager 2 was the first of the spacecraft to be launched, on
August 20, 1977, propelled into space in a Titan/Centaur
rocket. [P-19450AC]

The First Year Is the Roughest

During the autumn of 1977 Voyager 2, and
to a lesser extent Voyager 1, continued to
plague controllers with erratic actions. Thrusters
fired at inappropriate times, data modes
shifted, instrument filter and analyzer wheels
became stuck, and the various computer control
systems occasionally overrode ground commands.
Apparently, the spacecraft hardware
was working properly, but the computers on
board displayed certain traits that seemed
almost humanly perverse—and perhaps a little
psychotic. In general, these reactions were the
result of programming too much sensitivity into
the spacecraft systems, resulting in panic over-reaction
by the onboard computers to minor
fluctuations in the environment. Ultimately,
part of the programming had to be rewritten on
Earth and then transmitted to the Voyagers, to
calm them down so that they would ignore
minor perturbations, yet still be ready to perform
automatic sequences required to protect
the spacecraft from major threats. Meanwhile,
however, more serious problems were developing.

On February 23, 1978, during a series of
movements or slews, Voyager 1’s scan platform
slowed and stopped before completing the
maneuver. This failure caused a great deal of
concern, since the scan platform houses the optical
instruments that are crucial to the observation
of the Jovian system—the ultraviolet spectrometer,
the IRIS, the photopolarimeter, and
the two TV cameras. At JPL, tests were run on
a proof-test model—an exact copy of the Voyager
spacecraft—to try to find out why Voyager
1’s scan platform had become stuck. On March
17, Voyager 1’s scan platform was tested—JPL
engineers instructed the platform to move
slowly for a short distance, and Voyager
responded as ordered. Further tests were conducted
on March 23. This time the scan platform
was ordered to execute a sequence of four
slews, moving away from the part of the sky
where the original failure had occurred and
ending with the position that it would be most
useful to leave the platform in—just in case the
platform should become stuck again. On April

51

4 the scan platform was commanded to perform
a sequence of 38 slews, and fifty more
slews were performed on April 5. All were successful.
Yet engineers were still hesitant to force
the platform to move through the region where
it had originally stuck, and extensive discussions
were held to determine if the Jupiter
observations could be carried out without risking
a return to the danger area. It was argued,
however, that full mobility of the scan platform
really was required, and on May 31 commands
were sent to maneuver the scan platform
through the danger region. It moved normally:
The scan platform was operating properly
again. After additional slewing tests were run in
mid-June, the scan platform was pronounced
fit for operation. Engineers suspected that the
material caught in the platform gears must have
been crushed or moved out of the way by the
continued slewing, allowing the platform to
move once more.

Voyager 1 was launched on September 5, 1977. The launch
was delayed 5 days to make last-minute adjustments to
avoid the postlaunch difficulties experienced by Voyager 2.
[P-19480AC]

An even more serious crisis soon endangered
the Voyager 2 spacecraft. In late
November 1977, the S-band radio receiver
began losing amplifier power in its high-gain
mode, so the solid-state amplifier was switched
to its low-power position. No further problems
were noted until April 5, 1978, when Voyager
2’s primary radio receiver suddenly failed, and
shocked engineers discovered that the backup
receiver was also faulty. The trouble was
detected after Voyager’s computer command
subsystem directed the spacecraft to switch
from the primary radio receiver to the backup
receiver. This command was issued as part of a
special protection sequence: If the primary
radio receiver receives no commands from
Earth for seven days, the backup receiver is
switched on instead; if the secondary receiver in
turn receives no instructions over a twelve-hour
period, the system reverts to the main receiver.
When, on April 5, Voyager 2’s radio reception
was switched from the primary to the secondary
receiver, flight engineers found that they were
unable to communicate with the spacecraft—the
secondary receiver’s tracking loop capacitor
was malfunctioning. That meant that the secondary
receiver could not follow a changing
signal frequency sent out from Earth. The frequencies
of signals transmitted from Earth are
affected by the Doppler effect—just as the siren
on a fire engine seems first to rise in pitch as the
truck approaches, then falls as the truck speeds
away, so the frequency of signals transmitted
from Earth fluctuates with the Earth’s rotation
as the Deep Space Network’s radio antennas
move toward or away from the spacecraft. The
engineers had to wait until the primary radio
receiver was switched back on before they could
communicate with the spacecraft. Once the primary
receiver was on, Voyager 2 began receiving
instructions from Earth, but approximately
thirty minutes later, there was an apparent
power surge in the receiver. The fuses blew.

52

There was no recourse. The main receiver had
failed; its loss was permanent. It remained for
the engineers to devise a way to communicate
with the slightly deaf spacecraft.

Each Voyager spacecraft follows a billion-kilometer path to
Jupiter. Except for minor thruster firings to achieve small
trajectory corrections, each Voyager coasts from Earth to
Jupiter, guided by the gravitational pull of the Sun. At
Jupiter, the powerful tug of the giant planet deflects the
spacecraft and speeds them up, imparting an extra kick to
send them on their way toward Saturn.

Voyager 1

Voyager 2

Jupiter-Saturn-Uranus

Sun

Earth 8/20/77

Earth 9/1/77

Mars 8/20/77

Jupiter 8/20/77

Jupiter 3/5/79

Jupiter 7/9/79

Saturn 8/20/77

Saturn 11/13/80

Saturn 8/27/81

Uranus 8/20/77

Uranus 1/30/86

Because the switching of the radio receivers
was still controlled by the special protection
sequence discussed earlier, flight engineers
would have to wait for seven days—until April
13—before they could attempt communication
with the spacecraft again. During that week
special procedures were established and
rehearsed so that commands could be sent to
Voyager in the short time that the backup
receiver would be on. On Thursday, April 13,
1978, the seven days were up and the spacecraft
should have shifted from the dead main receiver
to the sick backup system. There was just
a twelve-hour “window” in which to restore
communication. At about 3:30 a.m. PST the
Madrid tracking station of the Deep Space Network
sent its first order to the spacecraft, approximately
474 million kilometers away. Almost
an hour later, word arrived from Voyager
that the command had been accepted. (One-way
light time for a signal to travel the distance
from Earth to Voyager at that time was almost
27 minutes.) Elated flight controllers went
ahead and transmitted nine hours of commands
to the spacecraft.

Voyager 2 was successfully commanded
again on April 18 and April 26. The April 26
commands included a course change maneuver
that was executed properly on May 3. On June
23, Voyager 2 was programmed for a backup
automatic mission at Saturn in the event that
the secondary radio receiver should also fail.
These backup mission instructions would
operate all the science experiments, but only a
minimum amount of data would be returned,
since the scan platform would only be programmed
to move through three positions
rather than thousands as it would in normal
operation. Instructions for a backup minimum
automatic encounter at Jupiter were transmitted
to Voyager 2 in two segments, the
second of these on October 12, 1978.

With the backup instructions recorded on
board the spacecraft, Voyager personnel felt
their fears partially allayed. If Voyager 2’s
secondary radio receiver failed, the spacecraft
would still obtain some science data at Jupiter
and Saturn. But that would mean that there
would be no mission beyond Saturn; our first
opportunity to explore Uranus, its satellites, its
newly discovered ring system, and possibly even
to get a look at Neptune, would not come in
this century.

Another major concern affecting both
Voyager spacecraft was the proper management
of hydrazine fuel reserves. Hydrazine is
used by the thrusters on the Voyagers for
stabilization of the spacecraft and for trajectory
correction maneuvers (TCM). Each
Voyager was loaded with 105 kilograms of
hydrazine budgeted for use on the long flight to
Jupiter, Saturn, and beyond. Because of the
excellent performance of the launch rockets,
both Voyagers required less hydrazine than
anticipated for their final boost into proper
trajectory toward Jupiter, and at first it looked
as though both spacecraft would have plenty of
propellant to spare.

Charles E. Kolhase, Manager of Mission
Analysis and Engineering for the Voyager Project,
later explained the situation: “Voyager 1
should have been launched September 1. Had it
been launched on September 1—and I’m glad it
wasn’t—the maneuver to correct the trajectory
for a Titan flyby would have required a change
in velocity of 100-110 meters per second—an
enormous maneuver—and we would have had a
propellant margin for going on to Saturn of
perhaps 4.5 kilograms. But, by launching on
the fifth of September we increased our margin
to 23 kilograms. Fortunately, for every launch
date that went by, that velocity change maneuver
was shrinking at a rate of 10 meters per
second per day. Now, a 1 meter per second
change uses about a pound of hydrazine [about
0.5 kilogram]. So when we launched on the
fifth of September, now we suddenly had 40
pounds of hydrazine excess over what we would
have had if we had launched on the first of
September. As a result, Voyager 1 is in great

53

shape as far as hydrazine is concerned.”

THE DEEP SPACE NETWORK

A vital component of the Voyager Mission is the communications system linking the
spacecraft with controllers and scientists on Earth. The ability to communicate with spacecraft
over the vast distances to the outer planets, and particularly to return the enormous amounts of
data collected by sophisticated cameras and spectrometers, depends in large part on the
transmitters and receivers of the Deep Space Network (DSN), operated for NASA by JPL.

The original network of these receiving stations was established in 1958 to provide round-the-world
tracking of the first U.S. satellite, Explorer 1. By the late 1970s, the DSN had evolved
into a system of large antennas, low-noise receivers, and high-power transmitters at sites strategically
located on three continents. From these sites the data are forwarded (often using terrestrial
communications satellites) to the mission operations center at JPL.

The three DSN stations are located in the Mohave desert at Goldstone, California; near
Madrid, Spain; and near Canberra, Australia. Each location is equipped with two 26-meter
steerable antennas and a single giant steerable dish 64 meters in diameter, with approximately the
collecting area of a football field. In addition, each is equipped with transmitting, receiving, and
data handling equipment. The transmitters in Spain and Australia have 100-kilowatt power,
while the 64-meter antenna at Goldstone has a 400-kilowatt transmitter. Most commands to
Voyager are sent from Goldstone, but all three stations require the highest quality receivers to
permit continuous recording of the data streams pouring in from the spacecraft.

Since the mid-1960s, the DSN’s standard frequency has been S-band (2295 megahertz).
Voyager introduces a new, higher frequency telemetry link at X-band (8418 megahertz). The
X-band signal can carry more information than S-band with similar power transmitters, but it
requires more exact antenna performance. In addition, the X-band signal is absorbed by
terrestrial clouds and, especially, rain. Fortunately, all three DSN stations are in dry climates,
but during encounters the weather forecasts on Earth become items of crucial concern if precious
data are not to be lost by storm interference.

As a result of the development of larger antennas and improved electronics, the DSN
command capabilities and telemetry data rates have increased dramatically over the years. For
example, in 1965 Mariner 4 transmitted from Mars at a rate of only 8⅓ bits of information per
second. In 1969, Mariners 6 and 7 transmitted picture data from Mars at 16 200 bits per second.
Mariner 10, in 1973, achieved 117 200 bits per second from Mercury. Voyager operates at a
similar rate from Jupiter, about six times farther away. Many of these improvements in data
transmission result from changes in the DSN rather than in the spacecraft transmitters.

Problems with hydrazine management
developed, however. Voyager 1’s first trajectory
correction maneuver achieved only 80 percent
of the required speed change. Exhaust plumes
from the thrusters apparently struck part of the
spacecraft, causing a 20 percent loss in velocity.
That being the case, Voyager might require
more fuel than had been expected to complete
the mission. The extra fuel requirements did
not threaten Voyager 1 itself, since it held
ample fuel to reach Saturn; the concern was for
Voyager 2, where the effective loss of fuel
might be enough to jeopardize the Uranus mission.

54

55

56

Because of the plume impingement problem
on Voyager 1, Voyager 2’s first trajectory
correction maneuver was adjusted to allow for
the possibility of a 20 percent loss in thrust. The
Voyager 2 maneuver was successful, but controllers
felt that additional action was required
to conserve fuel. One way to save was by reducing
requirements on control of the spacecraft
orientation. Less control fuel would be needed
if the already miniscule pressure exerted on the
spacecraft by the solar wind could be reduced.
Flight engineers at JPL calculated that the
pressure would be reduced if the spacecraft
were tipped upside down; however, to accomplish
this, the spacecraft would have to be
steered by a new set of guide stars. By reprogramming
the attitude control system it was
found possible to substitute the northern star,
Deneb, in the constellation of Cygnus, for the
original reference star, Canopus, in the
southern constellation of Carina. With this
change, as well as readjustment of Voyager 2’s
trajectory near Jupiter, inflight consumption of
hydrazine was reduced significantly.

In late August 1978 both Voyagers were
reprogrammed to ensure better science results
at Jupiter encounter; for example, the reprogramming
would prevent imaging (TV) photographs
from blurring when the tape recorder
was operating. By early November, flight crews
had begun training exercises to rehearse for the
Voyager 1 flyby of Jupiter on March 5, 1979. A
near encounter test was performed on
December 12-14, 1978: a complete runthrough
of Voyager 1’s 39-hour near encounter period,
which would take place March 3-5, 1979. Participants
included the flight team, the Deep
Space Network tracking stations, the scientists,
and the spacecraft itself. Results: Voyager and
the Voyager team were all ready for the encounter.

Meanwhile, the spacecraft were busy
returning scientific data to Earth. Technically,
the Voyagers were in the cruise phase of the
mission—a period that, for Voyager 2, would
last until April 24, 1979, and for Voyager 1, until
January 4, 1979, when each spacecraft would
enter its respective observatory phase.

Cruise Phase Science

In the first few days after launch, the
spacecrafts’ instruments were turned on and
calibrated; various tests for each instrument
would continue to be performed throughout the
cruise phase. This period presented a great opportunity
for the Voyagers to study the interplanetary
magnetic fields, solar flares, and the
solar wind. In addition, ultraviolet and infrared
radiation studies of the sky were performed. In
mid-September 1977 the television cameras on
Voyager 1 recorded a number of photographs
of the Earth and Moon. A photograph taken
September 18 captured both crescent Moon and
crescent Earth. It was the first time the two
celestial bodies had ever been photographed
together.

In November both Voyagers crossed the
orbit of Mars, entering the asteroid belt a
month later. On December 15, at a distance of
about 170 million kilometers from Earth, Voyager
1 finally speeded past its slower twin. The
journey through the asteroid belt was long but
uneventful: Voyager 1 emerged safely in September
1978, and Voyager 2 in October. Unlike
Pioneers 10 and 11, the Voyagers carried no
instruments to look at debris in the asteroid
belt.

By April both spacecraft were already halfway
to Jupiter and, about two months later,
Voyager 1, still approximately 265 million kilometers
from Jupiter, began returning photographs
of the planet that showed considerable
detail, although less than could be obtained
with telescopes on Earth. Both the imaging
(TV) and the planetary radio astronomy instruments
began observing Jupiter, and, by
October 2, 1978, officials announced that “the
polarization characteristics of Jupiter’s radio
emissions have been defined. In the high frequencies,
there is consistent right-hand circular
polarization, while in the low frequencies, there
is a consistent left-hand circular polarization.
This was an unexpected result.” In addition to
scientific studies of the interplanetary medium
and a first look at Jupiter, the plasma wave instrument,
which studies waves of charged particles
over a range of frequencies that includes
audio frequencies, was able to record the sound
of the spacecraft thrusters firing, as hydrazine
fuel is decomposed and ejected into space. The
sound was described as being “somewhat like a
5-gallon can being hit with a leather-wrapped
mallet.”

On December 10, 1978, 83 million kilometers
from Jupiter, Voyager 1 took photographs
that surpassed the best photographs ever
taken from ground-based telescopes, and scientists
were anxiously awaiting the start of continuous
coverage of the rapidly changing cloud
forms. These pictures, together with data from
several ground-based observatories, were carefully
scrutinized by a team of scientists at JPL
to select the final targets in the atmosphere of
Jupiter to be studied at high resolution during
the flyby. The observatory phase of Voyager
1’s journey to Jupiter was about to begin.

57

As Voyager 1 approached Jupiter, the resolution of the images steadily improved. In October 1978, at a distance of about
125 million kilometers, the image was less clear than would be obtained with an Earth-based telescope. [P-20790]

By December 10,
the spacecraft had moved to a distance of 85 million kilometers, and the resolution was about 2000 kilometers, comparable
to the best telescopic images. [P-20829C]

On January 9, 1979 (c), at a distance of 54 million kilometers, the image surpassed all ground-based
views and approached the resolution of the Pioneer 10 and 11 photos. [P-20926C]

In this, taken January 24 at a distance of 40
million kilometers, the resolution exceeded 1000 kilometers. [P-20945C]

58

The Observatory Phase

The observatory phase, originally scheduled
to start on December 15, 1978, eighty days
before encounter, was postponed until January
4, 1979, to provide the flight team a holiday-season
break. For the next two months, Voyager
would carry out a long-term scientific
study—a “time history”—of Jupiter, its satellites,
and its magnetosphere. On January 6,
Voyager 1 began photographing Jupiter every
two hours—each time taking a series of four
photographs through different color filters as
part of a long-duration study of large-scale atmospheric
processes, so scientists could study
the changing cloud patterns on Jupiter. Even
the first of these pictures showed that the atmosphere
was dynamic “with more convective
structure than had previously been thought.”
Particularly striking were the changes in the
planet, especially near the Great Red Spot, that
had taken place since the Pioneer flybys in 1973
and 1974. Jupiter was wearing a new face for
Voyager.

In mid-January, photos of Jupiter were
already being praised for “showing exceptional
details of the planet’s multicolored bands of
clouds.” Still 47 million kilometers from the
giant, Voyager 1 had by now taken more than
500 photographs of Jupiter. Movements of
cloud patterns were becoming more obvious;
feathery structures seemed painted across some
of the bands that encircle the planet; swirling
features were huddled near the Great Red Spot.
The satellites were also beginning to look more
like worlds, with a few bright spots visible on
Ganymede and dark red poles and a bright
equatorial region clearly seen on Io when it
passed once each orbit across the turbulent face
of Jupiter.

From January 30 to February 3, Voyager
sent back one photograph of Jupiter every 96
seconds over a 100-hour period. Using a total
of three different color filters, the spacecraft
thus produced one color picture every 4¾ minutes,
in order to make a “movie” covering
ten Jovian “days.” To receive these pictures,
sent back over the high-rate X-band transmitter,
the Deep Space Network’s 64-meter antennas
provided round-the-clock coverage.
Voyager 1 was ready for its far encounter
phase.

The Galilean satellites of Jupiter first began to show as tiny worlds, not mere points of light, as the Voyager 1 observatory
phase began. In this view taken January 17, 1979, at a range of 47 million kilometers, the differing sizes and surface reflectivities
(albedos) of Ganymede (right center) and Europa (top right) are clearly visible. The view of Jupiter is unusual in that
the Great Red Spot is not easily visible, but can just be seen at the right edge of the planet. Most pictures selected for publication
include the photogenic Red Spot. [P-20938C]

Far Encounter Phase

By early February Jupiter loomed too large
in the narrow-angle camera to be photographed
in one piece; 2 × 2 three-color (violet, orange,
green) sets of pictures were taken for the next
two weeks; by February 21, Jupiter had grown
too large even for that, and 3 × 3 sets were
scheduled to begin. When these sets of pictures
are pasted together to form a single picture, the
result is called a mosaic.

59

By February 1, 1979, Voyager 1 was only 30 million kilometers from Jupiter, and the resolution of the imaging system corresponded
to about 600 kilometers at the cloud tops of the giant planet. At this time, a great deal of unexpected complexity
became apparent around the Red Spot, and movie sequences clearly showed the cloud motions, including the apparent six-day
rotation of the Red Spot. [P-20993C]

60

One of the most spectacular planetary photographs ever taken was obtained on February 13 as Voyager 1 continued its
approach to Jupiter. By this time, at a range of 20 million kilometers, Jupiter loomed too large to fit within a single narrow-angle
imaging frame. Passing in front of the planet are the inner two Galilean satellites. Io, on the left, already shows
brightly colored patterns on its surface, while Europa, on the right, is a bland ice-covered world. The scale of all of these
objects is huge by terrestrial standards; Io and Europa are each the size of our Moon, and the Red Spot is larger than the
Earth. [P-21082C]

While the imaging experiments were in the
limelight, the other scientific instruments had
also begun to concentrate on the Jovian system.
The ultraviolet spectrometer had been scanning
the region eight times a day; the infrared spectrometer
(IRIS) spent 1½ hours a day analyzing
infrared emissions from various longitudes in
Jupiter’s atmosphere; the planetary radio
astronomy and plasma wave instruments
looked for radio bursts from Jupiter and for
plasma disturbances in the region; the photopolarimeter
had begun searching for the edge of
Io’s sodium torus; and a watch was begun for
the bow shock—the outer boundary of the
Jovian magnetosphere.

On February 10, Voyager 1 crossed the
orbit of Sinope, Jupiter’s outermost satellite.
Yet the spacecraft even then had a long way to
go—still 23 million kilometers from Jupiter,
but closing in on the planet at nearly a million
kilometers a day. A week later, targeted photographs
of Callisto began to provide coverage of
the satellite all around its orbit; similar photos
of Ganymede began on February 25.

Meanwhile excitement was building. As
early as February 8 and 9, delight with the mission
and anticipation of the results of the
encounter in March were already evident.
Garry E. Hunt, from the Laboratory for
Planetary Atmospheres, University College,

61

London, a member of the Imaging Team,
discussing the appearance of Jupiter’s atmosphere
as seen by Voyager during the
previous month, said “It seems to be far more
photogenic now than it did during the Pioneer
encounters; I’m more than delighted by it—it’s
an incredible state of affairs. There are infinitely
more details than ever imagined.”

The Voyager Project was operated from the Jet Propulsion
Laboratory managed for NASA by the California Institute
of Technology. Located in the hills above Pasadena, California,
JPL is the main center for U.S. exploration of the
solar system. [JB17249BC]

The Voyager TV cameras do not take color pictures directly as do commercial cameras. Instead, a color image is
reconstructed on the ground from three separate monochromatic images, obtained through color filters and transmitted
separately to Earth. There are a number of possible filter combinations, but the most nearly “true” color is obtained with
originals photographed in blue (480 nanometers), green (565 nanometers), and orange (590 nanometers) light. Before these
can be combined, the individual frames must be registered, correcting for any change in spacecraft position or pointing
between exposures. Often, only part of a scene is contained in all three original pictures. Shown here is a reconstruction of a
plume on Jupiter, photographed on March 1, 1979. The colors used to print the three separate frames can be seen clearly in
the nonoverlapping areas. For other pictures in this book, the nonoverlapping partial frames are omitted. [P-21192]

The pictures from Voyager are “clearly
spectacular,” said Lonne Lane, Assistant Project
Scientist for Jupiter. “We’re getting even
better results than we had anticipated. We have
seen new phenomena in both optical and radio
emissions. We have definitely seen things that
are different—in at least in one case, unanticipated—and
are begging for answers we haven’t
got.” There was already, still almost a month
from encounter, a strong feeling of accomplishment
among the scientists and engineers; they
had done a difficult task and it has been successful.

By the last week of February 1979, the attention
of thousands of individuals was focused
on the activities at JPL. Scientists had arrived
from universities and laboratories around the
country and from abroad, many bringing graduate
students or faculty colleagues to assist
them. Engineers and technicians from JPL contractors
joined NASA officials as the Pasadena
motels filled up. Special badges were issued and
reserved parking areas set aside for the Voyager
influx. Twenty-four hours a day, lights burned
in the flight control rooms, the science offices,
the computer areas, and the photo processing
labs. In order to protect those with critical tasks
to perform from the friendly distraction of the
new arrivals, special computer-controlled locks
were placed on doors, and security officers
began to patrol the halls. By the end of the
month the press had begun to arrive. Amid
accelerating excitement, the Voyager 1 encounter
was about to begin.

62

The smaller-scale clouds on Jupiter tend to be more
irregular than the large ovals and plumes. At the lower right, one of the
three large white ovals clearly shows internal structure, with the
swirling cloud pattern indicating counterclockwise, or anticyclonic,
flow. A smaller anticyclonic white feature near the center is
surrounded by a dark, cloud-free band where one can
see to greater depths in the atmosphere. This photo was taken
March 1 from a distance of 4 million kilometers. [P-21183C]

63

CHAPTER 6

THE FIRST ENCOUNTER

The Giant Is Full of Surprises

The Voyager 1 encounter took place at
4:42 a.m. PST, March 5, 1979. About six hours
before, while the spacecraft continued to hurtle
on toward Jupiter, overflow crowds had poured
out of Beckman Auditorium on the campus of
the California Institute of Technology. There
had been a symposium entitled Jupiter and the
Mind of Man. More than one face that evening
had turned to look toward the Pasadena night,
for there, glittering against the fabric of the
sky, was the “star” of the show—a planet so
huge that the Earth would be but a blemish on
its Great Red Spot. One might have tried to
imagine Voyager 1, large by spacecraft standards,
rapidly closing in on Jupiter—a pesky,
investigative “mosquito” buzzing around the
Jovian system.

Meanwhile, at JPL, pictures taken by
Voyager 1 were flashing back every 48 seconds,
pictures that were already revealing more and
more of Jupiter’s atmosphere and would soon
disclose four new worlds—the Galilean satellites.
The encounter was almost at hand.

4:42 a.m.—Voyager 1 had made its closest
approach to Jupiter 37 minutes earlier. Only
now were the signals that had been sent out
from the spacecraft at 4:05 a.m. reaching the
Earth.

But the moment of closest encounter did
not have the same impact a landing would have
had. Although the champagne would flow later
for those who had worked so long and hard on
this successful mission, there was none now. In
the press room there were just four coffeepots
working overtime to help keep the press alert.
In the science areas, focus had shifted to the
satellite encounters, which would stretch over
the next 24 hours; meanwhile, a few persons
tried to catch a little sleep at their desks before
the first closeups of Io came in. The instant of
encounter came ... and went ... with no
screams, no New Year’s noisemakers. All the
excitement of the mission lay both behind ...
and ahead.

Thursday, February 22.

The encounter activity
was kicked off in Washington, D.C., by a press
conference at NASA Headquarters. After introductory
statements by NASA and JPL officials,
some of the scientific results from the
observatory and far encounter phases were
presented.

Both the plasma wave and the planetary
radio astronomy instruments had detected very-low-frequency
radio emission that generally increased
in intensity whenever either the north or
south magnetic pole of Jupiter tipped toward
the spacecraft. The plasma wave experiment
had also detected radiation that seemed to come
from a region either near or beyond the orbit of
Io—perhaps even as far as the outer magnetosphere.
In addition, Frederick L. Scarf, Principal
Investigator for the plasma wave instrument,
released a recording of the ion sound
waves created by 5 to 10 kilovolt energy protons
traveling upstream from Jupiter.

James Warwick, Principal Investigator of
the radio astronomy investigation, enthusiastically
reported the detection of a striking new
low-frequency radiation from Jupiter, at wavelengths
of tens of kilometers. Such radio waves
cannot penetrate the ionosphere of the Earth,
and thus had never been detected before.
Because of their huge scale, these bursts probably
did not originate at Jupiter itself, but in
magnetospheric regions above the planet—perhaps
in association with the high-density
plasma torus associated with Io. Warwick commented
that “only from the magnificent

64

perspective of the Voyager as it approaches
Jupiter have we been able to get this complete
picture.”

The Voyager 1 encounter with Jupiter took place during a
little more than 48 hours, from the inbound to the outbound
crossing of the orbit of Callisto. This figure shows
the spacecraft path as it would be seen from above the
north pole of Jupiter. Closest approach to Jupiter was
350 000 kilometers. The close flybys of Io, Ganymede, and
Callisto all took place as the spacecraft was outbound.

Voyager 1 trajectory

Launch date = 9/5/77

Jupiter arrival date = 3/5/79

Satellite closest approach

Sun occultation

Earth occultation

Io

Ganymede

Periapsis

Callisto

Amalthea

Europa

Another unexpected result was announced
by Lyle Broadfoot, Principal Investigator for
the ultraviolet spectrometer investigation. The
scientists had expected to find very weak ultraviolet
emissions on the sunlit side of Jupiter,
caused by sunlight being scattered from hydrogen
and helium in Jupiter’s upper atmosphere.
“Instead we are seeing a spectacular auroral
display. There are two features of the emission—the
auroral emission which comes from
the planet and a second type of emission which
appears to come from a radiating torus or shell
around the planet at the orbit of Io. The spectral
content of these two radiating sources is
distinctly different. What we find is that the
auroral emission from Jupiter’s atmosphere is
so strong that it completely dominates the emission
spectrum even on the sunlit side of the
atmosphere.”

“Not since Mariner 4 carried its TV camera
to Mars fifteen years ago have we been less
prepared—have we been less certain of what we
are about to see over the next two weeks,” said
Bradford Smith, Imaging Team Leader. He
mentioned the time-lapse “rotation movie,” in
which the colorful planet spun through ten full
Jupiter days; tiny images of the satellites passed
across Jupiter’s face as though being whipped
along by the rotation of the giant. A week or so
earlier, when this film had been shown for the
first time to the full Imaging Team, it provided
an occasion for good-humored rivalry between
planet people and satellite people, with jokes
about the satellites getting in the way of the
important studies of Jupiter. For the next few
days, the imaging focus remained on Jupiter; it
shifted to Io, Ganymede, and Callisto, as each
was passed in turn after closest approach to the
planet.

Tuesday, February 27.

(
Range to Jupiter, 7.1
million kilometers
). At a distance of 660 million
kilometers from Earth, within 90 Jovian radii
(R
J
) of Jupiter, Voyager 1 was prepared to
begin the encounter with the planet’s magnetosphere.
On the previous day the spacecraft had
crossed the point, at 100 R
J
, at which Pioneers
10 and 11 had found the bow shock, the first indication
of the magnetospheric boundary. The
start of Voyager’s plunge into the Jovian magnetosphere
was overdue, and scientists anxiously
watched the data from the particles and
fields instruments, looking for the first indication
of disordered magnetic fields and altered
particle densities that would mark the bow
shock. Apparently, higher solar wind pressure,
associated with increased solar activity since
1974, had compressed the magnetosphere, but
no one could predict how strong this compression
might be.

ENCOUNTER DISTANCES FOR VOYAGER 1

Object
Range to Center at Closest Approach (kilometers)
Best Image Resolution (km per line pair)

Jupiter
349 000
8

Amalthea
417 000
8

Io
21 000
1

Europa
734 000
33

Ganymede
115 000
2

Callisto
126 000
2

For the first time since its discovery, Lyle
Broadfoot and his UVS colleagues suggested a
probable identification for the unexpected
ultraviolet emission near the orbit of Io. The
most likely candidate was sulfur atoms with
two electrons removed (S III), at an inferred

65

temperature perhaps as high as 200 000 K. An
additional indication of sulfur came from Mike
Krimigis, who reported that the low-energy
charged particles instrument had detected bursts
of sulfur ions streaming away from Jupiter that
had apparently escaped from the inner magnetosphere.
No explanations were offered,
however, for the presence of large amounts of
this element.

At JPL, a press room had been opened in
Von Karman Auditorium to accommodate the
hundred or so reporters expected to arrive. To
keep all the interested people informed of
Voyager progress, frequent television reports
were beamed over closed-circuit TV throughout
JPL. From an in-lab television studio called the
Blue Room, JPL scientist Al Hibbs, who had
played a similar role during the Viking Mission
to Mars, provided hourly reports and interviewed
members of the Voyager teams. As the
pressure for constant commentary and instant
analysis increased, Garry Hunt of the Imaging
Team was also called on to host activities in the
Blue Room, where his British accent added an
additional touch of class to the operation.

As the encounter progressed, the JPL television
reports reached a wider audience. In the
Los Angeles area, KCET Public Television
began a nightly “Jupiter Watch” program,
with Dr. Hibbs as host. During the encounter
days, service was extended to interested public
television stations throughout the nation. In
this way, tens of thousands of persons were
able to experience the thrill of discovery, seeing
the closeup pictures of Jupiter and its satellites
at the same moment as the scientists at JPL saw
them, and listening to the excited and frequently
awestruck commentary as the first tentative
interpretations were attempted. Unfortunately,
the commercial television networks
did not make use of this opportunity, and the
greatest coverage available to most of the country
was a 90-second commentary on the nightly
network news.

Wednesday, February 28.

(
Range to Jupiter,
5.9 million kilometers
). At 6:33 a.m., at a range
of 86 R
J
, Voyager 1 finally reached Jupiter’s
bow shock. But by 12:28 p.m. the solar wind
had pushed the magnetosphere back toward
Jupiter, and Voyager was once more outside,
back in the solar wind. Not until March 2, at a
distance of less than 45 R
J
, would the
spacecraft enter the magnetosphere for the final
time.

At 11 a.m. the first daily briefing to the
press was given. “After nearly two months of
atmospheric imaging and perhaps a week or
two of satellite viewing, [we’re] happily bewildered,”
said Brad Smith. The Jovian atmosphere
is “where our greatest state of confusion
seems to exist right at the moment, although
over the next several days we may find that
some of our smirking geology friends will find
themselves in a similar state. I think, for the
most part, we have to say that the existing atmospheric
circulation models have all been shot
to hell by Voyager. Although these models can
still explain some of the coarse zonal flow patterns,
they fail entirely in explaining the
detailed behavior that Voyager is now revealing.”
It was thought, from Pioneer results, that
Jupiter’s atmosphere showed primarily horizontal
or zonal flow near the equatorial region,
but that the zonal flow pattern broke down at
high latitudes. But Voyager found that “zonal
flow exists poleward as far as we can see.”

Smith also showed a time-lapse movie of
Jupiter assembled from images obtained during
the month of January. Once each rotation,
approximately every ten hours, a color picture
had been taken. Viewed consecutively, these
frames displayed the complex cloud motions on
a single hemisphere of Jupiter, as they would be
seen from a fixed point above the equator of
the planet. The film revealed that clouds move
around the Great Red Spot in a period of about
six days, at speeds of perhaps 100 meters per
second. The Great Red Spot, as well as many of
the smaller spots that dot the planet, appeared
to be rotating anticyclonically. Anticyclonic
motion is characteristic of high-pressure
regions, unlike terrestrial storms. Smith noted
that “Jupiter is far more complex in its atmospheric
motions than we had ever imagined. We
are seeing a much more complicated flow of
cyclonic and anticyclonic vorticity, circulation.
We see currents which flow along and seem to
interact with an obstacle and turn around and
flow back.” There is a Jovian jet stream that is
“moving along at well over 100 meters per second.
Several of these curious little dark features
that appear to be small brown spots near
Jupiter’s north temperate region have been seen
to overtake one another and gobble each other
up. And then they occasionally spit out a piece
here and there as they move along.”

Thursday, March 1.

(
Range to Jupiter, 4.8
million kilometers
). At 5 a.m., at a distance of

66

71 R
J
, Voyager crossed the bow shock for the
third time, catching up with the contracting
magnetosphere of the planet. About noon, at
66 R
J
, the spacecraft finally reached the boundary
of the magnetosphere, called the magnetopause.
Herbert Bridge, the plasma instrument
Principal Investigator, noted that the solar
wind pressure as monitored by Voyager 2, still
between the Sun and Jupiter, had been for
several days from two to five times greater than
its level during the Pioneer 10 and 11 encounters.
Presumably, this high pressure was
the cause of the compressed state of the magnetosphere.
However, in the previous few hours
the solar pressure had dropped, so Bridge anticipated
that the Jovian magnetosphere might
soon inflate and expand outward.

The southern hemisphere of Jupiter presents a tremendous diversity of atmospheric structure and motion. The Great Red
Spot rotates counterclockwise in about six days; above and below it high-speed jet streams flow to the right and the left,
while a complex, dynamic cloud pattern develops in its wake. This picture was taken on February 25, when Voyager 1 was 9
million kilometers from the planet. [P-21151C]

67

Fred Scarf intrigued the press with a tape
of the sounds made by high-energy protons
coming upstream from Jupiter. The plasma
wave instrument had recorded the noise of the
protons, mixed with the noise of the spacecraft
itself, producing sound effects that sounded
somewhat like a mixture of singing whales, a
Nor’easter, and the Daytona 500.

At the press briefing, interest in the imaging
results began to shift from Jupiter toward
the satellites. Pictures of each of the four big
Galilean moons revealed bright and dark
features as small as about 200 kilometers
across. Unfortunately, this resolution is not
enough to be diagnostic—the spots cannot be
interpreted in terms of recognizable geological
features, such as mountains or craters. Today
one could only speculate, but tomorrow or the
next day the answers would begin to come in.
Deputy Imaging Team Leader Larry Soderblom
conveyed his excitement through a
metaphor that would be repeated many times
during the next week: “We’re beginning a stage
in this mission which represents, I think, one of
the most exciting points in man’s scientific exploration
of the solar system—in the next few
days, we’ll explore four new worlds,” seeing in
a few days’ time what it took us centuries to
learn about other worlds in our solar system. In
terms of our experience with the exploration of
Mars, “it is about 1700 AD this morning,
tomorrow it will be about 1800, and it will be
about 1976 [the year of Viking] by Tuesday
evening.”

Friday, March 2.

(
Range to Jupiter, 3.6 million
kilometers
). Early in the morning, a twelvefold
increase in solar wind pressure caused another
contraction of the magnetosphere, which was
behaving like a spring, compressing in response
to outside forces. As the magnetopause boundary
moved rapidly inward, it crossed the
spacecraft at 59 R
J
from the planet. An hour
later the bow shock also flashed past, and
Voyager was once more in the interplanetary
medium. By noon reinflation of the
magnetosphere began again; Voyager crossed
the bow shock for the fifth and final time at 55
R
J
, followed by three more magnetopause
crossings, as the magnetospheric boundary
flopped in and out between 45 R
J
and 50 R
J
.

A few days before encounter, the Voyager images of the larger Galilean satellites, Callisto and Ganymede, were beginning to
show distinctive surfaces with many bright spots. These two pictures were taken on March 5 at a range of 8 million
kilometers; the resolution is about 100 kilometers. Although extremely tantalizing, these images were uninterpretable,
because the spots could not be associated with any recognizable geological features, such as mountains or craters. Like a
naked-eye view of the Moon, these pictures seemed to reveal more than was actually meaningful. [P-21188C and P-21150C]

Some Project officials began to worry
about the contracted state of the magnetosphere.
The radiation “hardening” of Voyager
was carried out to protect against the energetic
particle fluxes observed by Pioneers 10 and 11.

68

Under the new conditions, would the particles
in the inner magnetosphere be more concentrated
and perhaps increase the radiation levels
beyond the design limits? Scientists asked how
long the compression might last and speculated
about how much energy might be pumped into
the Jovian radiation belts, but only time could
provide the answers.

VOYAGER 1 BOW SHOCK (S) AND MAGNETOPAUSE (M) CROSSINGS

Boundary
Day
Distance (R
J
)

Inbound

S
2/28
86

S
2/28
82

S
3/01
72

M
3/01
67

M
3/02
59

S
3/02
58

S
3/02
56

M
3/03
47

Outbound

M
3/13
158

M
3/13
163

M
3/13
165

S
3/16
199

S
3/18
227

S
3/18
227

S
3/19
240

S
3/20
256

S
3/20
258

Accurate recording of the X-band data being
sent from Voyager at 115 thousand bits per
second required fairly clear weather at the
tracking sites. The three Deep Space Network
(DSN) stations in California, Spain, and
Australia are located at normally dry sites.
However, early in the morning, heavy rain at
the Australian site interfered with reception of
the Voyager signal for fourteen minutes. Fortunately,
the loss occurred when the DSN tracking
of the spacecraft was being switched from
Goldstone, California, to the Australian station.
Mission control was able to extend Goldstone
coverage for several minutes so that only
about three minutes’ worth of data was lost
completely.

A more positive announcement was made
at the press conference that morning by Donald
Shemansky of the Ultraviolet Spectroscopy
Team: the discovery of a high-energy torus of
doubly ionized sulfur (S III) circling Jupiter in
the region of Io’s orbit. “We were surprised out
of our chairs to see a spectacularly bright emission
in the 650-1100 angstrom region, immediately
implying that we were looking at a plasma
that had to be at a temperature of about
100 000 degrees.” The scientists estimated that
the density of this torus must be at least 500
ions per cubic centimeter, and that the power
needed to keep this plasma at such a high
temperature must be in the neighborhood of
500 billion watts. As Al Hibbs mentioned on
“Jupiter Watch” that night, 500 billion watts
of power is the total amount of installed
generating capacity of the United States.

Saturday, March 3.

(
Range to Jupiter, 2.5
million kilometers
). Early in the morning the
final crossing of the magnetopause took place
at 47 R
J
, and Voyager finally joined the Jovian
system. At the end of the day, the rapidly moving
spacecraft crossed the orbit of Callisto, but
that satellite itself was on the far side of the
planet. Not until the outbound crossing of its
orbit on March 6 would closeup views of
Callisto be obtained.

During the preceding night, a severe summer
thunderstorm in Australia again caused a
loss of data. A line of storms over the tracking
station blocked the high-rate, X-band science
data for three hours and twenty minutes. Attempts
were made to save a part of the data by
commanding the spacecraft to slow its transmission
rate, rather like speaking slowly to a
partially deaf listener. But by the time the craft
received the signal and responded, the storms
had intensified, and no signal could get
through. Closeups of the Great Red Spot and
an extended series of observations of the glowing
sodium cloud around Io were lost.

A black-and-white movie assembled from
photos obtained in January and February was
shown at the press conference. The movie was
taken from observatory phase pictures photographed
in blue light. From these pictures, the
imaging team “put together this so-called ‘blue
movie’,” said Brad Smith, introducing the
film. The film showed changes taking place in
Jupiter’s atmosphere over a period of about
seventy Jovian days. Near the equator there
were “bright plumes floating by—at high speed
the plumes seem to wave around, something
like a flag waving in the breeze.” Farther north,
along the edge of the north temperate zone, one
could see one of the dark ovals—“a rather
fuzzy one would move up, catch up with the one
just ahead of it, get stuck to the outside and roll
around on it for a while, then get ejected a little

69

later.” Dr. Smith also showed new closeup
views of the region around the Red Spot, showing
not only the anticyclonic features but filamentary
“spaghettilike” material which was
rotating in a cyclonic direction, indicating a
low-pressure region. “The filamentary material
still seems to be rather a mystery—very difficult
to see the details of the motion.” But the photographs
were already showing what seemed to be
stream lines in the white ovals. “In appearance
the white ovals seem to resemble the Red Spot.
The stream lines are at least suggestive of divergent
flow, that is, material in each of these
spots which is upwelling in these areas and then
moving out tends to go around in a counterclockwise
anticyclonic motion but may, at the
same time, be slowly diverging outward.”

At a resolution of about 100 kilometers a planetary surface just begins to reveal its personality. Io was photographed against
the disk of Jupiter on February 26, from a distance of about 8 million kilometers. Such early pictures whetted the appetites
of the Voyager scientists at JPL as they anxiously speculated about what they would find in closer views of the surface of this
remarkable satellite. [P-21185 B/W]

The large white ovals are about forty years
old. Dr. Smith explained how they formed: Between
1939 and 1940, “where those three white
spots exist right now, was a rather bright band
similar to the north temperate zone we see on
Jupiter right now. In that time period of a year
or so, three darkish spots formed. A dark cloud
spread out at each one of those three locations
and just kept spreading longitudinally until the

70

white material condensed between them.” In
the end, everything was dark except for the
three ovals, which have persisted ever since.

Torrence Johnson of the Imaging Team
commented on a photo of Io in which features
resembling circular crater-type structures
seemed to be visible. “Whatever they are,
[those circular features] are approaching the
size of the things that we would call basins if
they were impact structures on other planets.
We don’t really know whether they’re impact
structures. They have some characteristics that
look reminiscent of impact structures. They
could be endogenic—volcanic in origin—or internally
generated in some other way.” Johnson
also showed another photograph of Io, this one
taken against black sky, showing a “strikingly
different face” looking, perhaps, like
someone’s nightmare, glaring back at the intruder
from Earth. One huge feature—a “bullseye”
or “hoof print” on Io—appeared to be
approximately 1000 kilometers long. No one
had ever seen such a feature, and the imaging
scientists could only speculate about its significance.

Small-scale structures in the jet streams of Jupiter’s north tropical zone reveal details of atmospheric circulation. The small
dark oval near the right edge of the zone may offer a glimpse deep into Jupiter’s atmosphere. Between the regularly spaced
dark ovals near the bottom of the frame are more small-scale features that are being studied for their roles in Jovian atmospheric
activity. The blue-gray regions along the shear line between the equatorial zone and the north equatorial belt also appear
to be windows into the deeper regions of the atmosphere. This photo was taken February 19 by Voyager 1 from a
distance of 14 million kilometers. [P-21160C]

A few days earlier, someone had posted in
the Imaging Team area a quote from a 1975
review paper on the Jovian satellites by David
Morrison and Joseph Burns. The section on Io
began, “Io is one of the most intriguing objects
in the solar system.” This statement seemed
more and more appropriate as Voyager images

71

improved. Johnson referred to this day as
equivalent to the “late 1960s” in our study of
the Jovian satellites. “We can see much more
clearly than ever before, but still not clearly
enough to provide understanding of what we
are seeing.”

Sunday, March 4.

(
Range to Jupiter, 1.2
million kilometers
). At 4:37 a.m., the near encounter
phase began: Voyager 1 was almost
there! In the press room, someone taped a fortune
cookie message to the Voyager TV
monitor: “There is a prospect of a thrilling time
ahead for you.”

Pulled by the powerful gravity of Jupiter,
the spacecraft was now on a curved path
through the inner Jovian system. At 2 p.m.
PST, it crossed the orbit of Ganymede, and
later in the afternoon it passed within less than
2 million kilometers of Europa, providing
Voyager 1’s closest look at this satellite. During
the afternoon and evening, a number of views
were obtained of Amalthea, the small inner
satellite, at a range of less than 500 000
kilometers. At 8 p.m. the orbit of Europa was
crossed, and increasing attention was drawn to
the coming encounter with Io. At about 7 p.m.
a full-frame color sequence of Io was received
with a resolution of 16 kilometers. During the
night, as Imaging Team members scratched
their heads trying to prepare a press release caption
to interpret the peculiar structures seen, the
JPL Image Processing Lab rushed to prepare a
color version for release the next day.

The Great Red Spot became more and more spectacular as Voyager 1 approached, with each day revealing new and intricate
detail in the clouds. This view was obtained on March 1 at a distance of 5 million kilometers; the smallest features that can be
made out are about 100 kilometers across. To the west of the Great Red Spot is a region of great turbulence, and to the south
is one of the three white ovals. [P-21182C]

72

Large brown ovals in the northern hemisphere of Jupiter are apparently regions in which an opening in the upper, ammonia
clouds reveals darker regions below. This oval, about the same length as the diameter of the Earth, was at latitude 15°N.
Features of this sort are not rare on Jupiter and have an average lifetime of one to two years. Above the feature is the pale
orange north temperate belt, bounded on the south by the high-speed north temperate current, with winds of 120 meters per
second. The range to Jupiter at the time this photograph was obtained on March 2 was 4 million kilometers, with the smallest
resolvable features being 75 kilometers across. [P-21194C]

73

The best Voyager 1 photos of Europa were obtained on March 4 from a distance of about 2 million kilometers. This view of
the hemisphere centered at about 300° longitude has a resolution of about 40 kilometers. Most of the surface is bland and
highly reflective, being composed almost entirely of water-ice. No craters resulting from meteoric impacts can be seen. The
most striking visual features, which set Europa off from the other satellites, are the dark streaks, as much as several thousand
kilometers long, that cross the surface. Just barely visible to Voyager 1, these streaks were dramatically apparent to
Voyager 2 in its closer flyby in July. [P-21208C]

Once again, tracking station problems
interrupted the smooth flow of data from the
spacecraft. Failure at Madrid to reestablish the
correct receiver frequency after a spacecraft
maneuver resulted in the loss of 53 minutes of
irreplaceable data; an additional eleven minutes
were lost an hour later. As the first problem
was being corrected, the tracking antenna
became misaligned, resulting in a noisy data
return. Meanwhile, only a few of the watchers
at JPL mourned the lost data, so exciting were
the other new results that kept pouring in.

“For the highlights of this morning Dr.
Soderblom will come up and show some beautiful
satellite pictures,” Brad Smith announced
at the daily press briefing. Larry Soderblom’s
excitement was hard to contain. “Today is
probably going to turn out to be one of the
most memorable days in our exploration program.
For the planetary geologists it’s truly
Christmas Eve. We see tonight the beginning of
the exploration of four new worlds. We’re racing
through time and space at an incredible
rate—the rate at which we are learning things is
awe-inspiring in itself.” Callisto was still too
far away to see well “but the things we’re seeing
on the closer three satellites have really got us
charged in anticipation.” Ganymede—“What
can I say? Loops and swirls and incredible
patches that are difficult now to hazard a guess
about.” Io—an eerie-looking red, orange, and
yellow world—“this one we’ve got all figured
out. [Laughter from the press and applause.] It
is covered with thin candy shells of anything
from sulfates and sulfur and salts to all kinds of
strange things.”

The low energy charged particle instrument
had discovered high-speed sulfur in the
outer Jovian magnetosphere, ten times as far
from the planet as the sulfur torus around Io.
The high-speed sulfur, which whizzed by
Voyager 1 at 8000 kilometers per second, was
first detected as the spacecraft crossed the
magnetopause and entered the magnetosphere.
Apparently this sulfur had picked up speed as it
moved outward from Io’s torus, but the
mechanism for this acceleration was not
known. Roby Vogt reported that the cosmic ray
instrument was detecting two distinct groups of
atoms closer in to the planet. One group was

74

apparently of solar composition (derived from
the solar wind), and the other showed enhanced
oxygen as well as sulfur. The plasma instrument
had also begun to measure sulfur in the same
form (S III) as that detected by the UVS in the
Io torus. Where, the scientists asked, could the
oxygen and sulfur be coming from? Could Io be
the source of these atoms?

At one point, as questions from the press
became too detailed, asking for “instant analyses”
of the data, Dr. Smith was prompted to
make the following statement: “I want to say
something about what’s going on right now in
the imaging area because we get a lot of pointed
questions. We have a remarkably good system
that is getting extremely good photographs.
Not only are the cameras working well, but
Jupiter and the satellites are cooperating by
showing a lot of truly remarkable detail. And it
may sound unprofessional, but a lot of the people
up in the Imaging Team area are just standing
around with their mouths hanging open
watching the pictures come in, and you don’t
like to tear yourself away to go and start looking
at numbers on a printout. We will do that,
but in the meantime we’re just caught up in the
excitement of what’s going on.”

While the press briefing was underway, between
11:38 and 11:50 a.m., a special experiment
was being tried on board the Voyager. As
the spacecraft passed through the plane of the
equator of Jupiter, it aimed its narrow-angle
camera to a point in space halfway between the
cloud tops and the orbit of Amalthea and took
a single, eleven-minute exposure. The purpose:
to search for a possible faint ring around
Jupiter, which, if present, could best be seen by
sighting along the plane of the equator. The
image appeared briefly on the TV monitors,
clearly showing something—a strange band of
light—streaking across the center of the frame.
Up in the imaging area, analyses began at once
to determine if the strange band were really the
sought-for ring, but it would not be until March
7 that the identification would be confirmed
and the discovery announced.

The “bullseye” of Io was first photographed at a range of 2.8 million kilometers on March 3, and this color version was
released on March 4. At the time, Imaging Team scientists wrote that “The large heart-shaped feature with a dark spot near
its center could be Io’s equivalent of an impact basin such as Mare Orientale on the Moon. Its outer dimensions are about
800 by 1000 kilometers. Subsequent high-resolution coverage should reveal whether the small dark spots are impact craters,
or perhaps something more exotic such as volcanoes. The reddish color of Io has been attributed to sulfur in the salts which
are believed by some to make up the surface of Io.” It would be another week before this feature, later named “Pele” for the
Hawaiian volcano goddess, would be recognized as an active, erupting volcano. [P-21187C]

Monday, March 5.

(
Encounter Day. Minimum
range to Jupiter, 780 000 kilometers; speed of
spacecraft, almost 100 000 kilometers per
hour
). Many celebrities, including the Governor
of California, spent the night at JPL to
witness the historic occasion. In Washington,

75

D.C., a special TV monitor was set up in the
White House for the President and his family.

As late Sunday night eased into the early
morning of encounter, closeup images of
Jupiter, looking more like abstract art than like
planetary science, flashed across the TV
screens, and verbal images far less wild than the
visuals from Jupiter were heard from commentators
and from members of the press. “Are
you sure Van Gogh didn’t paint that?” “That’s
not Jupiter; it looks like a closeup of a salad.”
“They’re not showing us Jupiter, that’s some
medical school anatomy slide.”

Shortly before closest approach to Jupiter,
Voyager began its intensive observations of Io.
Much of this information, taken while the
Australian station was tracking the spacecraft,
was recorded on Voyager’s onboard tape-recorder
for playback later that day. But even
before the results of that imaging were known,
Larry Soderblom was calling Io “one of the
most spectacular bodies in the solar system.”
As more and more vivid photos of Io appeared
on the monitors, members of the Imaging Team
in the Blue Room buzzed with excitement.
“This is incredible.” “The element of surprise
is coming up in every one of these frames.” “I
knew it would be wild from what we saw on approach
but to anticipate anything like this
would have required some sort of heavenly
perspective. I think this is incredible.”

At 7:35 a.m. Voyager was scheduled to
pass through the flux tube of Io, the region in
which tremendous electric currents were calculated
to be flowing back and forth between the
satellite and Jupiter. Norm Ness suggested,
after examining magnetometer data, that
Voyager skirted the edge of the flux tube, and
that the current in the tube was about one million
amps. As the flux tube results were received,
champagne bottles began to pop in the
particles and fields science offices, in celebration
of the successful passage through the inner
magnetosphere. Meanwhile, at 7:47 a.m., closest
approach to Io occurred, at a range of only
22 000 kilometers. Voyager was 25 000 times
closer to this satellite than were the watchers on
Earth.

At 8:14 a.m., while still within 30 000 kilometers
of Io, the spacecraft passed out of sight
behind the edge of Jupiter. All scientific data
for the next two hours and six minutes were
stored on the onboard tape recorder for later
transmission to Earth. Meanwhile, the radio
communication signal was used to probe the atmosphere
of Jupiter, yielding a profile of electron
density in the ionosphere and of the gas
pressure and temperature in the upper atmosphere.
While out of sight from Earth, at 9:07
a.m., Voyager plunged into the shadow of
Jupiter. As the Sun set on the spacecraft, the
ultraviolet instrument used the absorption of
sunlight to determine the composition and temperature
of the upper atmosphere. In the darkness,
the infrared IRIS measured the night-side
temperatures of the planet, and long-exposure
images were taken to search for aurora, lightning,
and fireballs in the Jovian atmosphere. At
10:20 a.m., Voyager reappeared from behind
Jupiter and radio contact was restored; at 11:24
a.m., it emerged from shadow into sunlight,
speeding on toward encounter with Ganymede.

At 8 a.m. a special press conference was
held to mark the successful Jupiter flyby. Noel
Hinners, Associate Administrator for Space
Science and the highest ranking NASA official
present, congratulated all those who had made
the Voyager Mission a success. The encounter
was the “culmination of a fantastic amount of
dedication and effort. The result is a spectacular
feat of technology and a beginning of a
new era of science for the solar system. Just
watching the data come in has been fantastic. I
had a fear that things on the satellites were going
to look like the lunar highlands. Nature
wins again. If we’re going to see exploration of
this nature occurring in the 1980s and 1990s we
must continue to expound the results of what
we’re finding here, the role of exploration in
the history of our country, what it means to us
as a vigorous national society.”

As time passed, it became apparent that
Voyager 1 had been affected by Jupiter’s radiation
environment. The basic timing—the main
clock on the spacecraft—had slowed down.
First it slowed by 6.3 seconds, but by March 6 it
was found to have slowed a total of eight seconds.
In addition, the two central computers
apparently got out of synchronization both
with themselves and with the flight data subsystem.
On March 6 it was reported that the spacecraft
cameras were shuttering one frametime
(48 seconds) early; this was partly offset by the
eight-second spacecraft “masterclock” slow-down
resulting in images (according to our
clocks) being photographed forty seconds
early. This timing error resulted in the camera
taking some pictures while the scan platform
was moving, causing some blurred images. A
number of the highest resolution images of Io
and Ganymede were seriously degraded by this
malfunction.

76

When the first color close-up of Io was released, Imaging Team Leader Brad Smith said that he had seen “better looking
pizzas”; hence this view, taken March 4 at a range of about 860 000 kilometers, became known as “the pizza picture.” The
circular feature in the center (the piece of pepperoni) was later revealed to be the active volcano Prometheus, but at the time
of its release this lovely but bizarre picture baffled scientists and press alike. [P-21457C]

At the regular 11 a.m. press briefing, Brad
Smith glowed. “We’re all recovering from what
I would call the most exciting, the most fascinating,
what may ultimately prove to be the
most scientifically rewarding mission in the unmanned
space program. The Io pictures this
morning were truly spectacular and the atmosphere
up in the imaging area was punctuated by
whoops of joy or amazement or both.” The
new color photo of Io taken the night before
was released, showing strange surface features
in tones of yellow, orange, and white. The
image defied description; the Imaging Team
used terms like “grotesque,” “diseased,”
“gross,” “bizarre.” Smith introduced the picture
with the comment, “Io looks better than a
lot of pizzas I’ve seen.” Larry Soderblom
added, “Well, you may recall [that we] told you
yesterday that when we flew by we’d figure all
this out. I hope you didn’t believe it.”

One thing was certain: There were no impact
craters on Io. Unless the satellites of
Jupiter had somehow been shielded from the
meteoric impacts that cratered objects such as
the Moon, Mars, and Mercury, the absence of
craters must indicate the presence of erosion or
of internal processes that destroy or cover up
craters. Io did not look like a dead planet.
Imaging Team member Hal Masursky, looking
at the “pizza” picture, estimated that the surface
of Io must be no more than 100 million
years old—that is, some agent must have erased
impact craters during the last 100 million years.
This interpretation depended on how often
cratering impacts occur on Io. No one could be
sure that there had been any interplanetary
debris in the Jovian system to impact the surfaces
of the satellites. Perhaps none of them
would be cratered. The forthcoming flybys of
Ganymede and Callisto would soon provide
this information.

77

The giant volcanic feature Pele, about 1000 kilometers across, mystified Voyager scientists when this picture of Io was taken
on March 5 from a distance of about 400 000 kilometers. The brilliant colors, the strange shapes of the surface deposits, and
the absence of impact craters all testified that Io was unlike any world previously encountered in the exploration of the solar
system. [P-21226C]

78

As Voyager 1 approached Io, the images of the surface became more and more spectacular. On the morning of March 5, at a
range of 130 000 kilometers, this picture was taken centered near longitude 320° and latitude 10°S. The width of the picture
is about 1000 kilometers (the distance from the Mexican border to the northern edge of California). There are no impact
craters, signifying a geologically young surface, and the dark center with radiating red flows indicates recent volcanic activity
of some sort. [P-21277C]

79

The close flyby of Ganymede took place at
6:53 p.m., at a range of 115 000 kilometers.
During the preceding four hours, photos revealed
a surface covered with impact craters.
Watching these photos and supplying commentary
for the television listeners, David Morrison
remarked, “While I’m delighted to see craters,
it’s just the opposite of what I would have expected.
I was telling everyone a few days ago
that I thought Io would have plenty of craters
and that Ganymede, because of the ice surface,
simply would not be able to hold large craters
over geological time. So this is fascinating and
this is confusing—both what has happened on
Io to erase the craters and why Ganymede’s surface
is strong enough to preserve them.”

Just before closest approach, at 6:35 p.m.,
the ultraviolet instrument watched as a bright
star passed behind Ganymede and reemerged
ten minutes later. No dimming that could be attributed
to an atmosphere was seen; when the
data were analyzed later, scientists set an upper
limit for any gas on this satellite at one-billionth
of the atmospheric pressure at the surface of
the Earth.

As encounter day drew to a close, celebrations
took place all over JPL. For many, however,
the excitement was tempered by exhaustion.
After 48 hours of intense activity, sleep
was imperative for some. But the close approach
to Callisto was still to come, as was an
examination of the data already received.

After its close flyby of Io, Voyager 1 headed for Ganymede, the largest of the Galilean satellites. This global view of
Ganymede, taken on March 4 at a range of 2.6 million kilometers, shows features as small as 50 kilometers across. At the
time, Voyager scientists speculated that the numerous white spots were impact craters, surrounded in some cases by icy ejecta
blankets splashed onto the surrounding surface. However, many narrow white streaks, especially those in the lower left
quadrant, promised new and exciting geological features on this satellite. [P-21207C]

Tuesday, March 6.

Voyager was now receding
from Jupiter, accelerated on a new trajectory—one
that would speed it on toward its November
1980 encounter with Saturn. But first came the
encounter with Callisto, with closest approach
at 9:50 a.m., at a range of 126 000 kilometers.
The satellite was littered with craters and there
appeared one huge “bullseye” pattern that
might have been the result of an impact. As the
photos of Callisto came in, Garry Hunt described

80

the scene in the imaging area: “The
activity around the monitors now is quite incredible
with people caught breathless by the
pictures coming in. Every satellite we’ve seen
has been a different world.” Asked how he felt
about the images of Jupiter’s atmosphere, he
replied, “I’m absolutely delighted with what
I’ve seen, and I’m delighted Voyager 2 is not
far behind since I’m convinced that we’ll see yet
another face of Jupiter by then. The weather
will have changed by July.”

At the morning press briefing, the wealth
of new data began to be revealed. “If Jupiter
had ever posed for Monet, it would probably
have turned out like this,” said Brad Smith as
he introduced some enhanced (exaggerated)
color images that had been specially processed
to show more detail in the Great Red Spot
region. Indeed, these photographs did look like
paintings with Jupiter displaying some of its
best abstract art.

As Voyager 1 approached Ganymede on March 5, many
strange new surface features became visible. In this frame,
taken from a distance of 250 000 kilometers and showing
features as small as 5 kilometers across, three distinct types
of terrain are seen: polygons of old dark surface, extensive
areas of lighter, younger material, and brilliant white ejecta
patterns (probably water-ice) around fresh craters. The
bright rays in the upper part of the picture are 300-500
kilometers long; at the bottom are several craters with only
faint, muted ejecta patterns. [P-21262C]

Voyager 1 found that the surface of Ganymede was geologically
very complex. This frame, taken March 5 from a
range of 250 000 kilometers, shows a region about 1000
kilometers across centered near longitude 0° and latitude
20°S. The surface displays many craters, some (probably
the younger ones) with bright ray systems. Bright grooved
bands traverse the surface in various directions. One of
these bands, running in a north-south direction in the lower
left of the picture, is offset along a white line that may represent
a fault. Ganymede is the only Galilean satellite to
show indications of such lateral offsets in the crust.
[P-21266]

The first picture of Amalthea was shown,
revealing an elongated, dark, reddish object
about 265 kilometers long. Smith reported:
“There is actually some structure that one can
see—a crater—a couple of bright features for

81

which we have no interpretation and some
other evidence of cratering. It doesn’t look like
much, but after all, Amalthea has never been
seen as anything more than a point of light
from the Earth, and, in fact, there are very few
people that have even seen it as a point of light.
I doubt that more than one astronomer out of a
hundred has actually seen Amalthea.”

Larry Soderblom introduced new photographs
of the satellites. Io still showed no
craters, even at high resolution. The craters that
“should” have been on Io were on Ganymede
and Callisto. Ganymede not only had craters, it
had fault lines as well. “There is transverse
motion along these faults. Things get offset,
apparently, for hundreds of kilometers. So it’s
the first time we’ve seen major kinds of transverse
motion on the surface of another planet.”
Ganymede, in effect, had shown evidence of
having its own icy version of the San Andreas
Fault.

Amalthea was thought to be the
innermost satellite of Jupiter until Voyager 2
discovered tiny Adrastea (1979J1). The
Voyager 1 camera revealed Amalthea as an irregular
dark reddish object with dimensions of 270 × 160 kilometers. These
three images have resolutions of (b) 25 kilometers;
(c) 13 kilometers; (d) 8 kilometers. [260-503]

(b)

(c)

(d)

Although Callisto was heavily covered
with craters up to 200 kilometers in diameter,
Dr. Soderblom commented on the absence of
larger impact basins. Perhaps there was one in
the huge bullseye feature; however, it was not a
“standard” looking basin like those on the
Moon. Callisto was “extremely smooth and
free of any relief. The structure [the bullseye],
if impact caused, shows no relief; the limb does

82

not show any relief; maybe it’s possible that
Callisto cannot support relief.” By the next
day, the geologists on the Imaging Team were
becoming more convinced that the Callisto
“bullseye” was the frozen remnant of an enormous
impact into Callisto’s surface. Since
Callisto is composed in large part of water and
has an icy crust, the team speculated that any
raised features created by the impact would
eventually “slide” back into the surface, “and
the ripple marks from the shock wave caused by
the impact were frozen” into the surface.

Callisto was the last of the Galilean satellites to be studied by Voyager 1. In this photo, taken March 5 from a distance of 1.2
million kilometers, with a resolution of about 25 kilometers, the extensive cratering of the surface began to be apparent.
Near the upper left edge is the large impact basin Valhalla; the numerous light spots are craters 100 kilometers or more in
diameter. This is the same side of Callisto that was photographed at higher resolution during the Voyager 1 flyby of the
satellite a day later. [P-21284C]

Lyle Broadfoot announced that the ultraviolet
spectrometer had detected very strong
auroral emission in Jupiter’s north and south
polar regions. The aurora seemed to be caused
primarily by the excitation of molecular hydrogen,
although some atomic hydrogen was also
detected. Auroral emissions from helium atoms
were not detected.

83

The largest ancient impact basin on Callisto is called Valhalla. The central light area is about 600 kilometers across.
Surrounding it is a set of concentric low ridges, looking like frozen ripple marks, extending about 1500 kilometers from the
center. This picture was taken by Voyager 1 on March 6 at a range of 350 000 kilometers. [P-21287C]

84

The IRIS infrared measurements required
more computer processing than other Voyager
data, and therefore they were not available until
a day or two after the observations were
made. However, Rudy Hanel already had two
new results to report. First, the Great Red Spot
was about 3° C cooler than its surroundings,
and this cooling extended many kilometers
above the clouds, into the thin upper atmosphere.
Second, the thermal emission from Io
was peculiar, with an unexpected shape to the
spectrum. Tentatively, Hanel suggested there
might be some hot spots on the surface of the
satellite.

Jupiter has been full of surprises, but the
excitement was far from over. Major discoveries
were yet to be made.

Voyager 1 discovered the rings of Jupiter on March 4 in a single eleven-minute exposure with the narrow-angle camera.
Spacecraft motion during the time exposure streaked the picture, as can be seen from the hairpin-like images of the stars.
(The star field was unusually rich, since it happened to include the Beehive star cluster in Cancer.) The ring image itself is a
multiple exposure, with six separate images side by side. The ring does not extend out of the right side of the picture,
indicating that this image captured the outer edge of the ring, about halfway between the cloud tops and the orbit of
Amalthea. [P-21258]

Wednesday, March 7.

At the press briefing,
Brad Smith made a spectacular announcement:
“This morning I would like to add yet another
important discovery to be claimed by this outstanding
mission—that of a thin flat ring of
particles surrounding Jupiter. Thus Jupiter
now joins Saturn and Uranus to become the
third planet of our solar system known to
possess a planetary ring system and leaves Neptune
as the only member of the group of giant
planets without a known ring. The discovery of
the ring was unexpected in that the current
theory which treats long-term stability of planetary
rings would not predict the existence of
such a ring around Jupiter. The single Voyager

85

camera image which recorded the ring was
planned by the Voyager Imaging Team several
years ago, not really with any great expectation
of a positive result, but more for the purpose of
providing a degree of completeness to
Voyager’s survey of the entire Jupiter system.
The observation, as planned, involved looking
off to the right of the limb of Jupiter in the
planet’s equatorial plane at the exact moment
that the spacecraft would be crossing the equatorial
plane. The image actually was taken at 16
hours and 52 minutes before encounter from a
distance of about 1.2 million kilometers. Exposure
time was 11.2 minutes. We weren’t certain
of the exact moment that we would cross
the equatorial plane, so we planned to open our
shutter and leave it open as we went through.”

Since the Voyager 1 ring photograph was taken exactly edge-on, it was not possible to determine the width of the ring. In this
artist’s conception, the ring is drawn as if it were ribbon-like, with very little width, quite unlike the broad flat rings of
Saturn. Voyager 2 later showed this to have been a lucky guess. [P-21259]

The image showed six exposures of the
ring, together with streaked trails of background
stars. Smith reported that the thickness
of the ring was less than 30 kilometers, and that
it extended to a point 128 000 kilometers from
the center of Jupiter, or 57 000 kilometers
above the clouds. In response to this discovery,
scientists were eagerly planning to alter the
Voyager 2 encounter sequence to try to obtain
additional information on the ring.

The newspapers carried stories of the ring
discovery on Thursday, March 8. One story was
seen by two University of Hawaii astronomers,
Eric Becklin and Gareth Wynn-Williams, who
were observing at Mauna Kea Observatory, at
an altitude of 4200 meters on the Big Island of
Hawaii. Within two days they had succeeded in

86

detecting the rings by their reflected sunlight, at
an infrared wavelength of 2.2 micrometers,
providing a rapid confirmation of the Voyager
discovery.

As the plasma measurements from the Io
flyby were analyzed, an additional clue to the
origin of sulfur and oxygen was revealed. Herb
Bridge reported the detection of sulfur dioxide
(SO₂), the simplest molecule composed of these
two atoms.

The high-resolution tape-recorded pictures
of Io baffled imaging scientists. A number of
features looked like volcanic flows; together
with the absence of impact craters, these features
indicated a geologically active planet. A
central point of discussion was the recent theoretical
work on Io by Stanton Peale of the
University of California and two NASA scientists,
Pat Cassen and Ray Reynolds. These
authors had just published a paper in the
March 2 issue of
Science
showing how tidal
heating from Jupiter’s gravity could melt the
interior of Io. They wrote that “widespread
and recurrent surface volcanism might occur.”
It began to look as if the prediction had been
correct.

Thursday, March 8.

The last Voyager 1 press
briefing was held. Each speaker was allotted
only a few minutes, prompting Larry Soderblom
to preface his remarks by trying to explain
how difficult it was to describe four new
planets—the Galilean satellites—in the time
allowed. “Torrence [Johnson] was sitting with
me last night, puzzling. He said, ‘You know,
Larry, it’s sort of like imagining we’d flown
into the solar system the day before yesterday,
and said, “There’s a thing we’ll call Mercury,
and there’s the Moon, and there’s Earth, and
there’s Mars. Now let’s explain them in ten
minutes”.’” There was Callisto, with the
highest density of craters of any Galilean satellite—the
oldest of the Galilean surfaces—featuring
a huge “bullseye” that is “the largest
single contiguous feature seen so far in the solar
system.” There was Ganymede, cratered, but
also overrun with fault lines that looked,
according to one person, like “tire tracks in the
desert,” showing a surface that “had laterally
slid—faulted and sheared and sheared again—twisted
and torn apart.” There was Io, the most
bizarre—the one that scientists had thought
would be most lunarlike—showing a surface
that had apparently been “cooked and steamed
and fumed out leaving deposits all over the surface
much like you might see around a
fumarole at Yellowstone National Park. The
fact that these things exhibit such youth makes
it likely that the planet is still volcanically active.”
There was Europa, with huge linear
features unlike those of the other three Galileans—Europa
the mystery satellite, waiting for
the probing eyes of Voyager 2 to survey it in
early July.

Ed Stone summed it all up: “I think we
have had almost a decade’s worth of discovery
in this two-week period, and I think that all of
the people who have been talking to you feel the
same saturation of new information which has
occurred. And in fact, we will probably be
studying it in great detail for at least five
years.”

Over the next day or so the press packed up
and went home. The TV monitors showed the
spacecraft’s parting glance at a crescent
Jupiter, only hinting at the vastness of space
Voyager 1 would travel until its encounter with
Saturn in the autumn of 1980. Maybe now there
would be a relative calm that would allow the
scientists to begin analyzing that “decade’s
worth of data.” But things were not to be calm
just yet.

Fire and Brimstone

At about 5 a.m. on March 8, Voyager had
taken a historic picture. Looking back at a crescent
Io from a distance of 4.5 million kilometers,
the camera had been used to obtain a
long-exposure view for the spacecraft navigation
team—one that showed the satellite against
the field of background stars. During the day,
Linda Morabito, an optical navigation engineer,
began to work with this picture on her
computer-controlled image display. She noted
what appeared to be a crescent cloud, extending
beyond the edge of Io. But Io has no atmosphere,
so a cloud rising hundreds of kilometers
above the surface did not seem to make sense.

The next day, working with her colleagues,
Morabito eliminated all possibilities for the new
feature on Io except the obvious—a cloud. If it
were a cloud, it must be the result of an ongoing
volcanic eruption of incredible violence. The
picture was shown to members of the Imaging
Team, who agreed with the identification. But
it was Friday and Brad Smith and Larry Soderblom,
along with most of the other team members,
had left for the weekend to try to get some
rest. The picture would have to wait two more

87

days.

HIGHLIGHTS OF THE VOYAGER 1 SCIENTIFIC FINDINGS
[2]

Atmosphere

Uniform wind speeds for cloud features with
widely different size scales, suggesting that
mass motion and not wave motion is being
observed.

Rapid formation and spreading of bright
cloud material, perhaps the result of disturbances
that trigger convective activity.

A pattern of east-west winds in the polar
regions, previously thought to have been
dominated by convective upwelling and
downwelling.

Anticyclonic motion of material associated
with the Great Red Spot, with a rotational
period of about six days.

Interactions of smaller spots with the Great
Red Spot and with each other.

Auroral emissions in the polar regions, both
in the ultraviolet (which were not present
during the 1973 Pioneer encounter) and in
the visible.

Cloud-top lightning bolts, similar to terrestrial
superbolts, and meteoritic fireballs.

A temperature inversion layer in the stratosphere
and a temperature of 160 K at the
level at which the atmospheric pressure is
0.01 bar.

Very strong ultraviolet emission from the
disk, indicating a thermospheric temperature
of more than 1000 K.

A hot (1100 K) upper ionosphere on the dayside
that was not observed by Pioneer 10,
suggesting there may be large temporal or
spatial changes.

An atmospheric composition with volume
fraction of helium of 0.11 ± 0.03.

A substantially colder atmosphere above the
Great Red Spot than in the surrounding
regions.

Satellites and Rings

At least eight currently active volcanoes on
Io, probably the result of tidal heating of the
interior of the satellite, with plumes extending
up to 250 kilometers above the surface.

A large hot spot on Io near the volcano Loki
that is about 150 K warmer than the surrounding
surface.

Numerous intersecting, linear features on
Europa, possibly due to crustal cracking.

Two distinct types of terrain, cratered and
grooved, on Ganymede, suggesting that the
entire ice-rich crust was once under tension.

An ancient, heavily cratered crust on
Callisto, with vestigial rings of enormous
impact basins since erased by flow of the ice-laden
crust.

The elliptical shape of Amalthea (270 × 160
kilometers).

A faint ring of material about Jupiter, with
an outer edge of 128 000 kilometers from the
center of the planet.

Magnetosphere

An electrical current of more than a million
amperes flowing in the magnetic flux tube
linking Jupiter and Io.

Very strong ultraviolet emissions from
ionized sulfur and oxygen in the Io plasma
torus, indicating a hot (hundred thousand
degree) plasma that evidently was not present
at the time of Pioneer 10 encounter.

Plasma electron densities exceeding 4500 per
cubic centimeter in some regions of the Io
plasma torus.

A cold, corotating plasma inside 6 R
J
with
ions of sulfur, oxygen, and sulfur dioxide.

High-energy trapped particles inside 6 R
J

with significantly enhanced abundances of
oxygen, sodium, and sulfur.

Hot plasma near the magnetopause predominantly
composed of protons, oxygen, and
sulfur.

Jovian radio emission at kilometer wavelengths,
which may be generated by plasma
oscillations in the Io plasma torus.

Corotating plasma flows unexpectedly far
from Jupiter in the dayside outer magnetosphere.

Evidence suggesting a transition from closed
magnetic field lines to a Jovian magnetotail
at about 25 R
J
from Jupiter.

Whistler emission interpreted as lightning
whistlers from the Jovian atmosphere.

[1]
Adapted from a paper by E. C. Stone and A. L. Lane in the Voyager 1 Thirty-Day Report.

[2]
Adapted from a summary prepared by E. C. Stone and A. L. Lane for the Voyager 1 Thirty-Day Report.

88

The dramatic discovery of active volcanoes on Io was made by Linda Morabito and her colleagues from this navigation
picture, taken March 8 at a range from Io of 4.5 million kilometers. On the bright edge, the immense plume of volcanic ash
from Pele (P₁) rises nearly 300 kilometers above the surface. At the terminator, the border between day and night on Io, a
second smaller cloud from the volcano Loki (P₂) catches the sunlight. These two eruptions—captured on this single
discovery photograph—are much larger than the largest terrestrial volcanic eruption known. [P-21306 B/W]

Once the existence of giant volcanic eruptions on Io was recognized, a reexamination of the Voyager 1 encounter pictures
revealed many more plumes. These two views of Prometheus (P₃) were found by Joseph Veverka and Robert Strom on
March 12 when they reproduced earlier pictures.

The plume is silhouetted against the black space, although it is
also possible to see dark “feet” where the falling material reaches the surface. [P-21295]

89

The complex jets of material are
clearly seen as dark streaks against the light background of the surface of Io. The plume itself rose more than 100 kilometers
above Io’s surface. [P-21294]

Meanwhile, new information about Jupiter
was released to the public. A long-exposure
(three minutes and twelve seconds) image of the
dark side of the planet, taken with the wide-angle
camera while in the shadow of the planet,
caught Jupiter showing off some Jovian “fireworks.”
A long, broad, white streak across the
picture was a visible aurora, the largest aurora
ever seen—almost 29 000 kilometers long. In
addition, nineteen smaller bright splotches,
looking insignificant by comparison, were in
reality “superbolts” of lightning. Since huge
electrical discharges such as lightning can,
under the right circumstances, power chemical
reactions that form complex organic molecules,
the discovery of lightning on Jupiter could have
profound implications. Was “lightning-inspired”
organic synthesis going on in
Jupiter’s atmosphere? No one knew.

Returning to JPL on Sunday night, Brad
Smith got his first look at the Morabito picture
of the volcanic cloud. Early Monday morning,

90

other Imaging Team scientists saw it. As soon
as the JPL computers were operating, Joseph
Veverka and Robert Strom began working with
the two interactive TV terminals to look for evidence
in other pictures of ongoing eruptions.
Faint clouds or plumes would not show up in
normally processed pictures, but could be
brought out easily with the computer-controlled
displays. By midmorning, several additional
volcanic plumes had been found.

Linda Morabito shows the discovery photo of the volcanic
eruptions on Io. [P-21718]

The dark side of Jupiter revealed many surprising phenomena to Voyager 1. A wide-angle view, taken on March 5, led to the
discovery of a double auroral arc at north-polar latitudes and numerous flashes of lightning illuminating the clouds during
this 3-minute, 12-second exposure, taken at a range of half a million kilometers. [260-460]

Meanwhile, on March 11, John Pearl of
the IRIS team had independently drawn the
conclusion that volcanic activity must be taking
place on Io. He and Rudy Hanel found evidence
of strongly enhanced thermal emission
from parts of the satellite. The most prominent
was a source nearly 200° C hotter than its surroundings.
On March 12, Pearl brought his new
results to the Imaging Team, and sure enough,
the hot spot was located near one of the
volcanic plumes! A month later, continuing

91

analysis of IRIS spectra yielded identification
of sulfur dioxide (SO₂) gas over this same
erupting volcano. At last a source had been
located for the enigmatic sulfur and oxygen
ions in the magnetosphere.

The volcanoes provided a thread with
which to weave together the disparate data on
Io. A few months earlier there had been a
report of a sudden brightening of Io in the infrared;
now it seemed plausible that thermal
emission from an eruption was the source. The
Voyager ultraviolet experimenters had been
worrying over the source of the intense sulfur
emissions they had seen and had been disturbed
by the changes in the gas clouds around Io since
the Pioneer 10 and 11 flybys; now a variable
source for these gas clouds was identified. In
addition, the craterfree surface and bizarre
features seen in the Voyager images could be
recognized as the product of violent explosive
eruptions on Io. It appeared that Peale, Cassen,
and Reynolds had found, in their theoretical
calculations, the key to the most geologically
active body ever encountered in the solar
system.

News of the discovery was released to the
press on Monday, March 12. During the next
few days, a total of eight gigantic eruptions
were located in the Voyager pictures of Io.
Within a few weeks, scientists all over the world
were thinking with renewed energy about this
incredible satellite.

With four new planet-sized satellites now
photographed, there was a sudden requirement
for maps and for names to be assigned to the
newly discovered features. The maps were produced
from Voyager images at the Astrogeology
Branch of the U.S. Geological Survey at
Flagstaff, Arizona. The names, proposed by a
group of scientists headed by Voyager Imaging
Team members Tobias Owen and Hal Masursky,
were given official approval by the International
Astronomical Union in August. For a
time, a dual nomenclature persisted for the
erupting volcanoes on Io. The eruption plumes
were given numbers, P₁, P₂, etc., while the
volcanic features were given names taken from
the mythology of fire and volcano legends.
Thus the “hoof print” of Io was called Pele,
for the Hawaiian volcano goddess, and the 280-kilometer-high
plume associated with it was
called P₁. By the time of the Voyager 2 encounter,
scientists had prepared maps on which
to plot their new discoveries.

While the Voyager scientists fanned out
across the world to share their findings with
colleagues, attention at JPL turned to Voyager
2. In response to the discoveries of the first encounter,
changes were required in the sequencing
of scientific observations for July. Voyager
2, still troubled by a faulty receiver, might require
more coddling from the spacecraft team
than had its sister spacecraft, now safely on the
way to Saturn.

92

The particles of the rings of Jupiter are stronger reflectors of red light than of blue, as can be seen in this view, assembled
from two images taken in orange and violet light. Since the images were registered on the rings, not the planet, the bright
bands of colors along the edge of Jupiter are an artifact of misalignment. [P-21779]

93

CHAPTER 7

THE SECOND ENCOUNTER: MORE SURPRISES FROM THE “LAND” OF THE GIANT

Approaching Jupiter

At the beginning of July, the dry summer
heat had returned to Pasadena, and so had the
press. The scientists had come days or weeks
earlier to look at data being transmitted from
the second Voyager as it approached Jupiter
and its satellites. The mood at JPL seemed
quieter than it had been in March for Voyager
1, although the press room would once again be
deluged with observers on the day of encounter.
This would be our second good, close look at
the Jovian system, but it was to be no summer
rerun. Voyager 2 would have a different view of
each world, and, in addition, both Io and Jupiter
had undergone changes, as though to ensure
that no one would become bored and fall asleep
in front of a TV monitor. In a sense, this encounter
was to be another first look at Jupiter
and its satellites, with a view of each object that
was quite different from what had been seen
before.

Changes in Jupiter’s cloud formations
became noticeable long before July. After a gap
of six weeks following the first flyby, Voyager
2’s observatory phase began on April 24, 1979,
seventy-six days before its July 9 encounter
with Jupiter. During this time, the spacecraft’s
ultraviolet and fields and particles instruments
studied the Jovian system and its interaction
with the solar wind. Between April 24 and
May 27, Voyager 2’s imaging system concentrated
on the motions in Jupiter’s atmosphere,
creating another approach time-lapse “movie.”
From May 27 to 29 photographs were taken in a
more rapid sequence, showing the planet during
five 10-hour rotations. From these studies it
was apparent that Garry Hunt’s prediction had
been right—the weather
had
changed by July.
A month before the encounter JPL’s Voyager
Bulletin—Mission Status Report announced
that “Jupiter is sporting quite a different face
than it did just four months ago. The bright
‘tongue’ extending upward from the Red Spot
is interacting with a thin, bright cloud above it
that has traveled twice around Jupiter in four
months.” The turbulent region west of the
Great Red Spot had begun to break up and
separate from the Red Spot. The white ovals
south of the Red Spot had drifted to the east
(about 0.35 degrees a day), while the Red Spot
itself had drifted west (about 0.26 degrees a
day). The white zone seen just south of the Red
Spot by Voyager 1 had become very narrow—like
a thin white line just barely outlining
the bottom of the spot. The Red Spot had also
changed: It had become a more uniform
orange-red, perhaps reverting to the color seen
by Pioneers 10 and 11. The brown spots that
had been seen in the north temperate region at
the same longitude as the Red Spot were now
on the other side of the planet. A dark brown
spot not present during the Voyager 1 flyby had
developed along the northern edge of the brown
equatorial region on the Red Spot side of the
planet. Some of the white markings that seemed
to have protruded into the equatorial region at
the time of the first flyby were missing in the
Voyager 2 photographs.

As Voyager 2 entered the far encounter
period on May 29, all instruments on the spacecraft
(except for the photopolarimeter) seemed
to be in good shape for encounter. As was the
case with Voyager 1, the polarization wheel on
Voyager 2’s photopolarimeter was stuck, so the
instrument was able to obtain only color photometry
measurements.

94

In early June, as Voyager 2 carried out its observatory phase, additional changes in Jupiter’s face began to be apparent.
These two images, taken from a distance of 24 million kilometers, have a resolution of about 500 kilometers.

The
Great Red Spot and the white oval south of it are seen to be followed on the west by regions of chaotic and turbulent clouds.
This is not the same white oval that was near the Red Spot in March; the differential rotation of the planet carried a different
oval close to the Red Spot during the intervening three months. [P-21713C]

95

Io is visible to the right of the planet, and the shadow
of Ganymede falls on the colored clouds of Jupiter’s equatorial belt. [P-21714C]

96

The Voyager 2 trajectory was complementary to that of Voyager 1. This time, the satellites were encountered before Jupiter,
revealing their other hemispheres. As shown in this drawing, the spacecraft flew by first Callisto, then Ganymede, then
Europa. The ten-hour Io volcano watch took place immediately after closest approach to Jupiter. [260-533A]

Voyager 2 trajectory

View normal to Jupiter equator

Sun occultation

Earth occultation

Launch date = 8/20/77

Jupiter arrival date = 7/9/79

Periapsis

Satellite closest approach

Amalthea

Europa

Io

Ganymede

Callisto

These two faces of Jupiter were photographed by Voyager 2 on May 9 at a distance of 46 million kilometers from the planet.
Voyager scientists began to detect significant changes in the cloud patterns since the Voyager 1 encounter two months earlier.
[260-507]

97

The weather is changing over one of the northern hemisphere brown ovals in this picture taken July 6. The brown ovals are
regions in which breaks in the upper layer of ammonia clouds reveal darker clouds below. A high, white cloud is seen moving
over the darker cloud, providing an indication of the structure of the cloud layers. Thin white clouds are also seen within the
dark cloud. At right, blue areas, free of high clouds, are seen. [P-21753C]

Although Voyager 2’s radio receiver still
could not track a Doppler-shifted radio signal
from Earth (the problem is that it “hears a
monotone,” explained Deputy Project Manager
Esker K. Davis), the Deep Space Network
engineers had learned to work with the spacecraft,
determining what frequency the spacecraft
would listen to at any particular time. They
had discovered that some of the “housekeeping”
telemetry signals from the receiver were
sensitive to the match between the incoming
frequency and the receiver frequency. By monitoring
these signals, they could detect a frequency
drift in time to correct the transmission,
thus keeping the system in tune in spite of slow
changes in the receiver. The system was slow
and demanding but effective; all the necessary
command sequences were successfully loaded
into the computer, and communications during
the encounter were entirely successful.

The timing offset experienced by Voyager
1 as a result of Jupiter’s intense radiation environment
was not expected to be a problem on
Voyager 2 for two reasons: Even at closest
approach, Voyager 2 would still be more than
twice as far from Jupiter as Voyager 1 had
been, and the Voyager 2 computer was programmed
to resynchronize the spacecraft’s timing
systems automatically every hour. In this

98

way, even if the radiation environment proved
to be much higher than anticipated, the image
smear that might occur from a timing offset
would be prevented.

Complex activity in the southern hemisphere of Jupiter continued during the Voyager 2 encounter, although changes had
occurred in the region of the Great Red Spot. A white oval, different from the one observed in a similar position at the time
of the Voyager 1 encounter, was situated south of the Red Spot. The region of white clouds extended from east of the Red
Spot and around its northern boundary, preventing small cloud vortices from circling the feature. The disturbed region west
of the Red Spot had also changed since the equivalent Voyager 1 image. The picture was taken on July 3 from a distance of 6
million kilometers. [P-21742C]

As a result of the discoveries made by
Voyager 1, the project scientists decided to
modify some of Voyager 2’s preplanned sequences.
As early as April 1, the painstaking
job of constructing new computer commands
began. A ten-hour Io Volcano Watch was
added to the spacecraft’s program, taking
advantage of the fact that shortly after closest
approach to Jupiter, the spacecraft would remain
within about 1 million kilometers of Io
for a long period, keeping nearly the same face
in view. Provisions were also made to take extensive
ultraviolet measurements of the emission
from the glowing torus surrounding
Jupiter near the orbit of Io. Further studies
would be made of the dark side of Jupiter to
search for lightning and auroral activity, and
there was also the hope that the plasma wave instrument
would be able to detect lightning
whistlers (radio signals created by lightning
bolts) as the Voyager 1 instrument had done. A
high priority was given to observations of the

99

newly discovered ring, which had not been in
the original Voyager 2 sequence at all. The
spacecraft would cross the ring plane twice,
photographing the ring during both the inbound
and the outbound passages.

As was originally planned, Voyager 2
would make its closest approaches to Callisto,
Ganymede, Europa, and Amalthea before encounter
with Jupiter. Because of the difference
in the trajectories of the two spacecraft,
Voyager 2 would see the faces of Callisto and
Ganymede not seen by Voyager 1. The most important
difference, however, was that the second
Voyager would fly much closer to Europa
than Voyager 1 did, giving scientists their first
good look at the mysterious streaks scratched
on the surface of that bright golden world.
Voyager 2 would also have a closer flyby of
Ganymede, giving us a second chance to examine
its strange “snowmobile tracks.” The
major loss, of course, was Io, which would be
seen from Voyager 2 only at distances of a
million kilometers or more.

Io appeared in front of Jupiter as seen by Voyager on June 25, at a range of 12 million kilometers. At a resolution of about
200 kilometers, the bright and dark spots on the satellite are just beginning to be resolved, but it was not possible to
determine if any eruptions were still in progress. [P-21719C]

The Encounter

Wednesday, July 4.

(
Range to Jupiter, 5.3 million
kilometers; range to Earth, 921 million
kilometers
). While most of the nation celebrated
Independence Day with picnics, sports
events, and fireworks, the scientists and engineers
at JPL were working around the clock.

100

Voyager 2 had already entered Jupiter’s territory,
crossing the bow shock for the first time
on July 2 at a distance of 99 R
J
from Jupiter,
indicating that the magnetosphere had expanded
in the interval between the two encounters.
At about noon on July 3, the spacecraft
encountered the magnetopause, but on
July 4, the data from the particles and fields instruments
were ambiguous. Apparently the
magnetosphere was pulsating in response to
changing pressures, and the spacecraft was
playing tag with the rapidly shifting boundaries
of the bow shock and the magnetopause.

As the low energy charged particle instrument
began to measure particles coming from
inside the Jovian magnetosphere, it became apparent
that some important changes had taken
place since Voyager 1’s encounter. From the
composition of the particles, it appeared that
they were largely of solar origin, unlike the
heavy concentrations of ions of sulfur and oxygen
seen by Voyager 1. Scientists began to
speculate that the Io volcanoes, which presumably
eject sulfur and oxygen into the magnetosphere,
might have declined in activity. In the
evening, the first images of Io at a resolution
high enough to allow the volcanic plumes to be
seen would be beamed back to Earth.

ENCOUNTER DISTANCES FOR VOYAGER 2

Object
Range to Center at Closest Approach (kilometers)
Best Image Resolution (km per line pair)

Jupiter
722 000
15

Amalthea
558 000
10

Io
1 130 000
20

Europa
206 000
4

Ganymede
62 000
1

Callisto
215 000
4

Voyager scientists anxiously awaited the first views of Io that would show whether the volcanic eruptions seen in March were
still active. This picture was taken on July 4, at a range of 4.7 million kilometers, about the same as that of the volcano
discovery picture on March 8. One large plume is clearly visible, rising nearly 200 kilometers above the surface. At the time
of release of this picture on July 6, the scientists wrote, “The volcano apparently has been erupting since it was observed by
Voyager 1 in March. This suggests that the volcanoes on Io probably are in continuous eruption.” [P-21738B/W]

Thursday, July 5.

(
Range to Jupiter, 4.4 million
kilometers
). The press room at Von Karman
Auditorium opened and the members of the
press, most of them veterans of the first encounter,
arrived at JPL. Meanwhile, the spacecraft
continued to measure fluctuations in the
magnetospheric boundary. By noon, JPL had
reported at least eleven crossings of the bow
shock as the solar wind flirted with Jupiter’s
magnetosphere. Apparently the solar wind was
much more variable in July than it had been in
March. At times the bow shock seemed to be

101

thicker than that experienced by Voyager 1; one
Voyager 2 crossing took ten minutes, whereas
the longest Voyager 1 crossing was only one
minute long. Even though the processes affecting
the magnetosphere seemed more complex,
the magnetosphere was less compressed; when
Voyager 2 actually entered the magnetosphere
at a distance of 62 R
J
, it was much farther from
Jupiter than Voyager 1 had been at its final
crossing (47 R
J
).

Photos obtained the day before from over
4 million kilometers showed that at least one of
Io’s volcanoes was still active. A total of eight
ongoing eruptions had been seen by Voyager 1,
and scientists were anxious to see how many of
these were still erupting four months later.

VOYAGER 2 BOW SHOCK (S) AND MAGNETOPAUSE (M) CROSSINGS

Boundary
Day
Distance (R
J
)

Inbound

S
7/02
99
(multiple)

S
7/02
97

S
7/03
87

M
7/04
72
(multiple)

M
7/05
71

S
7/05
69

S
7/05
67

M
7/05
62

Outbound

M
7/23
169

M
7/23
173

M
7/24
174

M
7/24
175

M
7/24
176

M
7/24
177

M
7/25
184

M
7/25
185

M
7/27
213

M
7/31
253

M
8/01
258

M
8/01
262
(multiple)

M
8/03
279
(multiple)

S
8/03
283
(multiple)

Although Voyager 2 did not come as close to Io as had Voyager 1, some changes in the surface during the four months
between encounters were so large that they could still be easily seen. These two pictures of the region of the volcano Pele were
taken in early March and early July, respectively. The most dramatic change was the filling in of the indentation in the ejecta
ring, turning the hoofprint into a symmetric oval. The oval is about 1000 by 700 kilometers in outermost dimension, and the
area that changed amounts to more than 10 000 square kilometers. [260-687AC]

While attention at JPL focused on the unfolding
drama of the Jupiter encounter, many
members of the world’s press seemed more interested
in the fate of Skylab, which was nearing
its death plunge into the Earth’s atmosphere.
Launched in 1973, Skylab had been one
of NASA’s more successful projects. Three
crews of astronauts had visited it, carrying out
intensive studies of the Sun and breaking one
record after another for the duration of
manned space flight. Since the departure of the
final group of three astronauts in 1974, Skylab

102

had been sinking gradually lower as a result of
friction with the extreme upper atmosphere of
Earth. During the past year, higher temperatures
in the atmosphere had increased this drag,
and now the end was near. With a strange fascination,
the world watched the end of this old
spacecraft, almost seeming to forget the spectacular
new results being transmitted from
Jupiter. To the frustration of the Voyager team
and the press “camped out” in Von Karman
Auditorium for the second encounter, the
exaggerated stories of a possible Skylab disaster
took precedence over Voyager news. Ultimately,
Skylab fell over the Indian Ocean and
Australia on Wednesday, July 11, just as the
major findings of Voyager 2 were being released.

Friday, July 6.

(
Range to Jupiter, 3.5 million
kilometers
). With the first satellite encounter
still two days away, Voyager 2 continued to
make a variety of measurements of Jupiter and
all the Galilean satellites. As the distance to Io
decreased, it was possible to see detailed surface
features as well as to look for the volcanic
plumes at the edge of the disk, silhouetted
against black space. By the end of the day, the
Great Red Spot loomed so large that six imaging
frames (a 2 × 3 mosaic) were required to
encompass it and its immediate surroundings.

At the first formal press conference of the
Voyager 2 encounter, Project Scientist Ed
Stone reviewed the progress of the mission.
Because the ailing spacecraft receiver was working
so well, Ray Heacock, Voyager Project
Manager, announced that the major trajectory
correction maneuver at Jupiter had been rescheduled
to take place only two hours after
closest approach. Since the geometry was especially
favorable at this time, the 76-minute
rocket burn could put the spacecraft on its
planned route to Saturn with a minimum
expenditure of fuel, thereby preserving the
option of sending the spacecraft on to Uranus.

The Io torus was under observation, both
directly by the ultraviolet spectrometer, and indirectly
by the charged particle instruments.
The LECP instrument had begun to pick up
sulfur ions, but at lower energies and lower
concentrations than those recorded during the
first encounter. In the ultraviolet, glows could
be seen both from the torus and from aurorae
in the polar regions of Jupiter.

Photographs of Io showed that the heart-shaped
feature surrounding Pele (P₁), Io’s
largest volcano, had changed shape. The indentation
of the heart had disappeared, making the
heart into an oval. Apparently a new deposit of
volcanic ejecta had blanketed the surface, altering
its color. Perhaps an earlier obstruction in
the volcanic vent, or the shape of the vent itself,
had caused the area surrounding Pele to look
heart-shaped. In any case, whatever had caused
the indentation was now gone. At the same
time, new photos failed to show a plume above
Pele, and there was speculation that changes in
this eruption might be related to the altered
population of charged particles in the magnetosphere.

The Voyager 2 pictures of Callisto looked remarkably similar
to those obtained of the other side of the satellite by
Voyager 1. Seen from a distance of 2.3 million kilometers,
the large craters (100 kilometers or more across) appear as
light spots. No new major impact features such as Valhalla,
discovered by Voyager 1, are visible on the hemisphere seen
by Voyager 2. [P-21740C]

Saturday, July 7.

(
Range to Jupiter, 2.6 million
kilometers
). As the spacecraft rapidly closed
on Callisto, better and better photographs were
taken of the previously unseen hemisphere. As
with the Voyager 1 observations, however, the
main impression was one of heavy cratering,
unrelieved by other geologic structures. Meanwhile,
the coverage of Io had improved as the
satellite rotated to the point at which a census

103

of the volcanic eruptions seen in the first encounter
began to emerge.

At the 11:00 a.m. press conference, Larry
Soderblom announced that four of the volcanoes
discovered by Voyager 1 had been
looked at again by Voyager 2, and three of
them—Prometheus (P₂), Loki (P₃), and
Marduk (P₇)—were still active. However, there
was no trace of volcanic activity coming from
Pele, the source of the largest plume seen by
Voyager 1. P₁ was either greatly subdued or
had turned off completely.

Dr. Soderblom also announced that Voyager
2 images had detected another giant ring
structure on Callisto, bringing the total to
three, and there were probably more. This particular
ring feature was estimated to be about
1500 kilometers across. It was also noted that
although Callisto generally seemed to be saturated
with shoulder-to-shoulder craters, the
crater density near the ring structures seemed to
be lower.

Saturday was a fairly quiet time for the scientists
but not for the spacecraft or the spacecraft
team. “We blocked out about 7½ hours,”
explained Michael Devirian, Ground Data
Systems Development, Integration, and Test
Director, “in which we could send it a set of
commands and re-send it if necessary to make
sure all close-encounter commands were received
by Voyager 2 until all the commands got
through. The whole thing went perfectly the
first time.” So everything was “go” for close
encounter. The near encounter phase began at
6:36 p.m. PDT.

A new face of Ganymede was revealed to Voyager 2. This image was taken July 7 from a distance of 1.2 million kilometers
and clearly shows the large dark area Regio Galileo, as well as much of the lighter grooved terrain discovered by Voyager 1.
The bright spots are impact craters. This image also shows what appear to be polar caps, extending down to about latitude
45° in both the northern and southern hemispheres. [260-670]

Sunday, July 8.

(
Range to Jupiter, 1.5 million
kilometers
). At 2:30 a.m. the first long-exposure
sequence of ring pictures was taken,
and at 3:00 a.m. the intensive period of the Callisto
encounter began. Eighty high-resolution
images were obtained of the satellite, centered
around closest approach (215 000 kilometers)
at 6:13 a.m. Incoming photos showed some features
that looked like double-walled craters, but
no more giant ring structures were seen. It appeared
that there was an asymmetry in the
distribution of large impact features over Callisto’s
surface. “Callisto may turn out to be the

104

most heavily cratered body in the solar
system,” Torrence Johnson remarked. Garry
Hunt was to add later on, “There’s just not
room for another crater on that body—it’s
totally full.”

At the press conference, Brad Smith confirmed
the earlier finding that Io’s volcano Pele
was quite dead—at least for now. Although P₄
had not yet been looked at, all other volcanoes
discovered by Voyager 1 were still active, but
no new plumes had been found. However, new
ultraviolet images of P₂ (Loki) suggested that
the eruption had increased in size. (In a later
report, the imaging team announced that P₂
had increased in height to 175 kilometers and
had changed to a two-column plume.) The new
photographs of Jupiter’s ring showed it to be
quite narrow and ribbonlike, Dr. Smith announced.
The artist’s drawing (released during
the Voyager 1 encounter), intended to show the
outer edge of the ring, turned out to be a good
representation of the actual ring, Dr. Smith said.

There seemed to be less high-speed sulfur
and oxygen inside Jupiter’s magnetosphere
than there had been during the Voyager 1
encounter, George Gloeckler announced.
Voyager 2’s low energy charged particle instrument
was finding substantial amounts of carbon,
silicon, magnesium, and other elements of
solar origin, but the Io-associated elements
were almost depleted. The ultraviolet instrument
had found as much glowing sulfur in Io’s
torus as before, but less of it seemed to be
raised to energies high enough to leave the torus
and be detected elsewhere in the magnetosphere.

There were other indications of Jupiter’s
changing weather. In a Voyager report Sunday
evening, Garry Hunt remarked, “One very exciting
observation came the other day which
caused major excitement down in the imaging
area. We actually saw a white cloud starting to
intrude across a dark barge [large brownish
oval-shaped feature in Jupiter’s northern
hemisphere]. Atmospheric scientists get very
excited by that because this is showing us how
the colors layer themselves up—that white
cloud is clearly above the dark brown. We’re
desperately trying to understand the relationship
of colors on Jupiter.”

The first close-up views of Europa were both exciting and perplexing to Voyager scientists. The best Voyager 1 resolution
had been only about 30 kilometers, but the Voyager 2 trajectory permitted a much closer flyby. These pictures, taken on July
9 at a range of 240 000 kilometers, have a resolution of about 5 kilometers. The bright icy crust of Europa is covered with a
spectacular series of dark streaks, giving the satellite a cracked appearance. In a few cases, narrower light lines run down the
centers of the dark streaks, which are typically a few tens of kilometers in width. Very few, if any, impact craters are visible
on Europa. [P-21760C and P-21764C]

105

Monday, July 9.

(
Range to Jupiter at encounter,
722 000 kilometers
). Encounter day! And not
just one encounter, but a whole sequence:
Ganymede, Europa, Amalthea, Jupiter, and
Io. By early Sunday evening, a wealth of new
data on Ganymede was pouring in. Not only
was this a side of the satellite not seen before,
but Voyager 2 would pass closer to Ganymede
than had Voyager 1. Encounter took place at
1:06 a.m., at a range of 62 000 kilometers. Between
9:00 p.m. Sunday night and 1:30 a.m.
Monday morning a total of 217 photos, plus infrared
and ultraviolet spectra, were scheduled.

106

Sixty-nine photos were sent back in real time;
others were recorded for playback later.

As the Ganymede pictures appeared on the
TV screens, they revealed a world of tremendous
variety. Some regions were heavily
cratered: “Ganymede looks like Mercury or the
highlands of the moon,” one Voyager scientist
remarked. Other parts of the surface, however,
showed very different features: long, parallel
mountain ridges that looked like grooves made
with a giant’s rake; narrow, segmented lines;
white ejecta blankets from impacts that looked
like a dazzling, snow-covered landscape. Some
of the pictures suggested cracking and slipping
of Ganymede’s crust, while others showed what
appeared to be remnants of ancient terrain
unaffected by subsequent intense geologic
activity. Many of the highest resolution frames
were not seen at this time; they were recorded
on the spacecraft for playback later.

Starting at about 8 a.m., Earth began receiving
the first closeup views of Europa.
Europa “could be the most exciting satellite in
the whole Jovian system,” said Larry Soderblom,
“because it’s sort of the transition body
between the solid silicate body, Io, and the ice
balls, Ganymede and Callisto.” The icy crust
looked as though it “had been ruptured all
over—as though it was in pieces—just as
though it had been broken in place and left
there.” At 11:43 a.m., closest approach took
place at a range of 206 000 kilometers. By this
time the scientists were dazzled by what they
had seen; some were calling Europa the most
bizarre of all the Galilean satellites. In the
Imaging Team viewing area, David Morrison
compared Europa’s surface to “a cracked
egg,” and Gene Shoemaker said, “It looks like
sea ice to me.” When someone commented that
the canal-like streaks were reminiscent of Mars,
Torrence Johnson replied, “It looks like some
pictures of Mars I’ve seen, but only on the walls
of Lowell Observatory.” Another quipped,
“Where is Percival Lowell, now that we need
him!”

There were to be two press conferences:
one to present spacecraft and scientific results
and one to celebrate the second successful flyby
and to talk of new goals—Saturn, and perhaps
Uranus.

At the first conference, Ed Stone began by
discussing the radiation Voyager was experiencing.
One of Jupiter’s surprises was that the
radiation environment was greater than had
been anticipated, and this caused problems with
the radio receiver. The receiver frequency was
shifting “more rapidly than we had
anticipated,” said Ray Heacock, “and we have
not been able to keep an uplink continuously
with the spacecraft.” The solution was to keep
sending up commands at different frequencies
until a frequency the spacecraft would accept
was found. Just how bad were the radiation
levels? Ed Stone commented, “The penetrating
radiation at a given distance is more intense
now at this distance than it was when Voyager 1
flew by.” From a preliminary analysis it
seemed that, overall, Voyager 2 would still be
subjected to lower radiation levels than
Voyager 1 had been, but to higher levels than
had been expected. In addition, Voyager 2’s
radio receiver was much more sensitive. The
higher than expected radiation intensity also led
Voyager scientists to have the ultraviolet spectrometer
shut off, since that instrument was
also quite sensitive to the radiation.

The fourth member of the Galilean satellites
had finally been seen, and Larry Soderblom
happily introduced Europa. “Well, some
few months ago, before the Voyager 1 encounter,
we thought we had some idea of what
planets were like—at least the planets in the
inner solar system: Mars, Mercury, the Moon,
the Earth. And we’ve discovered many times
over in the last couple of months how narrow
our vision really was. Included in the Jovian
collection of satellites are the oldest (Callisto),
the youngest (Io), the darkest (Amalthea), the
brightest (Europa), the reddest (Amalthea and
Io), the whitest (Europa), the most active (Io),
and the least active (Callisto). Today we found
the flattest (Europa).”

In spite of the appearance of a cracked or
broken surface, Europa showed no topography
at all. Toward the sunset line, where the low
angle of illumination should reveal even low
relief, “the surface disappears—as if it were the
surface of a billiard ball.” It seemed clear that
Europa has much less relief than the other two
icy satellites, Ganymede and Callisto. But why
can’t Europa’s surface support relief? Perhaps
Europa has a thick ice mantle—on the order of
100 kilometers. If Europa is affected by tidal
heating, then such an ice mantle might be “sort
of soft and slushy” rather than rigid as are the
crusts of Ganymede and Callisto. “The fact
that the surface of Europa cannot support relief
of any substantial amount suggests that the surface
must be soft.” But, Dr. Soderblom added,
there does not appear to be much lateral motion
or rotation causing the surface markings—they
don’t seem to be offset—rather, “it’s as if
Europa had been cracked, broken, by some
process which crushed it like an eggshell and
just left the pieces sitting there. Expansion and
contraction of ice and water are a good way to
crunch up the surface.”

107

Regio Galileo is the largest remnant of the ancient, heavily cratered crust of Ganymede. This Voyager 2 color reconstruction
was made from pictures taken at a range of 310 000 kilometers; the scene is about 1300 kilometers across. Numerous craters,
many with central peaks, are visible. The large bright circular features have little relief and are probably the remnants of old
large craters that have been annealed by the flow of icy near-surface material. The closely spaced, arcuate linear features are
analogous to features on Callisto, such as the “ripple” marks surrounding the ancient impact feature Valhalla. [P-21761C]

108

At high resolution, the grooved terrain on Ganymede shows
a wonderful complexity. Surface features as small as 1
kilometer across can be seen in this mosaic of Voyager 2
images taken July 9. The grooves are basically long, parallel
mountain ridges, 10 to 15 kilometers from crest to crest—about
the same scale as the Appalachian mountains in the
Eastern United States. The numerous impact craters superposed
on the mountain ridges indicate that they are old—probably
formed several billion years ago. [260-637]

The other side of Ganymede presented
quite a different face from the one Voyager 1
had seen. Here were the dark ancient cratered
terrains, the shoulder-to-shoulder craters
reminiscent of Callisto, and there was a huge
circular feature on Ganymede looking like the
remnant of a Callisto-style ringed basin,
preserved in the ancient, dark terrain. The very
large dark feature revealed by Voyager in the
northern hemisphere which bears these impact
scars was later named “Regio Galileo,” for the
discoverer of the Galilean satellites. It was seen
in the low-resolution Pioneer 10 picture of
Ganymede taken in 1973, but its nature was not
understood. It is so large it has even been
glimpsed on occasions of exceptionally stable
“seeing” with ground-based telescopes.

3:29 p.m. PDT—Jupiter Encounter! In the
press room half a dozen cameras clicked in
unison as the universal clock declared the
Voyager 2 had made its closest approach to
Jupiter—650 000 kilometers from the cloud
tops, zipping by at about 73 000 kilometers per
hour—neither as close nor as fast as Voyager 1.
By the time of the special press conference at
4:30 p.m., everyone at JPL was in a party
mood. Thomas A. Mutch, who had replaced
Noel Hinners as NASA Associate Administrator
for Space Science, Robert Parks, and
Rodney Mills were the speakers.

The Jovian system is a place of “incredible
beauty and mystery. Jupiter has been a nice
place to go by, but we wouldn’t want to stop
there—we’re going on to Saturn,” Rod Mills
explained, and Bob Parks agreed.

Tim Mutch had a different perspective.
“Although we have just heard Jupiter somewhat
downgraded in favor of Saturn, nonetheless
what we have been witnessing, first in
March and now, in July, is a truly revolutionary
journey of exploration. We have gone beyond
the familiar part of the solar system to objects
that are so exotic that their very existence, at
least as far as I’m concerned, was something I’d
accepted intellectually, but didn’t really accept
in an immediate sense. We’re starting out in our
own space program on a new stage of space exploration—on
our own long journeys beyond
the solar system to distant lands. We never like
to think, or rather, it’s statistically unlikely,
that we’re at a turning point in history. But if
you look back at history books, such events are
clearly read into the record. And I submit to
you that when the history books are written a
hundred years from now, two hundred years
from now, the historians are going to cite this
particular period of exploration as a turning
point in our cultural, our scientific, our intellectual
development.”

Although everyone was already celebrating
another successful mission, the encounter was
far from over. Data continued to come in; there
was still the ten-hour Io Volcano Watch, which
had begun at 4:31 p.m.; there were more observations

109

of Jupiter, including scheduled ring
observations and dark side searches for aurorae
and lightning bolts. There was a lot of work
and excitement yet to come. Jupiter had
another surprise in store for Voyager 2.

During the 10-hour Io volcano watch on July 9, the spacecraft kept nearly the same face of Io in view. Most of the surface
was turned away from the Sun, however, and only a thin crescent could be seen, shrinking as the observations continued.
These four frames were all photographed with identical exposures from a range of about 1 million kilometers. These images
show Amirani (P₅) and Maui (P₆) on the west edge, brightening as the Sun illuminates them more nearly from behind.
[260-677]

Masubi (P₈) is faintly visible in the crescent (above and below).

Loki (P₂) rises 250 kilometers above the surface,
catching the morning sunlight on the east edge of Io.

Tuesday, July 10.

(
Range to Jupiter, 1.4 million
kilometers
). The Io watch continued through
the night. As time passed, the satellite rotated
in the same direction as the motion of the spacecraft,
keeping nearly the same side in view.
Because of this, a few volcanoes could be
closely watched, but most would be missed entirely.
During the sequence, the illuminated
crescent steadily shrank, until at the end,
volcanic plumes could be seen on both edges,

110

one illuminated by the setting Sun, the other
shining in the dawn light.

At the 11 a.m. press conference, Esker Davis
announced that engineers had lost contact with
the spacecraft radio receiver Monday evening
(probably due to Jupiter’s radiation) and had
to “chase it around most of the night,” sending
commands at various frequencies until they
locked on to the frequency the spacecraft would
accept. The major trajectory correction maneuver,
begun at about the same time contact with
the receiver was lost, was successful. The
76-minute thruster firing, done at periapsis instead
of two weeks after encounter, enabled the
spacecraft to get a bigger “boost” from Jupiter
than was originally planned, amounting to a
fuel saving of about 10 kilograms of hydrazine,
enough to preserve the option of going on from
Saturn to Uranus.

Andrew Ingersoll discussed some results of
the analysis of the Jovian atmosphere. “At
first, Voyager seemed to do nothing but emphasize
the chaos, not the order.” But, with the
help of ground-based observations, Reta Beebe
found that there is a “regular alternation of
eastward and westward jets” underlying the
seemingly chaotic visible features. “The turbulence
we see in the visible clouds seems to be a
minor side show, or a process without much
energy or mass compared to the very great
energy and mass that might be moving around
in the deep atmosphere.”

“We’re continuing to operate in our panic
mode to try to get pictures to the press,” Brad
Smith said as he introduced new photographs
of the satellites. In earlier photos, Ganymede
had seemed to have two different kinds of
terrain—an ancient, cratered, Callisto-like surface,
and the stranger, grooved terrain—terrains
that might be representative of two
very different types of major episodes in Ganymede’s
history. The most recent images showed
a much more confused picture, with several additional
types of surface geology.

At the daily project science briefing,
another interpretation was being discussed.
Lyle Broadfoot reported that new measurements
of the position of the ultraviolet aurora
demonstrated that it was caused by charged
particles from the Io torus, not from the outer
parts of the magnetosphere. Apparently these
plasma particles arise in the volcanic eruptions,
are trapped for a time in the torus, and then fall
into the polar regions of Jupiter, where they excite
auroral emissions. A terrestrial aurora, in
contrast, is caused by particles that originate in
the solar wind. Jim Sullivan of the plasma investigation
estimated that about two tons of
material each second are fed from Io into the
plasma torus. This plasma, driven by the rotation
of the Jovian magnetic field, appears to be
able to supply the million-million watts of
power radiated in the ultraviolet.

By 5:00 p.m. the excitement had died
down; many of the scientists had parties to attend
that evening, and some members of the
press were planning parties of their own. The
schedule of spacecraft activities also seemed to
have slowed. There were dark-side observations
planned to search for lightning and aurorae.
There would be a few more ring pictures—not
too much to see on the monitors that night ...
or so many people thought. But a few people
were waiting around, perhaps to catch a
glimpse of lightning or auroral activity, or to
wait for another look at Jupiter’s faint ring.

Between 5:52 and 6:16 p.m., six long-exposure,
wide-angle photographs of the dark
side of Jupiter had been scheduled to search for
aurorae and lightning. The spacecraft was
1 450 000 kilometers from Jupiter and about
two degrees below the equatorial plane.

Shortly after 6 p.m., the first of these ring
photographs appeared on the TV monitors with
unexpected brilliance. Taken in orange and
violet light, the images showed the outline of
Jupiter and, protruding from it, two narrow
lines—one reaching all the way to Jupiter’s
limb, the other broken off, apparently hidden
by the shadow of the giant planet. Seen from
the new perspective of the shadow of Jupiter,
the tenuous rings were remarkably clear. A sudden
renewal of excitement surged through the
devotees remaining in the press room. About
6:15, Brad Smith came down to join the press
to watch the remainder of this series of pictures
come in. “Hey Brad, are you going to burn out
the camera with the ring?” someone joked.
“Well, the rings do forward scatter nicely,
don’t they?” Dr. Smith replied. As the wide-angle
pictures were followed by narrow-angle
views, more and more detail became apparent.
For the first time, a definite width for the ring
could be seen, and there was even a hint of additional
material inside the main ring. All in all,

111

Voyager had provided one more splendid series
of pictures before it took off for Saturn.

From a vantage point 2.5 degrees above the ring plane,
Voyager 2 was able for the first time to determine the width
of Jupiter’s ring. This picture shows that the ring is ribbon-like
and only a few thousand kilometers wide, quite unlike
the broad rings of Saturn. [P-21757B/W]

Wednesday, July 11.

JPL Public Information
Officer Frank Bristow opened the 10 a.m. press
conference with an announcement: “We’ll have
the report from the Imaging Team including the
tremendous pictures that we received here last
night of the Jupiter ring that excited the entire
team.”

Brad Smith showed the ring pictures. “As
many of you who were here last night know, we
got some rather nice pictures of the ring of
Jupiter. It’s as though Voyager 2 was fearful
that we might be becoming just a little bit
apathetic after this series of marvelous discoveries
and felt that it had to dazzle us one more
time before it left for Saturn. The rings appear
very much brighter than we had expected them
to be.” The outer ring is about 6500 kilometers
wide. There is material inside the ring. There is
a rather sharp outer boundary and a somewhat
diffuse inner region. “And it is now our belief
that the material in the ring goes all the way
down to the surface of Jupiter.” There is a very
narrow relatively bright outer ring and an extremely
faint inner ring that goes all the way
down to Jupiter’s cloud tops.

Larry Soderblom summarized the satellite
data: With respect to the Galilean satellites,
“We’re in a relatively high state of ignorance.”

The Io Volcano Watch images seemed to
indicate that plume P₂ was now the highest
volcano on Io, since P₁ seemed to have become
quiet. Io may be the easiest Galilean satellite to
try to understand, because we can actually see
the geological processes that are shaping the
planet. Io’s “twin,” Europa, seems to be where
“our highest state of ignorance” lies. “The
faint bright streaks which show some relief are
evidently different from the diffuse dark bands
which don’t seem to show topography, but the
similarity of these forms [that both the light
and dark markings are of planetary scale] suggests
that they must be related.”

Ed Stone speculated about the other two
Galilean satellites. Ganymede and Callisto are
essentially identical in size, mass, and probably
composition. By examining them, we can
perhaps learn what happens when bodies with
very similar chemistry have different “life
histories” and different surface properties
(there are indications that Ganymede’s crust
may not have been as rigid as Callisto’s). Going
further, he added that Callisto and Mercury,
the least dense and the most dense, respectively,
of the terrestrial-style planets, although totally
different in composition and density, seem to
have similar surfaces and similar histories.
What would have happened to Mercury if it
had been made of ice, water, and rock as
Callisto is? Would it have evolved as Callisto
did?

112

One of the most spectacular of the Voyager 2 images was obtained from inside the shadow of Jupiter. Looking back toward
the planet and the rings with its wide-angle camera, the spacecraft took these photos on July 10 from a distance of 1.5 million
kilometers. The ribbon-like nature of the rings is clearly shown. The planet is outlined by sunlight scattered from a haze layer
high in the atmosphere. On each side, the arms of the ring curving back toward the spacecraft are cut off by the planet’s
shadow as they approach the brightly outlined disk. [P-21774B/W]

The rings of Jupiter proved to be unexpectedly bright when seen with the Sun nearly behind them. Strong forward scattering
of sunlight is characteristic of small particles. These two views were obtained by Voyager 2 on July 10 from a perspective
inside the shadow of Jupiter. The distance of the spacecraft from the rings was about 1.5 million kilometers. Although the
resolution has been degraded by camera motion during the time exposures, these images reveal that the rings have some
radial structure. [260-610B/W and 260-674]

HIGHLIGHTS OF THE VOYAGER 2 SCIENTIFIC FINDINGS
[3]

Atmosphere

The main atmospheric jet streams were present
during both Voyager encounters, with
some changes in velocity.

The Great Red Spot, the white ovals, and the
smaller white spots at 41°S, appear to be
meteorologically similar.

The formation of a structure east of the
Great Red Spot created a barrier to the flow
of small spots which earlier were circulating
about the Great Red Spot.

The ethane to acetylene abundance ratio in
the upper atmosphere appears to be larger in
the polar regions than at lower latitudes and
appears to be 1.7 times higher on Voyager 2
than on Voyager 1.

An ultraviolet map of Jupiter shows the
distribution of absorbing haze. The polar
regions are surprisingly dark, suggesting that
the absorbing material must be at high
altitudes.

Equatorial ultraviolet emissions indicate
planet-wide precipitation of charged particles
into the atmosphere from the magnetosphere.

The high-latitude ultraviolet auroral activity
is due to charged particles that originate in
the Io torus.

Satellites and Ring System

The ring consists of a bright, narrow segment
surrounded by a broader, dimmer segment,
with a total width of about 5800
kilometers.

The interior of the ring is filled with much
fainter material that may extend down to the
top of the atmosphere.

Images of Amalthea in silhouette against
Jupiter indicate that the satellite may be
faceted or diamond shaped.

Volcanic activity on Io changed somewhat,
with six of the plumes observed by Voyager 1
still erupting.

The largest Voyager 1 plume (Pele) had
ceased, while the dimensions of another
plume (Loki) had increased by 50 percent.

Several large-scale changes in Io’s appearance
had occurred, consistent with surface
deposition rates calculated for the large
eruptions.

Europa is remarkably smooth with very few
craters. The surface consists primarily of
uniformly bright terrain crossed by linear
markings and very low ridges.

There are four basic terrain types on
Ganymede, including younger, smooth terrain
and a rugged impact basin first observed
by Voyager 2.

Callisto’s entire surface is densely cratered
and is likely to be several billion years old.

Equatorial surface temperatures on the
Galilean satellites range from 80 K (night) to
155 K (the subsolar point on Callisto).

Magnetosphere

The outer region of the magnetosphere contains
a hot plasma consisting primarily of
hydrogen, oxygen, and sulfur ions.

The hot plasma generally flows in the corotation
direction out to the boundary of the
magnetosphere.

Beyond about 160 R
J
, the hot plasma
streams nearly antisunward.

Outbound the spacecraft experienced multiple
magnetopause crossings between 204 R
J

and 215 R
J
.

The abundance of oxygen and sulfur relative
to helium at high energy increases with
decreasing distance from Jupiter.

Measurements of high energy oxygen suggest
that these nuclei are diffusing inward toward
Jupiter.

The ultraviolet emission from the Io plasma
torus was twice as bright as four months
earlier and the temperature had decreased by
30 percent to 60 000 K.

The low-frequency (kilometric) radio emissions
from Jupiter have a strong latitude
dependence and often contain narrowband
emissions that drift to lower or higher frequencies
with time.

A complex magnetospheric interaction with
Ganymede was observed in the magnetic
field, plasma, and energetic particles up to
about 200 000 kilometers from the satellite.

[3]
Adapted from a summary prepared by E. C. Stone and A. L. Lane for the Voyager 2 Thirty-Day Report.

114

A new inner satellite of Jupiter, provisionally designated 1979J1, was discovered by David Jewitt and Ed Danielson of
Caltech in these Voyager 2 ring photographs.

In a 15-second exposure with the wide-angle camera, the edge-on ring
shows as a faint line, and the satellite is the dot indicated by the arrow. [260-807]

In a narrow angle 96-second exposure, the
motion of the satellite can be seen. Again, the faint band is the ring, blurred by camera motion, and the arrow indicates the
streak due to the satellite. A star streak is located above and to the left of the satellite; note that the length and angle of the
two trails are different, owing to satellite motion. [P-22172]

A New Satellite

One of the most fascinating discoveries of
Voyager 2 was not recognized at first. Graduate
student David Jewitt of the California Institute
of Technology, working with Imaging Team
member Ed Danielson, began a detailed
analysis of all the ring photos in late summer.
In early October he determined that a short

115

streak on a photo taken July 8, previously
presumed to be an image of a star trailed by the
time exposure, did not correspond to any known
star position. Perhaps this was a new satellite!
Additional sleuthing turned up a second image
of the same part of the ring that also showed
the anomalous object, together with trails due
to known stars. The differing angles and
lengths of the trails of the object and the stars
confirmed that this was indeed a 14th satellite
of Jupiter. Following the guidelines of the International
Astronomical Union, it was
designated 1979J1, pending later assignment of
a mythological name. The proposed name is
Adrastea, a nymph who nursed the infant Zeus
in Greek legend.

The newly discovered satellite orbits
Jupiter at a distance of 58 000 kilometers above
the equatorial cloud tops, placing it just at the
outer edge of the ring and much closer to the
planet than is Amalthea, previously thought to
be the innermost satellite. It travels at 30
kilometers per second (nearly 70 000 miles per
hour), circling Jupiter in just seven hours and
eight minutes. From its brightness, scientists
guessed that it might be 30-40 kilometers in
diameter.

The proximity of Adrastea to the ring suggests
a relationship between the two. When the
discovery was announced to the press in mid-October,
it was speculated that the ring
material might originate on the satellite,
perhaps eroded away by the energetic charged
particles in the inner Jovian magnetosphere.
Once again, Voyager had added to our perspective
on planetary processes, suggesting that undiscovered
but similar small satellites might
also be associated with the rings of Saturn and
Uranus.

Voyager 2 had certainly added a few years’
of data of its own to Voyager 1’s “ten years’
worth of data.” It had given a different view of
the Jovian system, helping to solve some of the
mystery surrounding Jupiter and its satellites,
and creating new mysteries. As Voyager 2 sped
out away from Jupiter, riding along the giant
planet’s huge magnetotail, attention turned to
Saturn: What would Pioneer 11, the
Pathfinder, discover in September 1979? What
would the Voyagers learn in November 1980
and August 1981? Would all go well? Would
Voyager 2 fly on to Uranus?

There was also a yearning to examine more
closely, with the Galileo Project, what had been
unknown for so long, yet had become so
familiar in only a few months’ time—the little
dark, red “potato” Amalthea, the volcano-covered
world Io, the mysterious “cracked
billiard ball” Europa, cratered and groovy
Ganymede, ancient Callisto, and the king of the
planets itself, a colorful, banded world of
stable climate and ever-changing weather patterns.

A fifteenth satellite of Jupiter was discovered in the spring of 1980 by Steven Synnott of JPL. It was first seen on this
Voyager 1 image taken March 5, 1979, in which the 75-kilometer-diameter satellite shows as a dark oval against the planet.
Also visible is the shadow of the satellite, designated 1979J2. This satellite orbits between Io and Amalthea with a period of
16 hours and 11 minutes. [P-22580B/W]

116

The Jupiter seen by the Voyager cameras is a cloud-belted world of rapid jet streams and complex cloud forms. Prominent in
this Voyager 1 image, taken February 5 at a range of 28.4 million kilometers, is the alternating structure of light zones and
dark belts, and the Great Red Spot and numerous smaller spots. Also easily visible are the two inner Galilean satellites, Io
and Europa. The resolution in this picture is 500 kilometers, about five times better than can be obtained from Earth-based
telescopes. Callisto can be faintly seen at the lower left. [P-21083C]

117

CHAPTER 8

JUPITER—KING OF THE PLANETS

A Star That Failed

More massive than all the other planets
combined, Jupiter dominates the planetary
system. The giant revealed by Voyager is a gas
planet of great complexity; its atmosphere is in
constant motion, driven by heat escaping from
a glowing interior as well as by sunlight absorbed
from above. Energetic atomic particles
stream around it, caught in a magnetic field
that reaches out nearly 10 million kilometers
into the surrounding space, embracing the seven
inner satellites. From its deep interior through
its seething clouds out to its pulsating magnetosphere,
Jupiter is a place where forces of incredible
energy contend.

At its birth, Jupiter shone like a star. The
energy released by infalling material from the
solar nebula heated its interior, and the larger it
grew the hotter it became. Theorists calculate
that when the nebular material was finally exhausted,
Jupiter had a diameter more than ten
times its present one, a central temperature of
about 50 000 K, and a luminosity about one
percent as great as that of the Sun today.

At this early stage, Jupiter rivaled the Sun.
Had it been perhaps 70 times more massive
than it was, it would have continued to contract
and increase in temperature, until self-sustaining
nuclear reactions could ignite in its
interior. If this had happened, the Sun would
have been a double star, and the Earth and the
other planets might not have formed. However,
Jupiter did not make it as a star; after a brief
flash of glory, it began to cool.

At first Jupiter continued to collapse.
Within the first ten million years of its life, the
planet was reduced to nearly its present size,
with only a few percent additional shrinkage
during the past 4.5 billion years. The luminosity
also dropped as internal heat was carried to the
surface by convection and radiated away to
space. After a million years Jupiter emitted
only one-hundred thousandth as much radiation
as the Sun, and today its luminosity is only
one-ten billionth of the Sun’s.

Jupiter’s internal energy, although small
by stellar standards, has important effects on
the planet. About 10¹⁷ watts of power, comparable
to that received by Jupiter from the
Sun, reach the surface from the still-luminous
interior. The central temperature is still thought
to be about 30 000 K, sufficient to maintain the
interior in a molten state. Scientists generally
agree that Jupiter is an entirely fluid planet,
with no solid core whatever.

Composition and Atmospheric Structure

Because of its great mass, Jupiter has been
undiscriminating in its composition. All gases
and solids available in the early solar nebula
were attracted and held by its powerful gravity.
Thus it is expected that Jupiter has the same
basic composition as the Sun, with both bodies
preserving a sample of the original cosmic
material from which the solar system formed.

118

Jupiter is a gas giant, composed of the same elements as the Sun and stars—primarily hydrogen and helium. Its internal
structure is dominated by the properties of hydrogen, its most abundant constituent and by the high temperatures in the deep
interior that remain from its luminous youth. Most of the interior is liquid: metallic hydrogen at great depths and high
pressures, and normal hydrogen nearer the surface. In the upper few thousand kilometers, the hydrogen is a gas. The
primary known or suspected cloud layers are, from the top down, thin hydrocarbon “smog”; ammonia; ammonium hydrosulfide;
water-ice, and liquid water. [260-828]

Cloud top-aerosols

Ammonia crystals

Ammonium hydrosulfide clouds

Ice crystal clouds

Water droplets

Trace compounds

Fluid molecular hydrogen

Transition Zone

Fluid metallic hydrogen

Possible core

119

The primary constituents of Jupiter have
long been suspected to be hydrogen and helium,
the two simplest and lightest atoms. However,
it has proved impossible to derive accurate
measurements of the abundance of these two
elements from astronomical observations. On
the basis of a rather simple infrared measurement,
Pioneer investigators found He/H₂ =
0.14 ± 0.08. On Voyager, IRIS was able to obtain
much improved infrared spectra, yielding
an initial value of He/H₂ = 0.11 ± 0.3. Voyager
scientists expect that further analysis will
reduce the uncertainty to about ± 0.01. The
ratio of 0.11 is in excellent agreement with the
solar value of about 0.12, supporting the idea
that Jupiter and the Sun have similar elemental
compositions.

Astronomers have known for a long time
that, in addition to hydrogen and helium, the
compounds methane (CH₄) and ammonia
(NH₃) are present in the visible atmosphere of
Jupiter. In the 1970s, additional spectra in the
infrared resulted in the discovery of water
(H₂O), ethane (C₂H₆), germane (GeH₄),
acetylene (C₂H₂), phosphine (PH₃), carbon
monoxide (CO), hydrogen cyanide (HCN), and
carbon dioxide (CO₂). All these are trace
constituents, with two of them, ethane and
acetylene, apparently formed at high altitudes
by the action of sunlight on methane.

A total of approximately 100 000 infrared
spectra, many of small regions on the disk,
were obtained by IRIS. These spectra generally
show hydrogen, helium, methane, ammonia,
phosphine, ethane, and acetylene. In addition,
excellent spectra were obtained in “hot spots,”
regions in which breaks in the upper clouds permit
radiation from deeper layers to escape.
(The hot spots generally correspond to dark
brown regions on photographs of the planet.)
IRIS measured temperatures in the hot spots up
to -13° C but no higher; apparently this temperature
corresponds to the top of a deeper
cloud deck. Spectral features indicative of the
presence of water vapor and germane were
clearly seen in the hot spots.

Further analysis of the IRIS spectra will be
required to derive the abundances of the gases
detected. However, even the preliminary data
showed how variable Jupiter can be, especially
in its upper atmosphere. The two hydrocarbons,
ethane and acetylene, vary in relative
abundance with latitude; there is less acetylene
near the poles. In addition to this planetwide
trend, smaller variations were seen from place
to place and between the observations in March
and July. All the variations will eventually provide
information on the processes of formation,
transportation, and destruction of hydrocarbons
in the upper atmosphere.

ELEMENTS DETECTED IN THE JOVIAN MAGNETOSPHERE

Element
Atomic Number
Instruments

Hydrogen (H)
1
UVS, Plasma, LECP, CRS

Helium (He)
2
Plasma, LECP

Carbon (C)
6
LECP

Nitrogen (N)
7
CRS

Oxygen (O)
8
UVS, Plasma, LECP, CRS

Neon (Ne)
10
CRS

Sodium (Na)
11
LECP, CRS

Magnesium (Mg)
12
CRS

Silicon (Si)
14
CRS

Sulfur (S)
16
UVS, Plasma, LECP, CRS

Iron (Fe)
26
CRS

Voyager did not make any direct measurements
of the chemical composition of the
clouds, but theorists generally agree that the
uppermost clouds are ammonia cirrus, and that
layers of ammonium hydrosulfide (NH₄SH)
and water exist at deeper levels. All these clouds
are formed in the troposphere, the layer of the
atmosphere in which convection takes place.
The top of the ammonia cloud deck is thought
to have a pressure of about 1 atmosphere and a
temperature of about -113° C.

Ammonia cirrus is white, yet Jupiter’s
clouds display a spectacular range of colors.
Voyager did not determine the nature of the
coloring agents; they may be minor constituents—trace
impurities in a sea of white clouds.
Perhaps organic polymers, formed from atmospheric
chemicals such as methane and ammonia
that have reacted with lightning, are responsible
for the oranges and yellows. The color of the
Red Spot could be caused by red phosphorus
(P₄). According to this theory, phosphine
(PH₃) from deep in Jupiter’s atmosphere is
brought to high altitudes by the upwelling of
the Great Red Spot. Ultraviolet light, penetrating
the upper reaches of the Red Spot, splits the
phosphine molecules, and, through a series of
chemical reactions, converts the phosphine into
pure phosphorus. However, this theory fails to
explain the existence of the smaller red spots on
Jupiter; these spots are not at such high
altitudes as the Great Red Spot (which is the
highest and coldest of Jupiter’s visible clouds),
so it is unlikely that ultraviolet light could react
with any phosphine in these areas to produce
red phosphorus.

120

Although the Voyager spacecraft never flew over the poles of Jupiter, it is possible to reconstruct from several images the
View that would be seen from directly above or below the planet.
Note the absence of a strong banded structure near both poles. The regular spacing of cloud features is obvious. In the
Southern hemisphere, the three white ovals are 90 degrees apart in longitude, but a fourth oval at the other quadrant is
missing. The irregular black areas at each pole are places for which no Voyager data exist. The resolution of the original
pictures from which these polar projections were made was about 600 kilometers.

North pole. [P-21638C]

121

South pole. [P-21639C]

122

Various forms of elemental sulfur might be
responsible for the riot of color we see on
Jupiter. Sulfur forms polymers (S₃, S₄, S₅, S₈,)
that are yellow, red, and brown, but no sulfur
in any form has been detected on Jupiter. “We
never promised you we were going to identify
the colors on Jupiter with this mission,” one of
the atmospheric scientists remarked, “but we
will have a probe that is going into the atmosphere
in the mid-1980s—Galileo.” Perhaps the
mystery of the Jovian clouds will have to wait
till then.

Temperature maps of Jupiter were obtained
by IRIS in radiation arising at different
levels above the clouds. Maps show temperatures
at pressures of 0.8 atmosphere near the
clouds, and 0.2 atmosphere near the top of the
troposphere. In addition to the low temperatures
over the bright zones and the higher
temperatures over dark belts, there is a great
deal of smaller scale structure. It is interesting
that a cold area corresponding to the Great Red
Spot is clearly visible even near the top of the
troposphere, indicating that this feature
disturbs the atmosphere to very high altitudes.

The structure of the atmosphere of Jupiter
above the troposphere was investigated through
the radio occultation experiment as well as by
IRIS. The level in which the minimum temperature
of about -173° C occurs has a pressure of
0.1 atmosphere. Above this point lies the stratosphere,
in which temperatures increase with
altitude as a result of sunlight absorbed by the
gas or by aerosol particles resembling smog. At
70 kilometers above the ammonia clouds, the
temperature is about -113° C. Above this
level, the temperature stays approximately constant,
although at extreme altitudes the temperature
again rises in the ionosphere.

If one could “unwrap” Jupiter like a map, views such as these would be obtained. The comparison between the pictures shows the relative motions of
features in Jupiter’s atmosphere. It can be seen, for example, that the Great Red Spot moved westward and the white ovals
eastward during the time between the acquisition of these pictures. Regular plume patterns are equidistant around the
northern edge of the equator, while a train of small spots moved eastward at approximately latitude 80° S. In addition to
these relative motions, significant changes are evident in the recirculating flow east of the Great Red Spot, in the disturbed
region west of the Great Red Spot, and as seen in the brightening of material spreading into the equatorial region from the
more southerly latitudes. [P-21771C]

The planet as it appeared about March 1.

As it was in early July.

Weather on Jupiter

The Voyager pictures reveal a planet of
complex atmospheric motions. Spots chase
after each other, meet, whirl around, mingle,
and then split up again; filamentary structures
curl into spirals that open outward; feathery
cloud systems reach out toward neighboring
regions; cumulus clouds that look like ostrich
plumes may brighten suddenly as they float
toward the east; spots stream around the Red
Spot or get caught up in its vortical motion—all
in an incredible interplay of color, texture, and
eastward and westward flows. Such changes can
be noticed in the space of only a few Jovian days.

123

Differing characteristics of Jupiter’s meteorology are apparent in high-resolution images, such as this one taken by
Voyager 1 on March 2 at a range of 4 million kilometers. The well-defined pale orange line running from southwest to
northeast (north is at the top) marks the high-speed north temperate current with wind speeds of about 120 meters per
second. Toward the top of the picture, a weaker jet of approximately 30 meters per second is characterized by wave patterns
and cloud features which have been observed to rotate in a clockwise manner at these latitudes of about 35°N. These clouds
have been observed to have lifetimes of one to two years. [P-21193C]

On a broader time scale, greater changes
on the face of Jupiter can be seen. Features
drift around the planet; even the large white
ovals and the Great Red Spot slide along in
their respective latitudes. Belts or zones intrude
upon each other, resulting in one of the banded
structures splitting up or seeming to squeeze
together and eventually disappear. Small structures
form, then die. The largest spots may
slowly shrink in size, and the Red Spot itself
changes its size and color.

The Jupiter of Pioneers 10 and 11 was
quite unlike the planet seen by Voyager 1. At
the time of the Pioneer exploration, the Great
Red Spot, embedded in a huge white zone, was
more uniformly colored, and pale brown bands
circled the northern hemisphere. In the intervening
years, the south temperate latitudes have
changed completely, developing the complex
turbulent clouds seen around the Red Spot by
Voyager 1. Yet, even between the two Voyagers,
Jupiter appeared to be undergoing a
dynamic “facelift.” At a quick glance, Voyager
2 photographs showed the visage that had been
familiar since early in 1979, but a closer look
showed that it is not quite the same. The white

124

band below the Great Red Spot, fairly broad
during the first flyby, had become a thin white
ribbon where it rims the southern edge of the
Spot. The turbulence to the west of the Red
Spot had stretched out and become “blander”
than it was before. Small rotating clouds
seemed to be forming out of the waves in this
region. The cloud structure that had been east
of the Red Spot during the Voyager 1 flyby
spread out, covering the northern boundary
and preventing small clouds from circling the
huge red oval. The Red Spot itself also
changed. Its northern boundary seemed—at
least visually—to be more set off from the
clouds that surround it, and the feature appeared
to be more uniform in color, perhaps
reverting back to the personality it had in
Pioneer days.

Jupiter’s cloud patterns changed significantly in the few months between the two Voyager flybys. Most of the changes are the
result of differential rotation, in which the prevailing winds at different latitudes shift long-lived features with respect to
those north or south. Thus, for example, the three large white ovals shifted nearly 90 degrees in longitude, relative to the
Great Red Spot, between March and July. [P-21599]

The most obvious features in the atmosphere
of Jupiter, after the banded belts and
zones, are the Great Red Spot and the three
white ovals. These have often been described as
“storms” in Jupiter’s atmosphere. The ovals
are about the size of the Moon, and the Red
Spot is larger than the Earth. Voyager has
revealed that in many respects the white ovals,
which formed in 1939, resemble their ancient
red relative. All four spots are southern hemispheric
anticyclonic features that exhibit
counterclockwise motion; hence they are meteorologically
similar. Other smaller bright elliptical
and circular spots also exhibit anticyclonic
motion, rotating clockwise in the northern
hemisphere and counterclockwise in the southern
hemisphere. In general, these features are
circled by filamentary rings that are darker than
the spots they surround. Hints of interior spiral
structure can be seen in some of these spots. All
the elliptical features in the southern hemisphere
lie to the south of the strong westward-blowing
jet streams. The spots tend to become
rounder the closer they are to the poles.

Along the northern edge of the equator are
a number of cloud plumes, which appear to be
regularly spaced all around the planet. Some of
the plumes have been observed to brighten
rapidly, which may be an indication of convective
activity; indeed, some of the plume structures
seem to resemble the convective storms
that form in the Earth’s tropics. The plumes
travel eastward at speeds ranging from about
100 to 150 meters per second, but they do not
move as a unit.

125

The Great Red Spot of Jupiter is a magnificent sight, whether viewed in normal or exaggerated color. These pictures were
taken by Voyager 1 at a range of about 1 million kilometers; the area shown is about 25 000 kilometers, with features visible
on the originals that are as small as 30 kilometers across. The Red Spot is partly obscured on the north by a thin layer of
overlying ammonia cirrus cloud. South of the Red Spot is one of the three white ovals, which are also anticyclonic vortices in
the atmosphere.

This frame is in natural color. [P-21430C]

The red and blue have been greatly exaggerated in this
frame to bring out fine detail in the cloud structure. [P-21431C]

126

The most visible cloud interactions take
place in the region of the Great Red Spot.
Material within the Red Spot rotates about
once every six days. Infrared measurements
show that the Red Spot is a region of atmospheric
upwelling, which extends to very high
altitudes; however, the divergent flow suggested
by this upwelling seems to be very small—one
bright feature was observed to circle the Red
Spot for sixty days without appreciably changing
its distance from the spot’s center. During
the Voyager 1 flyby, spots were seen to move
toward the Red Spot from the east, flow along
its northern border, then either flow on to the
west past the Red Spot or into the outer regions
of its vortex. A spot caught on the outer edge of
the Red Spot flow might break in two as it
reached the eastern edge of the spot, with one
piece remaining in the vortex and the other
moving off to the east. Alternatively, a spot
floating toward the Red Spot from the east
might be pushed northward to join the eastward
current flowing north of the giant red
oval.

By the time of the second Voyager encounter,
a ribbon of white clouds curled around
the northern border of the Red Spot, blocking
the motion of small spots that might otherwise
have been caught up in the vortex. Spots approaching
the Red Spot from the east just
turned around and headed back in the direction
from which they had come.

Voyager 2 captured the Red Spot region four months after Voyager 1, when some changes had taken place in the cloud
circulation pattern around it. This is a mosaic of Voyager 2 frames, taken on July 6. The white oval to the south is not the
same one that was present in a similar location during the Voyager 1 flyby, because of differential rotation at the two
latitudes. [260-606]

In the northern hemisphere, small brown
anticyclonic features speed around the planet,
often colliding with one another. On collision,

127

the spots may combine and roll around together
for a while. Ultimately, part of the mass of the
combined spots is ejected as a streamer, and the
remaining material continues on its eastward
path.

Order out of Chaos

Despite all the turbulence in Jupiter’s atmosphere—this
ever-changing chaotic mixture
of cyclonic and anticyclonic flows, of ovals and
filaments, of reds, browns, and whites—a pattern
may be emerging: There is an underlying
order to the seemingly random mixing of patterns
we see in the Jovian atmosphere.

First, the changing weather patterns are in
some sense cyclic. The fact that Jupiter may be
reverting to the appearance it presented at the
time of Pioneers 10 and 11 is not surprising.
From Earth-based studies, astronomers have
found that the face of Jupiter often goes
through a major change every few years. The
transition is very rapid, but the planet maintains
its new “look” for some time—until the
next major transition. At the time of the Pioneer
flybys, “The Red Spot was prominent, but
it was surrounded by intense cloud. There was
no visible structure at all in the south tropical
zone—it was totally bland. You couldn’t see the
turbulent area to the west,” explained Garry
Hunt. “And, I believe that the buildup of cloud
that we’re seeing to the east of the Red Spot is
the beginning of the transition that will produce
the Pioneer look.”

There is even more order underlying
Jupiter’s changing atmosphere. This order is
revealed in part in the alternating belts and
zones. It is believed that the cloud-covered
zones are regions of rising air, and the belts are
regions of descending air. The internal energy
of Jupiter provides the power to maintain this
pattern of slow vertical circulation. In addition,
there are horizontal or zonal flows that are
much more regular than the changing cloud
patterns.

The three large white ovals are the longest-lived features in
Jupiter’s atmosphere, after the Great Red Spot. Like the
Red Spot, they are anticyclonic, or high-pressure, regions.
During Voyager 2 encounter, one of the ovals was just
south of the Red Spot. This picture shows the other two
ovals as they looked in early July. The clouds show very
similar internal structures. To the east of each of them,
recirculating currents are clearly seen. [P-21754C]

In this frame, a
similar structure is seen to the west of the cloud.

128

A sequence of pictures of Jupiter, taken once per rotation (about ten hours), can be used to construct a time-lapse movie of
the circulation of the Jovian atmosphere. These frames are from the Voyager 1 “Blue Movie” of the Great Red Spot region.
Every odd Jovian rotation is shown, so the 24 frames correspond to 48 Jupiter days, or about 20 Earth days. White spots can
be seen entering the Red Spot from the upper right and being carried around by its six-day rotation until they are ejected
toward the lower right. Above the Red Spot, the flow is toward the right; below it, toward the left. The rotation of the Spot is
counterclockwise, or anticyclonic. [260-449]

129

At different latitudes, the strong prevailing zonal winds produce different apparent rotation rates. Plotted here are the
horizontal velocities measured from a pair of Voyager images taken one rotation (about ten hours) apart. Also shown for
comparison are older ground-based measurements obtained from careful timings of the apparent rotation rate at different
latitudes. The excellent agreement of the two plots indicates the stability of the zonal winds. Also, the wind pattern shows
much greater symmetry between northern and southern hemispheres than do the more superficial cloud patterns.

“At first, Voyager seemed to do nothing
but emphasize the chaos, not the order in
Jupiter’s atmosphere,” Andy Ingersoll stated.
“There are turbulent regions in which individual
little spots seem to change every Jovian
rotation. And the whole texture in certain turbulent
regions is unrecognizable in one earth
day.” With the Voyager spacecraft, more detail
could be seen than ever before; in addition,
changes could be observed on a small timescale,
as they happened. “It became much more of a
mystery how large-scale order could exist in the
face of all this small-scale chaos. But I think we
are beginning to see the order underneath.
What we are looking at when we observe
Jupiter are minute cloud particles representing
only a small fraction of the mass of the atmosphere.”
The large-scale order the scientists had
found was a regular alternation of eastward
and westward jets. “If we take all the measurements
from Earth-based observations over the
last 75 years, we find that every current that has
ever been seen from the Earth over 75 years is
visible in one ten-hour rotation. They’re all
there—they were just invisible.” The ever-changing
appearance was dancing above a
regular, almost stationary pattern of alternating
flows, which may come from deep within
Jupiter’s atmosphere. Why this alternating pattern
persists remains a mystery. Even if the
underlying pattern can be thought of as a sort
of Jovian climate, it still does not explain the
mechanics of “the minor sideshow”—the
changing weather patterns. Analysis of the
Voyager pictures is sure to keep planetary meteorologists
busy for many years to come.

Lights in the Night Sky

Toward the end of the first encounter
period, Voyager 1 flew behind Jupiter, and the
spacecraft’s wide-angle camera scanned the
northern hemisphere on the nightside of the
planet, searching for aurorae and lightning
bolts. The most impressive darkside feature
found was a tremendous aurora in the north
polar region. But this was not the first time
Jovian aurorae had been detected. Very-high-energy
auroral emissions resulting from
ultraviolet glows of atomic and molecular
hydrogen had been detected prior to encounter
on the bright side of Jupiter by the ultraviolet
spectrometer. The ultraviolet observations indicate
that atmospheric temperatures in the
auroral regions are at least 1000 K. In both the
visible and the ultraviolet spectra, the aurorae
are confined to the polar regions and result
from charged magnetospheric particles striking
the upper atmosphere. The ultraviolet aurorae
are created when high-energy particles from the
Io plasma torus spiral in toward Jupiter on
magnetic field lines.

Several meteor trails were also evident in
the darkside pictures of Jupiter’s atmosphere.
Traveling at roughly 60 kilometers per second
as they entered, these fireballs brightened

130

quickly and seemed to survive for about 1000
kilometers before they died.

Clusters of lightning bolts—indicative of
electrical storms—were also discovered on
Jupiter’s nightside. This particular phenomenon
does not seem to depend on latitude. The
Voyager 1 photograph that captured the huge
Jovian aurora also caught the electrical
discharges of 19 superbolts of lightning, and
Voyager 2 photographs located eight additional
flashes. Radio emission (whistlers) from lightning
discharges were also detected by the
Voyager radio astronomy receivers and the
plasma wave instrument.

The night side of Jupiter is not dull. A large aurora (northern light) arcs across the northern horizon, while farther south
about twenty large bolts of lightning illuminate electrical storms in the clouds. Similar pictures also revealed fireballs, or
large meteors, burning up in the atmosphere of Jupiter. [P-21283B/W]

Magnetic Field

Deep in the interior of Jupiter, the pressures
are so great that hydrogen becomes an
electrical conductor, like a metal. Currents
driven by the rapid rotation of the planet are
thought to flow in this metallic core. The result
is a magnetic field that penetrates the space
around Jupiter.

Direct measurements of the Jovian magnetic
field were first made by the Pioneers, and
Voyager results generally confirm the initial
findings. The strength of the Jovian field is
about 4000 times greater than that of the Earth.
The dipolar axis is not at the center of Jupiter,
but offset by about 10 000 kilometers and
tipped by 11 degrees from the axis of rotation.
Each time the planet spins, the field wobbles up
and down, carrying with it the trapped plasma
of the radiation belts. The Voyager particles
and fields instruments concentrated not on the
planetary magnetic field but on the processes
taking place in the magnetosphere.

131

A probe of the Jovian atmosphere is obtained each time a spacecraft passes behind the planet as seen from the Earth.
Passage through the ionosphere and atmosphere alters the phase of the radio telemetry signal, and subsequent computer
analysis allows members of the Radio Science Team to reconstruct the profile of the atmosphere. Shown here is the
atmospheric temperature as a function of pressure as derived from the Voyager 1 X-band occultation data, corresponding to
a point at latitude 12°S, longitude 63°. The two curves represent extreme interpretations of the same data; the best fit lies
somewhere between. Accuracy is high at greater depths but poor at levels above a pressure of about 0.03 bar. Clearly shown
is the temperature minimum near 0.1 bar and the steady increase of temperature with depth as the radio beam probed toward
the cloud level near 1.0 bar.

At a wavelength near 5 micrometers, the primary gases in the atmosphere of Jupiter are particularly transparent, and the
infrared radiation from the planet comes from relatively great depths. At these depths, it is possible to see evidence of gases
such as water vapor that condense at higher altitudes where the temperatures are lower. This IRIS spectrum in the
5-micrometer spectral region shows features identified with water (H₂O), germane (GeH₄), and deuterated methane (CH₃D),
as well as the more easily detected ammonia (NH₃).

Wavelength (µm)

H₂O

CH₃D

GeH₄

NH₃

Voyager 1

Voyager 2

Wave number (cm⁻¹)

Voyager 1 brightness temperature (K)

Voyager 2 brightness temperature (K)

132

The structure of the Jovian atmosphere can be derived from
infrared spectra as well as from the radio occultation data. This
profile of temperature as a function of pressure covers the same
range of altitudes as does the preceding figure and is in good
agreement. Both profiles locate a temperature minimum of about 110 K near a pressure of 0.1 bar (1000 mb = 1 bar = 1
atm). The IRIS data also show variation of structure with position, including a cooler minimum temperature (about 100 K)
over the Great Red Spot.

The structure of the atmosphere can be inferred from IRIS spectra at many locations over the disk of Jupiter. Scientists are
beginning to assemble this vast amount of information into maps that show the temperatures at a given pressure. The temperature contours are labeled in degrees Kelvin. The banded structure, with higher
temperatures near the dark equatorial belt, is most clearly evident at the lower altitude. Surprisingly, the cool region
associated with the Great Red Spot (latitude 23°S) is more apparent at high altitude.

The observed temperature at a depth near the cloud tops (0.8 bar).

133

The observed temperature at an altitude about 30 kilometers higher (0.15 bar).

The Magnetosphere

Giant Jupiter has an enormous realm—from
the size of its satellite system to its tremendous
aurorae and superbolts of lightning, to the
huge planet-sized cloud features that surround
its atmosphere. The most gargantuan Jovian
feature is its magnetosphere, which envelopes
the satellites and constantly changes in size,
pumping in and out at the whim of the solar
wind. The Pioneer and Voyager spacecraft provided
four cuts through this dynamic region,
showing that its borders in the upwind solar
direction lie between 50 R
J
and 100 R
J
from
Jupiter. Downwind, away from the Sun, the
magnetosphere extends much farther; some scientists
postulate that a magnetotail may reach
as far as the orbit of Saturn.

Charged particles in the magnetosphere are
subject to powerful forces. Tightly embedded
in Jupiter, the magnetic field spins with a ten-hour
period as the planet rotates. The particles
are caught in the spinning field and accelerated
to high speeds. The result is a co-rotating
plasma in the magnetic equator of Jupiter, extending
outward to at least 20 R
J
. Beyond this
distance, the flow breaks up and the magnetosphere
is more unstable. Within the co-rotation
region, the spinning plasma sets up a powerful
electric current girdling the planet.

Charged particles can be accelerated in the
magnetosphere to high energies, corresponding
to speeds tens of thousands of kilometers per
second. Some of these particle streams escape
from the inner parts of the magnetosphere and
can penetrate the magnetopause and be ejected
from the Jovian system. On Voyager 1, the low
energy charged particle instrument began
detecting these streams of “hot” plasma on 22
January, when Voyager 1 was still 600 R
J

(almost 50 million kilometers) from the planet.
Voyager 2 first detected Jovian particles at an
even greater distance, 800 R
J
. Hydrogen and
helium ions (protons and alpha particles)
dominate the magnetosphere at great distances
from Jupiter, but increasing amounts of sulfur
and oxygen appeared as the spacecraft crossed
the magnetopause. The heavier ions presumably
originate from Io.

In the inner magnetosphere, the Galilean
satellites have a powerful influence on the
populations of fast-moving particles. During
the Voyager 1 encounter, the primary effect
was observed at Io, where the satellite apparently
sweeps up energetic electrons. In the
million-volt energy range, these particles are
depleted near Io, with peaks observed both inside
and outside the satellite’s orbit. Voyager 2
passed close to Ganymede, and here also major
effects were seen, with the satellite apparently
absorbing electrons. In the wake created by the
motion of the co-rotating plasma past
Ganymede, the particle populations showed
large and complex variations.

134

The magnetosphere of Jupiter can be “seen” from
Earth by its emissions at radio wavelengths. The recent development of
imaging radio telescopes in Great Britain, The Netherlands, and the United States allows frequent mapping of the large-scale
features of the innermost magnetosphere, inside the orbit of Io. These six images showing one rotation of Jupiter were
obtained near the time of the Voyager 1 flyby by Imke de Pater at the Westerbork Radio Observatory near Leiden. The
brightest emission is shown by dark red or black. The size of the planet is indicated by a dotted white circle. The tilt of the
magnetosphere relative to the rotation axis of the planet can be seen by the wobble of the magnetosphere as Jupiter rotates.

135

Just inside the Jovian magnetosphere is the
“hot spot” of the solar system: a 300-400
million degree plasma detected by Voyager 1
while it was still about 5 million kilometers
from Jupiter. T. P. Armstrong commented,
“Even the interior of the Sun is estimated to be
less than 20 million degrees.” S. M. Krimigis
added that the temperature of this plasma is
“the highest yet measured anywhere in the solar
system.” Fortunately for Voyager, this region
of incredibly hot plasma is also one of the solar
system’s best vacuums. The spacecraft was in
little danger because the bow shock protects
this region from the solar wind, and most of the
particles in Jupiter’s magnetosphere are held in
much closer to the planet.

Each Voyager passed through the boundaries of the
magnetosphere—the bow shock (BS) and the magnetopause
(MP)—on both the inbound and the outbound legs of its
passage through the Jovian system. In this diagram, the
heavy solid line represents the spacecraft trajectory, as seen
looking down from the north. Also shown are the positions
of the bow shock in March and of the magnetosphere in
both March and July.

Several regions of plasma (charged particles) make up the
Jovian magnetosphere. These sketches, based on Voyager
data, show the magnetosphere as viewed from above (a)
and as seen from the Jovian equatorial plane (b). Most
of the plasma co-rotates with the planet and is confined near
the magnetic equator, where it forms a broad plasma sheet
about 100 R
J
across.

The very hot plasma in the outer magnetosphere
discovered by Voyager is thought to play
an important role in establishing the size of the
Jovian magnetosphere. Although the density is
low, only about one charged particle per hundred
cubic centimeters, this plasma actually
carries a great deal of energy because of the
high speed of the particles. It is this plasma
pressure, rather than the magnetic field
pressure, that appears to hold off the pressure
of the solar wind. However, the balance between
hot plasma inside the magnetopause and
the solar wind outside is not very stable. The
Voyager experimenters suggest that a small
change in solar wind pressure can cause the

136

boundary to become suddenly unstable. A large
quantity of the hot plasma can then be lost,
producing the bursts seen at large distances and
permitting a sudden collapse of the outer magnetosphere.
Continued injection of hot plasma
from within would then reinflate the magnetosphere,
which would expand like a balloon until
another instability developed. Processes of this
sort may be the cause of the rapidly varying
magnetospheric boundaries observed by both
Voyager spacecraft.

The rings of Jupiter are best seen when looking nearly in the direction of the Sun, since the small particles that comprise them
are good forward scatterers of sunlight. This mosaic is of Voyager 2 images (two wide angle and four narrow angle) obtained
from a perspective behind the planet and inside the shadow of Jupiter. The spacecraft was 2 degrees below the equator of
Jupiter and 1.5 million kilometers from the rings. The shadow of the planet can be seen to obscure the near segment of the
ring near the edge of the planet. The brightest region of the ring is about 1.8 R
J
from the center of Jupiter. [260-678B]

Rings of Jupiter

One of the spectacular discoveries of
Voyager was the existence of a ring system of
small particles circling Jupiter. Saturn and
Uranus were known to have rings, but none had
been seen before at Jupiter.

As revealed by the Voyager cameras, the
rings extend outward from the upper atmosphere
to a distance of 53 000 kilometers above
the cloud tops, 1.8 R
J
from the center of the
planet. The main rings, however, are much narrower,
spanning from 47 000 to 53 000 kilometers
above Jupiter. There are two main rings,
a 5000-kilometer-wide segment, and a brighter,
outer 800-kilometer segment. The thickness of
the rings is unknown, except that it is certainly
less than 30 kilometers, and probably under 1
kilometer.

137

Structure within the ring can be seen in the best Voyager 2 images, taken about 27 hours after closest approach to Jupiter.
This enlarged portion of a wide-angle picture taken with a clear filter shows a bright core about 800 kilometers across with a
dimmer region a few thousand kilometers across on the inside, and a narrow dim region on the outside. [260-674]

The rings of Jupiter are quite tenuous,
which explains why they are invisible from
Earth [although they have been detected from
Earth since Voyager]. Seen face on, the
brightest part of the ring blocks less than one
part in ten thousand of the light passing
through, making it essentially transparent. In
fact, the ring does not even offer much resistance
to a spacecraft; Pioneer 11 traversed the
ring in 1974 with no obvious ill consequences.
Apparently the individual particles that make
up the ring are widely dispersed. They can be
seen only when the rings are viewed nearly
edge-on, or toward the Sun, where they show
up well in forward scattered light. It is this extra
brilliance when backlit that created the excellent
photos taken by Voyager 2 from inside the
shadow of Jupiter.

The individual ring particles are probably
dark, rocky fragments that are very small—essentially
dust grains. They move around
Jupiter in individual orbits, circling the planet
in 5 - 7 hours. Scientists postulate that such orbits
are not stable and that the particles fall
slowly in toward Jupiter. Apparently the rings
are constantly renewed from some source,
which may be the satellite Adrastea (J14),
discovered by Voyager 2. There has also been
speculation that Adrastea may influence the
ring structure by sweeping particles out of the
ring. At present the rings of Jupiter remain
mysterious. They are clearly very different
from the rings of Saturn and Uranus, and
reaching an understanding of their origins and
dynamics presents many challenges to planetary
scientists.

138

The four Galilean satellites of Jupiter are planet-like worlds, revealed by Voyager to be as diverse and fascinating as the
terrestrial planets Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars. In this Voyager 1 composite, all four are shown in their correct relative
size, as they would appear from a distance of about 1 million kilometers. Relative color and reflectivity are also approximately
preserved, although it is not possible to show on a single print the full range of brightness from the dark rocky surface
of Callisto to the brilliant white of Europa or orange of Io. [260-499C]

Io (longitude 140°).

Europa (longitude 300°).

Callisto (longitude 350°).

Ganymede (longitude 320°).

139

CHAPTER 9

FOUR NEW WORLDS

Jupiter’s Satellite System

In a sense, the Voyager Mission revealed a
new planetary system. Astronomers had long
been fascinated by the large Galilean satellites
of Jupiter, but they had only looked from afar,
watching the dancing points of light in their
telescopes, and, occasionally, as the atmosphere
steadied, seeing these points resolve
themselves into tiny disks before dissolving
again in the turbulence of the terrestrial atmosphere.
Much had been learned from telescopic
studies, but not until the Voyager flights had we
truly seen the Galilean satellites. The historic
hours as Voyager 1 cruised past each satellite on
March 5 and 6, 1979, fundamentally altered our
perspective. Four new worlds were revealed, as
diverse and fascinating as the more familiar terrestrial
planets. Although not yet household
words, the names Io, Europa, Ganymede and
Callisto have now been added to Mercury,
Venus, Moon, and Mars in the lexicon of important
“Earth-sized” bodies in the solar
system.

Jupiter has fifteen known satellites,
counting the two new satellites discovered by
Voyager. These moons vary greatly in size,
composition, and orbit. The four outermost
satellites, Sinope, Pasiphae, Carme, and
Ananke, circle the planet in retrograde orbits of
high inclination; their distances from Jupiter
vary between 20 and 24 million kilometers (290
R
J
to 333 R
J
). These small bodies, none more
than 50 kilometers in diameter, require nearly
two years for each orbit of Jupiter. It is possible
that they are captured asteroids, but so little is
known about them that astronomers cannot tell
if their surface properties resemble those of
asteroids, or if these four satellites are even
similar to each other.

The next group of Jovian satellites consists
of four small difficult-to-observe objects.
These are Lysithea, Elara, Himalia, and Leda,
the latter discovered by Charles Kowal of Hale
Observatories in 1974. They have similar orbits,
varying in distance from Jupiter between 11
and 12 million kilometers (about 160 R
J
). Like
the outer group, these satellites have orbits of
high inclination; unlike the outer group, they
move in the proper, prograde direction around
Jupiter. The largest, Himalia (170 kilometers in
diameter) and Elara (80 kilometers diameter),
are known to be very dark, rocky objects, and it
seems probable that the others are similar. It is
unlikely that the census of the outer groups of
irregular satellites is complete, and new satellites
less than 10 kilometers in diameter will
probably be discovered.

The Jovian system is dominated, of
course, by the large Galilean satellites, which
vary in size from just smaller than the Moon
(Europa) to nearly as large as Mars
(Ganymede). These satellites are in regular,
nearly circular orbits in the same plane as the
equator of Jupiter, and all four lie within the
inner magnetosphere of Jupiter, where they interact
strongly with energetic charged particles
and plasma. Most of this chapter will be
devoted to a discussion of these fascinating
worlds.

We now know of three additional small satellites
inside the orbit of Io, orbiting close to
Jupiter. The first, Amalthea, was discovered in
1892; it orbits Jupiter in just twelve hours at a
distance of 181 000 kilometers (2.55 R
J
). A
smaller object, Adrastea (officially 1979J1 for
the first new satellite of Jupiter discovered
in 1979), is much closer, at 134 000 kilometers
(1.76 R
J
). As described in Chapter 7, it skirts
the outer edge of the ring, circling Jupiter in
just over seven hours. The inner satellite moves
faster than Jupiter’s rotation; seen from the
planet, it would rise in the west and set in the
east. Both Amalthea and Adrastea are buried
deep within the inner magnetosphere where
they are continually bombarded by energetic
electrons, protons, and ions. Depletion of the
Jovian radiation belt particles was observed at
the orbits of both satellites by Pioneer 11,
which went much closer to Jupiter than the
Voyagers, testifying to the intensity of the interaction
between these objects and their
surroundings.

140

Callisto was revealed by the Voyager cameras to be a heavily cratered and hence geologically inactive world. This mosaic of
Voyager 1 images, obtained on March 6 from a distance of about 400 000 kilometers, shows surface detail as small as 10 kilometers
across. The prominent old impact feature Valhalla has a central bright spot about 600 kilometers across, probably
representing the original impact basin. The concentric bright rings extend outward about 1500 kilometers from the impact
center. [260-450]

141

SATELLITES OF JUPITER

Distance From Jupiter

Name

10³ kilometers
Jupiter Radii
Period (days)
Year of Discovery

Adrastea
J14
134
1.76
0.30
1979

Amalthea
J5
181
2.55
0.49
1892

1979J2
J15
222
3.11
0.67
1980

Io
J1
422
5.95
1.77
1610

Europa
J2
671
9.47
3.55
1610

Ganymede
J3
1070
15.10
7.15
1610

Callisto
J4
1880
26.60
16.70
1610

Leda
J13
11 110
156
240
1974

Himalia
J6
11 470
161
251
1904

Lysithea
J10
11 710
164
260
1938

Elara
J7
11 740
165
260
1904

Ananke
J12
20 700
291
617
1951

Carme
J11
22 350
314
692
1938

Pasiphae
J8
23 300
327
735
1908

Sinope
J9
23 700
333
758
1914

The state of the interiors of the Galilean satellites can be judged from their sizes and densities. These cross-sectional views
represent the best guess following the Voyager flybys as to the composition and structure of the objects. Io, with a density
equal to that of the Moon and a long history of volcanic activity, is a dry, rocky object. Europa is less dense, and it probably
has a global ocean of ice as much as 100 kilometers thick over a rocky interior. Ganymede and Callisto both have densities
near 2 grams per cubic centimeter, suggesting a composition about half water and half rock. There is probably a rocky core
surrounded by an icy mantle.

Io

Active volcanoes

Sulfur and frozen SO₂

Molten silicate interior

Europa

Global fracture patterns

Ice crust

Rocky interior

Ganymede

Fresh craters expose ice

Young grooved terrain with intricate fracture

Old, dark cratered areas

Ice crust

Water or ice mantle

Callisto

Large basins reduced by ice flow

Fresh craters expose ice

Ice/rock crust

Water or ice mantle

Moon

Mercury

142

Long after the flybys of Jupiter, continued
analysis of Voyager images revealed another
new satellite, Jupiter’s fifteenth. Initially
designated 1979J2, the unexpected new satellite
orbits the planet at 3.17 R
J
, between Io and
Amalthea. Stephen Synnott of the JPL Optical
Navigation Team discovered the satellite on
pictures taken during the Voyager 1 events on
March 5, 1979, while searching for additional
images of satellite 1979J1. It is about 75 kilometers
in diameter, but nothing else is known
about its physical properties.

Together, the 15 satellites circling giant
Jupiter form a mini-solar system. Perhaps the
outer, irregular satellites were captured or
resulted from the catastrophic collisions of one
or more larger satellites with passing asteroids.
The inner seven satellites constitute a coherent
system, almost certainly formed together with
Jupiter and sharing a common 4.5-billion-year
history. They are fascinating as individual
worlds, and also as brothers and sisters, and the
study of their interrelationships undoubtedly
will provide insights into the general problems
of planetary formation and evolution.

SIZES AND DENSITIES OF THE GALILEAN SATELLITES

Name
Diameter (kilometers)
Density (grams per cubic centimeter)

Io
3640
3.5

Europa
3130
3.0

Ganymede
5270
1.9

Callisto
4840
1.8

Callisto

Callisto is the least active geologically of
the Galilean satellites. Basically a dead world, it
bears the scars of innumerable meteoric impacts,
with virtually no sign of major internal
activity. Callisto is a world of craters, and to
understand it we must explore the role that
cratering plays in molding planetary surfaces.

The space between the planets is filled with
debris, ranging from the larger asteroids, hundreds
of kilometers in size, down to
microscopic grains of dust. Inevitably, each
planet collides with some of these fragments.
The smaller particles do little damage; in the
case of a planet with an atmosphere, like Earth,
they burn up as meteors before reaching the
surface, whereas on an airless planet, they
erode the surface by sandblasting the exposed
rock. The larger impacts are another matter,
and the craters they produce can be the dominant
features on the surface of a planet.

Voyagers 1 and 2 photographed most of the surface of Callisto at resolutions of a few kilometers or better. Shown here is a
preliminary shaded relief map. Additional measurements will improve the accuracy of the coordinate system. [260-672]

143

Callisto is a world of craters, as is well shown in this Voyager 2 photomosaic taken from a distance of 400 000 kilometers.
Craters about 100 kilometers in diameter cover the surface uniformly. Many have bright rims, perhaps composed of exposed
water-ice. There are very few craters larger than 150 kilometers in diameter, however, indicating that the scars of very large
impacts do not survive on the surface of Callisto. [P-21746B/W]

144

The concentric rings surrounding Valhalla are perhaps the most distinctive geological feature on Callisto. This Voyager 1
close-up shows a segment of the ridged terrain. The presence of superposed impact craters shows that the rings formed early
in Callisto’s history; however, the density of craters is less here than on other parts of the satellite, where the surface is older.
[P-22194]

We who live on Earth tend not to realize
the importance of cratering, for the simple reason
that our planet has very few craters, and
these are frequently of volcanic rather than
meteoric origin. Why are we so favored? Is
there an invisible shield to protect us from the
cosmic shooting gallery? Clearly not; the Earth
has experienced just as many cratering impacts
as has the Moon or other planets. The difference
is not that craters are formed less often,
but that the great geological activity of Earth—erosion,
volcanism, mountain building, continental
drift, etc.—erases craters as fast as they
are formed. On the average, a 10-kilometer-wide
crater is formed on Earth about once
every million years, but all those older than a
few million years have been eroded away, filled
in, or crushed beyond recognition by crustal
motion.

If a planet lacks great internal geologic
forces, large craters can survive almost indefinitely.
Such is the case for the Moon. Most of
the volcanism and other activity on the Moon
ceased 3½ billion years ago, as the dating of
lunar samples obtained by the Apollo astronauts
showed. Since that time, the lunar surface
has been passively accumulating impact scars.
The longer any particular surface area has been
exposed, the more densely packed are the craters.
Thus crater density is the first thing a
planetary geologist looks for in photos of a new
world. Craters are the touchstone of this field,
revealing the degree of internal activity and
allowing the determination of the relative ages
of different surface units.

On Callisto the density of craters is very
high. In some places they are packed as closely
as one can imagine, particularly for craters
several tens of kilometers in diameter. Although
no one knows the exact rate of formation
of impact craters on the Jovian satellites,
geologists on the Voyager Imaging Team estimate
that it would require several billion years to
accumulate the number of craters found on
Callisto. They therefore conclude that Callisto
has been geologically inactive almost since the
time of its formation.

Although superficially similar to the heavily
cratered surfaces of the Moon and Mercury,
Callisto is far from identical to these rocky
worlds. One of the most obvious differences is
a lack of craters larger than about 150 kilometers
on Callisto, together with a tendency for
large craters to have much shallower depths.

145

Apparently the ice-rock composition of Callisto
alters the ability of the crust to retain large
craters. Geologists speculate that the ice flows
over many millions of years, filling in crater
floors and gradually obliterating the largest
craters. There is also a conspicuous absence of
mountains on Callisto, again suggestive of a
weak, icy crust.

The IRIS instrument measured the temperature of spots on the surface of Callisto as each Voyager sped past. The measurements
shown here were all made at equatorial latitudes (between -10° and 25°). Shown are very low predawn temperatures
(-190° C) followed by an increase to a noon-time maximum of about -120° C, and then a drop again as the Sun sets.
[260-735]

The most prominent features in the Voyager
pictures are the ghost remnants of what
must have been immense impact basins. The
largest of these, the “bullseye” of the Voyager
1 images, has been named Valhalla, for
the home of the Norse gods. These ghost basins
have lost nearly all their vertical relief. What remains
is a central, light-colored zone (probably
the location of the original crater), surrounded
by numerous concentric rings of subdued,
bright ridges. Such features had never been seen
before on any planet, and they appear to be the
characteristic geologic feature of an ice-rock
planet.

Little is known about the composition of
Callisto’s surface, the material from which sunlight
is reflected. It appears to be primarily dark
rock or soil, but it lacks diagnostic spectral features,
except for one infrared band due to water
molecules bound in the soil. The many lighter
spots and arcs that outline craters in the high-resolution
pictures may be regions in which the
ice is showing through, but these cover only a
very small fraction of the exposed surface. (It
should be noted that, although Callisto is the
darkest of the Galilean satellites, the term
“dark” is relative, for even Callisto is brighter
than Earth’s moon.)

The daytime surface temperature of Callisto,
observed both from the ground and by
Voyager, is about -118° C. The Voyager infrared
interferometer spectrometer also determined
the minimum temperature, reached just
before dawn, of -193° C. No atmosphere is
expected at these cold temperatures, and none
was seen.

Analysis of Voyager images provided an
improved diameter for Callisto of 4840 kilometers,
yielding an average density of 1.8 grams
per cubic centimeter. As noted previously, it is
this low density that leads to the conclusion that
ice or water is an important component of the
interior of Callisto. The ice has never been
detected directly, but the peculiar nature of the
craters seen by Voyager adds strong circumstantial
support to this conclusion.

Callisto, with its heavy cratering, is the
most familiar-looking of the Galilean satellites;
if all of them had turned out to be as geologically
dead as Callisto, planetary geologists
would certainly have been disappointed. However,
each satellite, progressing in toward
Jupiter, presents increasing evidence of internal
activity.

146

Ganymede

The largest of the Galilean satellites (5270
kilometers in diameter), Ganymede was expected
to be similar to Callisto in many ways.
Both have low densities (for Ganymede, 1.9
grams per cubic centimeter), indicating a bulk
composition of about half rocky materials and
half water. In addition, their diameters differ
by only eight percent, and both are far enough
from Jupiter to escape the severe pounding Io
receives from magnetospheric charged particles.
Thus it was with great interest that Voyager
scientists looked at the differences that
emerged between these two satellites.

Shaded relief map of Ganymede. [260-673]

The surface of Ganymede as revealed by
the Voyager cameras is one of great diversity,
indicating differing periods of geologic activity.
At one extreme there are numerous dark areas
that resemble the surface of Callisto in both
albedo (reflectivity) and crater density. The
largest of these, Regio Galileo, stretches from
the equator to latitude +45° and is 4000 kilometers
across, nearly as large as the continental
United States. This ancient terrain even preserves
the remnants of a Callisto-type impact
basin in the form of a system of parallel, curving,
subdued ridges about 10 kilometers wide,
100 meters high, and spaced about 50 kilometers
apart. The central part of this ghost
basin is missing, however; it was presumably
destroyed by subsequent geologic activity.

Other regions of the surface of Ganymede
are clearly the product of intense internal
geologic activity. Generally, these regions are
of higher albedo and consist of many straight
parallel lines of mountains and valleys. The
Voyager geologists call these the grooved terrain
because of their appearance from a great
distance. Typically, these mountain ridges are
10-15 kilometers across and about 1000 meters
high, similar in scale to some sections of the
Appalachian Mountains in the Eastern United
States. No higher relief exists, presumably for
the same reason it is absent on Callisto. In
many places the grooved terrain forms between
areas of the older, darker surface, giving the
appearance of mountains extruded between
separating plates of ancient crust. In other
areas the relationships are much more complex,
with curved systems of grooves and ridges overlying
each other, displaying intricate crosscutting
relationships. Apparently Ganymede has
experienced a series of mountain-building
events.

The grooved terrains show a substantial
range in age, as indicated by the crater densities.
The oldest have nearly the same density
as the ancient, dark plains, suggesting that formation
of the grooved terrain began early, perhaps
4 billion years ago. The youngest grooved
terrain has only about one-tenth as many
craters, but this is still as many as are seen in the
3.5-billion-year-old lunar plains. The Voyager
geologists believe that even in these areas
geologic activity ceased billions of years ago.

147

The hemisphere of Ganymede that faces away from the Sun displays a great variety of terrain. In this Voyager 2 mosaic,
photographed at a range of 300 000 kilometers, the ancient dark area of Regio Galileo lies at the upper left. Below it, the
lighter grooved terrain forms bands of varying width, separating older surface units. On the right edge, a prominent crater
ray system is probably caused by water-ice splashed out in a relatively recent impact. [260-671]

148

The sinuous nature of some of the narrower Ganymede groove systems can be seen in this oblique view, obtained on March 5
by Voyager 1. The area shown is about the size of California, with features visible as small as 5 kilometers across. The ridges
appear to be the result of deformation of the crust of Ganymede. [P-21235]

Other types of surfaces are seen on Ganymede.
Some regions are lightly cratered and
smooth, with no indication of mountain building.
In one place, there is a rough mountainous
area that looks more like the jumbled lunar
mountains than the long ridges and valleys of
the rest of Ganymede. Many of the larger
craters are distinguished by brilliant white halos
and rays that suggest that impacts may have
splashed large quantities of water or ice over
the surface.

Many of the geologic features seen on
Ganymede appear to have been caused by
breaking, faulting, or spreading of the crust. In
a few cases, there even seem to be indications of
transverse, or sideways, motion along faults.
This evidence is extremely exciting to geologists,
since similar crustal motion on Earth is
associated with the drift of continental plates,
drawn by convection currents deep in the mantle.
Such activity has never been seen before on
another planet.

Astronomers on Earth had known since
1971 that about half the surface of Ganymede
was covered with exposed water ice and about
half with darker rock. An examination of the
albedo variations in the Voyager pictures suggests
that the ice is exposed near large craters
and, to a lesser extent, in the grooved terrain,
but no direct measurements were made by Voyager
of the composition of different parts of the
surface.

The presence of ice on the surface suggested
to many astronomers that Ganymede

149

might have a very tenuous atmosphere of water
vapor or oxygen, which might be released by
the breakdown of water vapor by sunlight.
During the Voyager 1 flyby, a sensitive test for
an atmosphere was made by the ultraviolet instrument
from observations of the star Kappa
Centauri as it was occulted by Ganymede. No
dimming of the starlight was seen, yielding an
upper limit for the surface pressure of the gases
oxygen, water vapor, or carbon dioxide of
10⁻¹¹ bar, or one hundred-billionth the atmospheric
pressure at Earth.

The differences between the geologic histories
of Ganymede and Callisto are surprisingly
large. No one knows the reason. Perhaps
only a small increase in internal temperature is
necessary to initiate geologic activity in an icy
planet, and for some reason Ganymede crossed
this threshold for a part of its history, whereas
Callisto did not.

The complex patterns of the grooved terrain on Ganymede
are apparent in high-resolution images. This picture, taken
by Voyager 1 on March 5, has a resolution of about 3 kilometers
and shows a region about the size of the state of
Pennsylvania. The mountain ridges are spaced about 10 to
15 kilometers apart and rise about 1000 meters, similar to
many of the mountains of Pennsylvania. The transections
of different mountain systems indicate that they formed at
different times. A degraded crater near the left center of the
picture is crossed by ridges, indicating that it predated the
period of crustal deformation and mountain building.
[P-21279]

Ray systems of exposed water-ice are visible in this high-resolution
mosaic of Ganymede, obtained by Voyager 2 on
July 9 at a range of about 100 000 kilometers. The rough
mountainous terrain at lower right is the outer portion of a
large fresh impact basin that postdates most of the other
terrain. At the bottom, portions of grooved terrain transect
other portions, indicating an age sequence. The dark
patches of heavily cratered terrain (right center) are probably
ancient icy material formed prior to the grooved terrain.
The large rayed crater at upper center is about 150
kilometers in diameter. [P-21770B/W]

150

The many variants of smooth and grooved terrain on Ganymede suggest a complex geologic history for this satellite. Four
high-resolution views by Voyager 2 are grouped together. [260-678A]

A band of low mountain ridges has apparently been cut and offset by a fault.

Multiple sets of mountain ridges transect at nearly right angles. Some impact craters were
formed before, and some after, the grooved terrain.

Many short parallel ridges butt into each other, making a crazy-quilt pattern.

In the center of this frame is an unusual smooth area, perhaps the result of flooding of the
surface by material that filled in the grooves.

Europa

As one proceeds inward through the Galilean
satellites, these worlds become less and less
familiar to the planetary geologist. This was an
unexpected effect. Callisto and Ganymede were
expected to have unusual properties as a result
of their large percentage of ice. The densities of
Europa and Io are more normal for the smaller,
terrestrial-type planets, and before Voyager
many scientists expected these two satellites
might look much like the Moon, which they
resemble in size.

Europa, with a diameter of 3130 kilometers,
is about 15 percent smaller than the
Moon. Its density is 3.0 grams per cubic centimeter,
indicating a basically rocky composition.
However, cosmic mixtures of rocky and
metallic materials are often a bit denser than
this, leaving room for a substantial component
of ice or water. Calculations indicate that if all

151

the ice were at the surface, it might form a crust
up to 100 kilometers thick.

Shaded relief map of Europa. [260-659]

Telescopic observations of Europa demonstrated
long before Voyager that this satellite is
almost completely covered with ice. It is a
white, highly reflecting body, looking, from a
great distance, like a giant snowball. In the
early Voyager pictures, Europa always showed
a bland, white disk, in striking contrast to the
spottiness of Ganymede or the brilliant colors
of Io.

Voyager 1 never got closer to Europa than
734 000 kilometers, and at that distance it remained
a nearly featureless planet, with no obvious
impact craters or other familiar geologic
structures. What did show in the Voyager 1 pictures,
however, were numerous thin, straight
dark lines crisscrossing the surface, some extending
up to 3000 kilometers in length. To the
members of the Imaging Team, these features
were “strongly suggestive of global-scale tectonic
processes, induced either externally (as by
tidal despinning) or internally (as by convection).”
It was with the greatest interest that the
Voyager 2 images, taken from about four times
closer, were anticipated.

The spectacular pictures obtained of the
satellite in July were perhaps more confusing
than clarifying. Europa is entirely covered with
dark streaks that vary in width from several
kilometers to approximately 70 kilometers and
in length from several hundred to several thousand
kilometers. Most streaks are straight, but
others are curved or irregular. The streaks lie
on otherwise smooth, bright terrain, featureless
except for numerous random dark spots, most
less than 10 kilometers in diameter.

Voyager 2 photos showed, in addition to
the smooth terrain with its dark streaks, regions
of darker, mottled terrain. This mottled terrain
appears rough on a small scale, and it may contain
small craters just on the limit of resolution
(about 4 kilometers). Only three definite impact
craters have been identified, each about 20 kilometers
across. This small number of craters
suggests either that the surface is relatively
young or that craters are not preserved for long
in the icy crust.

Although the dark streaks give Europa a
cracked appearance, the streaks themselves are
not obviously cracks. They are not depressed
below their surroundings; in fact, they have no
topographic structure whatever. Europa is extraordinarily
smooth, and the dark streaks look
rather like marks made with a felt-tipped pen
on a white billiard ball. The streaks are not even
very dark; the contrast with adjacent smooth
terrain is only about 10 percent.

One of the most remarkable geologic phenomena
discovered by Voyager is the light

152

streaks that appear on Europa. These are
smaller than the dark streaks, only about 10
kilometers in width, but much more uniform.
Seen at low Sun angle, they also show vertical
relief of less than a few hundred meters. These
light ridges are seen best at low Sun and tend to
be invisible at higher illumination angles.

The most amazing thing about the light
ridges is their form. Instead of being straight,
they form scallops or cusps, with smooth curves
that repeat regularly on a scale of 100 to a few
hundred kilometers. In some of the low-Sun-angle
pictures, the surface of Europa seems to
be covered with a beautiful network of these
regular curving lines. The impression is so bizarre
that one tends not to believe the reality of
what is seen. Nothing remotely like it has ever
been seen on any other planet.

At present the geology of Europa remains
beyond our understanding. Presumably there is
a thick ice crust, perhaps floating on a liquid
water ocean. Presumably there is sufficient heat
coming from the interior to have produced
cracking or motion in the ice crust, and the light
and dark streaks preserve a pattern in some way
related to this internal activity. However, the
actual mechanisms for producing the observed
features so lightly traced on this smooth white
world remain for scientists to decipher.

Europa looks like a cracked egg in this computer mosaic of
the best Voyager 2 images. In this presentation, the variation
of surface brightness due to the angle of the Sun has
been removed by computer processing, so that surface features
can be seen equally well at all places. The many broad
dark streaks show up well, but this presentation does not
bring out the much fainter and more enigmatic light
streaks. These pictures were taken from a distance of about
250 000 kilometers and show features as small as 5 kilometers
across. [260-686]

Io

The most spectacular of the Galilean satellites
is Io. Even in low-resolution images, its
brilliant colors of red, orange, yellow, and
white set it apart from any other planet. The
dramatic scale of its volcanic activity confirms
that Io is in a class by itself as the most geologically
active planetary body in the solar system.

The diameter of Io is 3640 kilometers, and
its density is 3.5 grams per cubic centimeter.
Both values are nearly identical to those of our
Moon. Were it not for Io’s proximity to Jupiter,
it would probably be a dead, rocky world
much like Earth’s satellite.

Careful examination of all the Voyager images
of Io, some of which have resolutions as
good as 1 kilometer, has failed to reveal a single
impact crater. Yet the flux of crater-producing
impacts at Io must be even greater than for the
other Galilean satellites, because of the focusing
effect of Jupiter’s gravity. The absence of
craters alone would indicate that Io has an extremely
young and dynamic planetary surface,
even without the observation of active volcanoes.
Calculations indicate that craters on Io
must be filled in or otherwise obliterated at a
rate corresponding to the deposition of at least
100 meters per million years, and quite probably
a factor of ten greater, or 1 meter every
thousand years.

153

One of the most remarkable of all the Voyager discoveries was the arcuate white ridges on Europa. Visible only at very low
Sun angle, these curved bright streaks are 5 to 10 kilometers wide and rise at most a few hundred meters above the surface.
Their graceful scalloped pattern is unique to this planet and has defied explanation. Also visible in this view, taken by
Voyager 2 on July 9 at a range of 225 000 kilometers, are dark bands, more diffuse than the light ridges, typically 20 to 40
kilometers wide and hundreds to thousands of kilometers long. [P-21766]

154

Shaded relief map of Io as it appeared in early March 1979. [260-634BC]

The great erupting volcanoes on Io produce distinctive surface markings. These are three views of Prometheus (P₃).
The bright ring on the surface rims the areas of fallout from the plume, and it is probably an area in which sulfur dioxide
frost is being deposited on the surface. [260-451]

These views are of Loki (P₂) as seen by Voyager 1. [260-451]

The asymmetric structure of the plume can be seen.

An ultraviolet image has been used to produce a false-color composite; the
large ultraviolet halo above the visible-light plume may be due to scattering from sulfur dioxide gas rather than solid
particles.

155

Perhaps the most spectacular of all the Voyager photos of Io is this mosaic obtained by Voyager 1 on March 5 at a range of
400 000 kilometers. A great variety of color and albedo is seen on the surface, now thought to be the result of surface
deposits of various forms of sulfur and sulfur dioxide. The two great volcanoes Pele and Loki (upper left) are prominent.
[260-464]

156

In place of impact craters, the surface of Io
has a great many volcanic centers, which
generally take the form of black spots a few
tens of kilometers across. In a few cases, high-resolution
pictures show the characteristic
shapes associated with volcanic calderas on
Earth and Mars, and, if the other volcanic
centers are similar, about 5 percent of the entire
surface of Io is occupied by calderas. These are
extremely black, reflecting less than 5 percent
of the sunlight; often they are surrounded by irregular,
diffuse halos nearly as black as the central
spot. The calderas seem more like the
Valles caldera in New Mexico, which is associated
with vents that produced large quantities
of ash, than with those of Hawaiian-type shield
volcanic mountains.

There is evidence in many of the Voyager
photos of extensive surface flows on Io. These
originate in dark volcanic centers and either
spread to fan shapes, typically 100 kilometers
across, or else snake out in long, twisting tentacles.
Some of the flows are lighter than the
background and some are darker. Most are red
or orange in color, often outlined by fringes of
contrasting albedo.

The equatorial regions of Io are quite flat,
with no vertical relief greater than about 1 kilometer
high; indeed, many of the volcanic
centers do not appear to correspond to mountains
or domes at all. There are, however, a
number of long, curvilinear cliffs or scarps and
narrow, straight-walled valleys a few hundred
meters deep. These appear to be places in which
the crust has broken under tension, somewhat
similar to terrestrial faults and the valleys called
graben. A few rugged mountains of uncertain
origin are visible in low Sun elevation pictures.

Near the poles of Io the terrain is more irregular.
There are few volcanic centers, but
more mountains, some with heights of several
kilometers. In addition, there are regions that
appear to be made of stacked layers of material.
These so-called layered terrains are revealed
when erosion cuts into them, exposing
the layers along the cliff or scarp. The largest
such plateau or mesa has an area of about
100 000 square kilometers. The scarps sometimes
intersect each other, suggesting a complex
history of deposition, faulting, and erosion.
Voyager geologists believe that these scarps
may be areas in which the release of liquid sulfur
or sulfur dioxide has undercut cliffs, analogous
to internal sapping by groundwater at
similar scarps on Earth.

Perhaps the most distinctive surface features
on Io are the circular or oval albedo markings
that surround the great volcanoes. The first
of these to be seen was the 300-kilometer-wide
white donut of Prometheus, on the equator at
longitude 150°. Much more spectacular is the
hoofprint of Pele, about 700 by 1000 kilometers.
These symmetric rings mark the locations
of the kinds of eruptions that generate large
fountains or plumes, and may be produced by
condensible sulfur or sulfur dioxide raining
down from the volcanic fountain. At least one
new ring appeared during the four months between
the Voyager encounters, centered at
longitude 330°, latitude +20°, but by the time
Voyager 2 photographed this area, no plume remained
active.

During the Voyager 1 flyby, temperature
scans of the surface of Io were made with the
infrared interferometer spectrometer (IRIS). A
number of localized warm regions were found,
the most dramatic being just south of the volcano
Loki. Here the images showed a strange,
U-shaped black feature about 200 kilometers
across. The IRIS team interpreted its data to indicate
a temperature for the black feature of
17° C (or room temperature), in contrast to the
surrounding surface at -146° C. Perhaps the
dark feature was some sort of lava lake, either
of molten rock or molten sulfur. The melting
point of sulfur is 112° C. If there were a scum
of solidifying sulfur on top of the “lake,” this
interpretation might well be the correct one.

The brilliant reds and yellows of the surface
of Io immediately suggest the presence of
sulfur. When heated to different temperatures
and suddenly cooled, sulfur can assume many
colors, ranging from black through various
shades of red to its normal light-yellow
appearance.

Even before Voyager, laboratory studies
had shown that sulfur matches the overall properties
of the spectrum of Io, including the low
albedo in the ultraviolet and the high reflectivity
throughout the infrared. Contemporary
with the Voyager flybys, additional telescopic
observations and laboratory studies by Fraser
Fanale at JPL and Dale Cruikshank at the University
of Hawaii identified another component
on Io, sulfur dioxide. Sulfur dioxide is an acrid
gas released from terrestrial volcanoes, where it
combines with water in the Earth’s atmosphere

157

to produce sulfuric acid. At the temperature of
the surface of Io, sulfur dioxide is a white solid.
Researchers guessed that the extensive bright
white areas in the Voyager pictures of Io might
be covered with sulfur dioxide frost or snow.
The presence of this material on Io was confirmed
when the infrared IRIS instrument obtained
a spectrum of sulfur dioxide gas over the
erupting volcano Loki during the Voyager 1
encounter.

Close-ups of Io reveal a wide variety of volcanic phenomena. This Voyager 1 view of an equatorial region near longitude
300° shows several large surface flows that originate in volcanic craters or calderas. At the right edge is a light flow about 250
kilometers long. Another dark, lobate flow with bright edges is just left of center, with an exceedingly dark caldera to its left.
[260-468A]

The discovery of the ongoing eruptions on
Io, made shortly after the Voyager 1 flyby, did
much to clarify the confused evidence pouring
in concerning the apparent youth of Io’s surface.
Here, under the very eyes of Voyager,
eruptions were taking place on a scale that
dwarfed anything ever seen before. The discovery
picture alone, taken from a distance of 4
million kilometers, showed two eruptions (Pele
and Loki), each of which was much larger than
the most violent volcanic eruption ever recorded
on Earth.

Voyager 1 found eight giant eruptions,
with fountains or plumes rising to heights of
between 70 and 280 kilometers. To reach these
altitudes, the material must have been ejected
from the vents at speeds of between 300 and
1000 meters per second, several times greater
than the highest ejection velocities from terrestrial
volcanoes. Although widely spaced in
longitude, these volcanoes were concentrated
toward the equator; seven of the eight were at
latitudes between +30° and -30°, and the
eighth at -44°.

When Voyager 2 arrived four months
later, it was able to reobserve seven of the eight
volcanoes. (To be identified reliably, the volcanic
plumes must be silhouetted against dark
space at the edge of the disk.) Six of these
were still erupting; one, Pele, the largest plume
seen by Voyager 1, had ceased activity. The
plume associated with Loki had also changed
markedly, increasing in height from 100 to 210
kilometers in visible light. (All the plumes appear
larger when viewed in the ultraviolet.)
Loki had developed a more complex structure;
in March it appeared to originate near the south
end of a 250-kilometer-long dark feature, but in
July there was a double plume, with activity at
both ends of the dark feature.

158

Differences in surface elevation can clearly be seen in a few of the Io close-ups from Voyager 1. This remarkable picture is of
the center of the great volcano Pele, at latitude 15°S and longitude 224°. A low mountain with flow features can be seen. In
the background, there are several large irregular depressions with flat floors that appear to be the result of collapse. The
diffuse dark features in the center are probably the ejecta plumes being erupted from the Pele vent. [P-21220B/W]

159

At the highest resolution obtained by the Voyager cameras, Io revealed some landscapes that looked familiar to terrestrial
geologists. This picture, taken by Voyager 1 at a range of only 31 000 kilometers, shows a region about the size of the state of
Maryland at a resolution of 300 meters. Clearly seen is a volcano not too different from some of those on the Earth or Mars.
At the center is an irregular composite crater or caldera about 50 kilometers in diameter with dark flows radiating from its
rim. The style of volcanism illustrated here is quite different from the explosive plumes or fountains with their associated
rings of bright material deposited on the surface. This volcano is located at about longitude 330°, latitude 70°S. [260-502]

160

In addition to its giant volcanic plumes or fountains, Io possesses other indications of current volcanic activity. One of these
takes the form of intermittent blue-white patches that may be caused by gas venting from the interior. In this pair of
photographs, the same region of the surface is shown about six hours apart. On the right, there is an arcuate bright gas
cloud; on the left the same region is black. It is believed that the venting gas is sulfur dioxide, and that the condensation of
this gas produces fine particles of “snow” that look blue. [260-508]

Some of the most dramatic changes in the surface of Io between March and July took place in the vicinity of the volcano
Loki, at longitude 310° and latitude 15°N. On the left is a Voyager 1 view; on the right, one from Voyager 2. The “lava
lake” associated with Loki has become less distinct, apparently as a result of deposits that fell on the northern part of the
dark U-shaped feature. Perhaps the surface had also cooled between these photos. In the upper left center, a new dark
volcanic caldera with bright spots near it and a large, faint bright ring had appeared by July, although it was not active at the
time Voyager 2 flew by. [260-687AC]

161

No new eruptions were seen by Voyager 2;
between them, the two spacecraft effectively
surveyed the whole surface of Io for plumes
down to 40 kilometers height. Interestingly, the
smallest plume seen was 70 kilometers high;
there appeared to be a real absence of smaller
eruptions.

From the number and size of the observed
eruptions, it is possible to calculate the resurfacing
rate for Io due to these plumes. The
result is that each plume is erupting about
10 000 tons of material per second, or more
than 100 billion tons per year. This quantity
corresponds to about 10 meters of deposition
over the whole surface in a million years. When
additional note is taken of surface flows, the
deposition rate could easily be ten times higher,
or 100 meters per million years, in agreement
with the rate estimated from the absence of impact
craters.

Energy for the Io Volcanoes

Clearly, something extraordinary is happening
to Io to generate the observed level of
volcanism. The primary heat source for the
interiors of the terrestrial planets is the decay of
the long-lived radioactive elements thorium and
uranium. But Io would have to be supplied with
a hundred times its quota of these elements to
explain the observed activity.

A way out of this difficulty was provided
by a theoretical investigation carried out by
Stanton Peale of the University of California at
Santa Barbara and Pat Cassen and Ray Reynolds
at the NASA Ames Research Laboratory.
Working in the months before the first Voyager
flyby, they calculated that the tidal effects of
Jupiter on Io could generate large-scale heating
of the satellite. Io is about the same distance
from Jupiter as the Moon from Earth, but the
much greater mass of Jupiter raises enormous
tides in its satellite. These tides distort its shape,
but no other effect would be present if Io remained
at a constant distance from Jupiter.
What Peale, Cassen, and Reynolds realized was
that the distance of Io from Jupiter varies as the
result of small gravitational perturbations from
the other Galilean satellites. Therefore the tidal
distortions also vary, in effect squeezing and
unsqueezing Io each orbit. Such flexing pumps
energy into the interior of Io in the form of
heat; theorists calculated that the heat supplied
could be as high as 10¹³ watts. They predicted,
in a paper published just three days before the
Voyager flyby of Io, that “widespread and
recurrent surface volcanism might occur,” and
that “consequences of a largely molten interior
may be evident in pictures of Io’s surface
returned by Voyager.”

Voyager 2 obtained beautiful views of the volcanic
eruptions during its ten-hour Io volcano watch on July 9.
On the edge of the crescent image are the volcanoes
Amirani (P₅) and below it Maui (P₆), each sending up
fountains about 100 kilometers above the surface. The blue
color is probably the result of sunlight scattered by tiny
particles of sulfur dioxide snow condensing in the erupting
plume. [P-21780]

162

VOLCANIC ERUPTIONS ON IO

Plume Number
Name
Location (latitude/longitude)
Height During Voyager 1 Flyby (kilometers)
Activity During Voyager 2 Flyby

1
Pele
-20°/255°
280
ceased

2
Loki
+20°/300°
100
increased

3
Prometheus
-5°/155°
70
increased

4
Volund
+20°/175°
95
no data

5
Amirani
+25°/120°
80
similar

6
Maui
+20°/120°
80
similar

7
Marduk
-25°/210°
120
similar

8
Masubi
-40°/ 50°
70
similar

Between the two encounters, the volcanic eruption at Loki (P₂) changed character. The single plume emanating from the
western end of an apparent dark fissure seen in March was joined by a second fountain of similar size about 100 kilometers
to the east. The plume also increased in height, from about 120 kilometers in the Voyager 1 image (left) to 175 kilometers in
the Voyager 2 image (right). [260-662A and B]

163

The detailed structure near the volcano Loki is like nothing seen elsewhere on Io.  [260-642B]

When this Voyager 1 picture was
taken, the main eruptive activity (P₂) came from the lower left of the dark linear feature (perhaps a rift) in the center. Below
it is the “lava lake,” a U-shaped dark area about 200 kilometers across. In this specially processed image, detail can be seen
in the dark surface of this feature, possibly due to “icebergs” of solid sulfur in a liquid sulfur lake.

(Bottom) The IRIS on
Voyager 1 found this “lava lake” to be the hottest region on Io, with a temperature about 150° C higher than that of the
surrounding area.

164

One model for the structure of Io indicates that an ocean of liquid sulfur with a solid sulfur crust covers most of the satellite.
Heat escapes from the interior in the form of lava, which erupts beneath the sulfur ocean. Secondary eruptions in the sulfur
ocean heat liquid sulfur dioxide, which is mixed with solid sulfur in the crust. The rapid expansion of sulfur dioxide gas then
produces the great eruptive plumes, which consist of a mixture of solid sulfur, sulfur dioxide gas, and sulfur dioxide snow.

Solid sulfur + solid SO₂

Solid sulfur + liquid SO₂

Molten sulfur

Solid silicate

The Voyager observations appear to confirm
the theoretical calculations. The tidal heat
source has presumably been acting since Io was
formed more than 4 billion years ago. With a
totally molten interior and continuing large-scale
volcanism, Io has had an opportunity to
thoroughly sort out its composition. In the process
it would have lost all the volatile gases such
as water and carbon dioxide, explaining why Io
now has no appreciable atmosphere in spite of
the outpouring of material from the interior. In
addition, most of the sulfur from the interior
could have risen to the surface, where it would
be constantly recycled through volcanic activity.

The presence of large amounts of sulfur on
the surface may help explain the extraordinary
nature of the Io volcanoes. One model considered
for the satellite postulates that it is covered
by a sea of liquid sulfur several kilometers
deep, with a crust of solid sulfur and, below the
surface, liquid sulfur dioxide. Calculations by
Sue Kieffer of the U.S. Geological Survey and
others indicate that the expansion of the sulfur
dioxide in such a model can explain the observed
eruption velocities of up to a kilometer
per second.

The volcanic plumes on Io appear to be
made primarily of sulfur and sulfur dioxide.
Both are molten as they emerge from the vent,
but they quickly cool as the plume rises 100 or
more kilometers into the near vacuum of space.
Unlike terrestrial volcanoes, there is almost no
gas in the plumes. It requires about half an
hour for the fine particles of solidified sulfur
and sulfur dioxide snow to fall back to the surface,
where they form the colorful rings that
mark the major eruptive sites.

Almost all the roughly 100 000 tons of
material erupted each second by the Io volcanoes

165

snows back to the surface. But apparently
a part—perhaps 10 tons per second—escapes
from Io and is captured by the Jovian
magnetosphere. Another part contributes to an
ionosphere—a tenuous atmosphere of electrons
and ions—that surrounds Io. The injection of
several tons of particles each second into the
magnetosphere has dramatic consequences that
can be seen even from Earth.

Direct evidence of an atmosphere on Io was obtained during the Voyager 1 flyby by the IRIS. In the region near the volcano
Loki and its associated “lava lake,” infrared spectra clearly showed the signature of sulfur dioxide gas. It is not known
whether this gas was a temporary feature associated with the eruption of Loki or if it might be present on Io more generally.
Other evidence, however, points to the sulfur dioxide atmosphere as a transient feature. A small amount of the sulfur dioxide
escapes and is broken apart by sunlight to provide the oxygen and sulfur ions observed in the Io torus.

Sulfur dioxide gas cloud

Plume

-235° F

Hot surface areas (45° F)

The Io Torus

Surrounding Jupiter at the distance of Io is
a donut-shaped volume, or torus, of plasma
that originates at the satellite. At first, the
atoms escaping from Io expand outward as a
gas, but soon they are stripped of electrons and
become electrically charged. Some of these
gases, such as sulfur dioxide, apparently originate
in the large volcanic eruptions; other, such
as the sodium cloud being studied with Earth-based
telescopes, result from sputtering of surface
materials by energetic particles in the
magnetosphere. After they are ionized by the
loss of one or more electrons, the atoms are
caught by the spinning magnetic field of Jupiter
and become a part of what is called a co-rotating
plasma, spinning at 74 kilometers per
second with the same ten-hour period as Jupiter
itself.

The Io torus was easily detected on
Voyager by the ultraviolet spectrometer, even
from a distance of 150 million kilometers. The
strongest ultraviolet radiation comes from
twice-ionized sulfur (atoms that have lost two
electrons) (S III), emitting a wavelength of 69
nanometers or about one-eighth the wavelength
of visible light. The spectrometer also detected
glows from atoms of triply ionized sulfur (S IV)
and twice-ionized oxygen (O III).

166

At the time of the Voyager 1 encounter, the most abundant
heavy ions in the Jovian magnetosphere were sulfur and
oxygen. Multiply ionized sulfur and oxygen both emit
strongly in the ultraviolet, where they could be observed by
the ultraviolet spectrometer. This spectrum of the Io torus
registers the tremendous amount of ultraviolet energy
(about a million million watts) being radiated. To emit so
strongly, the temperatures in the torus must be near
100 000 K.

Direct measurement of the heavy ions associated with the Io
torus were made by the Voyager 1 LECP instrument. Here
the amounts of various elements are shown for two cases:
the Jovian inner magnetosphere (solid line) and a typical
solar event. Both the Jovian and the solar particles have
been scaled to show similar amounts of oxygen, but the
solar particles are also rich in carbon and iron, whereas
Jupiter has a great deal of sulfur. Evidence such as this
demonstrates that the sulfur does not come from the Sun;
rather, the sulfur and most of the oxygen appear to be the
product of the Io sulfur dioxide volcanic eruptions.

Scans across the torus showed that it had a
thickness of 1.0 R
J
and was centered at a
distance of 5.9 R
J
from Jupiter. The torus is
centered on the magnetic, rather than the rotational,
equator of the planet. To produce the
intense glow observed, the electron temperatures
in the torus must be 100 000 K, with an
electron density of about 1000 per cubic centimeter.
The brightness in the ultraviolet corresponds
to a radiated power of more than a
million million (10¹²) watts. This enormous
amount of energy must be continuously supplied
by the magnetosphere.

The ultraviolet emissions from the Io torus
seen by Voyager were dramatically different
from those seen in 1973 and 1974 with the
simpler ultraviolet instrument on board Pioneers
10 and 11. These changes correspond to
more than a factor of 10 in brightness. As noted
by the Voyager Team, “Because of the remarkable
differences we conclude that the Jupiter-Io
environment has changed significantly since
December 1973. The observed differences are
so spectacularly large that this conclusion does
not depend on a detailed comparison of the two
instruments, their calibrations, or the observing
geometry.” The reason for this change, or the
degree to which it reflects a large-scale variation
in the volcanic activity of Io, is one of the
major questions arising from the Voyager mission.

The Io torus can also be observed from the
ground. In 1976, spectra showed the glow of
singly ionized sulfur (S II), and in 1979 singly
ionized oxygen (O II) was detected. The observations
of S II and O II are particularly interesting
because they provide a measure of the
density and temperature of the plasma. In April
1979, between the two Voyager flybys, Carl
Pilcher of the University of Hawaii succeeded
in obtaining a telescopic image of the torus in
the light of S II. He measured nearly the same
ring diameter (5.3-5.7 R
J
) as had Voyager; interestingly,

167

both agree that the sulfur torus is
centered slightly inside the orbit of Io (6.0 R
J
).

The emission of light from sulfur ions in the Io torus is so
strong it can be measured from the Earth. In these pictures,
University of Hawaii astronomer Carl Pilcher photographed
the torus in the light of ionized sulfur on the night
of April 9, 1979. As the planet rotates, the torus is seen first
partly opened, then edge-on, and again opened in the opposite
direction. The dark band on the right of each image is
due to light from Jupiter scattered in the telescope, as
shown in the bottom picture, which contains the scattered
light only.

Direct measurements of the torus were
made from Voyager 1 as the spacecraft passed
twice through this region, once inbound and
once outbound. The low energy charged particle
instrument and the cosmic ray instrument
both determined that the composition of the
ions in the Io torus was primarily sulfur and
oxygen. Ionized sodium was also observed. For
several years, ground-based telescope observations
had revealed a cloud of neutral sodium
around Io; the Voyager instruments picked up
these atoms after they had each lost an electron
and become trapped in the magnetosphere.
These instruments also derived the electron and
ion density (about 1000 per cubic centimeter)
and confirmed that the ions were co-rotating
with the inner magnetosphere.

Another Io-associated phenomenon
searched for by Voyager was the Io flux tube.
As a conductor moving through the Jovian
magnetic field, Io generates an electric current,
estimated to have a strength of about 10 million
(10⁷) amperes and a power of the order of a
million million (10¹²) watts. The region of
space through which this current flows from the
satellite to Jupiter is called the flux tube.

Voyager 1 was targeted to fly through the
Io flux tube. This was an important decision,
since this option precluded the possibility of obtaining
occultations by either Io or Ganymede.
The event was to take place on March 5, just
after closest approach to Io. The effects of the
flux tube were clearly observed by the magnetometer,
the LECP instrument, and other particle
and field instruments; however, subsequent
analysis indicated that the spacecraft had not
penetrated the region of maximum current
flow; it probably missed the center of the flux
tube between 5000 and 10 000 kilometers.

The flux tube is not the only connection
between Io and Jupiter. Radio emissions from
the atmosphere are triggered by Io’s orbital
position, and the aurorae that illuminate
Jupiter’s polar regions are the result of charged
particles falling into the planet from the Io
torus. Other charged particles can occasionally
escape outward and be detected as far away as
Earth.

Io is unquestionably a remarkable world.
The only planetary body known to be geologically
more active than the Earth, it provides
many extreme examples to test the theories of
geoscientists. Its intimate interconnections with
the Jovian magnetosphere and the planet itself
provide a unifying theme to the complex processes
taking place in the inner parts of the Jovian
system.

168

The Galileo Probe will make a fiery entry into the Jovian atmosphere, carrying a payload of scientific instruments for the
first direct sampling of the atmosphere of a giant planet. Shown here is the moment, at a pressure level of about 0.1 bar,
when the parachute is deployed and the still-glowing heatshield drops free from the Probe.

169

CHAPTER 10

RETURN TO JUPITER

A Successor to Voyager

The spectacular discoveries of the Voyagers
did not exhaust our interest in the Jovian
system. Both the giant planet and its system of
satellites will almost certainly play a central role
in any future program of solar system exploration
and research. Thus, even as the two Voyager
spacecraft directed their attention further
outward toward Saturn, NASA had begun development
of the next Jupiter mission, named
Galileo.

Galileo is an ambitious, multiple-vehicle
planetary mission. It has two major interlocking
elements: a probe to be placed in the atmosphere
of Jupiter and an orbiter to explore
Jupiter, its satellites, and its magnetosphere. By
using individual satellite flybys to alter its orbit,
the Galileo spacecraft can carry out a satellite
“tour” consisting of flybys of the Galilean
satellites at different geometries and a deep
penetration into the magnetosphere in the unexplored
region of space behind Jupiter.

Both an atmospheric probe for the planet
and a long-lived orbiter to study the satellites
and magnetosphere are logical successors to
Voyager. In 1974, three years before Voyager
launch, the Space Science Board of the National
Academy of Sciences was already emphasizing
the scientific advantages of both of these
approaches. In suggesting goals for 1975-1985,
the Board wrote, “We recommend that a significant
effort in the NASA planetary program
over the next decade be devoted toward the
outer solar system. Jupiter is the primary object
of outer solar system exploration.” Looking at
specific mission goals, the Board recommended
that “the primary objectives in the exploration
of Jupiter and its satellites for the period
1975-1985 in order of importance are (1) determination
of the chemical composition and
physical state of its atmosphere, (2) the chemical
composition and physical state of the
satellites, and (3) the topology and behavior of
the magnetic field and the energetic particle
fluxes. In order to carry out this program, it
will be necessary to utilize orbiting spacecraft
and probe-delivering spacecraft.”

In the same period NASA carried out
studies of two possible orbiter and probe missions.
Working through the Ames Research
Center, a scientific panel chaired by James Van
Allen explored the adaptation of the Pioneer 10
and 11 spinning spacecraft to carry a probe to
Jupiter and to carry out an orbiter mission
emphasizing magnetospheric studies. William
B. Hubbard of the University of Arizona
chaired a JPL-based panel investigating the use
of a Mariner-class fully stabilized spacecraft
similar to Voyager to carry out a satellite-oriented
orbiter mission. In 1976 these concepts
were combined in a study, again chaired by Dr.
Van Allen, of a Voyager-type orbiter with
probe-carrying capability. This mission concept
was given the name JOP, for Jupiter Orbiter
Probe, and lead responsibility was assigned by
NASA to JPL, with Ames carrying out the
design of the probe.

In 1977, as Voyager activity was building
toward autumn launch, a struggle was underway

170

in Washington to obtain approval for the
new Jupiter orbiter and probe mission. Budgeting
authority was requested in the President’s
Fiscal Year 1978 budget, but only after extensive
testimony and several Congressional votes
was the mission approved. The official new
start for JOP, soon to be renamed Galileo, was
set for July 1, 1977, and the scientific investigators
and their instruments were selected in
August.

At JPL, many members of the Voyager
Team made a smooth transition to the Galileo
Project. Much of the knowledge that had gone
into the design of the Voyager spacecraft and
its subsystems was now incorporated into
Galileo. Similarly, at Ames the knowledge
gained from the design of the Pioneer Venus
probes, which were launched to Venus in 1978,
a year after Voyager launch, was applied to
design of a Jupiter probe. Among the individuals
who brought their Voyager experience
to Galileo were John Casani, who left the position
of Voyager Project Manager to become
Galileo Project Manager, and Torrence
Johnson of the Voyager Imaging Team, who
became Galileo Project Scientist.

The Scientific Capability of Galileo

The investigations of Jupiter and its system
planned for the Galileo Project represented
substantial advances over those carried out by
Voyager. In part, this was the result of new
spacecraft capabilities, particularly the atmospheric
entry probe. It also represented
increasing sophistication in scientific instrumentation
over the seven-year interval between
the selection of the payloads for the two missions.

The main emphasis in the study of Jupiter
itself is on direct measurements with the Probe.
For the first time it will be possible to examine
directly the atmosphere of a giant planet. By
measuring the temperature and pressure as it
descends through the clouds, the Probe can
determine the structure of the atmosphere with
much higher precision than could ever be obtained
from remote observations. The structure,
in turn, provides information on
dynamics—the circulation and heat balance of
the Jovian atmosphere. In addition, the Probe
can make direct measurements of the composition
of the gases, with sensitivity in some cases
to quantities as low as a few parts per billion. In
addition to the elemental abundance, the
amount of different isotopes can also be
measured.

Direct studies of the clouds of Jupiter can
be made from the Galileo Probe. With a device
called a nephelometer (literally, cloud-meter),
the sizes and compositions of individual aerosol
particles will be determined. An infrared instrument
will determine the temperatures of the
cloud layers and measure the amounts of sunlight
deposited in different regions of the atmosphere.
Another instrument will search for
lightning; it has the ability to detect both the
flash of light and the radio static generated by
each bolt.

Additional studies of the atmosphere,
similar to those of Voyager, can be carried out
from the Galileo Orbiter. Television pictures,
ultraviolet and infrared spectra, and measurements
of the polarization of reflected light will
all be obtained with the same scan platform instruments
that are used to study the surfaces of
the satellites.

A full battery of fields and particles instruments
is planned for the Galileo Orbiter.
Many of these are direct descendants of
Voyager instruments. In general, their
capabilities have been improved, particularly
their ability to determine the composition of
charged particles. There is a steady progression
from Pioneer to Voyager to Galileo: The early
measurements were concentrated on particle
energies, but more sophisticated instruments
yield the composition of the ions and the details
of their motion.

Many of the advances expected from Galileo
in magnetospheric studies result from the
Orbiter’s ability to explore many parts of the
environment of Jupiter. The Pioneer and
Voyager spacecraft made single cuts through
the magnetosphere, and often it was difficult to
distinguish temporal from spatial effects.
Galileo will repeatedly swing around Jupiter,
sampling conditions at many distances from the
planet over a time span of two years or more. In
addition, it is planned to adjust the orbit of
Galileo to swing out into the magnetotail, the
turbulent region of the magnetosphere that
stretches “downwind” from Jupiter for hundreds
of Jupiter radii. No flybys can reach the
magnetotail; an orbiting spacecraft is required.

The Galilean satellites naturally will be a
primary focus of Galileo science, particularly
after Voyager. It is planned to have as many as
a dozen individual encounters, most of them at
much closer range than the Voyager flybys. To
take advantage of these opportunities, the

171

Galileo scan platform will carry two new
remote sensing systems.

The Orbiter section of the Galileo spacecraft will carry both remote sensing and direct measuring instruments for the study of
Jupiter, its satellites, and its magnetosphere. Several remote sensing instruments—an imagery system, a near infrared
mapping spectrometer, an ultraviolet spectrometer, and a photopolarimeter/radiometer—will be mounted on a scan
platform. The particles and fields instruments will be on a spinning section of the spacecraft. The Orbiter is expected to
operate for at least two years around Jupiter, providing one close flyby of Io and several each of Europa, Ganymede, and
Callisto. [P-20772]

Instead of the vidicon television camera on
Voyager, Galileo imaging will be done with a
new solid-state detector called a charged coupled
device (CCD). The CCD has a wider spectral
response and greater photometric accuracy.
In addition, its increased sensitivity permits
shorter exposures, so that even on very close
flybys the pictures will not be blurred by
spacecraft motion. Substantial coverage at a
resolution of 100 meters should be possible,
compared to Voyager’s best resolution of 1
kilometer for Io and 4 kilometers for Europa.

172

Galileo will be launched by the Space Shuttle, the central element of the new NASA Space Transportation System. Together
with its upper stage launch rocket, Galileo will be placed into Earth’s orbit in the large Shuttle bay, about 20 meters long and
5 meters in diameter. After releasing Galileo, the Shuttle will be piloted back to a landing at Cape Canaveral, to be used
again for many future flights. [5-78-23599]

The Space Shuttle and the Inertial Upper Stage of Galileo as they will appear in Earth orbit. The upper stage has been
released from the Shuttle bay and is being prepared for launch to Jupiter.

173

To determine the composition of satellite
surface materials, Galileo will also carry a near-infrared
mapping spectrometer (NIMS). This
instrument will obtain measurements over the
visible and infrared spectra of areas as small as 10
kilometers across. With NIMS, it should be possible
to investigate the composition of individual
features as small as the volcanic calderas on Io
or the ejecta blankets of Ganymede’s craters.

Galileo Mission Design

The Galileo Orbiter and Probe are to be
launched with NASA’s new Space Shuttle and
Inertial Upper Stage. To carry the maximum
possible payload to Jupiter, a close flyby of
Mars is planned en route. The gravitational
field of Mars will give a boost to Galileo, just as
that of Jupiter was used by Voyager to swing on
to Saturn.

The exact launch date and trajectory for
Galileo have not yet been specified, but if all
goes well, the Orbiter spacecraft will approach
Jupiter from the dawn side of the planet sometime
in the mid-1980s. It will not be moving as
fast as Voyager, since it must be placed into
orbit around Jupiter rather than flashing past
on its way to the outer solar system. On its initial
trajectory, Galileo will probably come within
5 R
J
of Jupiter, slightly closer than Voyager
1. At this time it will fire its rocket engines (supplied
by the Federal Republic of Germany in a
cooperative program with NASA) to shed excess
speed and let itself be captured by Jupiter’s
gravity. The first pass will also be the time for a
close flyby of Io.

The most critical period of the Galileo flight will be the Probe entry at Jupiter. The Probe must strike the atmosphere at
precisely the correct angle and speed to be slowed down without being destroyed. At a pressure level of about 0.1 bar the
rapid deceleration period ends and the heat shield is released. A parachute is deployed to slow the descent further, and the
Probe then has a period of nearly an hour to study the atmosphere and clouds of Jupiter. The Probe mission ends when its
batteries run down or when it is crushed by the pressure of the Jovian atmosphere near the 20-bar level, whichever comes
first. [SL78-545(3)]

174

GALILEO PROBE SCIENCE INVESTIGATIONS

Probe Scientist: L. Collin, NASA Ames

Investigation
Principal Investigator
Primary Objectives

Atmospheric structure
A. Seiff, NASA Ames
Measure temperature, density, pressure, and molecular weight to determine the structure of Jupiter’s atmosphere.

Neutral mass spectrometer
H. B. Neimann, NASA Goddard
Measure the composition of the gases in Jupiter’s atmosphere and the variations at different levels in the atmosphere.

Helium abundance interferometer
U. von Zahn, Bonn U. (Germany)
Measure with high accuracy the ratio of hydrogen to helium in Jupiter’s atmosphere.

Nephelometer
B. Ragent, NASA Ames
Determine the sizes of cloud particles and the location of cloud layers in Jupiter’s atmosphere.

Net flux radiometer
R. W. Boese, NASA Ames
Measure energy being radiated from Jupiter and the Sun, at different levels in Jupiter’s atmosphere.

Lightning and radio emission
L. J. Lanzerotti, Bell Labs
Measure lightning flashes in Jupiter’s atmosphere, from the light and radio transmissions from those flashes.

Energetic particles
H. M. Fischer, U. Kiel (Germany)
Measure energetic electrons and protons in the inner regions of the Jovian radiation belts and determine their spatial distributions.

Because of the intense radiation environment,
the Galileo Orbiter will not be able to
spend much time in the inner magnetosphere,
near the orbit of Io. To do so would risk
damage to the spacecraft electronics and a
premature end to the mission. Additional
thruster firing during the first orbit can be used
to raise the periapse to 10 R
J
or greater. No
more close passes by Io will be possible, but
studies of this satellite can be made on each
subsequent orbit with imaging resolutions of
about 10 kilometers, sufficient to see details of
the volcanic eruptions and monitor volcano-associated
changes in the surface.

At each subsequent orbit, Galileo will be
programmed for a close flyby of one of the
other satellites. Several passes each of Callisto,
Ganymede, and Europa should be possible.
The satellite tour does not need to be fully
planned in advance; by adjusting the spacecraft
trajectory with small bursts of the thruster
motors, navigation engineers can modify the
orbit to permit adaptation to scientific needs.
As the Orbiter mission progresses, the spacecraft
will also sample many parts of the magnetosphere,
including one long excursion, at least
150 R
J
, into the magnetotail.

The total duration of the Orbiter mission is
planned to be at least 20 months. Additions to
the basic mission are possible if the spacecraft
remains healthy and fuel reserves are adequate.
In contrast, the Galileo Probe mission lasts
only a few hours.

As the Probe approaches the atmosphere
of Jupiter at the awesome speed of 26 kilometers
per second, it will be traversing a region
of space never before explored. An energetic
particle detector will investigate the innermost
magnetosphere before the entry begins. Then,
within a period of just a few minutes, friction
with the upper atmosphere must dissipate the
Probe energy until it is falling gently in the
Jovian air.

Jupiter, being the largest planet, presents
the most challenging atmospheric entry mission
ever undertaken by NASA. The design of the
Galileo Probe calls for a massive heat shield to
protect the instruments during the high-speed
entry phase. After the Probe has slowed to subsonic
velocities, a parachute will be deployed,
and the heat shield, having done its job, will be
dropped free.

175

GALILEO ORBITER SCIENCE INVESTIGATIONS

Project Scientist: T. V. Johnson, JPL

Investigation
Principal Investigator
Primary Objectives

Solid state imaging
M. J. S. Belton, Kitt Peak Observatory (Team Leader)
Provide images of Jupiter’s atmosphere and its satellites; study atmospheric structure and dynamics on Jupiter; investigate the composition and geology of the satellite surfaces; study the active volcanic processes on Io.

Ultraviolet spectrometer
C. W. Hord, U. Colorado
Study composition and structure of the upper atmospheres of Jupiter and its satellites.

Near-infrared mapping spectrometer (NIMS)
R. W. Carlson, JPL
Provide spectral images and reflected sunlight spectra of Jupiter’s satellites, indicating the composition of their surfaces; measure reflected sunlight and thermal emission from Jupiter’s atmosphere to study composition, cloud structure, and temperature profiles; monitor hot spots on Io.

Photopolarimeter/radiometer
J. E. Hansen, NASA Goddard
Measure temperature profiles and energy balance of Jupiter’s atmosphere; measure Jupiter’s cloud characteristics and composition.

Magnetometer
M. G. Kivelson, UC Los Angeles
Measure magnetic fields and the ways they change near Jupiter and its satellites; measure variations caused by the satellites interacting with Jupiter’s field.

Plasma particles
L. A. Frank, U. Iowa
Provide information on low-energy particles and clouds of ionized gas in the magnetosphere.

Energetic particles
D. J. Williams, NOAA Space Environment Lab
Measure composition, distribution, and energy spectra of high-energy particles trapped in Jupiter’s magnetosphere.

Plasma waves
D. A. Gurnett, U. Iowa
Investigate waves generated inside Jupiter’s magnetosphere and waves radiated by possible lightning discharges in the atmosphere.

Dust detection
E. Grün, Max-Planck-Institut (Germany)
Determine size, speed, and charge of small particles such as micrometeorites near Jupiter and its satellites.

Celestial mechanics
J. D. Anderson, JPL (Team Leader)
Use the tracking data to measure the gravity fields of Jupiter and its satellites; search for gravity waves propagating through interstellar space.

Radio propagation
H. T. Howard, Stanford U. (Team Leader)
Use radio signals from the Orbiter and Probe to study the structure of the atmospheres and ionospheres of Jupiter and its satellites.

Interdisciplinary Scientists:
F. P. Fanale (JPL), P. J. Gierasch (Cornell U.), D. M. Hunten (U. Arizona), H. Masursky (U.S. Geological Survey), M. B. McElroy (Harvard U.), D. Morrison (U. Hawaii), G. S. Orton (JPL), T. Owen (SU New York), J. B. Pollack (NASA Ames), C. T. Russell (UC Los Angeles), C. Sagan (Cornell U.), F. L. Scarf (TRW), G. Schubert (UC Los Angeles), C. P. Sonett (U. Arizona), J. A. Van Allen (U. Iowa).

176

The Probe will spend nearly an hour descending
from a pressure level of about 0.1 bar,
where the heat shield is jettisoned, to a depth of
10-20 bars. During this time it will make most
of its scientific measurements, relaying them
back to Earth via the Probe carrier. Designers
expect the Probe to sink through regions of ammonia
clouds, ammonium hydrosulfide clouds,
and ice and water clouds during this hour.

By the time it has descended below the
water clouds, the increasing pressure will exceed
the strength of some Probe components.
Engineers expect the Probe to have completed
its mission, exhausted its battery power, and
been crushed by the atmospheric pressure
before the 20-bar level is reached. Lifeless, it
will then sink on into the thick, hot lower atmosphere
of Jupiter.

During its two years in orbit, the Galileo Orbiter will carry out many investigations of the planet, the Galilean satellites, and
the Jovian magnetosphere. Repeated close flybys of the satellites are used to modify and shape the orbit to provide additional
flybys at an optimum viewing geometry. Initially, the orbit is a long loop that extends in the general direction of the
sunset side of Jupiter. The orbit is then contracted, and the encounters with the satellites rotate it behind the planet for a long
excursion into the magnetotail late in the tour.

Beyond Galileo

After Galileo, the future cannot be
predicted. Perhaps there will no longer be a
program of planetary exploration. But if
humanity still has the vision to seek a future in
the stars, there will surely be other Jupiter missions.

Perhaps the next mission will concentrate
on Jupiter itself. Probes could be built to withstand
pressures as high as several hundred bars,
feeling their way deep into the murky depths of
the planet. Or a hot-air balloon could be deployed
from a probe to carry instruments for
long-term studies of the atmosphere. A number
of proposals have also been made for additional
satellite missions, including orbiters or
landers for Ganymede and Callisto. Or perhaps
it will be desirable to land a vehicle on one of
the satellites and collect a sample and return it
to Earth for laboratory analysis.

Whatever the future holds, it is clear that
the Pioneer and Voyager missions blazed the
path to Jupiter and beyond. The little Pioneers
proved that it could be done, and the Voyagers
expanded their vision, exploring and discovering
new worlds more remarkable and exciting
than anyone could have imagined.

177

APPENDIX A

PICTORIAL MAPS OF THE GALILEAN SATELLITES

These maps were prepared for the Voyager Imaging Team by the U.S. Geological
Survey in cooperation with the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of
Technology and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Copies are
available from Branch of Distribution, U.S. Geological Survey, 1200 South Eads
Street, Arlington, VA 22202, and Branch of Distribution, U.S. Geological Survey,
Box 25286, Federal Center, Denver, CO 80225.

178

Preliminary Pictorial Map of Callisto

Atlas of Callisto

1:25,000,000 Topographic Series

Jc 25M 2RMN, 1979

I-1239

This map was compiled from Voyager 1 and 2 pictures of Callisto. Placement of
features is based on predicted spacecraft trajectory data and is highly approximate.
The linkage between Voyager 1 and Voyager 2 pictures is particularly tenuous.
Placement errors as large as 10° are probably common throughout the map, and a
few may be even larger. Feature names were approved by the International Astronomical
Union in 1979. Airbrush representation is by P. M. Bridges.

Jc 25M 2RMN: Abbreviation for (Jupiter) Callisto, 1:25,000,000 series, second
edition, shaded relief map, R, with surface markings, M, and
feature names, N.

179

North polar region; South polar region

Scale 1:13 980 000 at 56° latitude

Polar stereographic projection

180

Callisto

Scale 1:25 000 000 at 0° latitude

Mercator projection

182

Preliminary Pictorial Map of Ganymede

Atlas of Ganymede

1:25,000,000 Topographic Series

Jg 25M 2RMN, 1979

I-1242

This map was compiled from Voyager 1 and 2 pictures of Ganymede. Placement of
features is based on predicted spacecraft trajectory data and is highly approximate.
The linkage between Voyager 1 and Voyager 2 pictures is particularly tenuous.
Placement errors as large as 10° are probably common throughout the map, and a
few may be even larger. A large unresolved discrepancy exists in the area bounded
by the -45° and -55° parallels between 120° and 180° longitude. Relative placement
of features is distorted in that area. Feature names were approved by the International
Astronomical Union in 1979. Airbrush representation is by J. L. Inge.

Jg 25M 2RMN: Abbreviation for (Jupiter) Ganymede, 1:25,000,000 series, second
edition, shaded relief map, R, with surface markings, M, and
feature names, N.

183

North polar region; South polar region

Scale 1:13 980 000 at 56° latitude

Polar stereographic projection

184

Ganymede

Scale 1:25 000 000 at 0° latitude

Mercator projection

186

Preliminary Pictorial Map of Europa

Atlas of Europa

1:25,000,000 Topographic Series

Je 25M 2RMN, 1979

I-1241

This map was compiled from Voyager 1 and 2 pictures of Europa. Placement of
features is based on predicted spacecraft trajectory data and is highly approximate.
Feature names were approved by the International Astronomical Union in 1979.
Airbrush representation is by J. L. Inge.

Je 25M 2RMN: Abbreviation for (Jupiter) Europa, 1:25,000,000 series, second
edition, shaded relief map, R, with surface markings, M, and
feature names, N.

187

North polar region; South polar region

Scale 1:13 980 000 at 56° latitude

Polar stereographic projection

188

Europa

Scale 1:25 000 000 at 0° latitude

Mercator projection

190

Preliminary Pictorial Map of Io

Atlas of Io

1:25,000,000 Topographic Series

Ji 25M 2RMN, 1979

I-1240

This map was compiled from Voyager 1 and 2 pictures of Io. Placement of features
is based on preliminary control information provided by M. E. Davies of the Rand
Corporation, Santa Monica, California, and is probably accurate within 50 to 100
km. Feature names were approved by the International Astronomical Union in
1979. Airbrush representation is by P. M. Bridges.

Ji 25M 2RMN: Abbreviation for (Jupiter) Io, 1:25,000,000 series, second edition,
shaded relief map, R, with surface markings, M, and feature
names, N.

191

North polar region; South polar region

Scale 1:13 980 000 at 56° latitude

Polar stereographic projection

192

Io

Scale 1:25 000 000 at 0° latitude

Mercator projection

195

APPENDIX B

VOYAGER SCIENCE TEAMS

Imaging Science

Bradford A. Smith, University of Arizona, Team Leader

Geoffrey A. Briggs, NASA Headquarters

A. F. Cook, Smithsonian Institution

G. E. Danielson, Jr., California Institute of Technology

Merton Davies, Rand Corp.

G. E. Hunt, University College, London

Tobias Owen, State University of New York

Carl Sagan, Cornell University

Lawrence Soderblom, U.S. Geological Survey

V. E. Suomi, University of Wisconsin

Harold Masursky, U.S. Geological Survey

Radio Science

Von R. Eshleman, Stanford University, Team Leader

J. D. Anderson, Jet Propulsion Laboratory

T. A. Croft, Stanford Research Institute

Gunnar Lindal, Jet Propulsion Laboratory

G. S. Levy, Jet Propulsion Laboratory

G. L. Tyler, Stanford University

G. E. Wood, Jet Propulsion Laboratory

Plasma Wave

Frederick L. Scarf, TRW Systems, Principal Investigator

D. A. Gurnett, University of Iowa

Infrared Spectroscopy and Radiometry

Rudolph A. Hanel, Goddard Space Flight Center, Principal Investigator

B. J. Conrath, Goddard Space Flight Center

P. Gierasch, Cornell University

V. Kunde, Goddard Space Flight Center

P. D. Lowman, Goddard Space Flight Center

W. Maguire, Goddard Space Flight Center

J. Pearl, Goddard Space Flight Center

J. Pirraglia, Goddard Space Flight Center

R. Samuelson, Goddard Space Flight Center

Cyril Ponnamperuma, University of Maryland

D. Gautier, Meudon, France

S. Kuman, University of Southern California

Ultraviolet Spectroscopy

A. Lyle Broadfoot, Kitt Peak National Observatory, Principal Investigator

J. L. Bertaux, Service d’Aeronomie du CNRS, France

J. Blamont, Service d’Aeronomie du CNRS, France

T. M. Donahue, University of Michigan

R. M. Goody, Harvard University

A. Dalgarno, Harvard College Observatory

Michael B. McElroy, Harvard University

J. C. McConnell, York University, Canada

H. W. Moos, Johns Hopkins University

M. J. S. Belton, Kitt Peak National Observatory

D. F. Strobel, Naval Research Laboratory

Sushil Atreya, University of Michigan

William R. Sandel, University of Southern California

Donald Shemanski, University of Southern California

Photopolarimetry

Charles W. Hord, University of Colorado, Acting Principal Investigator

196

D. L. Coffeen, Goddard Institute for Space Studies

J. E. Hansen, Goddard Institute for Space Studies

K. Pang, Science Applications Inc.

Planetary Radio Astronomy

James W. Warwick, University of Colorado, Principal Investigator

Anthony Riddle, Radiophysics, Inc.

Jeffrey Pearce, Radiophysics, Inc.

J. K. Alexander, Goddard Space Flight Center

A. Boischot, Observatoire de Paris, France

W. E. Brown, Jet Propulsion Laboratory

T. D. Carr, University of Florida

Samuel Gulkis, Jet Propulsion Laboratory

F. T. Haddock, University of Michigan

C. C. Harvey, Observatoire de Paris, France

Y. LeBlanc, Observatoire de Paris, France

R. G. Peltzer, University of Colorado

R. J. Phillips, Jet Propulsion Laboratory

D. H. Staelin, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Magnetic Fields

Norman F. Ness, Goddard Space Flight Center, Principal Investigator

Mario H. Acuna, Goddard Space Flight Center

K. W. Behannon, Goddard Space Flight Center

L. F. Burlaga, Goddard Space Flight Center

R. P. Lepping, Goddard Space Flight Center

F. M. Neubauer, Technische Universitat, F.R.G.

Plasma Science

Herbert S. Bridge, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Principal Investigator

J. W. Belcher, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

J. H. Binsack, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

A. J. Lazarus, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

S. Olbert, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

V. M. Vasyliunas, Max Planck Institute, F.R.G.

L. F. Burlaga, Goddard Space Flight Center

R. E. Hartle, Goddard Space Flight Center

K. W. Ogilvie, Goddard Space Flight Center

G. L. Siscoe, University of California, Los Angeles

A. J. Hundhausen, High Altitude Observatory

Low-Energy Charged Particles

S. M. Krimigis, Johns Hopkins University, Principal Investigator

T. P. Armstrong, University of Kansas

W. I. Axford, Max Planck Institute, F.R.G.

C. O. Bostrom, Johns Hopkins University

C. Y. Fan, University of Arizona

G. Gloeckler, University of Maryland

L. J. Lanzerotti, Bell Telephone Laboratories

Cosmic Ray

R. E. Vogt, California Institute of Technology, Principal Investigator

J. R. Jokipii, University of Arizona

E. C. Stone, California Institute of Technology

F. B. McDonald, Goddard Space Flight Center

B. J. Teegarden, Goddard Space Flight Center

James H. Trainor, Goddard Space Flight Center

W. R. Webber, University of New Hampshire

197

APPENDIX C

VOYAGER MANAGEMENT TEAM

NASA Office of Space Science

Thomas A. Mutch, Associate Administrator for Space Science

Andrew J. Stofan, Deputy Associate Administrator

Adrienne F. Timothy, Assistant Associate Administrator

Angelo Guastaferro, Director, Planetary Division

Rodney A. Mills, Program Manager

Milton A. Mitz, Program Scientist

Walter Jakobowski, Viking and Flight Support Manager

NASA Office of Space Tracking and Data Systems

William Schneider, Associate Administrator of Space Tracking and Data Systems Acquisition

Charles A. Taylor, Director, Network Operations and Communication Programs

Frederick B. Bryant, Director, Network System Development Programs

Maurice E. Binkley, Director, DSN Systems

NASA Office of Space Transportation Systems

John F. Yardley, Associate Administrator for Space Transportation Systems

Joseph B. Mahon, Director, Expendable Launch Vehicles

Joseph E. McGolrick, Chief, Small and Medium Launch Vehicles

B. C. Lam, Titan III Manager

Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California

Bruce C. Murray, Laboratory Director

Gen. Charles H. Terhune, Jr., Deputy Laboratory Director

Robert J. Parks, Assistant Laboratory Director for Flight Projects

Raymond L. Heacock, Project Manager

Esker K. Davis, Deputy Project Manager

Peter T. Lyman, Deputy Project Manager

Richard P. Laeser, Mission Director

George P. Textor, Deputy Mission Director

Charles E. Kohlhase, Mission Planning Office Manager

James E. Long, Science Directorate Manager

Charles H. Stembridge, Deputy

Arthur L. Lane, Assistant Project Scientist for Jupiter

Francis M. Sturms, Sequence Design and Integration Directorate Manager

Robert K. Wilson, Deputy

Michael J. Sander, Development, Integration and Test Directorate Manager

Robert G. Polansky, Deputy

Michael W. Devirian, Space Flight Operations Directorate Manager

Raymond J. Amorose, Deputy

Marvin R. Traxler, Tracking and Data System Manager

Kurt Heftman, Mission Control and Computing Center Manager

California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California

Edward C. Stone, Project Scientist

199

ADDITIONAL READING

TECHNICAL

Jupiter
, T. Gehrels, Ed., U. of Arizona Press,
Tucson, 1254 pages (1976).

Space Science Reviews
, special Voyager instrumentation
issues,
Vol. 21
, No. 2, pgs.
75-232 (November 1977);
Vol. 21
, No. 3,
pgs. 234-376 (December 1977).

“Melting of Io by Tidal Dissipation,” by S. J.
Peale, P. Cassen, and R. T. Reynolds,

Science, Vol. 203
, pgs. 892-894 (2 March
1979).

Science
, special Voyager 1 issue,
Vol. 204
,
pgs. 945-1008 (1 June 1979).

Nature
, special Voyager 1 issue,
Vol. 280
,
pgs. 725-806 (30 August 1979).

“Jupiter’s Ring,” by T. Owen et al.,
Nature,
Vol. 781
, pgs. 442-446 (11 October 1979).

Science
, special Voyager 2 issue,
Vol. 206
,
pgs. 925-996 (23 November 1979).

Geophysical Research Letters
, special Voyager
issue,
Vol. 7
, pgs. 1-68 (January 1980).

NONTECHNICAL

“The Solar System,” special issue of
Scientific
American, Vol. 223
, No. 3 (September 1975).

“The Galilean Satellites of Jupiter,” by D. P.
Cruikshank and D. Morrison,
Scientific
American, Vol. 234
, No. 5, pgs. 108-116
(May 1976).

Pioneer Odyssey
, by R. O. Fimmel,
W. Swindell, and E. Burgess, NASA SP-396,
217 pages (1977).

Murmurs of the Earth: The Voyager Interstellar
Record
, by Carl Sagan et al., Random
House, New York, 1978.

“Jupiter and Family,” by J. Eberhart,
Science
News, Vol. 115
, pgs. 164-173 (17 March
1979).

“The Far-Out Worlds of Voyager,” by J. K.
Beatty,
Sky and Telescope, Vol. 57
, pgs.
423-427 (May 1979) and pgs. 516-520 (June
1979).

“Return to Jupiter and Co.,” by J. Eberhart,

Science News, Vol. 116
, pgs. 19-21 (14 July
1979).

“Voyage to the Giant Planet,” by C. Sutton,

New Scientist, Vol. 83
, pgs. 217-220 (19 July
1979).

“Voyager Views Jupiter’s Dazzling Realm,”
by R. Gore,
National Geographic, Vol. 157
,
No. 1, pgs. 2-29 (January 1980).

“The Galilean Moons of Jupiter,” by L. A.
Soderblom,
Scientific American, Vol. 242
,
No. 1, pgs. 88-100 (January 1980).

“The Great Red Spot,” by D. Schwartzenburg,

Astronomy, Vol. 8
, pgs. 6-13 (July 1980).

“Four New Worlds,” by D. Morrison,
Astronomy,
Vol. 8
(September 1980).

National Aeronautics and Space Administration

Transcriber’s Notes

Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook is public-domain in the country of publication.

Silently corrected a few palpable typos.

Moved captions nearer the relevant images; tweaked image references within captions accordingly.

In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by _underscores_.

End of Project Gutenberg's Voyage to Jupiter, by David Morrison and Jane Samz

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VOYAGE TO JUPITER ***

***** This file should be named 58915-h.htm or 58915-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/8/9/1/58915/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.