Project Gutenberg's Common Sense for Housemaids, by Ann Fraser Tytler

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Common Sense for Housemaids

Author: Ann Fraser Tytler

Release Date: March 31, 2019 [EBook #59166]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COMMON SENSE FOR HOUSEMAIDS ***

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive)

[i]

COMMON SENSE

FOR

HOUSEMAIDS.

BY

A LADY.

Second Edition.

LONDON:

THOMAS HATCHARD, 187, PICCADILLY.

1853.

[ii]

LONDON:

G. J. PALMER, SAVOY STREET, STRAND.

[iii]

CONTENTS.

PAGE

Brass, how to clean

22

Bug poison

9

Carefulness, hints on

86

Carpets, how to clean

26

Clear-starching

77

Dress, observations on

90

Daily work, Housemaids’

34-75

Economy, observations on

91

Fire, how to light

38

Floor-cloth, how to clean

33

French polish, how to clean

15-20

Grates, how to clean

8
,
18
,
35

Lamps, how to clean

59

Mahogany, how to clean

16-21

Marble, how to clean

19

[iv]
Mirrors, how to clean

16-24

Nursing the sick, hints on

94

Paint, mixture for washing

11

Painted walls, how to clean

20

Papered walls, how to clean

14

Picture frames, how to clean

24

Pipeclay, how to prepare

31

Plate, how to clean

81

Scouring floor, different ways of

12

Stairs, how to clean

31

Sweeping, ways of

11

Washing muslins and lace

76

Windows, how to clean

23

[1]

EXTRACTS FROM A LADY’S JOURNAL,
SHOWING THE ABSOLUTE NECESSITY FOR WRITING
THIS BOOK.

Arrived yesterday in Cavendish Square at
half-past five o’clock, for a visit of a few days.
Much fatigued, but wonderfully sustained in
spirits during the journey, by the prospect of
seeing a dear friend, the ten thousand comforts
of her well-regulated establishment, and the
bright visions of the appearance of my accustomed
bed-room. Again and again, had it risen
before my mind’s eye, in all its glory. The inviting
appearance of the smooth, flat, well-made
bed, with the light night quilt of snowy whiteness
(and the heavy creature folded aside); the
easy chair, and footstool (with their bright
crimson covers), turned towards the clear glowing
fire; the dear little kettle of silvery brightness,
on the hob, singing its accustomed song to its
[2]

grateful mistress. A chair before the toilet, with
its pink and pure white drapery. The bright
looking-glass reflecting crystal candlesticks, wax-lights,
and essence-bottles, with all the perfumes
of Arabia. The washhand-stand, a perfect
picture, surrounded by a hundred towels.
The rose soap giving out sweet odours. The
additional large tumbler for the saline draft, the
cup and spoon, for less pleasant powders. Alas,
alas! how are all those glories buried in the dust,
and dust is now indeed the order of the day;
my friend is the same in heart and soul, but she
has sprained her ancle, and changed her
housemaid
.

Hurried to my room to dress, as the dinner
was to be at six o’clock; went straight to the
accustomed corner, where my trunk, resting upon
a stand, uncovered and uncorded, used to be
placed in readiness to be opened. The stand
was empty, the trunk upon the carpet, the ropes
and cover still on and covered with dust. Rang
the bell; no one answered, rang a second time;
the housemaid entered, undid the ropes, removed
the dusty cover, and left the room. Turned to
unlock my trunk, found it had been placed with
the lock turned towards the wall; tried to re-turn
it—found it impossible—rang again for the
housemaid, and with our united efforts turned
[3]

the trunk—stooped to unlock it, and found too
late that the dust of weeks was on the carpet—shook
it in disgust from my silk dress, and advanced
in haste to the washhand-stand, to wash the
remembrance from my hands at least,—found no
soap, no warm water; fortunately had soap in
my dressing-box, and, unwilling to apply a
third time to a bell-rope of most frail and suspicious
appearance, washed with ice-cold water,
and having performed my toilet with inconvenient
haste, descended to the drawing-room, and found
that the dinner had been on the table some
minutes. Forgot my discomforts in most agreeable
conversation—but much fatigued, was
thankful to retire at night, though with secret
misgivings as to the discomforts I might perceive
on re-entering my room. Opened the door and
perceived nothing, the smoke impenetrable, and
the fire out; rushed towards the window, threw
it open, a rush also of wind and sleet, and the
candle became extinguished; groped my way to
the bell, pulled it vigorously, heard no sound,
felt only a blow upon my cheek, and the bell-rope
in my hand—wished it around the neck of a
fellow-creature, advanced a few steps, got entangled
in the ropes and cover of my trunk (still
left upon the ground), stumbled and fell—found
the door at last, and rushing out upon the landing-place,
[4]

with the bell-rope in one hand, and
all that remained of the crystal candlestick in the
other, called franticly,
Housemaid, housemaid!

Mr. B—— sprang from his dressing-room en
robe de chambre. “What is the matter, is it fire?”
he exclaimed. “Alas, it is neither fire nor candle,”
was my melancholy answer, and my dark
history was given. The housemaid, half undressed
and sulky was brought into the room.
The thick crust of small coal, through which no
air could penetrate was removed, sufficient wood
to light a dozen fires, thrust into the grate, pieces
of small coal added, and all was soon in a blaze;
the window was shut down, and the water on the
washhand-stand, having once been warm, I
resolved to be thankful for small mercies, and,
pretending not to feel the smoke which lurked
in every corner of the room, as well as in my
throat, undressed and went to bed—“
To bed
,
but not to
sleep
.” O the variety of
mountain
heights
, and the scarcity of
pleasant plains
! fell
asleep at last holding fast by the side of the bed,
dreamt I was a swift rolling
snow-ball
, and
awoke upon the floor.

Two more nights have passed—No, I will not
detail them. What is friendship but a name?

I will leave the house——

I will write a book!

[5]

COMMON SENSE FOR HOUSEMAIDS.

This little book is intended to convey instruction
with regard to a housemaid’s duties to the
most ignorant in the simplest possible language.
Many will throw it aside in indignation, and
exclaim, “Does it require a book to be written
to tell us that the drawing-room grate should be
the first thing cleaned and polished, and not left
till a room is swept and dusted, or that if the
apartment has not been used for some time, and
the carpet carefully covered up, it is better to
leave it covered till the walls have been swept
down, and the window-curtains brushed?” Strange
as it may appear, such advice we have more than
once found necessary; we therefore address ourselves
to those who for want of regular training,
and from not bringing common sense into practice,
[6]

have fallen into similar errors to those here
alluded to, and to a still more numerous race,
who are every day leaving their father’s cottage
with the desire to obtain a housemaid’s place,
and would therefore willingly learn something of
a housemaid’s duties.

A housemaid’s duties are various, and by no
means easy of attainment; for she has to contend
against a host of enemies—dust, soot,
smoke, rust, insects of various kinds, and bad
smells innumerable; let her, however, not be discouraged;
all difficulties will give way before
early rising, habits of activity, an acute nose,
frequent open windows, and a teachable spirit;
let us therefore proceed without further preface
to give our best advice as to cleaning a house
thoroughly after the six winter months of smoke
and dust.

Let all the dusters and brushes which will be
required, be carefully washed the day before you
begin the work of cleaning. To sweep with a
dirty brush will do more harm to a carpet than
to leave it unswept; and a chair-cover, rubbed
with a soiled duster, is injured in a way which
no after-dusting can remove.

Let the stair-carpet be first taken up and folded
to be beaten with the other carpets. If the family
are absent, it is better that all the carpets which
[7]

require to be beaten should be taken up at the
same time and sent away, and all the chimneys
swept before the cleaning begins. But if the
family are at home, this should not be done, as
the cleaning should then only begin in one room
at a time, so as to occasion as little discomfort
and inconvenience as possible.

Let the stairs be first swept down after the
carpet has been removed, taking care that all the
bed-room doors be previously shut. If the chimneys
in the attics are to be swept, place a mat on
the upper landing-place, and if the rooms have
carpets, let the carpets be taken up in as many
of the rooms as can be cleaned in one day: as
the carpets in the upper rooms are, generally
small, they are in most families beaten in the
court below; the window and bed-curtains
should also be taken down and well shaken and
brushed below stairs, and the beds carefully
covered up with a covering-sheet, well tucked in
all round, that no soot may penetrate; then
remove the tables and chairs into the landing-place,
if there is space sufficient, turning the
bottom of one chair down upon the bottom of
another; if the landing-place is too small, remove
them into one of the attics, and let this
room be the last swept and scoured. As soon
as the chimney is swept, let the soot be carefully
[8]

collected, and the housemaid follow the sweep
down stairs, taking care that he previously has
rubbed his feet upon the mat, and also that he
does not allow the bag of soot which he carries
to touch the walls as he passes down,—this
should be still more attended to, when some
one chimney in a house may require to be swept
at a time when the stair-carpet is not taken up;
to have a handsome brussels carpet stained with
soot is no light misfortune to a feeling heart, to
trace the creature at every step is no pleasant
journey.

The grate is next to be cleansed, and if
polished with black lead, two brushes are to be
used, one for putting on the lead, and the other
for polishing. The fire-irons and fender to be
scoured with emery cloth, and then rubbed
quickly with a woollen cloth. All the articles
required for the grates should be kept in a box
for the purpose, and a coarse sheet should also
be kept in the housemaid’s closet to be laid
down whenever a grate is to be scoured: this
may seem unnecessary in an attic room where
the carpet may be shabby, or perhaps where
there may be no carpet,—but the habit acquired
is everything; where no sheet is laid down above-stairs,
pokers, tongs, even dust-pans, are often
put down on the drawing-room carpet, without a
[9]

feeling of remorse; a well-trained housemaid
would shudder at such a spectacle. The sweeping
down of the cornices and walls should now
be attended to. Let a pair of steps be brought
into the room, and (taking care that they are
stretched out to their full extent, so as to stand
quite steady on the floor), let the housemaid,
mounted on them with a long broom, sweep
away the cobwebs and dust from the ceiling and
cornices, sweeping also behind each window-shutter,
and round the ceilings and shelves of
the different presses in the room. The long
broom should then be covered with a bag of
coarse flannel, and the walls thoroughly swept
down. After this has been done, spread a large
sheet on the floor, and let the bedding be removed
upon it and covered up, the frame of the
bed thoroughly well brushed, and also all the
edges and corners of the sacking bottom, where
dust can lodge, and let the bed-posts and stock
be well rubbed till no soil remains on the duster.
Then with a feather or small hair-brush, anoint
every joint and crevice with the following mixture:—

Put one ounce of corrosive sublimate into a
pint of spirits of wine—shake the phial well, and
keep it closely corked except when in use.
Poison should be written in large letters on the
[10]

phial, and great care taken to keep it in a safe
place out of the reach of children.

Should the housemaid be called away, even
for a moment, while she is using this mixture,
let her not leave the room till she has put this
phial out of the reach of every one. If the beds
are kept free from dust, and every spring anointed
with this mixture, there will be no risk of their
becoming infested by those creatures which it is
impossible to name, but which are very dreadful.
Clothes-baskets from the laundress for this
reason should never be brought into the bed-rooms.
The clean linen should be carefully
looked over below, and hung upon a screen
before the fire, to be made thoroughly dry before
it is put into the drawers or wardrobes. The
dusting and anointing of the bed-frames being
completed, proceed next to switch and brush the
bedding—an old riding whip is an excellent
thing for switching bedding or the cushions of
chairs, as anything heavy and unyielding is apt
to cut them; as soon as you have made the
bedding free from dust, replace it on the bed,
and cover all up with a sheet, well tucked in,
leaving the bed-curtains to be put up, and the
bed-linen put on after the cleaning of the room
has been completed.

We come next to sweeping the floor previous
to having it scoured. There are various
[11]

modes of sweeping, and of non-sweeping; the
non-sweepers follow the principle of letting
the
wee pickle stour lie
(as they say in Scotland)—they
wash on the top of the dust, and the inky
appearance of the boards brings no feeling of
shame to their darkened minds; other young
housemaids, again, sweep with an air, giving a
slight toss up with the broom, at every motion
of the hand, so as to make the dust mount up
and settle on all that has been previously
cleaned; a tidy young woman, on the contrary,
sprinkles the floor first with tea-leaves, she then
lays the broom close to the boards as she moves
along, sweeping gently, but thoroughly, and
leaving no spot unswept. If there are closets in
the room, let them be first swept, and the doors
shut, then sweep under the beds and chests of
drawers, &c., before sweeping the other parts of
the room. The scouring should then commence:
the first thing to be washed is the paint of the
window shutters, doors, chimney-piece, and
wainscots all round, and this should be done
with the following mixture. To every quart of
soft boiling water, add half an ounce of soft
soap, and half an ounce of pearlash. Soda is
too strong, and injures the paint. Let this
mixture dissolve before using it. If the room is
to be in immediate use, boiled yellow soap may
[12]

be used with the pearlash, as the smell of the
soft soap is disagreeable at first. Scour the paint
(a small portion at a time) with a coarse flannel
and this mixture; rub straight up and down,
then wash with a clean flannel and plenty of
water a little warm (cold water makes paint
look clouded), and dry with a linen cloth, rubbing
briskly: where there is carving above doors
or mouldings, use a painter’s brush, with the
soap and pearlash instead of the flannel, as it
gets better into the carved wood, and then wash
with a flannel and water. The floor is next to
be scoured, with a little soda mixed in soft warm
water—wet a small portion of the floor with your
washing-cloth of coarse flannel, rub yellow soap
upon your scrubbing-brush, and scrub hard up
and down the boards, but never across, then
wash well off with clean cold water, and dry with
a coarse cloth. In Yorkshire a wisp of straw,
tightly rolled up and doubled, is used in scrubbing
floors instead of a scouring-brush, and sand
instead of soap, and the floors are beautifully
clean and white; but this method is not understood
in London; the sand there is generally of a
dull grey colour, and the dust and smoke of a
large city require soap and hard scrubbing.
Except in country-houses, the German method
of sweeping and washing at the same time would
[13]

not answer either; there the sleeping apartments
are generally without carpets, and a broom is
seldom used in sweeping them; a coarse cloth
is passed through water, and being wrung out,
is drawn across the floor in every direction,
and by this method no dust is raised upon the
furniture.

The windows and doors should be left open
that the floor may dry quickly, and while it is
drying, the furniture outside the room should be
dusted and rubbed. The furniture in the attics
being generally painted wood, will require to be
washed twice a-year with the same mixture as the
other paint in the room, taking care to do it
lightly, and to wash it quickly off with water.
The carpet having been well beaten, should then
be put down, straight and tight, upon the clean
floor; a few small nails are requisite for this;
but as the carpets in the attics are generally
small, they require to be but slightly nailed
down, and should be frequently raised: the furniture
should now be restored to its proper place,
and the door of the room shut; and after each of
the attics has been cleaned in a similar manner
the housemaid will proceed to the bed-room story.
There all will be done as before; the furniture
removed, the window-curtains and bed-curtains
taken down to be switched and brushed, the beds
[14]

covered up, and the carpet lifted, the chimney
having been previously swept and the soot removed.
The grate and fire-irons will next be
scoured, the beds switched and brushed, and the
mixture used for the bed-stock; the cornices will
be swept, and the paint of the doors, window-shutters,
&c., &c., taking care that in sweeping
the paper on the walls the long broom be covered
with a clean flannel bag, which should be frequently
shaken and turned during the operation;
for if the flannel is not clean the paper will look
worse than it did before. Paper on walls can
be made to look almost new by being cleaned
with stale bread; this is a more tedious process;
when it is to be done, however, after sweeping
the walls with the broom covered with flannel,
take a quartern loaf of stale bread three days
old, cut it into four pieces, and holding the crust
in your hand, rub lightly downwards, taking
about half a yard at each stroke; the next time
of going round the room begin a little above
where the last stroke ended, and take care not to
rub across the paper or to go up again. The
floor having been sprinkled with tea-leaves,
should be swept before the bread is used for the
walls, and it will require to be swept a second
time before washing the paint of the window-shutters,
doors, chimney-piece, and scouring the
[15]

floor commences. If the carpet does not entirely
cover the room, attention should be observed in
scouring thoroughly those places not covered, as
nothing gives a greater look of cleanliness to a
room than nicely cleaned boards: scrub hard
straight up and down with the scrubbing-brush
and soap, and then wash well off with clean cold
water; it is a mistake to think that warm water
is necessary for the washing off; cold water does
quite as well, and is better, as it is more easily
changed: to change the water often is most
necessary in scouring floors: many housemaids
scour the floor constantly, and yet they have
always a black soiled look, from the water not
being sufficiently clean. The bed-room furniture
is next to be attended to: where the mahogany
is French-polished, rubbing lightly with
a dry soft cloth is generally all that is necessary;
but if the furniture is soiled in any way, then
wash it over with a sponge and water (a little
warm), and rub lightly with the cloth till quite
dry and clear. Where there is no French polish,
dust the mahogany well, and with cold drawn
linseed oil, mixed with a little turpentine, wash
it over with a sponge, and rub briskly and well
with a soft woollen or linen cloth; the rubbing
does more, in polishing the wood, than any
mixture you can use. Many people mix bees’-wax
[16]

with the oil, and this makes the furniture
look well at the moment, but it gives a fictitious
brightness, which every finger-touch or drop of
water will dim; the polish produced by rubbing
is superior to French polish or any other. The
oil should not often be put on, and never while
the slightest dampness remains on the mahogany.
Some servants use a great deal of oil and very
little rubbing, the consequence of which is, that
little or no lasting polish is acquired; the dust
sticks to the furniture, and gives it a dull soiled
look. Nothing gives one a greater idea of care
and cleanliness than to see all the mahogany
looking bright and clear; the legs and rims of
tables, and all that is below as well as above,
should be attended to; amongst other bright
things the looking-glass must not be omitted:
after the mahogany frame has been well rubbed
up, the glass should be washed with pure cold
water, dried with a clean soft cloth, and polished
with a silk handkerchief: if the bed-room chairs
have loose chintz covers, they should be taken
off and well shaken before the mahogany of the
chairs is rubbed up, then put on again as tightly
as possible, and rubbed lightly with a clean cloth;
all this having been done, before the furniture is
brought into the room, the carpet, having been
beaten, should be put down perfectly straight,
[17]

drawn as tight as possible, and slightly nailed;
there is nothing looks worse in a room than to
see a carpet all pulled awry, and the stripes and
seams running across instead of straight up and
down. The furniture should now be replaced,
the bed-curtains put on, the bed made up for
use,
[1]
and the blinds let down, so as to keep the
room cool and preserve the carpet.

All the bed-rooms having been thoroughly
cleaned in the same manner, the drawing-room
should be next attended to. If there are two
drawing-rooms, the chairs and lighter furniture
should be removed into the one while the other is
being cleaned; if there is but one room, and there
is not space on the landing-place, the chairs
should be placed, one turned down upon another,
in the most convenient corner of the room that
can be found for them; the carpet and rug should
be taken up to be beaten, and the window-curtains
taken down to be well shaken in the court below,
then spread upon a table and thoroughly brushed,
and if winter curtains, folded up and laid aside,
or, if summer muslin curtains, washed. In putting
aside winter-curtains, coverlids, &c., when
not in use, a sheet should be spread in the bottom
of a drawer, the curtains folded to the size of the
[18]

drawer, laid perfectly smooth, and the sheet
brought over them, so that no dust can get in at
the sides. Curtains or any other things, put
into a drawer uncovered, get marked at the edges
if they lie any length of time. Next, the pictures,
if easily removed, should be taken down,
and china and chimney ornaments, books, &c.,
&c., put into some closet or safe place, and
dusting sheets thrown over the sofas, mirrors,
&c., &c.: all this, if it can be managed, should
be done at night, that the room may be ready
for the sweeps in the morning. The chimneys
of sitting-rooms, where there is constant fire,
should be swept at least twice a year; a third
time, in the middle of winter, may be necessary
for some chimneys; in this case it will be necessary
to pin up the curtains, and enclose them in
bags similar to pillow-cases, and to cover the
carpet and furniture completely with sheets, as,
even with the most careful sweeps, a great deal
of soot finds its way into the room. As soon as
the soot has been removed the scouring of the
grate should commence; if a bright polished
steel grate, it should be rubbed with fine
emery cloth, or with a paste of fine emery
powder, No. 3, mixed with boiled soap; after
rubbing well with a piece of woollen cloth and
this paste, polish with glass-paper (not sand-paper),
[19]

and finish off with soft dry chamois
leather, rubbing quickly and lightly till quite
bright. The marble chimney-piece should then
be first dusted carefully and thoroughly with the
small dusting-brush, and afterwards washed,
rubbing soap on a soft brush or sponge, so as to
get the dust and smoke out of all the ornaments;
if they are deeply carved, so that the brush does
not get into the crevices, use a little bit of wood
bluntly pointed, for nothing gives a marble
chimney-piece a worse appearance than dust
lodging in the ornaments; whether flowers or
figures, let the roses, if roses there be, be pure
and white, and Cupid’s face particularly clean.
All this having been done, cover the whole up
with a covering sheet, putting one end of the
sheet on the marble chimney-piece, with a weight
to keep it down, and letting the rest hang like a
curtain before the grate, to preserve it also free
from dust; sweep the room then for the first
time, sprinkling the floor first with tea-leaves, to
keep down the dust as much as possible; after
this let the long steps be brought into the room:
place them alongside the wall at such a distance
as to give the full use of the broom; before
getting upon the steps, see that the feet are put
out as far as they can stretch, so that they stand
quite firm; then fearlessly mount upon them,
[20]

and with the long broom covered with a clean
flannel bag sweep the cornice and walls straight
down, leaving no spot untouched; shake the
dust frequently from the bag, and turn it during
the operation. The small dusting-brush should
next be used, for dusting the paint of the doors,
window-shutters, and wainscoting all round the
room, and the floor should be swept a second
time: proceed then to wash the paint which you
have dusted with the mixture of boiled soap and
pearlash, and scour the floor with yellow soap
and soda, in the same manner as directed in the
bed-rooms.

While the floor and the paint are drying the
furniture should be cleaned; if either the rose-wood
or mahogany furniture is French polished,
dusting and rubbing it, as has already been mentioned,
with a soft dry cloth, is all that is necessary,
or, if spotted or stained in any way, let it be
first washed over with a sponge and warm water
(but not too hot), as warm water is better than
cold for French polish; then rub briskly but
lightly with a soft cloth till the brightness is
restored. A mixture is now sold for reviving
French polish, which has considerable effect for
a short time, but requires to be frequently repeated,
and is by no means sufficient to give
lustre to any article which has not been previously
[21]

polished; in this case the cold drawn
linseed oil, for unpolished articles, with a little
turpentine, is the best mixture to be used, and
will, in time, with a great deal of rubbing, produce
a lustre equal to French polish, and much more
durable, as not liable to be worn off or easily
scratched, but on the contrary, increasing with
years, and kept bright with very little labour
after the polish has once been obtained.

As directions have been given with regard to
cleaning mahogany in the bed-rooms, it is needless
so particularly to repeat them here; the rubbing
is at first the great matter, and cannot be
done too often; very little oil and a great deal
of rubbing is the root of the business; it is not
enough to rub the furniture of a room with a
view to polish it on the great cleaning days, a
little every day makes, in time, a great impression;
a really good housemaid should never be
able to be alone in a room with a table or a
chair without giving it a good rub, or, if the
room is occupied, without
wishing
to do so.
Tables and chairs should be to her objects of
deep interest; after her own family and the
family of her mistress, they should claim the
next place in her affections; she should steadily
contemplate them between her and the light, and
[22]

in all various points of view, and if they present
themselves to her sight without spot or blemish,
shedding a bright lustre over her past labours,
she may rejoice in the work of her hands.

All the brass in the room comes next to be
polished; the plates and handles of the doors
and of the bells, the castors, &c., &c., should be
cleaned with rotten-stone and oil, and rubbed
with leather till quite bright; care should be taken
not to soil the paint in doing this; there is
nothing so ugly as a black rim round the handle,
or to see the mark of dirty fingers on the door
itself, giving evidence that the housemaid’s
mode of shutting the door is not by turning the
handle, but by pulling the door itself. This
strange dislike to touching the handle of a door,
this constant habit of putting the hand either
above the handle or below it, anywhere, in short,
but on the handle itself, seems a prevailing disease
amongst housemaids; the consequence is,
that one often sees the paint, either above or
below the handle, entirely rubbed off, and the
wood shining through from the necessity of frequent
scouring, or, if there are brass plates to
prevent this, they have constantly a dull and
smeared appearance: in scouring either the
handle or brass plate all marks of the rotten-stone
[23]

may be prevented by having a duster in
one hand to cover the paint, while the other
hand is employed in scouring the brass.

Where there is a balcony, and the drawing-room
windows can be cleaned in safety, this
should next be done; the footman generally
assists in this work. The window, both outside
and in, should be first dusted with a light dusting-brush,
and the footman being outside, and
the housemaid mounted on the steps within,
each should clean the same pane at the same
time, that it may be more easily cleaned, and
not left in streaks, which is apt to be the case
where only one side is cleaned at a time: a little
Spanish whiting, mixed with very little water,
should be rubbed over each pane and washed off
with a woollen cloth or sponge (but sponge, unless
after long use, is liable to have particles of
sand in it, which may scratch the glass, and
injure its appearance); each pane should be
finished and rubbed bright with a clean dry
linen cloth, and particular attention paid to
cleaning well at the edges and corners, as dim
corners will entirely spoil the look of the most
newly-cleaned window; the sun should not
strike on the window when it is being cleaned,
nor should this work ever be attempted during
frost, as the glass will then be much more apt
[24]

to crack. The frequency with which windows
should be thus thoroughly cleaned on both sides
will depend much on the situation of the house;
in the country three or four times during the
year may be sufficient, while in London, in
many situations, once a month may not suffice:
the inside of each window should be rubbed at
least once a week, when the room is regularly
done out, but a cleanly housemaid will give
many a rub between times; nothing improved
the look of everything within the room so much
as transparent windows. The windows being
all cleaned, and the bannisters brushed outside,
the balcony should be washed over with soap
and water, and the work within the room again
proceeded with.

The frames of the pictures and mirrors must
next be attended to. The frames should be
lightly dusted, for the flowers or other projecting
parts, being generally made of plaster, are easily
broken, and even when in carved wood the edges
and corners may be chipped off and disfigured;
a feather-brush should therefore be used for
this purpose; the glass of both mirrors and pictures
should be washed over with a woollen cloth
and pure cold water, dried with a soft clean linen
cloth, and polished with a silk handkerchief,
which should be kept for the purpose; but if
[25]

the glass be either dimmed by fly marks or
smoke, it may be necessary to wash it over with
spirits, then dust it over with powder-blue in a
small muslin bag, rub it up with a soft linen
cloth, and finally polish it with a silk handkerchief.
If there are portraits in the room not
glazed, which appear to require cleaning, they
might be gently washed over with cold water
without being injured, but on no account
touched with soap; it is however safer merely
to dust them, and even this should be with a
feather-brush, and very lightly done; it is impossible
to take too great care of such precious
possessions; an injury given to a valuable portrait
or painting no money can repair.

Should much dust have fallen from the pictures
and mirrors, &c., &c., it may be necessary
to sprinkle with tea-leaves and sweep round the
sides of the room very lightly before laying down
the carpet, or else remove the dust by drawing a
coarse damp cloth round the room as they do in
Germany; this method of sweeping answers extremely
well when there is not a great deal of
dust to be removed, and is much in favour of
keeping the furniture clean.
[2]
If the carpet is
[26]

made so that it can be turned each time that it
is laid down, then care should be taken that the
same part does not always lie before the door, so
as to be worn out before the rest, for a shabby
piece of carpet, on entering a room, immediately
strikes the eye; but if the carpet is cut to fit
into recesses, this cannot be avoided. As soon
as the carpet has been put down quite even on
the floor, and tightly stretched and nailed (which
is generally done by the man who has the charge
of beating it), the housemaid, with a clean coarse
cloth, should rub down each breadth, taking
care to turn to different parts of the cloth as
they get soiled. Many people approve of rubbing
it over in this way with a damp flannel,
but the practice is not a good one; it has the
effect of brightening for the moment, but gives it
afterwards a duller and more soiled look; a
greater degree of dampness than that produced
by the use of tea-leaves when brushing the carpet
is injurious. When a carpet is much soiled, by
having been used for years, it may be made to
look perfectly clean, and even the colours greatly
restored again, by being washed with a mixture
of boiled soap and ox-gall, but in a very short
time it will look worse than before; even if
clean cold water is spilt upon the carpet, though
[27]

no stain is left at first, that part will very soon
have a soiled appearance.
[3]

The room being now ready to receive the furniture,
the chairs having been previously dusted,
washed over, and rubbed bright, as directed,
and the cushions taken off, switched, and wiped
with a clean cloth, they should be restored to
their proper places in the room; the window-curtains
having been properly switched and
brushed below, should be put up, the fire-irons
and coal-scuttle brought back, having been
scoured, and all the china ornaments, after being
carefully washed in cold water, should be
arranged as before, together with books, writing-desks,
and work-boxes, and behold the room
complete. The housemaid may now look round
with modest triumph, and exclaim,
Sublime
. A
drawing-room in perfect order,
how lovely is it!

The dining-room, breakfast-parlour, and study,
should each be cleaned in the same perfect manner,
but as the mode of proceeding is in no way
different, it is unnecessary here to enter into any
further detail; a few words, however, may be
necessary with regard to arranging a gentleman’s
study; those days of thorough cleaning are days
[28]

of horror to the literary man; he would rather
have a lion let loose upon him than a cleanly
housemaid; and certainly, with regard to dusting
either books or papers, too much attention
cannot be shown, as much mischief may be
done by even shifting their places; books upon
a table should be taken up only one at a time,
dusted, and replaced in exactly the same spot,
or, if the table requires to be rubbed up, the
books should be placed on the floor in the same
position in which they stood on the table, then
taken up one by one, dusted and replaced on
the table as at first. A housemaid should never
exercise her own taste in arranging books in a
gentleman’s study; however her contempt of
1st, 2nd, or 3rd volume may be overlooked in a
drawing-room, it is a serious annoyance to the
literary man to be obliged to hunt for the 2nd
or 3rd volume of a work of which he has finished
the first, through, perhaps, fifty others; but it
is a still greater grievance to have a written
paper misplaced, torn, or destroyed; the smallest
scrap of writing, though found on the floor, or
in any odd corner, should be considered sacred,
and placed on the table in such a position as to
be easily discovered; a weight should be put on
any parcel of papers so as to prevent the draught
blowing them away when the windows are
[29]

opened, and the housemaid had better be content
with carefully dusting round them rather than
run the risk of misplacing them in any way; let
it be remembered, however, that this is perhaps
the only case in which it is better to dust round
a moveable article than to dust under it, for this
dusting round is a slovenly practice too often
indulged in. A lazy servant will dust round a
writing-desk or work-box, for a week together,
without once taking the trouble to remove it, till,
when taken up by some one, her negligence is
discovered by the line of dust which surrounds
each article. Where books in a book-case
require dusting, one shelf only should be emptied
at a time, and the books placed on the floor
(after the carpet has been lifted) in exactly the
same order as they stood in the book-case; the
shelf should then be washed, and the books taken
up, one by one, dusted, and restored to their
former places, as soon as the shelf is thoroughly
dry; care should be taken not to replace them
while the slightest dampness remains.

The rooms having been all cleaned, and the
doors carefully shut, the stairs must now be
swept down, beginning from the attic story.
The long brush called the Turk’s head, should
be used first, to sweep away the cobwebs from
the ceiling and corners, and to dust down the
[30]

walls; the bannisters must be brushed between
all the rails with a bannister-brush, and the
hand-rail washed over and well rubbed up. The
hand-rail should always be polished with French
polish that oil may not be required, as almost
every person who goes up stairs lays a hand
upon the rail of the bannisters, and it is difficult
to rub the oil off sufficiently to prevent its being
unpleasant to the touch: wherever oil is used
too great care cannot be taken to rub it completely
off.

A lady was heard to complain, that a set of
books which had recently been sent home, beautifully
bound, were all found, soon after, to be
spotted with oil; on inquiry being made, it was
discovered that the housemaid, wishing to make
everything look particularly bright in the drawing-room,
for expected company, had washed
the table over with oil, and, after very slight
rubbing, had exercised her taste by putting all
the best bound books round in a circle upon it,
with a bullfinch in its gilt cage in the middle.
This setting out of drawing-room tables with all
the best-bound books had better be avoided; a
small stand of books on a table, or a few scattered
up and down, together with writing-desks
and work-boxes, give a look of freedom and
comfort to a room which it is very agreeable to
[31]

see; but to find a table set out with a couple of
books, splendidly bound, at each corner, the
bible and prayer-book, in velvet, with their gold
clasps, very probably opposite to a couple of
volumes of Shakspeare and Lord Byron, and
sacred poetry at the alternate corners: to see
these books put out in January, 1850, to remain
till January, 1851 (unless the family should remove
for a time into the country), is a melancholy
picture of the general literature of the
inmates.

But to leave this literary discussion, and return
again to the uncarpeted staircase. The
next thing to be done, after rubbing well the
hand-rail, is to wash down the stairs, and then,
with a painter’s brush and pipeclay, go over the
sides of each step where the carpet does not
cover it: the pipeclay used for this purpose is
generally mixed with glue, or what painters call
size; but this size is often not quite fresh, which
produces a bad air on the staircase; to boil the
pipeclay with equal parts of water and milk, or
with water and beer, is a very good substitute
for size; it will rub off a little, but not nearly so
easily as when water alone is used in mixing it.

If there are any spots of grease on the stairs,
before using the pipeclay, scrape them off; then
on each spot put a little of a mixture of strong
[32]

soap lees and unslaked lime, let it lie for a few
minutes, then rub hard and wash it off. A
bottle of this mixture, well corked, should be
kept always at hand, to take spots of candle
grease or oil, either out of floors or stone passages;
when used for floors it should be washed
more quickly off, or it may be necessary also to
lower it with cold water, as this mixture will
discolour the boards if left on for any time.
The stairs being finished with the pipeclay,
sheets of very coarse brown paper should be laid
down under each carpet, and each sheet turned
in, so as to make it lie double at the edge of
each step; this prevents the carpet wearing so
fast as it is apt to do at the edges. Care also
should be taken that the same part of the carpet
is not always brought to the edge of the step, so
as to cause that part to be worn shabby while
the rest looks fresh: a little arrangement in
shifting, sometimes higher, sometimes lower,
will, in a great measure, prevent this. A stair-carpet
should be cut at least half-a-yard longer
than required for covering the stairs, and turned
in at top and bottom, which will allow for this
shifting. Attention also is necessary to stretch
the carpet as tight as possible in laying it down,
so that there should be no creases to be worn by
passing feet; and also to see that the rods, after
[33]

being well scoured with rotten stone and oil, and
rubbed bright, should be so driven through the
rings as not to get loose. By attending to these
particulars, a stair carpet will look well as long
again as when it is ill kept and neglected, and
allowed to lie so long without being taken up,
as to wear a mark at the edge of each step, which
it is impossible afterwards to efface.

The floorcloth in the lobby should next be
swept, then washed over with soap and water,
with a sponge or flannel (but never with a
scouring-brush, which some housemaids use),
and rubbed up with a dry cloth; a little bees’-wax
may be rubbed in, which improves the
appearance, and also preserves the surface, but
brisk light rubbing will be particularly required
when the wax is used, both to give it a bright
look, and to prevent the dust from sticking to it.
Floorcloths should not be much washed with
soap, as it injures the paint. When not very
dirty, washing them first with cold water, and
then with milk, will be sufficient; the milk gives
them a very pretty gloss, and they are more easily
rubbed up than when the bees’-wax is used.

As the steps from the outer door, the door
itself, and all in the under-story belongs in
general to the cook’s work, the housemaid may
now be considered as having fulfilled her task,
[34]

with regard to a thorough cleaning. We proceed,
now, to mention the routine of daily work
she has to go through in keeping all clean, and
will also combine this with the parlour work,
which, in families where there is no footman,
frequently falls to the housemaid’s portion.

With early rising and active habits much may
be done before breakfast, and much should be
done, or confusion will ensue for the rest of the
day. The housemaid’s work should be begun
both in winter and summer by six o’clock, for as
in winter a good deal must be done by candle
light, it is less difficult to accustom oneself to
awake always by a little after five o’clock, than
to leave off the habit in winter, and have to begin
it again; half an hour, or even a whole hour, of
longer sleep will make very little difference in
the feeling of comfort at the moment, and will
greatly add to the difficulties of the day. As the
sitting-rooms will require to be done out thoroughly,
each in turn once a week, this will
require three mornings from six o’clock, and
even the time this will give may not be sufficient;
some things may have to be left undone, which a
considerate mistress will give the opportunity
of being completed after breakfast. In some
houses where the cook has assistance, the dining-room
is under her care, this will give more time
[35]

to the housemaid for the drawing-rooms and
study; but still as the stair carpet will require to
be brushed down oftener than once a week, and
should always be done if possible before breakfast,
the necessity of early rising at all seasons is
very apparent.

The housemaid, before leaving her room in the
morning, should throw open the window, draw
off the bed-clothes and hang them over a couple
of chairs, at the foot of the bed, and then carefully
shut the door on leaving the room. Wherever
there is a window to open to air the bed-room,
the door should never be left open, as
nothing is so untidy as for any one passing by
to see the beds unmade, and the washhand-stand
in disorder. She should next go round the
lower rooms and drawing-rooms to unclose the
shutters, and open the windows, that all may be
properly aired; let her then proceed to prepare
the sitting-room, which will be first wanted, and
in which the family are to breakfast. The grate
is the first thing to be attended to, as it is a
general rule that what is to make most dust in
cleaning a room should be done first. Begin by
folding up the rug, and carrying it into the court
below to be shaken, then spread a covering sheet
before the fire-place. If it is the season when no
fire is required, all that is necessary is to dust
[36]

out the grate and sweep the hearth, giving the
shavings a shake from dust—if there are shavings
in the grate, or if white paper is beyond the bars
removing it if necessary, she should then rub the
bars and sides of the grate briskly with a soft
cloth, which should be previously held before a
fire to remove the possibility of any dampness,
for the slightest damp will cause polished steel to
rust. But in winter the grate will require much
more labour: having carefully spread the covering
sheet, let her place upon it the coal-scuttle and
wood for kindling the fire, also her box, which
should be well stocked with the following articles.
Emery paste for polished steel, and black lead
for grates which are not polished; soft brushes
for putting on the emery paste and lead, blacking
and polishing brushes, emery-cloth, now used for
cleaning the bars in preference to emery paper,
and a soft leather for giving the last polish. It
is only now and then that the sides of a grate
which is brightly polished will require to be
cleaned with emery paste, and then rubbed up,
first with a soft cloth, and then with leather; but
every day the sides of the grate will require to be
rubbed with a soft cloth, which has been previously
heated, and the bars rubbed with emery-cloth,
the dust and ashes having been taken
away in the dust-pan before this is done, and
[37]

the sides of the vent and the back swept down
very gently, that the soot may not fly out into the
room, with a brush kept for the purpose. Much
smoke and discomfort may be avoided by the
housemaid regularly, once a week, when the room
is thoroughly done out, sweeping the soot from
the vent, as high as the arm can reach; it is not
possible to get a brush with a very long handle
up the vent, but in the bed-room story, where
the vents are shorter, the top almost may be
reached by putting up first a short hearth brush,
then tying it to a longer handle, and to another
and another, as you raise it in the vent. It may
appear almost unnecessary to describe how it is
to be got down again, but to prevent all distress
of mind to the young and inexperienced, it may
be mentioned that it is to be untied at the different
joints as it is lowered again, and also that when
this operation is to be performed, which will be
necessary only once, or perhaps twice, during the
winter, a fellow servant should assist by holding
a sheet before the vent to prevent the soot getting
out into the room. Great care must be taken,
that after the brush has been raised high in the
vent, it be not flourished about in a triumphant
manner, but used with the greatest gentleness in
removing the soot. As soon as all has been
cleared away, carried down stairs, and the grate
[38]

rubbed up and cleaned, proceed to lay the fire
and to light it. If the fire is properly laid, one
half of the wood generally used would suffice; a
clever housemaid has been known to light even
the drawing-room fire (which requires more wood
than the bed-rooms), with seven pieces of wood;
this however requires the skilful hand of what
would be called, in the language of the day, a

talented
housemaid; with moderate abilities,
however, she maybe taught to light four fires
with one bundle of wood, but even this will
require attention and the exercise of common
sense. If part of the ashes are left in a slovenly
way in the bottom of the grate, so as to prevent
the air from passing up, the wood thrust in without
arrangement, a mass of cinders put on the
top, and the window and door kept carefully shut,
what is to be expected but that, as soon as the
paper below the wood is lighted, the room should
fill with smoke, and the fire go out before even
the wood is burned away? The chief art in
lighting a fire is to arrange it so that a stream of
flame is carried up amongst the small coals, till
they are so warmed and kindled as to burn of
themselves: to effect this, the ashes and cinders
should be entirely cleared out from the grate;
then, having put a piece of paper, crushed together,
in the bottom, and a few small pieces of
[39]

the half-burned coal quite at the back, lay the
wood above the paper so as to rest on those pieces
of coal and on the front bar, taking care that they
do not come out beyond the bar; lay some of
the pieces of wood across the others, and, having
formed this support for the coals, pile very small
pieces, not larger than a nut, and very loosely,
upon the wood, so as to leave room for the flame
to pass up between them: the grate having been
cleaned from the ashes, the air which comes in
from the bottom will feed the flame, and drive it
up through the spaces amongst the small coals,
which, lying loosely together, will soon take a
red heat; a sprinkling of the smallest coal should
be added, as it flames easily, and is of assistance
to the wood.

It is a very general practice with housemaids
to pile cinders on the top of the wood, and then
throw a quantity of small coal above them, the
consequence of which is, that the air, not passing
through to carry up the flame, the wood is burned
away before the coals are lighted, and the smoke,
not being able to penetrate this cake of coal,
puffs out through the front bars of the grate,
instead of going up the chimney, and soon fills
the room, and (as the door is very generally left
open, and the window kept shut), we may add
the house also; for a careless servant, instead
[40]

of waiting a few minutes to see how the fire is
disposed to kindle, often leaves the room the
moment she has set fire to the paper in the grate,
and, having returned to the under story before
the smoke begins, it is frequently first discovered
by having reached the drawing-room, and, on
examination, the bed-room is found to be in such
a state from impenetrable smoke, that it is difficult
to find one’s way to the window to throw open
the sash. The paper on the walls, the curtains,
and everything in the room, will receive more injury
by being even once thoroughly smoked in this
way than by six months of careful use. Care also
should be taken that the register is opened before
lighting a fire; in rooms where there is not fire
during the day the register is generally shut, to
prevent the back smoke getting down into the
room, and the first thing a careful servant should
do is to open the register before lighting the fire.
Some chimneys vent better when the register is
only half screwed back, so as to open only half
the vent; some require to be entirely opened.
A little attention will soon make the housemaid
acquainted with the degree of draught which is
necessary to carry up the smoke freely, and in
most cases it will be found necessary to shut the
door and open the window before lighting the
fire; it is not the proper time to open the window
[41]

after she has set light to the fire, for the chimney,
being the only part in the room open to the air,
the draught comes down the chimney, and brings
out with it into the room the smoke of the new-made
fire, so that before she has time to get to
the window to open it the room is already half
filled with smoke; she should therefore open the
window first, which will make the proper draught
for carrying up the smoke, and then set light to
the fire.

There are very few chimneys that will not vent
well if care is taken to make a proper draught,
and not to choke the fire up with too much coal;
very little should be put on at first, and more
added as the fire burns up. The general practice
of putting the cinders next the wood, is not
favourable to lighting the fire quickly, or, with
little wood; a few cinders may be thrown at the
back of the fire, and the rest had better be carried
down into the kitchen to be burned there,
as small sharp-pointed pieces of fresh coal kindle
much more easily than cinders. It is astonishing
what a difference there will be, even in a very
short time, in the appearance of a room where
there is carelessness in lighting the fire; the
curtains, the books, everything in the room, gets
a soiled appearance, and is unpleasant to the
touch. Can there be anything more disagreeable
[42]

than to find one’s bed-room, at night, cold
as a cellar, from the necessity of keeping the
window open to the last minute to dispel the
smoke which inattention at first has produced,
and the smell of which still adheres to every
article, instead of finding a warm room, a comfortable
arm-chair turned towards a bright fire,
a shining kettle singing a quiet tune, and a clean-swept
hearth? Some housemaids have a habit
of constantly turning the arm-chair away from
the fire, and placing it against the wall, and
though, morning after morning, they find it has
been turned towards the fire, yet they never take
the hint, unless an express order is given; and
even then, such is the force of careless habits,
that it is often not attended to, and they continue
so long steadily turning the chair from the
fire, that it appears as if they had made a secret
vow against both warmth and comfort: an attentive
servant, on the contrary, will make use of
her own common sense, and will not always wait
to be told. If the chair has been turned from
the wall to the fire, she will continue to place it
there; if more than once she finds the bed-quilt
taken off and thrown aside, she will understand
that it is found too heavy to be an agreeable
covering, and will in future fold it off and leave
only the light covering sheet on the bed; if a
[43]

blanket is pushed down, then let her not carry it
away altogether, as there may come a sudden
change to cold, and much discomfort may be experienced,
but let her leave it tucked in at the
bottom of the bed, with the rest of the bed-clothes,
and folded down in folds, leaving the end uppermost,
so that in a moment the blanket can be
drawn up again over the bed: it is vexatious
when feeling chilly and half asleep, to find that
the end of the blanket has been carefully folded
in, and that one must be colder still, and broad
awake, before there is a chance of finding it.
Such observations may be thought trifling and
too minute, but the neglect of many such trifles
occasions much discomfort, particularly to those
who may be only occasional guests in a family;
they may be days in the house without seeing
the housemaid to explain their wishes, and even
if they have the opportunity, they feel a delicacy
in giving orders as to how their fire should be
lighted, or their bed-room comfortably arranged,
yet much silent annoyance, particularly to the
invalid, has been occasioned by a careless housemaid.

A few words may be added here as to carrying
fire from room to room in an open pan, and also
on leaving the poker in the fire with a view to
make it burn up more quickly; both practices
[44]

are attended with danger; sparks may be blown
about by the current of air through which the
bearer passes in carrying fire from room to room,
and houses have been burned down, and lives
lost, by this practice. Leaving the poker in the
fire is also attended with much danger, for as the
coals which kept it firm at first, burn away, the
poker gets loose and falls out, burning the rug
through to the floor, and, if not discovered in
time, setting fire to the floor itself.

To return, however, to the drawing-room
again, after this somewhat long digression. The
grate having been cleaned, and the fire lighted,
the carpet should now be swept; this does not
require to be done every day, except round the
table where the family may have been working,
and at the door, or in any other corners of the
room most in use; and this may be done with a
soft hand-brush, making use of the dust-pan to
carry away the dust, or any shreds of paper, as
you sweep. Using a carpet-brush every day
wears the carpet. Every article in the room
should now be dusted, the ledges round the walls,
the window-frames, the mantelpiece, the backs of
the sofas and chairs, shaking the dust, from time
to time, over the window while doing it; also
the writing-desks, work-boxes, and books, on
the different tables, should each be taken up and
[45]

dusted separately; a duster is preferable to a
dusting-brush for all this, as it removes the dust
from the article entirely, instead of only scattering
it to alight somewhere else; but for the gilt
frames of mirrors or pictures, a soft feather-brush
should be used. The covers of the sofas and
chairs should next be stretched free from creases,
and wiped with a perfectly clean duster, not that
which has been in use for dusting the furniture.
A little management is required in this, as in all
other well-regulated arrangements: the duster
used for wiping the chair-covers the one day
should be laid aside, and kept for dusting the
furniture on the next, so that each day a clean
duster is made use of for the cushions of the
chairs and sofas; from this not being attended
to, they are often more
dirtied
in being
cleaned

than if they had been left with the dust upon
them; with careful management the drawing-room
chintz will look long well, even in London.
The chair-covers should be stretched very tight
over the cushions; if put on loosely they will get
into creases, and look soiled in half the time;
the cushions on the sofas should also be well
shaken up. Care also should be taken in
arranging neatly the articles on the different
tables; if books are left scattered about, arrange
them on the table, putting two or three together,
[46]

above each other, but do not put a large book
above a smaller one; arrange them according to
sizes, the largest first. A small basket should be
kept on one of the tables, into which should be
put any small articles found lying about, such as
scissors, thimbles, odd gloves, &c., &c.; and before
leaving the room give a glance round to see
that everything is in perfect order, and draw
down the blinds, and shut the door; but in
summer leave a little bit of the window open, to
keep the room well aired, or if there is wind and
dust flying about, keep the window shut and air
the room by leaving the door open. If there are
cut flowers in the room change the water in
which they are frequently, and pick out any
withered ones: withered flowers, which have remained
long in the same water, not only give a
very untidy look to the room, but also produce
a very disagreeable air. Too great attention
cannot be given to keep the whole house well
aired, by frequently opening the windows, both
in the rooms and staircase. Some housemaids
have a horror of opening the windows, for fear
of admitting the dust, but the dust is not always
flying about. Opportunities can be seized, for
instance, in a quiet summer evening, when the
family are walking out; all the windows and
doors of the different rooms should be thrown
[47]

open for some time, and the house receive a
thorough airing; and besides this, each room
should be aired at some part of each day by leaving
the window open.

The daily routine of the drawing-room work
has thus been mentioned, but once a-week more
will be required, as the carpet, once a-week,
should be thoroughly swept with tea-leaves, and
the hearth-rug carried down to the court and
well beaten. As soon as the rug has been removed,
the grate cleaned and rubbed up, the
mantelpiece washed with a sponge and soap and
water, and the fire laid, shake the window-curtains,
roll them up to the top, and pin them, throw
covering-sheets over the sofas and chiffonnieres,
remove the chairs to the next room or landing-place,
and having sprinkled the carpet over with
damp tea-leaves, brush every corner carefully,
shifting the sofas and tables, so as to get at
every particle of dust that may have gathered
under them, and leaving no remote corner untouched
in the hope that the eye of the mistress
may not penetrate so far. The carpet being
swept, carry away the tea-leaves in the dust-pan,
either to be thrown out, or, if there is a scarcity,
to be put through water, and used a second time
in sweeping the floors. The mirrors and picture-frames
should be lightly dusted with the feather
[48]

brush, the mirrors wiped, the furniture, before
being carried back to the room, should be dusted
and rubbed up in the manner already mentioned,
the articles on the different tables dusted and
arranged, the inside of the windows wiped, and
the china ornaments carefully dusted.
[4]
All this
will require so much time that, even with early
rising, it may be necessary to leave some part of
the dusting-work to be done after breakfast, as
the hour for putting the heater for the tea-urn
into the hottest part of the kitchen fire, and
taking the breakfast-cloth from the napkin-press
will have arrived, and preparations must immediately
be made for breakfast.

Before laying the cloth let the housemaid wash
her hands, and put on a clean white apron, then,
having dusted the table and spread the table-cloth
quite smooth upon it, taking care that the
fold which marks the middle of the table-cloth
should be exactly in the centre of the table, let
her bring, on a large tray, the things necessary
for breakfast,—the teapot, slop-basin, cups and
saucers, plates, knives, silver forks, and tea-spoons,
and having arranged them on the table,
[49]

let the tray be taken down stairs again for the
cream, butter, eggs, rolls, and bread; let the
butter-dish be filled with the freshest spring-water
in summer, the colder the better, and in
winter a few drops of warm water should be
added, not much, or it will oil the butter, but
enough to give the water summer warmth. In
arranging all this on the table, attention should
be given that all that is necessary has been
brought into the room; that each person has,
besides his cup and saucer, a plate, knife, and
fork; that there is a large knife for cutting
bread, a butter-knife, and a spoon for each egg-cup,
the salt-cellars filled with salt, and a couple
of small breakfast-knives and of tea-spoons laid
upon the table, which last articles may at first
appear to be the property of no one, but which
are generally of essential service, in making it
unnecessary for the servant to be rung for during
breakfast; it is a rare thing when more knives
and spoons are not called for before breakfast is
over, and yet the difficulty of getting a servant
to attend to this simple order is very great; and
if it should chance that on any one morning the
spoons or knives have not been made use of,
they are sure to be omitted the next. It is the
same, often, with regard to the toast at breakfast
or tea; if all is not consumed on any one particular
[50]

day there is less sent up on the next, and
often a gradual diminution takes place daily, till
the toast-rack presents itself with one solitary
piece, which no one has courage to touch. These
are the tricks of lazy servants, who, to save a
few moments of trouble, bring much discredit
upon themselves.

If a friend steps in at breakfast or tea, the
maid, after having announced him, should not
leave the room till she has put a seat for the
guest, and should immediately return with a cup
and saucer, plate, and small knife, and not wait
till the mistress of the family has had to desire
the bell to be rung to order these things. Should
it be while dinner is going on that a guest is
announced, then the soup, meat and vegetables
should quickly be brought back if still warm, if
not, immediately warmed up, and replaced on the
table. The maid-servant should exercise her
own judgment in all this, and not wait for orders,
which may make the visitor feel that he is giving
trouble; common sense should tell her that, if a
guest comes at that hour he expects to dine, and
that a warm dinner is better than a cold one.

To return to the morning work, breakfast
having been served, the bed-rooms must now be
attended to; the first thing is to open the window
in each room, and to strip the bed, which is
[51]

done by placing two chairs at the foot, hanging
the bed-clothes over them, and raising up the
mattress (which is generally on the top of the
feather-bed) in an arch, so that the air can pass
through between; having done this in each
room in succession, proceed to empty the slops
in each, rinsing out the basins, bottles, and
ewers, with plenty of cold water, that fresh
water may be put into the bottles and ewers each
day, and carefully wipe the soap-box, tooth-brush-tray,
&c.; the pail should never be left a moment
in the room after this is done, but carried
down into the court to be instantly emptied,
well rinsed out with water and left in the air;
two pitchers of water should next be carried up,
the one with soft water for the ewers, and the
other with spring-water for the bottles; but if it
is sweeping-day when the room is to be completely
done out, a wooden pail should be brought
up with warm water, and all the chamber utensils
carefully washed with soap and a sponge before
the ewers are filled with fresh water, the bed in
each room should next be made up, and a fellow-servant
is required to assist in this. Few things
are more unpleasant than an ill-made bed; it is
generally the first thing which strikes guests on
being shown their bed-rooms; if the bed looks
as if it had been well shaken up, perfectly smooth,
[52]

and the counterpane nicely put on, folding neatly
over at the corners, pleasant anticipations of the
night present themselves, and a good opinion of
the housemaid is immediately formed; a well-made
bed gives promise that other things will
also be well attended to; it is, in fact, one of the
tests of a well-trained housemaid. In making
up the bed, the mattresses should be turned every
day, and if there is a feather-bed, it should be
turned, shaken up, and beaten, that the feathers
may not get into lumps, then smoothed and made
perfectly flat, the feathers being spread equally
over the whole surface, before the mattress is
laid on the top. Some housemaids have a way
of shaking the feathers into the middle of the
bed, leaving the sides in such a sloping condition,
that there is some chance of passing part
of the night on the floor, others of shaking the
feathers to the top of the bed, forming an inclined
plane, so that the constant feeling of sliding
down lower and lower leaves people very
uncertain as to where they are to find themselves
at last. It is impossible to make a bed too flat
or smooth, the bolster and pillows being well
shaken up also; the binding blanket should next
be spread, and tucked in, and in putting on the
under sheet, care must be taken to put it on as
tightly as possible, so that not a crease should be
[53]

seen, and the sheet should be tucked under the
lowest mattress, so as to cover the whole bedding;
it is very untidy to see the sheet tucked in
under the upper mattress and feather-bed, as is
frequently the case, leaving the rest of the bedding
uncovered, besides exposing it to dust and
smoke (the counterpane not being sufficient protection);
the blankets being spread, should be
tucked in during the day, but at night, if broad
enough, should be allowed to fall over at each
side, and only tucked in at the foot of the bed.
The top sheet is next to be put on, and lastly
the counterpane, which last in the evening should
be taken off, and folded up, leaving the top
sheet only during the night, the curtains, being
put neatly into folds, should be turned in on the
counterpane at each side of the top and foot of
the bed, and if it is the day for the room being
thoroughly cleaned, the valences should be
turned up all round, and the whole covered up
with a large dusting sheet: the washhand-stand
should also be covered, the grate having been
cleared out, rubbed up, and the fire laid as
already directed. If there is room on the landing-place,
the chairs should be rubbed up and removed
before the sweeping begins; if there is
not, let them be collected in the middle of the
room, moved up when the top of the room is
[54]

swept, and rubbed up and dusted afterwards.
The carpet being all strewed over with tea-leaves
and brushed—a sweeping-broom, with a wet
cloth wrapped round it, should be put in under
the bed, and gently moved about, so as to collect
the dust which gathers there, without raising it
so as to settle in the bed, and the same should
be done under the chest of drawers, or any other
piece of furniture too heavy to be moved. The
sweeping being over, and the dust-pan, with the
dust and tea-leaves, carried away, that the draught
when the windows are opened may not blow the
dust about again, the wardrobe, chest of drawers,
looking-glass, &c., &c., should then be rubbed
up, the window-frames, the chimney-piece,
the pannels of the door, and everything in the
room carefully dusted, and the chairs brought
back to their proper places; the housemaid goes
to another room to commence the same work
there, leaving the bed and washhand-stand covered
for a little while, till the dust which is flying in
the air will have settled. As soon as this is the
case, she has only to remove the covering sheets,
to fill the bottles and ewers with fresh water, to
place the looking-glass in a safe situation, that
it may not be blown over by the window being
open, and carefully to shut the door, that no
dust may fly in from the other rooms; if it is
[55]

summer and the blinds are let down to keep the
room cool, care must be taken not to leave the
blind loose, so as to blow about at the risk of
breaking the window or looking-glass; the blinds
should be only half drawn down, or if more is
necessary, the window may be left only a little
open.

The brushing the carpet, and removing and
rubbing the furniture, are not in general required
to be done more than once a week; but as every
day cleaning the grate, making the bed, wiping
everything on the washhand-stand, and dusting
everything in the room, are necessary, most of
this work will have to be done in the early part
of the forenoon, for probably before one chamber
even is finished, the housemaid will be rung for
to take away the breakfast-things. The urn is
the first thing to be removed, then the plates,
put one above another, the cups and saucers,
knives, forks, and every other article collected
together with the least possible noise, should be
carried away on a large tray, taking care not to
put more on at one time than it can safely hold,
for it is painful to see the way in which some
servants load the breakfast-tray so as to clear
the table of everything at once, decidedly indicating
that they would rather risk the whole
[56]

being broken, than have the trouble of returning
to the room a second time. On removing the
cloth, any crumbs which may have fallen on the
carpet, should be swept into the dust-pan with a
small brush, kept in a corner of the room for
that purpose; the carpet should never on any
account be touched with the hearth-brush; a
most slovenly practice, and all from a miserable
saving of trouble, for if no second brush be kept
in the room for this purpose, the time which it
will take the housemaid to fetch her own carpet-brush,
will be short compared to that which she
must bestow on brushing the carpet again and
again with tea-leaves, to get rid of the dust and
soil which it has contracted during a week of improper
management. It is not cleaning a room
once a week, and giving to it little time and
trouble, that will give it a clean, fresh appearance;
it is attention in doing a little daily, and
in doing that little in a proper manner. A carpet
had better not be brushed at all, than touched
with a dirty brush, and the chintz covers are less
injured even by the dust lying upon them, than
by having it rubbed off with a soiled duster,
which may have been used the moment before in
rubbing the furniture, or in wiping the fire-irons.
The crumbs having been swept away, fresh coal
[57]

should be put on the fire, and the hearth-brush
used in sweeping in the hearth before the maid
leaves the room.

Having shaken the breakfast cloth, folded it
in exactly the same folds as it had at first, and
put it into the napkin press, she will next proceed
to have her own breakfast, and that being
finished, she will put away the tea-leaves into a
jar kept for that purpose, and having put aside
the bread, butter, milk, &c., which may remain,
into their proper places, she will carefully wash
the plates, cups, saucers, &c., &c., in a large
wooden bowl, and with warm water—the vessel
for washing either china or crystal should always
be of wood, as it is much less liable to chip the
articles, and the water used should be warm, but
by no means at boiling heat, or accidents are sure
to happen, particularly in winter, when there is
frost in the air, as glass or china are then more
easily cracked: many a beautiful crystal butter-dish
has been cracked by being hastily plunged
into hot water, and even a far less degree of heat
will crack either crystal or china, if warm water
is poured upon it, while standing on any cold
surface. The warm water is required for the
butter-dish; crystal in general should always be
washed in cold water, as glass is made to look
much clearer by being washed in cold water.
[58]

So if any glasses have been used the night before,
let them now be washed in cold water, and well
rubbed up with a glass cloth, till they look quite
clear. The tea-spoons, cups, saucers, and milk-jug,
come next to be washed in warm water, and
lastly, the silver forks, plates, and butter-dish;
by this arrangement the articles not greasy will
not be dimmed by those that are; the knives
should be put aside in a knife-box, to be taken
away by the person who is to clean them, and
the tray, after being washed over, and well rubbed
up, should be placed in the butler’s pantry,
with its face to the wall, and each tea-cup hung
up on a nail, with the saucers ranged below on
shelves for the purpose; every article should be
put in its place, that all may be out of the way
of breakage, and ready when again wanted; it is
scarcely necessary to add that the linen cloths,
used for drying the cups, glasses, &c., should be
perfectly clean.

The work still to be done above stairs should
next be attended to and completed, and the
chamber candlesticks brought down to be
cleaned, and the lamps for the sitting rooms to
be trimmed and filled with fresh oil: this should
be done in a tidy manner, the drawer for the
ends of candles should be lined with coarse
brown paper, which will require to be frequently
[59]

changed, and a large sheet of brown paper spread
on a small table for the lamps and candlesticks
to stand upon. It is a dirty practice to clean the
candlesticks on the kitchen dresser (as is sometimes
done), for even if the paper be spread
beneath them, particles of tallow may be left on
the dresser, which are not perceived, and may be
mixed with the food preparing for dinner; it is
also an exceedingly bad practice to place the
candlesticks on the upper bar of the kitchen-grate
to melt the tallow; a most disagreeable
smell is raised in the house by the tallow dropping
into the fire, and the japan of the candlestick
is often injured by the heat. The knife
kept for scraping the candles should be wiped
with a bit of paper each time it is used, and put
back instantly into the candle-drawer, and the
oil-can also wiped. Great care should be taken
in cleaning the lamp: if all the passages are not
quite clear, so that the air can pass through, it
cannot burn well. There is now a small instrument
sold with the lamps which is of great assistance
in freeing them from the coagulated oil
and dust, and renders the necessity of washing
them less frequent; when they do require to be
washed, it must be done with boiling water and
soda mixed in it, then all the parts rinsed quite
clean in a second water, also very hot, and the
[60]

lamp put down before the fire for some hours
before it is filled with oil, so that all the parts
inside may be perfectly dry; if there is the least
remains of the soda or of water in the lamp, it
will burn dim. Attention also is required in
filling it quite full; a lamp often, after some
hours, begins to burn quite dim for want of sufficient
oil, yet the servant declares it cannot be
for this reason, as she filled it completely. An
air-bubble often rises in pouring in the oil, which
gives the appearance of its being full, and deceives
them—they must wait for a moment till
this subsides, and then continue gently to pour
in the oil till it is quite full. It is not necessary
to pour out any oil which may remain from the
night before; it is only required to fill it up; and
if in winter, the lamp should be put down near
a fire for some time before it is brought into the
room, as the oil congeals in cold weather, which
also prevents its burning bright. Pay particular
attention in cutting the wick quite smooth all
round with a pair of lamp-scissors: if it is ragged
or cut uneven, the light is flickering and uncertain—the
wick should be very little raised when
the lamp is first lighted, and turned higher up a
few minutes after, and by slow degrees; if it is
raised high at first, besides the risk of cracking
not only the chimney of the lamp, but the shade
[61]

itself by a sudden flame; it never burns so
bright again when turned down, as when slowly
raised to the proper height. The chimney should
each day be cleaned and made bright as a mirror—if
smoked or dirty, the light can never be
clear; the shade should be washed once a week
with soap and water, and during the day it is
well to have the lamp covered over with a paper
cap, or a towel put over it, as the dust flying
into the works makes it difficult to clean. It is
not easy to convince servants that attending to
those little things which they may think trifles,
saves a great deal of time in the end. If much
dust is allowed to fly in from day to day, washing
with soda and boiling water will not be sufficient,
the works of the lamp will require to be
boiled before it can be made perfectly clean.

When candles are required in the sitting-rooms,
in addition to the lamp, let the candlesticks be
properly cleaned, and fresh candles set in them,
and the shorter pieces made use of for the bed-rooms;
where wax-candles are not used, see that
the snuffers for the different candlesticks are
completely emptied and carefully wiped, and that
there is a pair of snuffers for each bed-room
candlestick, as well as for each sitting-room.
The lights being thus prepared for night, and the
work in the different rooms finished, if it is not
[62]

sweeping-day, the housemaid will still have some
time for needlework before laying the cloth for
dinner. Before sitting down to work, she will of
course wash her face and hands, change her
working-dress for a gown with long sleeves, a
white apron instead of a coloured one, and a tidy
modest-looking bobbin-net cap, coming close to
the face, and tied with a ribbon of some quiet
colour; nothing is more unbecoming in her
station, than a flying out cap hanging on the
back of the head, with gaudy soiled ribbons
streaming down in all directions. The style of
dress adopted by servants of late years is much
to be regretted; it is a loss of their money, of
their time, and above all, of their respectability;
a maid-servant can never be too scrupulously
clean and quiet in her dress.

A few more observations on this subject may
be added in another place. In sitting down to
work, she will take care to be within hearing of
the drawing-room bell, and the knocker of the
street door. By proper regulation there will
always be some part of each day for needlework,
and in the country, where less sweeping and
dusting is required, a great deal may be done in
this way. It is a pleasant sight to see a young
girl neatly and quietly dressed, busily plying her
needle, her tidy work-basket beside her well
[63]

stocked with cotton-reels, rolls of worsted, tapes,
needles, pins, scissors, and thimble. It will probably
be her business to mend the bed and table-linen,
to watch over the state of the carpets,
table-covers, &c., and repair them when necessary;
a slit or tear in the carpet, even of an attic, is
sure to give a bad impression of the housemaid.
The bed-linen should be carefully looked over each
time before going to the wash, and the slightest
fracture or slit repaired; and instead of allowing
the middle of the sheet to wear into holes, while
the sides are quite good, as soon as the sheet begins
to wear, the breadths should be unripped, and
the sides turned into the middle and joined again.
Care should also be taken that the buttons or
strings for each pillow-slip are complete; it is
most desirable that the housemaid should be a
good darner of table-cloths, and also of stockings,
for where there is no ladies’-maid the darning
of the ladies’ stockings will be part of her work;
and even where there is, the charge of the gentleman’s
stockings generally falls to her care; but
anxiety to get on with her work must not lead
her to forget when the time for laying the cloth
for dinner shall have arrived. Having previously
rung a bell precisely half-an-hour before dinner,
as a signal for the family to dress, which bell
should be punctual as the clock itself, and having
[64]

at the same time added fresh coal to the fire,
swept the hearth, and placed the plate-warmer
before the fire, she should enter the dining-room
to lay the cloth a quarter of an hour before the
dinner-hour strikes. To enable her to be ready
in this time, however, all must have been prepared
before sitting down to work; the clean
knives and forks put into the tray, the mustard
and vinegar replenished, the tops of the cruets
carefully wiped, and the salt-cellars filled. To
avoid as much as possible having to open and
shut the door often when laying the cloth, collect
as many of the articles necessary as you can bring
in at one time in a large tray, glasses, tumblers,
spoons, knife-tray, bread-basket, and beer and
water jugs. All being prepared, see that the
stand for placing your tray in while you bring in
the glasses, &c., is placed in a convenient corner
of the room, and that the basket for carrying
the plates and the trays for the knives and forks
which have been used, are placed near the sideboard,
but not in the way to prevent passing
easily. Having brought everything into the room
which is necessary, shut the door, and having laid
the cloth perfectly straight on the table, place a
plate for each person, with a napkin neatly folded
upon it, and on the right side of the plate, place
a knife and spoon, and on the left a silver fork.
[65]

The soup-plates should be placed before the
person who is to help the soup, and a carving-knife
and fork, and a gravy-spoon, put at the top
and bottom of the table. Place a salt-cellar at
each corner of the table, lay a couple of spoons
on each side of it, and a crystal caraffe filled with
clear spring-water; see that those caraffes, and
the tumblers and glasses (which should be placed
all round the table for each person) are perfectly
clear and bright: a clean glass-cloth
should be brought into the room to wipe off any
dimness which a finger may have caused. When
the different articles on the table are perfectly
bright-looking, and the dishes neatly sent up, the
plainest dinner has a look of comfort, and even
elegance about it. A knife, fork, or spoon,
which has not been properly cleaned, cannot be
taken into the hand without being discovered,
and leaving a disagreeable impression; a visitor
may not have the courage to send it away, but
the comfort of his dinner is destroyed. Having
cut some slices of bread rather thick, cut each
slice into four, and with a fork, put a piece all
round for each person, leaving the loaf in the
room in case more may be required; when more
is called for, hand some additional pieces in the
bread-basket. Place a chair for each person.

The sideboard should next be laid out with a
[66]

supply of knives, silver forks, spoons, tumblers,
glasses, and silver-waiters. As considerable taste
may be shown in the arrangement of those articles,
it may be well to take a lesson of laying
out a sideboard from the first butler, or experienced
man-servant, who may chance to be in
waiting on any of the dinner-guests at your
master’s table. All should be done without noise
or bustle, and with a quick hand and light foot;
jingling the glasses, making a clashing noise in
lifting the knives, knocking the chairs against
the legs of the table, and moving about with a
heavy foot, (and often with the addition of
creaking shoes,) are extremely disagreeable to
whoever may be in the room at the moment, and
even should no one be present, the servant should
accustom herself to do all these with the least possible
noise, that the habit of doing things quietly
may be acquired; activity is a first-rate quality
in a waiter at table, but then it must be quiet
activity.

All being prepared, the first dish should be
placed on the table as the appointed hour strikes;
the cook having brought the dishes as far as the
dining-room door, carry in the top and bottom
dishes separately, as they are generally large; the
side dishes may be brought in at once on the
dinner tray, which being placed upon the stand,
[67]

the dishes can easily be removed to the table. All
being neatly arranged, the top and bottom dishes
exactly opposite to each other, and the side
dishes perfectly straight, and at equal distances
from the top and bottom, announce to the family
in the drawing-room, that the dinner is on the
table. Standing back while they pass through
the door, which you have thrown open for them,
and having followed the last member of the
family down stairs, remain standing behind the
chair of your master till grace is said, then
remove the covers unless there is soup, in which
case the covers should remain on the other dishes
while the soup is being served; be careful to go
to the left hand of the persons you are serving,
when placing any thing before them, or handing
them anything; those to be first served are any
lady visitors who may be present, the elder ladies
first, then the younger, the lady of the house
and her daughters, and lastly the gentlemen. In
handing round the soup-plates, remove the flat
plates put at first on the table; and in the first
leisure moment place them on the plate-warmer
before the fire; let each soup-plate be taken
away the moment it is empty, having another
warm plate in your hand to replace it. The covers
on the other dishes should now be removed. In
handing round the soup-plates at first, be careful
[68]

not to spill the soup by placing them hastily
before any one; and in changing them for others,
make no clatter of plates; attend in going round
the table, not to push against any chair, or touch
any one as you pass, and take particular care
that no one’s dress should be injured by spilling
gravy or melted butter upon it; in handing the
sauce-boats, lower them as near as you can to
the left side of the plate, the person requiring
sauce can then help himself with the right hand,
without any danger of spilling it. If there are
any side dishes of meat, such as cutlets, patties,
&c., they should be handed round first, while the
joint is being carved. The spoons on each side of
the salt cellars now come into use in helping the
side dishes. Beware of offering a side dish to
any one till you have first placed a spoon in it.
As soon as each person has been helped to meat,
carry round the vegetable-dishes, then offer
melted-butter, pickles, &c., &c., as may be
required. Have your eye constantly on the
table, taking in by a glance all that is necessary
for you to do. Those that have been eating
cutlets, will require their plates to be changed
before being helped to the joint; and those that
have commenced with the joint, will now be
ready to be helped a second time, and to have
another plate given for the second helping.
[69]

When waiting at table there should be no gazing
out of the windows, or amusing one’s self with
one’s own thoughts; neither should the conversation
going on at table be attended to: this is
difficult, but if one accustoms one’s self from the
first to watch the numerous wants of the party,
and not their words, there will be sufficient employment
fully to engross the servant. Vegetables
will require to be taken round a second time,
and more bread to one, and beer or water to
another; in short, there is scarcely a moment in
which there will not be something required, and
if the servant is attentive and quick-sighted, she
will not find that she is standing idle at one
moment, and that in the next more of the party
will require to be served than she can attend to;
if there is a leisure moment, she can employ herself
by stirring the fire (if in winter), and if this
is not necessary, let her remain in quiet readiness,
with her eye upon the table, and her ear open to
the first request for her services. As each
finishes with the first course, let her place a plate
of smaller size generally used for tart or pudding
before him, with a silver fork and spoon: in some
families the spoon is not approved of, it is
thought that even custard should be eaten with
a silver fork; but the practice (or rather the
attempt) is more refined than agreeable or convenient.
[70]

As soon as the last person has finished
eating, ring the bell for the tart and pudding;
and having gone round the table with a knife-tray,
in which you should put the carving knife
and fork and gravy spoons from the different
dishes, carry away all that is on the table,
and bring in the tart and pudding. As soon as
each person has finished with the second course,
place a cheese-plate and small knife before them,
and when the tart and pudding have been carried
out into the hall (having rung for the cook to
carry them down into the kitchen), clear the
table-cloth with a spoon of the broken pieces of
bread, before setting down the cheese. Have
fresh pieces of bread cut in the bread-basket to be
handed to each person the moment they have
been helped to cheese. Stand behind your
master’s chair while he is cutting the cheese,
that you may be ready to carry it instantly round:
a good waiter will manage to offer the bread
immediately after the cheese, or even at the same
moment; but this is too little attended to; bread
has often to be cut after it is called for, and
sometimes there is no bread in the room, and
before more can be brought in, the cheese has
been eaten alone, and the waiter considered a
very intolerable person. The cheese being carried
away, any pieces of bread remaining should be
[71]

removed with a silver fork, the table-cloth folded
over at each side, doubled up, and taken out of
the room; the table wiped with a nice cloth, and
the wine decanters set before the master of the
house—having previously, before removing them
from the sideboard, wiped them gently with a
glass cloth, without shaking the wine. Put a
couple of wine glasses to each person—they are
generally of two sizes; the dessert-plates should
next be set round to each person with a napkin
neatly folded upon the plate, with a finger-glass
half filled with water, and a small dessert knife
and fork upon it. In winter, bring a jug of warm
water into the room, and pour a little into each
finger-glass, before placing it on the table. Let
the fruit be neatly arranged in the dishes, higher
in the middle than at the sides, but no dish so
full as to endanger any falling over when helped;
neither at dinner nor dessert should the dishes
be full. Place the larger kinds of fruit, such as
apples, pears, grapes, or oranges at top and bottom,
the smaller fruits and sweetmeats at the
sides. Place a crystal jug of clear water, with a
tumbler on each side of it in the middle of the
table, and pounded sugar at top and bottom,
which to look well, should be in cut crystal glasses.
If cream is required for strawberries or raspberries,
that also should be served in crystal.
Glance your eye over the table to see that all the
[72]

dishes are standing straight, and exactly opposite
to each other, and all being properly arranged;
leave the room, shutting the door behind you.

Having removed everything from the hall,
you will next shake and fold the table-cloth, lay
it in the napkin press, and carry the plates into
the scullery to be washed by the cook. It will
then be time to proceed to the drawing-room to
put it in order, before the return of the family.
You will smooth the sofa, shake up the pillows,
dust the table, and arrange any books or newspapers
(that may be scattered about) neatly upon
it; but beware of removing any book (which
some one member of the family may have been
reading), and stuffing it into an odd corner, or
even carefully replacing it in the book-case;
common sense should regulate in such matters,
and common sense should tell you, that it is
most disagreeable to have to hunt all over the
room for a book, in which one is interested, and
which had been left on the table half an hour
before. Having closed the curtains, put fresh
coals on the fire, and swept the hearth, it will
now be time to sit down to your own dinner with
the rest of the servants (unless the servants’ dinner
has been at an earlier hour): as soon as you
have finished, carry away the dessert things from
the dining-room, and having washed the dessert
plates, and the spoons, silver forks, tumblers,
[73]

and glasses, place all in order in the butler’s
pantry, and before you leave it, arrange the cups
and saucers in the tea-tray, so that if the family
is small, and you have not a great many articles
to wash, you can again sit down to work till
within a quarter of an hour of the time for tea,
when it will be necessary to get the butter and
cream in readiness, and to toast the bread or
cake for tea. Be sure to remember also to put
the heater for the urn into the kitchen fire in
such time that it may be completely red-hot
before putting it into the urn. Be careful also
that the water in the tea-kettle boils before it is
poured into it; the finest tea which can be used
becomes tasteless and bad, if the water in the
urn does not boil, and in some families this
happens day after day; the servant is either
obstinate or careless, and contents herself with
assuring you, either that it does boil or has
boiled. No such excuses should be listened to;
the most effectual cure in such cases is to send
the urn from the table each time that the rising
of the steam does not prove the water to be at
boiling heat.

While the family are at tea, the slops should
be emptied in the bed-rooms; the ewers and
bottles filled up with fresh water, and the beds
folded down. If in summer, the windows are
[74]

generally left open, and shut before the housemaid
retires to bed; and if in winter, the fire
should be lighted, taking care to shut the door
and open a little bit of the window before setting
fire to the paper in the grate, and to return again
in a little time to shut the window, and add
more coals to the fire, as more particularly mentioned
already.

Where there is no lady’s-maid, the housemaid
will also be required to lay out the combs
and brushes on the toilet, to stretch out the curl-papers,
or cut fresh ones; to lay out the nightcap,
neatly smoothed, and to unfold the nightclothes,
and hang them over a screen. Where
there is a lady’s-maid, the frills and nightcap are
generally ironed; but where the housemaid has
much to do, there is not time for this. Once a
week or fortnight, the hair-brushes will require
to be washed; they never should be plunged into
warm water, as it warps the back of the brush,
and destroys the polish, or discolours the ivory,
and softens the hair; a little soda should be
mixed in warmish water, and the surface of the
brush moved swiftly up and down in it, taking
care not to wet the back at all. The soda will
sufficiently clean it, and preserve the colour of
the hair, if too much soda is not used; if too
strong it will burn the hair, or turn it yellow;
[75]

the brush should be left to dry for some time in
the same position, with the face turned down,
that the water may run out. When brushes are
left to dry with the face up, the water lodges in
all the holes pierced for the hair, and discolours
the back. Be careful never to wash the tortoise-shell
combs, it makes them brittle and apt to
crack over; they should be cleaned with a comb-brush,
and rubbed with the palm of the hand to
keep up the polish. The cover of the toilet pincushion
should be regularly changed, as soon as
it gets soiled; though the washing is generally
given out, yet there are small articles to be
washed from time to time in all families where
things are well attended to, such as the tidies, for
the backs of sofas and chairs, the pincushion
covers, and where there is no lady’s-maid, and
the family is small, the housemaid may be also
required to do up the lady’s muslins.

It is the greatest advantage to all housemaids
to be able to get up fine linen, and to have a
knowledge of clear starching: besides making a
servant doubly useful to her mistress, it may be
the means at any time when out of a situation, of
her gaining a respectable maintenance. One
who gets up muslins and laces in a superior
manner, is sure to find employment, and it may
also lead to her filling one day, the superior situation
[76]

of lady’s-maid. Her excellence in this department,
is not only valuable as adding to the
elegant appearance of her mistress, but is productive
of great saving in expense. A fine
worked collar, with expensive lace, may be torn
or frayed, the very first time it is done up, by
improper management, and it is seldom that fine
muslins or lace have the elegant appearance they
should have, or last the proper time, from ignorance,
or the want of due attention in getting
them up. Nothing spoils the appearance of dress
more than torn lace, battered and stiff, and fine
muslin with the starch clouded upon it or
frayed and ironed awry. It will require considerable
practice to attain perfection in this department,
and the best way to learn is to see
others do it: still a few instructions may be useful.

Muslin or lace should never be rubbed in
washing. Take white soap, in proportion to the
muslins you have to wash, shave it down, and
boil it with soft water till it dissolves. When
cold, it should be as thick as jelly; mix a part
of this jelly with soft tepid water, so as to be
strong of the soap; let the muslins lie in this
for a night, then add boiling water; move them
up and down in the water, repeatedly squeezing
them through the hands, so as to wash them, but
[77]

do not rub them. Having steeped them well in
soap and water before, makes rubbing quite unnecessary;
tie them loosely up in a pillow-case,
and with soft water, and the rest of the boiled
soap, boil them for a couple of hours; if in the
country, they should be laid out on the grass to
bleach (without the soap being washed out), and
watered when necessary, so as to keep them
moist. If in town, where no bleaching on the
grass can be procured, put them into a washing-tub,
and having poured boiling water over them,
leave them in the back court in the air for the
rest of the day, and during the night in the
water; this has a great effect in whitening them;
in either case, after being bleached, rinse them
twice through cold water, to clear them completely
from the soap, and hang them up to dry
before being starched. A piece of lace, or any
small article can be very well bleached by being
put outside the window in the sun, in a crystal
bottle of water, having been previously washed,
and the soap left in it.

It is a frequent practice not to boil the starch,
but to mix it with boiling water, to hang up the
muslins or laces the moment they have been put
through the starch, and squeezed out, and when
dry, and as hard as a piece of board, then they
water them down (as it is called), leaving one
[78]

spot dry, and the rest wet, so that to stretch them
out for ironing, without tearing them, is almost
impossible. This mode of proceeding may account
for the melancholy frequency of torn lace,
and the dull heavy appearance of beautiful
worked collars, looking as if they had been partially
rubbed over with flour and water. To give
them that light transparent look which adds so
much to their beauty, the treatment must be very
different; the starch should be mixed in a little
cold soft water, and bruised down with the back
of a spoon till quite smooth: more water should
be added, till it resembles thin milk, then boiled
in a glazed-stone pipkin, till it becomes clear
and thick, so as to jelly when cold. The muslins
and laces should be put through the starch,
while it is still warm; squeezed out first in the
hand, then gently in a clean smooth cloth, so as
to get as much as possible of the starch out
without fraying them in any way. The cloth
must not be twisted round in the slightest degree,
but gently pressed between the hands,
putting but a few of the articles in at one time;
each article should then be taken separately,
held lightly by the two ends with the forefinger
and thumb of each hand, and beaten between the
palms of both hands for a few minutes; next
shaken out and drawn, so that each thread in the
[79]

muslin is perfectly straight, and the shape of the
collar is carefully preserved. If after holding it
up between you and the light, you find that in
some parts it is not sufficiently clear, then a
little drawing up and down on those spots will
be necessary, so as to free every thread from the
starch. It should then be folded up in a damp
cloth, and each article put beside it, as soon as
it has gone through the same process, so that
the whole may have a slight degree of dampness
when ironed. When it is not convenient to do
up muslins the moment they are starched, it answers
well after they have been squeezed in the
cloth, to fold up each article, and to leave them
wrapped up together in a cloth for some hours,
or a night, to clear themselves. When this is
done, they generally require only to be drawn a
little, and folded up for ironing; but where great
clearness is to be obtained, the stiffer the starch,
and the more they are beaten, the better.

In getting up fine things well much also depends
on the ironing. The ironing-blanket
should be thick, so that the work on the collars,
&c., &c., should have a raised look after being
ironed; where the blanket is thin the hard surface
of the table flattens the work, and injures
the appearance. The ironing-blanket should be
covered with a piece of thin, smooth, long-cloth,
[80]

kept for the purpose, and washed each time it is
used. In spreading out the collar, or whatever
you are about to iron, see that it lies perfectly
even, and that each thread is straight up and
down; also that the iron has been carefully
cleaned, first rubbed on a piece of old carpet,
and then wiped with a cloth; and also that it is
not too hot. Singing is a common fault with
the inexperienced, and it is a very bad one; for,
even when it is not to such a degree as to burn,
which may easily happen with a very thin
muslin, still it leaves a yellow shade, which not
only destroys the appearance at the time, but is
very difficult to get rid of. A little practice in
handling the irons will soon accustom one to
the degree of heat necessary, and till that is the
case, an old pocket-handkerchief, or some such
thing, should be at hand to try each iron upon
before you venture to iron anything of consequence.
Do not pass your iron frequently over
the same place if you wish the muslin to retain
the stiffness, and also you should hang the
article on a screen before the fire the moment it
is ironed; it becomes soft if folded up with the
slightest dampness upon it. Lace which, to
look well, should not be stiff, is improved and
cleared by being put through cold water as soon
as it has been starched; it should then be
[81]

squeezed out held by each hand, very slightly
beaten between the palms of the hands, and
gently drawn out; in drawing out the edge the
nails must never touch it; it should all be done
by the ball of the thumb and forefinger, and
ironed once or twice over to take out the stiffening.
When lace is sewed to a muslin collar,
and washed with it, as the collar requires to be
stiffer than the lace, it will be necessary, after
putting it through the starch, and clearing it by
beating and drawing it, to gather the lace together
in the hand, and dip it into cold water, so
as to take out a good deal of the starch (taking
care not to wet the collar); but this is only
necessary where the lace is put on with very
little fulness, or quite plain; where it is put on
full enough to be set up in small pipes with the
French irons, or rather, curling tongs (as they
may be called), it is not necessary to extract any
portion of the starch; the lace is the better for
being stiff, and, if rather damp when set up in
these small pipes, they will retain a regular and
tidy appearance as long as the collar can be
worn.

These small French irons are to be got of
different sizes, and answer remarkably well for
nightcap-borders, or frills of any kind. When
making use of them you should be near a stove
[82]

or fire, where they can be frequently heated, for,
as they cannot be used when very hot, for fear
of singing the lace, they require to be constantly
heated, and must be wiped with a cloth each
time before being used.

The care of the silver plate will also be part
of the housemaid’s occupation in a family where
no footman is kept. Every day, what is in daily
use will require to be washed perfectly free from
grease, in boiling water, then rinsed through
cold water, wiped with a clean linen cloth, and
rubbed up with soft chamois leather; very little
daily rubbing will be required if, once every
week, the different articles are washed with a
sponge in pretty strong soap lye, well rinsed in
warm water, and rubbed up with the chamois
leather; it is the rubbing well that gives polish
and brightness, and where plate is cleaned regularly
once a week with soap, it has a beautiful
pale bright silvery look, very different from that
dark lustre which plate, cleaned with rouge, presents.
Quicksilver is generally mixed with those
plate-powders sold in the shops, and the high
lustre which it gives at first is soon effaced, and
gives place to a dark, tarnished appearance; besides,
if plate-powder of this nature is frequently
used, the article becomes so brittle that a silver
spoon or fork may be broken by a fall on a stone
[83]

floor. Once in the three months it may be well
to clean all the plate thoroughly by washing it
first with soap-lye and hot water, and then rubbing
it, either with the finest sifted whiting and
spirits of wine, or strong spirits, or with prepared
hartshorn and spirits of wine, and, when
quite dry, polishing briskly with the soft chamois
leather, and also with the palm of the
hand—the longer plate is rubbed the brighter it
will look. The rouge sold by silversmiths is
generally composed of prepared hartshorn mixed
with quicksilver, and coloured with a little rose-pink,
and an extravagant price is demanded for
it: but in many houses, where the plate has been
remarked for having a particularly beautiful appearance,
it has been ascertained, that washing
with soap lye, and polishing with chamois leather
and the palm of the hand, had done all, and that
only twice during the year had the plate been
cleaned with plate-powder; prepared hartshorn,
with only so much rouge as to give it a pale
pinkish appearance, were then used.

It is painful to see the way in which, sometimes,
the silver spoons, forks, &c., are scratched
by coarse dry whiting being used. Where the
finest whiting and spirits of wine cannot conveniently
be made use of, it is well, at the time
of the general cleaning of plate, after the soap
[84]

has been used, to boil whiting in water, then dip
the different articles into this mixture, and, when
the whiting has dried upon them, polish them
with the chamois leather. A soft brush will
also be required in cleaning plate, to brush the
whiting well out of the carved places.

Plated articles should be cleaned in the same
way, and rouge had better be avoided altogether
in cleaning them. Nothing stronger than spirits
of wine and whiting should be used, and that
as seldom as possible; and they should not be
rubbed more than can be avoided to clean them.
When not in use they should be kept in flannel,
or green baize, or buried in well-dried bran, so
as to be kept quite free from damp, and from the
air. It has been found from experience, that
plated articles, once cleaned with plate powder
in which there was some injurious mixture, have
never recovered it; they look bright for a short
time after being cleaned, but each time they are
put aside for a little they become so completely
discoloured, and it requires such hard rubbing
to clean them, that the silver plating must be
very soon entirely effaced. When candlesticks
are spotted with wax or tallow, do not scrape
them, but pour boiling water upon the spots
before cleaning them.

Whether in town or country, it is necessary
[85]

to fix particular days for such operations as are
not of daily occurrence; such as cleaning plate,
washing brushes, arranging the butler’s pantry,
comparing lists, &c., &c. As the linen is generally
given out in the beginning of the week,
and two days of each week will be required to
clean the rooms thoroughly, Friday might be
fixed for washing brushes, cleaning plate, and
dusting the butler’s pantry; and Saturday and
Monday for mending the linen, previous to its
being given to be washed. In the bustle of a
town life particularly, the plate will get tarnished,
the pantry dusty, and all will get into confusion
in a housemaid’s work, unless certain days are
appointed, and regularity in observing them enforced;
even in the country, without regularity
in cleaning, all will soon assume a slovenly appearance;
and if a mistress has not given
written instructions for the arrangement of the
work, it would be well that the housemaid wrote
them down for herself, and strictly adhered to
them.

In cleaning her pantry her labour will be
greatly diminished by attention in placing the
trays always with their faces to the wall, turning
the wine-glasses, tumblers, &c., up-side-down on
the shelves, placing paper covers on the lamps,
and keeping the drawers carefully shut; dust
[86]

will still penetrate, however, in some degree, and
make it necessary, from time to time, to wash
the pantry itself, and all it contains; but where
the things in daily use are put by perfectly clean,
and wiped dry, so that the dust does not adhere
to them, a little weekly attention in dusting will
keep all as it should be for a considerable time.

The plate, when rubbed up weekly, should be
compared with the written list, so that any missing
article may be instantly looked for. And
the china, glass, &c., should be counted over the
same way when the pantry is thoroughly cleaned,
and the mistress informed of any breakage or
want which may be discovered. In some houses
it is a rule that a servant is forgiven if she instantly
gives information of having broken any
article. With a truly careful, conscientious servant
this may answer very well, but it has been
found to render others only more careless, as
they get over the shame and distress of such
confessions, and it may be well that they should
be made aware, that in proportion as those accidents
(as they are always called) happen, a part
of the price of each article will be required.

It is quite wonderful the difference in expense
which a careful or a careless servant will make
in a family. Some servants will go on for
months without cracking or chipping a single
[87]

article, either of glass or china, while others,
both from mismanagement and carelessness, are
meeting with a
misfortune
(as they generally
call it) every week. It is careless management
when a servant seizes upon a vessel of
earthenware to wash the china or glass, instead
of the wooden bowl which her mistress has appointed
for that purpose; the slightest touch
against the hard surface of the earthenware may
be the means of cracking or chipping a valuable
cup or glass; and, even with the wooden bowl,
care and management are required. If the cups
and saucers are all put into the bowl at once,
they may be knocked against each other, and injured
in the same way; whereas, if the warm
water (not too warm) is poured into the wooden
bowl, and only one article dipped in at a time, it
is almost impossible that either cup or glass,
however fragile, can be injured.

It is also careless management when a servant
attempts to cut bread from a loaf lying across
a plate much too small for it; in this case the
loaf only rests on the edges of the plate, without
touching the middle, and the additional pressure,
in attempting to cut it, may split the plate in
two. The same is likely to happen where large
plates are heaped upon the top of small ones;
and, in cleaning lamps, the shade (which is a
[88]

very expensive article) is frequently broken by
being laid on its side, and rolling off the table; it
may often be the oily appearance of the rim, and
the fear of soiling the table, which leads to this,
but a moment’s reflection will show, that both a
safe and a clean mode of disposing of it would be
by turning the shade up, and placing it on its
upper rim on the table. Many lamp-shades are
also cracked by the lamp, after it has been cleaned,
being pushed hastily against the wall when placing
it on the shelf in the butler’s pantry; it is
right and orderly to place it on the shelf, to be
out of the way of accidents, but it is wrong to do
it in so careless a manner as to produce the very
accident it was meant to avoid. The shades are
often cracked, also, by the lamp being turned
up too hastily when first lighted; the sudden
strong flame cracks the glass immediately. And
tumblers and wine-glasses are generally cracked
by hot water being poured hastily into them.

With a careful servant none of these things
will happen. She will put the loaf on end before
cutting from it, she will place the largest
plates at bottom, and not pile too many on each
other, and the lamp will be set carefully on the
shelf, and when lit, by turning it slowly up, the
flame will be gently raised, so that the glass will
be heated by degrees.

[89]

But when an accident does happen, from whatever
cause, let instant information be given, and
reproof borne patiently. Remember that the
fault of concealment is infinitely the worse fault
of the two; it is not only mean and dishonourable
to an earthly master, but it is a sin against
God. “
For God will bring every work into
judgment, whether it be good or whether it be
evil
.”
[5]
And servants may break the eighth commandment,
“
Thou shalt not steal
,” in many ways
besides actually taking what does not belong to
them. A servant has many things under her
care. If therefore she indulges in dirty and
careless habits, she injures her master’s property,
and is in this respect dishonest. All
wastefulness is a species of dishonesty, for to
waste or destroy her master’s property is to deprive
him of what is his. Eye-service is also
dishonest; by eye-service is meant, doing well
only as long as the eye of a mistress is upon
you, forgetting St. Paul’s exhortation—

“
Servants, obey in all things your masters
according to the flesh; not with eye-service, as
men-pleasers, but in singleness of heart, fearing
God.
”

“
And whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to
the Lord and not unto men.
”

[90]

“
Knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive
the reward of the inheritance, for ye serve the
Lord Christ.
”
[6]

Yes, service is honourable, and vice and virtue
belong to no one station in life. The Gospel
teaches, that all are servants, and that with God
there is no respect of persons, but all alike are
called upon to do their duty in that station of
life in which heaven has placed them. It is the
duty of a master and mistress to watch over the
conduct of their servants. In allowing them to
continue in error, they become partners in their
fault, and it is the duty of servants to bear reproof
with patience—“
Not answering again
”—and
to render an implicit obedience, and a willing
service, daily imploring assistance from a higher
power, to withstand the temptations to which they
are hourly exposed, and to fulfil the duties of the
situation in which they have been placed. A few
words have already been said on the propriety of
a servant dressing in a quiet and modest manner.
Neatness and economy are the points most necessary
to be attended to. Nothing gives a more unpleasant
idea of a servant, than to see her flaunting
about in dirty finery. Muslin dresses, artificial
flowers, &c., &c., are all unbecoming in her station
in life. In a gown neatly made of cotton-cloth
[91]

or stuff, a tidy white apron, and a neat little clean
cap of bobbin net, with coloured worsted drawn
through the cases, she will be genteelly and well
dressed, for she will be dressed according to her
station. One cannot see a servant dressed in
this modest and becoming manner, without feeling
respect for her, and forming a good opinion of
her general conduct and character; in her daily
work there will probably be the same spirit of
cleanliness and regulation, and in her mind also.
A mistress has been heard to observe, that in
looking out for housemaids, her mind always
turns to the remembrance of a young girl, who
was with her but for six weeks, during the illness
of her own servant. This girl was regularly
and cleanly in doing her work, but by no means
remarkably clever. It was her quiet, neat, modest
appearance, that left so favourable an impression.
It was her grey stuff gown, white apron, and pure
white muslin cap, with the border plaited close
in about her young and blooming face, that was
still remembered with interest. No ribbon or lace
was ever seen on this young girl, and her mistress
learned on inquiry, that during a dangerous illness
she had been visited by a worthy clergyman, who
had earnestly endeavoured to raise her mind
above the vanities of this world. She had made
a resolution then, that she never would again
[92]

dress beyond her station in life, and never spend
another farthing on lace, ribbon, or finery of any
kind, or even wear them if given to her; and she
had at that period kept her resolution for many
years. How differently does one feel towards a
girl flaunting about in vulgar finery, with bright
ribbons, and coarse artificial flowers, mimicking
her mistress in manners, and attempting to outshine
her in dress! It is impossible not to conceive
a bad opinion of that servant, both as to her
judgment and heart. It is very evident that more
attention is given to dressing up her own person,
than to doing her mistress’s work, and that she
prefers a bright ribbon, or gaudy artificial flower,
to the power of occasionally helping an old father
and mother, or a sick sister, or relation, or if no
such claims are upon her, of putting what she
can spare from necessary articles of clothing into
the savings’ bank, so as to ensure a small fund
for times of sickness or for her own old age.
Let no one think that a shilling, or even a much
smaller sum, is not worth the laying up, and that
it may therefore be as well made use of in the indulgence
of some piece of dress or amusement,
and that those presents of money which a servant
may occasionally receive from her mistress’s visitors,
may lawfully be employed in the purchase of
imitation lace, or some such piece of useless finery.
[93]

There is certainly no moral law against her
spending, as she chooses, what is her own, but in
so spending it she injures herself materially. It is
not meant that in anxiety to save she should be
shabby or mean in her appearance, but a gown of
cotton, or woollen stuff, will last double the time
of one of a thinner texture, and in it she will be
better dressed because made properly; and she
would do well to remember, that even a few half-pence
saved at a time, will soon amount to a shilling,
and even a single shilling will be received in a
savings’ bank; and that if the half-crowns given
to her from time to time were added to those
lesser savings, and such a wise habit were begun
on a girl first going to service, and continued as
her wages increase, the money thus placed will
have doubled itself again and again before old
age comes on, and the feeling of independence
will not only increase the enjoyment of the present
moment, but greatly brighten the future, for even
the most unthinking servants must sometimes
look forward with dread to that day, when their
services will be rejected, and when old age will
come upon them, before either friends or money
have been provided. A silly flaunting girl, who
spends all upon her person, and is for ever
changing her situation, from the hope of higher
wages, or getting into a gayer family, cannot expect,
[94]

in poverty or old age, to be assisted by those
who probably were only too happy to get rid of
her imperfect services. Whereas, a girl whose
heart is in her work, and in the wish to save her
mistress trouble in every possible way, and who
never enters her presence but with an appearance
so neat and modest, as constantly to ensure her
respect and approbation, may one day come to be
looked upon more as a friend than a servant, and
to assist her endeavours at independence in the
time of sickness or old age, will be considered as
a real pleasure. A good mistress will esteem the
possession of a perfectly faithful and attached
servant as a blessing which no money can either
purchase or repay; in times of sickness, particularly
(for sickness will come in all families), what
comfort and alleviation have been experienced from
the unwearied, watchful care of an attached servant;
and though the care of the sick does not
usually fall to the housemaid’s duty, yet a few
words on this subject may one day or other be
found useful.

In a good nurse, a light foot and very gentle
movements are indispensable requisites; the most
watchful care cannot atone for the absence of
such qualities; it is only those who have suffered
from illness themselves that can tell all the
misery of a heavy foot, or quick or hasty movements
[95]

in a sick room: all bustle or noise should
be carefully avoided; the rustling sound of folding
or unfolding a newspaper, or even turning hastily
the leaves of a book, is painful to a sick person;
loud speaking is generally refrained from, but
whispering is often indulged in, and, to the sick
ear, nothing is more fatiguing than the indistinct
buzzing sound of words which cannot be understood.
By attention and forethought almost
every noise which is hurtful in a sick-room can
be avoided. If you have creaking shoes let them
immediately be changed for light slippers. If
the door has a rusty lock, or creaking hinges, let
them be oiled. Avoid the noise of throwing
small coal upon the fire (which often rattles
down upon the hearth), by lifting small pieces of
coal with the tongs; or, have an old glove to
hand, and lift them with your hand; and, when
the fire requires to be poked, use a bit of wood,
so as to avoid all clatter of poker and tongs
against the grate. Keep in mind, that at all
times the absence of noise and bustle is desirable,
but to the sick, whose nerves are in a proportionally
weak state with the rest of the body, it is of
the very greatest importance. Have a table
covered with a nicely clean napkin, so that no
noise is made in putting down a glass or spoon,
and to avoid as much as possible going out and
[96]

in of the room, have a tray covered in the same
way, and filled with all you are likely to require,
such as a few cups, glasses, spoons, &c., &c. A
pitcher of fresh water should also be in the room,
and, if in cold weather, it is better to have a small
kettle by the fire than to have to send to the
kitchen every time warm water is required. The
cups, glasses, &c., should not be sent from the
room to be washed, but a wooden bowl, and a
supply of clean towels, kept on a table in a corner
in which they can be washed up the moment they
are used. The greatest possible cleanliness should
be observed in a sick-room: a nauseous draught
may be made infinitely more so to the patient by
being presented in a smeared, sticky glass.
When it is necessary to taste anything before
giving it to a sick person, take a clean spoon,
which you should immediately put aside to be
washed, but never put your lips to the cup or
glass. In giving anything to the sick, spread a
napkin, for the moment, on the upper sheet,
that no drop, should it fall, may give an untidy
look to the bed. The washing and arranging the
necessary things should not be done in the
patient’s sight, but in some quiet corner of the
room; to witness continued movement, or even
occupation of any kind, is often most fatiguing
to a sick person. Never leave the room without
[97]

thinking of all you can take away and bring back
at the same time, that your opening and shutting
the door may be as little frequent as possible.

If the patient is too weak to be able to leave
her bed, the linen may be changed by rolling the
under sheet up at both sides, towards the middle,
and putting the clean one, with one half rolled
up, in its place; the patient can then gently be
lifted up over those rolls to where the clean half
of the sheet has been spread; the two rolls of
the original sheet should be removed, and the
other half of the clean one unrolled on the opposite
side of the bed to where the patient has been
placed. To change the upper sheet, a person
should stand on each side of the bed, and holding
each a corner of the top of the sheet, let
them insert it at the bottom of the bed, and then
pull it gently up; the other sheet can be removed
by being pulled down in the same manner.
The bed-linen should be hung before a fire
for some hours, and thoroughly aired, before it
is put upon the bed; and when it is necessary
that, in changing the linen of the patient, it
should be put on warm, hold the collar of the
nightgown to the fire; when thoroughly warmed
turn that part in, warm the next part, and fold it
in, in the same manner, and continue warming
and folding till the whole is one close roll, which
[98]

should be instantly carried to the bed of the
patient. It is not sufficient to hold a nightgown
before the fire, and then carry it unfolded across
the room, to be cooled by the outer air before it
reaches the sick-bed. Body linen should be
changed even oftener in sickness than in health,
and no clothing worn during the day should be
continued to be worn during the night; every
article should be hung up, so as to be completely
aired before morning; in the same manner,
what has been used during the night should be
left off in the day. When the patient is able to
sit up long enough to have it done, the bed-clothes
should be regularly carried out, and aired
before an open window in another room, and the
bed left uncovered, and the mattress turned;
where the patient is so weak as generally to be
confined to bed, considerable relief may be experienced
by being raised in bed by means of a
bed-chair, for much support is required by the
back when in an upright position. Where there
is no bed-chair, a small footstool, put behind the
bolster, doubled, and the pillows, is a tolerably
good substitute; it adds greatly to the comfort
of this position to have something for the feet to
rest against, something solid, which will not
change its place when pushed against. Where
there is a foot-board it is easy to place some
[99]

such article on the bed; and even where this is
not the case, it can be managed by a strong
brace of linen being first fastened across the foot
of the bed. By attention to this manner of
raising the patient, the stress is taken off the
spine, without which there can be no relief in the
change of position. A light shawl or mantle
should be at hand, to be thrown over the shoulders
of the sick person when sitting up in bed,
and while lying down; the air of the sick-room
may be often changed, by throwing a shawl over
the bed, or even drawing it over the face if necessary,
while the window is opened for a few
minutes. It is often refreshing to a sick person
to have a few drops of vinegar sprinkled about
the room, and to have their temples and hands
spunged with vinegar and lukewarm water;
even such small changes as these are generally
an expressible relief to the sick, if administered
gently, without haste or bustle.

Preparations should be begun in good time for
laying a patient quiet for the night, as they may
be made feverish by not having perfect quietness
in the room at an early hour. A small table
should be set by the bed-side, on which fresh
toast and water, and any medicine to be taken
during the night, should be placed within reach
of the patient; or, if they are so ill as to require
[100]

any one to watch by them, let the person seat
herself, not too near the bed, but still within
reach of perceiving the slightest sign, or hearing
the gentlest whisper; and let her be careful so
to shade the light, which it is necessary to have
in the sick-room, so that no ray, either from
candle or rushlight, may fall upon the eyes of
the patient, or on any part of the bed.

The necessary medicine, or toast and water,
when required, should be given to the sick without
entering into anything like conversation, or
asking needless questions, which, by awakening
them completely, may break their rest for the remainder
of the night. Young nurses in particular,
often err from over anxiety to make themselves
useful, and the idea that they must for
ever be doing something for the patient: they
are constantly urging them to take a little nourishment,
or to change their position, or to allow
their pillow to be beat up, while they are only
anxious to be left in peace, and to rest their weary
head in the position in which they themselves
have placed it.

FOOTNOTES

[1]
Loose white wrappers kept for that purpose, should
be thrown over the working dress, while the beds are
being made.

[2]
To cover the floor with brown paper before the
carpet is put down is a great preservative.

[3]
Spots of grease on the carpet should not be washed
out. Fullers’ earth, in fine powder should be rubbed in

dry
and left for some days before it is brushed off.

[4]
Attention should be given to the manner in which
the China ornaments are placed before they are taken
up to be dusted, so as to replace them exactly in the
same position.

[5]
Eccles. xii. 14.

[6]
Colossians iii. 22, 23. Titus ii. 9.

LONDON:

G. J. PALMER, SAVOY STREET, STRAND.

End of Project Gutenberg's Common Sense for Housemaids, by Ann Fraser Tytler

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COMMON SENSE FOR HOUSEMAIDS ***

***** This file should be named 59166-h.htm or 59166-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/9/1/6/59166/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.