The Project Gutenberg EBook of Cancer--Its Cause and Treatment, Volume 1
(of 2), by Lucius Duncan Bulkley

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Cancer--Its Cause and Treatment, Volume 1 (of 2)

Author: Lucius Duncan Bulkley

Release Date: May 19, 2019 [EBook #59550]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CANCER--ITS CAUSE, TREATMENT, VOL 1 ***

Produced by Richard Tonsing, Turgut Dincer and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)

Transcriber’s Note:

The cover image was created by the transcriber and is placed in the public domain.

CANCER

ITS

CAUSE AND TREATMENT

BY

L. DUNCAN BULKLEY, A.M., M.D.

Senior Physician

The New York Skin and Cancer Hospital, etc.

NEW YORK

PAUL B. HOEBER

1915

Copyright, 1915

By
PAUL B. HOEBER

Published, February, 1915

Printed in U. S. A.

To

THE GOVERNORS

of the

NEW YORK SKIN AND CANCER HOSPITAL

whose kind appreciation of and assistance to the author

in his clinical work in their institution have

done much to encourage him and to

promote the interest of the profession

in the branch of

DERMATOLOGY

this little book is inscribed

7

PREFACE

Cancer has hitherto been regarded almost
wholly from its histological and surgical
aspects. The investigators and practitioners
along these lines have been innumerable,
the work done prodigious, and the
literature relating thereto enormous. But
relatively little attention has been paid to
the medical aspects of this most threatening
malady, although voices have been
raised from time to time, with more or less
force, all joining in the same plea that the
basic cause of the disease lies in some derangement
in the vital forces of the organism,
as influenced largely by diet and mode
of life.

It has, therefore, seemed to the writer
that it was time to stop and look at cancer
from a broader aspect, and by synthesis

8
and deduction to seek to understand some
of the underlying causes of malignant disease;
also to see if some general principles
could not be ascertained upon which could
be based an explanation of the views he
had long held, and of the practice which he
had long followed in regard to the prevention
and cure of this dire malady. And
as his studies progressed he was more and
more satisfied that the true solution of the
cancer problem lay along the lines indicated,
although there was still very much
to be learned regarding the details and application
of the principles involved.

The lectures were prepared for and delivered
to practicing physicians at the New
York Skin and Cancer Hospital, in connection
with the regular Wednesday lectures
on Diseases of the Skin, as I felt that
I should give them the benefit of what I
felt to be of value in my own practice, private
and public.

Although holding the views here expressed

9
for many years I have hesitated
writing strongly on the subject before, lest
I should be misunderstood or misjudged:
for favorable results based solely on a
clinical diagnosis of cancer are always
doubted. I have also feared lest by advocating
a dietetic and medical consideration
and treatment of cancer, which possibly
might not be carried out exactly, I might
really do harm; since some might be led to
neglect operative measures in proper cases,
at the proper time; and so in certain instances
great injury and injustice might be
done to the patient, and the time pass in
which a surgical operation might possibly
be of service.

But with my views and experience,
strengthened greatly by what studies I
have been able to make in the midst of a
busy professional life, I now feel that I
should do wrong in not presenting the results
and conclusions of my study and observation.
And I wish also to enter my

10
strong protest against the course which is
usually followed in regard to cancer, both
before and after operation. With a rather
extended experience during the last forty
years, I have rarely if ever found a patient
with cancer who has received adequate and
continuous medical care before operation,
with a view of discovering and rectifying
the cause of the morbid growth. Too often
when a cancer is suspected or discovered
it is taken as a foregone conclusion that
the malady is hopeless, except as the
results
of the disease
, that is the new growth,
may be removed by the knife, X-ray, radium,
caustics, etc. And after a surgical
operation, as far as my observation goes,
the patients are invariably left entirely to
their own resources, with the hope, alas,
too often futile, that the tumor will not
regrow, but with no attempt to so guide
the life that there shall not be the same
tendency to a recurrent malignant new-formation.

11
Against this latter course I
also raise my earnest protest.

In presenting matter from literature
bearing on the subject under discussion I
am well aware that I have hardly more
than touched the surface of the deep ocean
of recorded observations on cancer, but it
was the best that I could do in my busy
life. I only hope that others will take up
in earnest the subjects here presented, and
that this pioneer work may lead to the
building of a strong and permanent structure
regarding the true basic cause of cancer.
Truth never fears proof.

In studying the subject I have been
greatly assisted by the masterful work of
Roger Williams, so often referred to and
quoted from; and I feel that a candid and
careful perusal of that book will be a revelation
to many. I know that some have
endeavored to throw discredit upon some
of the deductions which he makes from

12
various statistics, but in the main they all
teach a valuable lesson and are worth serious
consideration, as they are taken from
reliable sources.

Realizing fully that the problem of the
cause and proper treatment of cancer is a
most profound one, which master minds
have long wrestled with and which cannot
be fully settled without much further
study, these lectures are presented to the
profession at large in the hope that they
may be the means of helping some one
threatened with or suffering from malignant
disease; and also that they may possibly
stimulate others to investigate even
more diligently along the lines of the
medical aspects of cancer.

January, 1915.

531 Madison Avenue.

13

CONTENTS

PAGE

LECTURE I

Nature of Cancer

15

LECTURE II

Frequency and Geographical Distribution of Cancer

43

LECTURE III

Metabolism of Cancer

70

LECTURE IV

Relation of Diet to Cancer

106

LECTURE V

Medical Treatment of Cancer

135

LECTURE VI

Clinical Considerations and Conclusions

170

Bibliography

211

Index

221

15

CANCER

ITS

CAUSE AND TREATMENT

LECTURE I

NATURE OF CANCER

It may be safely said that no disease which
has afflicted mankind has received as much
attention as Cancer, or concerning which
there has been as much diligent search to
find out its nature and cause. Tuberculosis,
which seemed at one time to threaten
even the existence of the race, has sunk
into relative significance, as we have
learned its true nature and conquered some
of the causes of its ravages, and reduced
its mortality very largely. Syphilis, under
various names, forms, and aspects, was
formerly much more of a menace than now,

16
and in earlier years caused veritable epidemics,
but is now well understood and controlled.
Leprosy is less of a terror than
in earlier times, since it has been definitely
shown not to be contagious. Smallpox no
longer rages, and yellow fever, and the
plague, and hook worm disease have been
hunted down by scientific study and the
application of proper sanitary and medical
measures. And so on in regard to many
of the ills which afflict mankind.

But cancer has held its own and has
even increased in frequency, with rapid
strides and bounds in some localities, until
now it looms large as a national
[1]
or even
universal scourge; it has been estimated to
cause the death of half a million persons
yearly among the civilized people of the

17
earth, and untold misery and suffering to
many times this number. And all this is
still going on in spite of the earnest, faithful,
and intelligent labors of innumerable
research workers, the sacrifice of countless
animal lives, and the expenditure of vast
sums of money; and the end, as far as relates
to its prevention and cure, seems almost
as far away as ever, for many surgeons,
in past and present times, have
acknowledged their inability to cope with
the disease.

Much, however, has already been established
by scientific research, and still more
earnest thought, observation, and endeavor
should be given to seeking most diligently
for the cause of the disease, in the laboratory
as well as in practice; for there must
be some cause of cancer, and also some
reason for its steady increase.

But it is never to be forgotten that, as
Pope says, “the proper study of mankind
is man,” and clinical observation, with

18
laboratory research, on cancer as it appears
in the human being, must be the ultimate
base upon which all true advance in
the knowledge of the nature, treatment,
and prevention of the malady can ever rest.
To effect this we must study the human
being in all relations of life, must know the
constitution and class of subjects in which
the disease is most apt to manifest itself,
understand the chemico-physiologic actions
going on in the system, before and during
the existence of the disease, and by a process
of synthesis and deduction understand
what is wrong and endeavor to correct it.

All this is indeed a great undertaking,
and can only be accomplished by great effort
on the part of many careful and skilled
observers. But I want, in these lectures, to
give you an outline of my own thought and
study for many years, and, if possible, to
let you see as I do the lines along which
investigation should be directed. It is
hoped, therefore, that this and the following

19
lectures will throw some light on the
connection of cancer with diet and mode
of life, and some suggestions as to its prevention
and cure.

Parasitism
has been excluded: for while
at different times many observers have reported
various organisms which were
thought to be the cause of malignant
growths, none of these have been definitely
confirmed by others, in spite of earnest
endeavor; and all experimental and clinical
evidence is against a parasitic etiology of
cancer. It is therefore seen how improper
it is to speak any longer of “
the germ of
cancer
,” for, as is now widely acknowledged,
there is no such germ, it is an
ignis
fatuus
which has been chased in vain.

The
contagiousness
of cancer has also
been excluded, certainly in the sense in
which this term is applied to other affections.
For while in some animals inoculation
experiments have resulted in the
transmission of certain tumors, little has

20
been determined except that such tumor
material when transplanted can, in some
unknown manner, multiply its cells indefinitely
and form a focus of malignant disease,
with disastrous effects on
adjoining tissue. The same occurs in
metastasis in cancer patients. But this
does not at all explain the true basic
nature of cancer, nor its development in
those who have had no connection with
other patients so afflicted. On the other
hand the instances of suggested or supposed
human transmission of cancer from
one individual to another are so remarkably
few, and so exceedingly doubtful, that
a recent author, Janeway, states that “no
well-authenticated cases of the transfer of
a malignant tumor from one human being
to another exist.” It has been found impossible
to inoculate human cancer into
rats, mice, and apes, nor can animal tumors
be inoculated into animals of a different
species.

Heredity
has been advanced as a cause,

21
but statistics fail to verify this in any degree
whatever. While certain instances
have been brought forward in which heredity
seemed evident, the study of large numbers
of those afflicted with cancer, in connection
with others free from the disease,
has shown almost the same proportion of
antecedents with cancer in both classes of
persons; although some recent evidence
seems to show that there is some tendency
in different families for different organs.
Experimental studies have, it is true,
seemed to demonstrate that tumors occur
apparently along hereditary lines in some
animals in regard to certain organs; but
in these instances it is to be remembered
that the animals were kept in captivity, and
all fed alike, conditions which have been
found to cause the development of malignant
disease in wild animals when confined
in Zoölogical Gardens.

In former years
malaria
was believed to
have an influence in the production of cancer,

22
and some investigators have thought to
trace the prevalence of the disease to
telluric
influences
, showing a preponderance
of cases along certain water courses, or in
certain streets or houses; but no definite
proof of such connection has ever been established,
and this theory is dismissed by
the best authorities.
Syphilis
, in its latent
effects, has also been claimed as an element
in the causation of cancer, and undoubtedly
the disease may develop, in suitable persons,
upon old syphilitic lesions, especially
about the mouth, anus, and genital region:
but no one well informed in regard to cancer
would regard syphilis as the real cause
of the disease. All these and other etiological
propositions are no longer considered
to be tenable, and the very multiplicity
of suggested causes shows that we are yet
very far from the true etiology of cancer.

Age
undoubtedly has a powerful influence
in the development of cancer, the vast
majority of cases occurring after the age

23
of forty or fifty. But, again, this does not
at all explain the true nature of the disease,
for only a certain proportion of elderly
people are so afflicted, and malignant
tumors have been observed in those of all
ages, and even in young children. The degeneration
of tissue belonging to advancing
years undoubtedly renders it more susceptible
to malignant disease, but this does not
explain why one person is affected and not
another, nor why the tissues in one locality
or another take on this morbid action.

More recent scientific study has attempted
to show that cancer originates
from what are called “
embryonic rests
,”
or pre-natal, wrongly placed, tissue elements,
which at some time or other take
on morbid action and develop into what
we know as the various forms of cancer.
Williams says, “From a biological standpoint
tumor formation must be regarded as
a phenomenon of the same order as reproduction
in general: that is to say, as a special

24
form of overgrowth of the individual.”
But here again it is necessary to determine
what causes them at certain times and in
certain places to thus proliferate and form
new tissue, which then becomes malignant
and may proceed to destroy all contiguous
tissues, and even to cause death.

Traumatism
has been claimed by many
as the cause which determines the activity
of the misplaced cells, and starts them on
their disastrous or rampant course: the
various percentages of the cases in which
it was believed that traumatism started up
the malignant process has varied greatly
with different observers, even up to 50 per
cent, or more. But it is far from proven
that this is always the case, nor does local
injury in any way explain the persistency
with which malignant disease, when once
started, pursues its destructive and even
fatal career; nor can traumatism account
for the great tendency to recurrence constantly
observed, either in the former site

25
or at some distant focus, through the
agency of the lymphatic or vascular system.
For of multitudinous traumatisms, even in
cancer subjects, how few ever develop into
malignant disease!

It would seem, therefore, that for the development
of the local manifestation of
cancer (the tumor or new growth) three
elements are requisite, namely: 1. A predisposition
or suitable blood condition. 2.
A local stimulation or irritation of the
part affected,
upon
, 3. The site of an
“embryonic rest.”

On the basis of the embryonic theory
surgeons have of late most earnestly advocated
the very early and complete removal
of malignant lesions, including those of
suspected malignancy, and even also the
removal of many innocent lesions which
are observed occasionally to lead to cancerous
formation; and unless a better plan
can be determined this cannot be urged
too strongly in proper cases.

26
But while early operation has improved
surgical statistics, it has not contributed
to our real knowledge of the basic cause
of cancer, nor has it taught us why those
lesions or “embryonic rests” will remain
quiescent for years, or prove harmless in
some individuals, while in others they become
most formidable agents of destruction.
For it is now recognized that these
wrongly placed tissue elements are very
common anatomical or histological accidents,
indeed it is claimed that they occur
and exist in every individual: and the
removal of isolated “embryonic rests”
which have developed into cancer, does not
by any means prevent the transformation
of other similarly misplaced cells into malignant
disease, as the frequent recurrence
of cancer after operation demonstrates.

The same is true of the many and various
forms of treatment other than surgical
excision, such as deep acting caustics, and
even the X-ray and radium, which like

27
surgery, only remove the focus of possible
systemic infection, and do not affect the
basic cause of the complaint: this latter is
being shown more and more, by scientific
investigation and observation, to be associated
with metabolic or chemico-physiological
changes in the system, and evidence
is accumulating that it is dependent upon
them.

All this leads thoughtful persons to
inquire if there is not some deeper, fundamental
cause lying back of the trouble,
which should be reached and rectified
by medical skill and acumen, something to
do with the life or diet of a person which
renders the tissues liable to take on malignant
disease. So that a recent surgical
writer on cancer states that “all study,
whether clinical, pathological, or experimental,
points to the fact that there is
some underlying, hidden cause which leads
to that aberration in the action of tissue
cells which we call cancer,” ... a cause

28
“residing in only the cells themselves or
in some abnormal chemical constitution of
the plasma bathing the cells, or in both of
these possibilities acting together.”

Occupation
has been questioned, but
with most unsatisfactory results, for in
some statistics which have been gathered
cancer has been observed in those following
all possible pursuits: and while laborers
stood first on the list, clergymen stood
fourth, while carters, threshers, and
guides, who would be exposed to local injury,
were at the bottom of a long list. It
has been found, however, to be more frequent
in trades or occupations in which
the individual is most subject to the habitual
abuse of alcoholics, as in bartenders,
printers, etc.

We see, then, that thus far no satisfactory
cause has been established for the
occurrence of cancer, much less for the
steady and great increase of the disease of
late years. And as far as can be learned,

29
no measures are recognized, or at least
generally adopted, to prevent its occurrence
or recurrence; although, as already
stated, modern surgery has seemed to improve
the statistics in regard to its mortality
in certain forms or locations, and
the X-ray and radium have certainly also
been able to remove, perhaps temporarily,
some of the products of the disease.

We come then to the question, what is
the real nature of cancer? Alas, all scientific,
experimental, and clinical investigations
have failed to solve the problem,
except that all “evidence points to the
conclusion that cancer is to be considered
as a pathological disturbance of the normal
cell life,” from some unknown cause.
A curious suggestion has been made by
Schmidt, who found that of 241 cases of
cancer of the chylopoietic system, 180 had
never had any infectious disease of childhood,
and 99 went through life without any
infection of any kind; the figures point to

30
the existence of a cancer diathesis—one
which is resistent to germs.

It would carry us too far from the practical
side of our subject, even if we were
at all able, to present or analyze the vast
number of contributions which have been
made to the pathological histology of cancer,
and the changes which take place in
the transformation of normal cells into
those of malignant character: the amount
of microscopic work which has been done
along this line can hardly be imagined, and
the literature relating to it is enormous.

Ewing, accepting the definition that the
cancer process is “atypical and destructive
proliferation of epithelium,” quotes Ribert
as saying that “no one has ever seen the
beginnings of mammary cancer”: but he
does not bring us much nearer to the solution
of the cancer problem than we were
before. Bainbridge rejects all possibility
of a blood condition, and finds the only
solution of it in the early removal of everything

31
which is thought to lead to cancer,
even the simplest benign new formations,
but Ewing states that “in some cases carcinoma
has developed after excision of
wholly benign fibro-adenoma”: and the
immense number of cases of recurrent cancer
after operations shows that we must
look further than surgery if we wish to
stay the progress of this formidable disease.

It would be useless to attempt to present
the many theories which have been advanced
relating to cellular metaplasia, or
even to detail all the more or less accepted
views in regard to the manner in which
normal cells change and degenerate into
those of malignant character: but some of
the principal facts may be of service in
understanding somewhat of the mode of
development of malignant tissue from that
which has been normal.

The statement of Virchow, “
Omnis
cellula e cellula
,” that is, “where a cell

32
arises there a cell must have previously
existed, just as an animal can spring only
from an animal and a plant from a plant,”
forms the basis of all study on the genesis
of cancer and all tumor formation; karyokinesis,
or indirect nuclear or cell division,
is at the bottom of all growth, both normal
and malignant, and the two classes of
growth differ only in their methods and
activity. In healthy tissues cell proliferation
and destruction proceed in an orderly
manner, forming homologous structures,
as when the hair and nails are constantly
produced from newly formed cells at the
root, and the result of this new growth is
removed mechanically when the hair and
nails are cut from time to time, or the hairs
fall out. In the case of the skin the epidermal
layers are pushed forward and finally
exfoliated as useless epithelial débris.

With the cells composing other, or internal
structures, however, the process is different.
For here each normal cell reproduces

33
others of homologous structure, and
the different parts of the system are thus
kept in active service through anabolism,
by means of which new cells are formed
with renewed vitality, and the older, or
effete cells are removed by catabolism; the
elements of which they are composed are
thus split up into their component parts,
and carried off by the blood or lymph
stream, and are then either discharged as
effete substances or reutilized in the system,
along physiological lines. Wakefield
has pretty clearly shown that the developing
cancer cell is the product of sub-catabolism,
or a sub-oxygenation, induced by
hyperacidity or oxidase deficiency in the
surrounding medium of the blood plasma.

A great deal of thought, study, and speculation
have been given in regard to the
behavior of the cells themselves, and
strong arguments are adduced for a local
cell pathology, that is, regarding the cells
as “autonomous beings, possessed of morphological

34
and physiological independence.”
But on the other hand we must
recognize some restraining influence which
continually causes the great mass of cells
to reproduce those of homologous structure,
in an orderly manner, and only very
rarely some of them to break loose and
form tumors, which may then become malignant
and even destroy life. How this
restraining influence is modified or withdrawn
is, of course, a part of the problem
of cancer. Those who maintain their autogenous
character lay great stress upon
the polarity of cells, and the relation of
the centrosome to the nucleus, indicating
a change in the polar axis in cells about to
be cancer-genetic, as does Ewing in his recent
classical study of pre-cancerous lesions.
But whatever changes are observed
microscopically we must recognize that the
cells themselves must be influenced ultimately
by that mysterious force which we
call life, which ends with its extinction

35
from the body as a whole, and which is
ultimately related to nerve action. We
must also recognize that the cells everywhere
depend for their life and activity
upon the plasma in which they are bathed
and from whence they draw their sustenance;
and this plasma is renewed day by
day from the food and drink taken.

Students of cancer are more and more
recognizing and acknowledging that “all
these phenomena, apparently so different,
are merely protean manifestations of one
common process which underlies and is the
cause of them all, to wit, cell growth and
proliferation. The particular outcome of
the process in any given case is due to the
influence of the conditions of nutrition—understanding
by this term the whole of
the material changes wrought in the organism
through its relation with the surrounding
world. This being so it is easy to
understand how, under favorable conditions,
certain cells may take on independent

36
action, growing and multiplying without
regard to the requirements of adjacent
tissues and of the organism as a whole.”

There seems to be some reason to support
the view advocated by Williams, that
tumor formation and growth are but forms
of agamogenesis, or non-sexual reproduction
of cells, distinctly related to the decline
in growth of the body in general.
Hence while the forces of growth, development,
and reproduction are in greatest activity
the tendency to this disease is relatively
small: but when growth declines and
nutrition is relatively low the cells undergo
gemmation, owing to perverted nutriment,
and thus hyperplasia and not inflammation
is the starting point of every neoplasm.

Experimental work has time and again
demonstrated that cell growth, either good
or bad, is modified in no uncertain way by
the character of the nutrition furnished.
Cancer has repeatedly been observed to
disappear spontaneously, as such cases are

37
on record by careful and competent medical
men: in certain of these instances it
has occurred in connection with a radical
change in the mode of life and diet, but in
the majority of instances there is no record
of the special cause of its disappearance.
The lesson to be learned from this is that
there are conditions of the system which
are antagonistic to the abnormal proliferation
of cell tissue, even when it has begun
to take place, as we must believe that there
are other conditions of the system which
favor such diseased action of aberrant
cells.

An interesting confirmation of this is attributed
to Ehrlich, but I cannot find the
original reference. He “has shown that
mice living upon a rice diet cannot be inoculated
with cancer, while mice living on a
meat diet can be readily inoculated, cancerous
tumors developing quickly and continuing
to grow until the animal dies.
Ehrlich also found that when mice with

38
cancerous tumors, the result of inoculation,
were placed upon a rice diet, the tumors
ceased to grow, and in many cases degenerated
and disappeared.” Valuable corroboration
of this has been given by Sweet,
Corson, White, and Saxon. They made a
series of experiments in regard to the “influence
of certain diets upon the growth of
experimental tumors,” all with the same
results. Of fifty white mice, 25 fed on
glutenin and gliadin, and 25 on normal
diet, 23 of the 25 on normal diet acquired
tumors, against only 4 in the 25 on the glutenin
and gliadin. This was repeated on
50 males, with the result of 18 in 25 against
3 in 25: and in a third series, of 50 females,
the figures were 15 in 25 against 7 in 25.
Thus, they found that 75 per cent. of 75
mice developed experimentally inoculated
tumors when under normal diet, while only
19 per cent. of other 75 mice developed
such tumors when under a diet of glutenin
and gliadin, that is, vegetable proteins;

39
moreover, the tumors in the latter were in
30 days hardly larger than those in the
former in 10 days. Rous has recently
shown that large growths of certain transplanted
rat and mouse tumors are checked
in their development by underfeeding the
host on a special diet.

The chemistry of cancer has been studied
in most varied directions, and the literature
relating thereto is very voluminous
and can be hardly more than alluded to
here. It is unfortunate, however, that most
of the researches have been made in connection
with patients who have advanced
cancer, and very commonly with the disease
affecting internal organs, which of itself
interferes very greatly with their
function, and so causes many of the perturbations
of metabolism observed. What
is needed are researches in regard to the
metabolism of patients before the development
of the disease, or in its earlier stages,
before it has exerted its injurious effects

40
on the system, in order to learn of the
causes which lead up to and induce the
wrong action of the cellular elements,
whose invasion and malignant action subsequently
become so serious.

It is quite impossible in these lectures to
enter at all fully upon the various bio-chemical
studies which have been carried
on in regard to cancer, but brief mention
will be shortly made of some of the salient
points. Not only has the structure of carcinomatous
tissue been examined chemically,
but the blood and urine have been
submitted to most painstaking investigation,
and metabolism in general has been
studied in almost all possible directions, in
the search for the cause of cancer; and yet,
as Beebe says, “no phase of metabolism
has been described in cancer which does not
have a counterpart in non-cancerous conditions.”
But, as previously mentioned,
all these observations and studies have
been largely made upon advanced cancer

41
cases, when the system has already felt the
unsettling and depressing effect of what is
probably an injurious secretion from the
deranged and actively proliferating cells
of the cancerous mass. In a later lecture
we will consider some of these matters in
so far as they have relation to the dietetic
and medical treatment of cancer.

The essence of our study thus far has
been, that in every instance what is called
malignant disease is but an aberrant action
of originally normal body cells. That, as
normal cells find their nutriment in the circulating
plasma, so some pathological
change in this latter causes them to take
on abnormal action, and they no longer develop
homologous cells, capable of forming
normal tissue, but heterologous elements
which have a natural tendency to disintegrate
or break down, and exert a destructive
influence on adjoining cells of any
kind; and in this process they secrete a
hormone which is prejudicial to the system

42
and tends to destroy life. In later lectures
we shall endeavor to understand this more
perfectly, and consider some of the elements
in life which tend towards the production
and arrest of cancer.

43

LECTURE II

FREQUENCY AND GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION OF CANCER

Cancer in man exists all over the globe,
but in different degrees of frequency, according
to varying conditions of life, as we
shall presently see. Malignant growths
occur also in animals and fishes, though
also with greatly varying frequency under
different conditions; but there are few real
tumors in reptiles or amphibians. Tumors
are also occasionally found in vegetable organisms,
presenting increased growth and
proliferation of cells, arising from adventitious,
or abnormally evolving buds, as
also from parasitic and other external irritants.
While these vegetable tumors are
very interesting and in a measure instructive,

44
in regard to the peculiarities of cell
growth which they exhibit, they bear, of
course, no relation to cancer in the animal
kingdom, although some have endeavored
to argue otherwise. There is, however, a
certain suggestion of analogy to be found
in the observation made by one writer,
that “the origin of buds, as well as their
subsequent development, is chiefly determined
by the conditions of nutrition.
Wherever there is an excess of nutritive
material, capable of being utilized for
growth by the cells of the part, there buds
may arise”; we shall see later that the
same thought applies to cancer in man and
animals, when we come to the consideration
of the relation of overindulgence along certain
lines of eating and drinking to cancer.

Cancer has well been styled a disease of
modern civilization, like tuberculosis, although
of quite a different nature. Interesting
studies have been made in regard to
the increased death rate from the former

45
in England, coincident with a diminished
mortality of the latter, in accordance with
nutritional changes which have taken place
in certain populations: and in the first lecture
I mentioned that in the United States
the mortality from tuberculosis had fallen
25 per cent. between 1900 and 1912 while,
as we shall see later, the mortality from
cancer has certainly risen.

Williams, who quotes very largely from
the accurate statistics which have long
been carefully recorded in England, says
that “while tubercle has declined with
great rapidity, cancer has increased at a
still faster rate, and these inversely related
changes are still in active progress. In
illustration of these remarks it may be
mentioned that during the last half of the
nineteenth century, the cancer mortality
for England tripled: while, during the
same period the tubercle death rate declined
to the extent of nearly one-half.
Unless some great change in the national

46
habits takes place, of which there is at the
present no well marked indication, cancer
will ere long claim more victims than
phthisis, as is already the case in many
localities—e. g., Hampstead, Clifton, Bath,
etc.” He further says, “I regard this decline
in the presence of tuberculous diseases
as the direct outcome of the better
food and improved hygienic conditions, for
which we are indebted to our increased national
prosperity: and I shall endeavor to
show that conditions of this kind, by their
action in another direction, are also mainly
responsible for the augmented cancer mortality.”
We shall see later that cancer has
asserted itself where modern civilization
has augmented the opportunities of overindulgence
along many lines of eating and
drinking: for while advancing scientific
knowledge has undoubtedly diminished
mortality in general, and has added to the
average length of life, the various factors
included in our modern mode of living have

47
also with certainty increased morbidity
along such lines as neurotic and vascular
disorders, tumors, etc.

All statistics from various localities
show that cancer has certainly increased
in frequency very greatly of late years, and
though some have attempted to claim that
this increase is only apparent, and is due
to greater accuracy of diagnosis, and the
prolonging of more lives to an age when
cancer is more common, there is no doubt
in the minds of those who have studied the
figures that the increase is certainly very
real; and unless there be found some way
to check its production, the death rate at
the end of the century will be appalling.

It is quite impossible here even to give
a comprehensive idea of the immense
amount of work which has been given to
the study of the statistics of cancer in various
parts of the world, as collected in the
remarkable works of Roger Williams and
Jacob Wolff, but brief mention must be

48
made of some of the items observed and
recorded in order to properly understand
our subject. Williams in particular has
analyzed the recorded facts in an interesting
and convincing manner, and shown
again and again in connection with the figures
from different countries, sections, and
cities, that the occurrence of cancer bears
a striking relation to the condition of the
people in reference to their material prosperity;
namely, that the well-to-do, who
can overindulge in many ways are vastly
more subject to cancer than those in the
poorer walks of life; also that aborigines
in the wilder parts of the world are either
almost exempt from cancer, or suffer from
it to a very much less degree than civilized
foreigners who come to their lands. This
is also shown in a very striking manner by
Wolff, and I present here a table which
he gives in regard to the progress of cancer
in a single country, Australia, among
the native born and foreigners.

49

OF 100,000 LIVING THERE DIE OF CANCER IN AUSTRALIA

Year

Number of Inhabitants

Native Born

English

Other Nationalities

1851

403,889

28

14

1861

1,153,973

5.6

30.5

19

1871

1,168,377

9.7

56.7

25

1881

2,252,167

16.8

72.9

32.6

1891

3,183,237

19.8

119.8

45.9

1901

3,771,715

22.6

203.1

57.3

He remarks, “We see from this comparison
in what a great degree the death rate
from cancer has increased in foreigners as
compared to the native born, in whom the
disease has remained about stationary,
when the increase in population is considered.”
Another writer remarks that when
native Australians mingle with foreigners
as servants or employés, and adopt their
diet and customs, cancer occurs more frequently
in them. Much the same has been
reported in regard to other peoples and
nationalities, and later we will consider the
influences of urban life on the production
of cancer.

50
In New Zealand, according to Hislop and
Fenwick, where the general death rate is
the lowest in the world, cancer is on the
increase, as civilization advances. In the
great majority of cases the alimentary
canal is the seat of invasion, even in
women: all the patients studied were
hearty eaters, taking also very much
strong tea many times daily.

The Polynesians and Melanesians seem
to be peculiarly exempt from cancer. Sir
William McGregor, although he had operated
several times on whites in the Fiji
Islands, never remembers operating on a
Polynesian or Melanesian, who are practically
vegetarians. He never saw a case
in British Guinea in 9½ years, and then
saw an encephaloid cancer of the tibia in
a Papuan, who for 7 or 8 years had lived
practically a European life, eating canned
Australian meat daily.

In regard to Africa, Williams quotes
Dr. Madden of Cairo, who says, “The consensus

51
of opinion among medical men in
Egypt is, that cancer is never found, either
in male or female, among the black races
of that country. These include the Berberines
and the Sudanese, who are all Mussulmans,
and live almost entirely upon
vegetable diet.” Of 19,529 deaths among
natives of Cairo during 1891, only 19 were
due to cancer (females 10, males 9) or 1
in 1028. In England during the same year
the proportion of cancer deaths to total
deaths was 1 in 29. In the Islands of
Lagos, on the West Coast of Africa, Dr.
Johnson, in 14 years’ practice there saw 5
cases of cancer in natives all of whom
lived as Europeans. In southern Africa,
“among the Boers and Europeans, who
are large flesh eaters, malignant tumors are
common: but among the natives, who are
mainly vegetarians, these tumors are so
rare as to be almost unknown.”

Renner reports interestingly in regard
to cancer among the descendants of liberated

52
Africans or Creoles, in Sierra Leone,
Africa. During 30 years, from 1870 to
1900, there were but 20 cases recorded as
malignant disease among 22,453 admitted
to the Colonial Hospital: in the next ten
years there were 26 among a total of 10,163,
a slow but steady gain in cancer incidence,
with the advancing influence of the white
man. He says that while the aborigines
eat no meat, the “Creoles” eat much meat;
the teeth of the latter are beginning to
decay, like those of the whites, which is attributed
to the sweets introduced by the
latter. Every case of cancer recorded has
been in a Creole, living like a European,
and not a single case among the aborigines.

Much the same freedom from cancer has
been noted in regard to negroes when first
brought to the United States in slavery,
when their food and mode of life was simple:
but since emancipation and in proportion
as they have mingled with whites and
eaten their food, with their own natural

53
tendency to gluttony and laziness, cancer
has increased among them, although their
death rate from malignant disease is still
much less than that of whites.

In India all writers agree that cancer is
rare among the inhabitants of warmer
country districts, where they live largely
on rice or millet, with a little milk and butter,
and vegetables: they eat meat rarely,
the immense majority of the people live a
rural life, depending upon agriculture for
their sustenance.

Investigations of late years, however,
might seem to indicate that cancer is more
prevalent in India than previously supposed,
but its incidence still bears no real
relation to that in many other countries,
and an analysis of some recent reports explains
in an interesting and curious manner
the reasons for the diversity of opinion
as to the actual frequency of the disease.

Thus, Benratt collected a total of 1700
cases only from 5 years’ statistics of 15

54
Mission Hospitals and 34 Government Hospitals,
representing, of course, many million
inhabitants, whereas in New York
City, according to the weekly Bulletin of
the Board of Health, there were 2193
deaths from cancer in the last six months,
a striking illustration of the rarity of cancer
in India. Moreover of these 1700
cases, over 1200 were about the mouth, a
very large share of these arising from the
very common habit of chewing betel, which
contains also much calcium, which latter is
one of the salts incriminated in the causation
of cancer. Sandwith attempts to
show that cancer is prevalent in India, but
refers to only 2000 cases reported in the
hospitals there, in three years, also among
many millions of people, and he refers likewise
to the betel chewing cancer, and the
“kangri burn” on the abdomen of men,
from the charcoal furnace worn for
warmth: these peculiar local disorders vitiate

55
any deductions which could be drawn
from such statistics.

In China, according to a recent writer,
“cancer is comparatively uncommon in
those parts where the bulk of the people
live on an almost exclusively vegetarian
diet, being too poor to purchase any of the
various flesh foods, which are there used
for culinary purposes.” But in places
where cancer is said to be more prevalent,
the reporter adds, “All Chinamen there eat
fish and pork at morning and evening
meals: fowls and ducks are always on the
table of all but the most humble of the
coolie class.”

In regard to the occurrence of cancer in
the Far East, however, some of the modern
investigators, such as Bashford, have endeavored
to overturn the generally accepted
view as to its infrequency, but I do
not feel that the evidence presented can at
all weigh against the unprejudiced opinion

56
of most capable medical men who have long
lived and practiced in those regions, some
of whom as medical missionaries have had
most intimate contact and acquaintance
with the natives. Only very recently a
medical missionary, who has long been connected
with the medical college and hospital
in Beirut, Syria, told me that cancer
was practically unknown among the thousands
of patients who flock there from all
over the Near East, he adding that they
were all largely vegetarians.

During a rather extensive trip through
the Far East I was unable to see or even
hear of any cancer, although I met a large
number of medical men, and made diligent
inquiry regarding the same. As I wished
to verify my views in regard to the rarity
of the occurrence of cancer among those
who lived on rice or other vegetarian diet,
I visited very many civil, military, and
mission hospitals, with a total of many
thousands of patients, and ministering to

57
many millions of population; in Japan,
Korea, China, the Philippines, India, Siam,
and Egypt, I met the same response, that
cancer was rarely seen among those vegetarian
natives.

Brazil is credited with having the lowest
cancer record of any portion of the western
hemisphere, especially among the natives
in the Equatorial regions, while in
the Argentine Republic, where meat is
known to be largely consumed, cancer is
fairly common. From many parts of the
world there come reports of the relative
infrequency or even absence of cancer
among simple living natives, one writer in
regard to the West Indies stating “Even
those cases which I have witnessed in this
class of people have been among the better
orders of them, whose habits of living assimilated
to those of Europeans.”

England and Wales present the most
satisfactory field for the study of the progress
of cancer, as the national vital statistics

58
have been well kept since 1840; even at
that time under the able direction of William
Farr they had already acquired a well-deserved
reputation for reliability, as Williams
remarks, from whom I shall freely
quote.

In that year, 1840, there died of malignant
disease in England and Wales 1 in
5,646 of the total population, 1 in 129 of
the total mortality, or 117 per million living.
In 1905, the deaths, due to this cause
were 1 in 1,131 of the total population, 1
in 17 of the total mortality, or 885 per million
living: thus, while the population had
only a little more than doubled, the cancer
death rate per million living had increased
five fold. Dr. Williams answers by figures
and tables the several objections which
have been raised in regard to the actual increased
mortality from cancer, as it has
been repeatedly claimed that the increase
is only apparent and not real; thus it has
been asserted that it is due—1. To mere

59
increase of population: 2. To the average
age of the population having advanced:
and 3. To improved diagnosis and more
careful death certification. Time does not
admit a full presentation of his statistical
refutation of these claims, to which he devotes
some pages very convincingly, but it
can be safely accepted that for some as yet
unknown reason, cancer has made strides
in England which are truly alarming.

Williams has also made some most interesting
studies in regard to the increase of
cancer in connection with changed conditions
of life, and from his analysis of statistics,
he very clearly shows that the
spread of the disease has closely followed
urbanization, and the rapid increase in material
prosperity of recent years: in England
where 80 per cent. of the population
are now town dwellers, this tendency to
collect in cities and towns has gone farther
than in any other community. He recognizes
that any far-reaching, environmental

60
change of some duration is probably potent
in disturbing the stability of the constituents
of living bodies, and the sudden change
from poverty to riches and plenty is conducive
to the development of cancer: allusion
has already been made to the inverse
relation of deaths from cancer and tuberculosis,
the latter diminishing with improved
material conditions, while the former increases
as wealth and indolence increase.

He shows this by statistics from various
localities, and by data from towns in different
countries he makes it pretty clear that
“Cancer mortality is lowest where the conditions
of life are hardest, the surroundings
the most squalid, the density of population
greatest, where the tubercle mortality is
highest, the general and infantile mortality
greatest, and where sanitation is least perfect—in
short, among the poor of the industrial
class in our great towns: whereas
among the wealthy and well-to-do, where
the standard of health is at its best and life

61
is easiest, and where all the conditions of
life are just the reverse of the foregoing,
there the cancer mortality is highest.”

While this is a pretty strong statement
and many exceptions could undoubtedly be
found, careful investigation will show it to
be true in the main; for it must be remembered
that even among the poorer classes
gluttony, especially in regard to proteids,
is not at all uncommon, and indolence, with
impeded metabolism, is not at all unusual.
Dr. Latham found that the mortality from
cancer in England, from 1881‒1890, was
more than twice as great among well-to-do
men having no specific occupation, as
among occupied males in general, the respective
mortality ratios being 96 for the
former and only 44 for the latter. Sir William
Banks confirms the steady increase in
cancer very strongly, which he attributes to
richer and more abundant food, of which
males eat more than females, and consequently
cancer is increasing proportionately

62
more among men, as all statistics
show.

Switzerland is reported to have the highest
death rate from cancer of any country,
it having augmented from 114 per 100,000
living in 1889, to 132 in 1898. There again
the cancer mortality varies greatly in the
different sections or cantons: thus, in
wealthy Lucerne it is 204 per 100,000 living,
and only 36 in poverty stricken Valais.
In the city of Geneva it is 177 per 100,000
living.

Denmark, next to Switzerland, is reputed
to have the highest cancer death rate of any
country in Europe, viz.: 130 per 100,000
living in 1900. But here the statistics are
only from the towns, which comprise but a
quarter of the whole population: the per
capita wealth is said to be higher there
than any other country in Europe except
France.

France shows a high cancer mortality,
with a constantly increasing death rate;

63
and, next to England, France is the richest
country in Europe, and wealth is much
more widely diffused: the French workers
own nearly 8 times, per capita, more than
those in England. In Paris the cancer
death rate has increased as follows, for
each 100,000 living, in 1865, 84; in 1870,
91; in 1880, 94; in 1890, 108; in 1900, 120.

Italy, a comparatively poor country,
shows a low cancer mortality, but even
here it is increasing from 20 per 100,000
living in 1880, to 52 in 1899, and 58 in 1905.
The consumption of meat is there the smallest
in any European nation, namely 23
pounds per capita in 1895. In the chief
towns the rate of death from cancer is
high: thus for each 100,000 living, in Florence
137, Ravenna 120, Venice 103, Milan
101, and Rome 77.

Time does not permit a wider survey of
the field of distribution of cancer, as presented
so remarkably from official statistics
by Williams, and Wolff; but in connection

64
with the high percentages of
deaths above quoted among the richer
classes it may be interesting to mention
some of the lowest records. Thus, in the
poor country of Kerry, Ireland, it was 27
per 100,000 living, in the province of Dalmaltia
19, in the Shetland Islands 16, in
Servia 8 (from 1895 to 1904), and in Ceylon
in 1903 the mortality from cancer was
about 6 for each 100,000 living.

The United States, unfortunately, has
not kept the vital statistics of the country
in years past with anything like the fullness
and accuracy which has obtained in
England, nor even at the present time is it
possible to learn definitely the frequency
and increase of cancer in every locality.
But all the statistics which have been gathered
show unequivocally that the disease
has steadily increased in a manner which
is alarming. Analyzing the recorded
deaths from cancer in thirty-one cities, and
the percentage of increase in four years,

65
one writer estimates that, if the same increase
is continued, by the end of the
century there will be a death rate, approximately,
of 1000 in every 100,000 inhabitants,
or one in every hundred.

In a recent Bulletin of the Board of
Health of New York City the following
statements are made in regard to the mortality
from cancer in 1913: “The statistics
of our seven largest cities recently tabulated,
show that the cancer death rate was
the highest on record. For New York
City the rate was 82 per 100,000 of the
population, against an average of 79, for
the last five years: for Boston 118 against
an average of 110: for Pittsburgh 79, against
an average of 70: for Baltimore 105,
against an average of 94: for Chicago 86,
against an average of 81: for Philadelphia
95, against an average of 88: for St. Louis
95, against an average of 85.” This average
increase of almost 8 per cent. of deaths
from cancer in the combined population of

66
these seven cities, during the last five years
is certainly an alarming fact, and cannot
be explained on the ground of greater accuracy
of diagnosis: for it is not to be presumed
that there has been such great improvement
along diagnostic lines during
the single year 1913.

It is difficult to state the exact prevalence
of cancer in the entire United States,
as the “registration areas” include only
about two-thirds of the total population:
much can be learned, however, from the
annual volumes published since 1900. According
to these Mortality Statistics of the
United States, the deaths from cancer and
other malignant tumors per 100,000 population
were as follows: in 1900, 63, in 1904,
70.2, in 1909, 73.8; and in 1912 there were
46,531 deaths from cancer, or 77 per
100,000 population, an increase in the death
rate from this disease of almost 25 per
cent. since 1900; while, as before stated the

67
tuberculosis mortality had fallen a little
over 25 per cent. in the same period.

As in other countries, which might also
be expected from the statements already
made, the disease varies in frequency
in different localities and communities.
Thus, cancer is stated to be much more
prevalent in the northern than in the southern
states, and as already stated, the negroes
are much less subject to the disease
than whites, especially when they are living
their own natural home life; but when they
come to the cities, as waiters, etc., in hotels,
their cancer death rate increases. But
even in New York City in 1912 the deaths
from cancer in negroes was 1 in 32.2 total
deaths, against 1 in 17.7 in whites; the
mass of negroes here, of course, live plainly
and work hard. The North American Indians
also are believed to be almost exempt
from cancer in their primitive savage condition,
but as they have come under the

68
influence of civilization they are more affected.
It has also been noted by several
observers that immigrants and their descendants
present a very much higher mortality
from malignant diseases than prevails
in their native countries; from these
and other considerations Williams suggests
that abrupt change of environment
may also be a factor in the causation of
this disease.

We have thus seen while cancer is very
widely distributed over the globe it is present
in varying degrees of severity in different
localities, and careful analysis shows
that the disease affects different classes of
persons with unlike severity. All these
statistical studies and observations serve
to confirm the statement made earlier that
cancer is a disease of so-called civilization,
and that it has increased in proportion as
human beings have come under the influence
of wealth, and consequent luxury and
overindulgence, with bodily inactivity; all

69
these elements lead to a disturbed metabolism,
which as we shall see later, is, at least,
a contributing cause to the deviation from
normal of some of the cellular elements of
the body. It also appears that some of
these metabolic shortcomings have to do
with a disturbed nitrogenous balance,
which is due to the constantly increased
consumption of meat. In 1909 the meat
consumption in the United States had
reached the high figure of 172 pounds per
capita, as I learned recently from Washington,
a far greater amount than in England,
130 pounds, as already stated; and
with this steady increase in the use of
nitrogenous food cancer has also increased
by leaps and bounds in both countries.

70

LECTURE III

METABOLISM OF CANCER

In the first lecture we saw that cancer was
an alteration of the normal cells of the
body, whereby they take on a malignant
action and continue to do so, destroying
contiguous tissues and leading to a lowered
vitality, with an apparent poisoning of the
system, which finally causes death. As the
cells of various organs furnish different
secretions, which in health contribute to
proper metabolism, resulting in growth or
maintenance of the tissues, so these disordered
cells are believed to secrete a toxic
substance, or malignant hormone, which
has a prejudicial action on the body, and
hæmolytic action on the blood, as has been
brought out pretty clearly by Troisier and
others.

71
We saw that as yet the definite cause had
not been determined, why at some period
certain cells take on the action which we
call cancer, nor why they persist in their
destructive course. Long continued and
abundant laboratory and clinical research
have about decided certain questions negatively
in regard to its etiology, so that in a
measure the field is cleared for the study
of some of the possible basic causes of the
disease in question. Thus, all are pretty
well agreed that cancer is
not
contagious
or infectious, that it is
not
caused by a
micro-organism or parasite, that it is
not

wholly due to local injury, that it does
not

appertain to any particular occupation,
that it is
not
hereditary to any great degree,
that it does
not
especially belong to
or affect any particular sex, race or class
of persons,
nor
is it confined to any location
or section of the earth, and that it is

not
wholly a disease of older age.

We saw further that there appeared to

72
be good evidence that certain misplaced
“embryonal rests” were the original
starting points of diseased cell action, but
as these are now known to exist in every
one from birth, this offers no real explanation
of the occurrence of the disease at
different times in life. It is, of course,
quite possible that local injury of one kind
or another may be the exciting cause which
determines that a cell or group of cells shall
revert to its original reproductive activity,
as Williams contends that the process is
one of agamogenesis, dependent upon excessive
and faulty nutrition. The question
as to the relation of uricacidæmia, or
lithæmia, to cancer has never been fully
studied, and it is worth considering
whether, as in gout and rheumatism, to
which cancer is often associated and perhaps
closely allied, the exciting cause may
not be the lodgment somewhere of uratic
deposit, which is further excited and fed

73
by effete or imperfectly oxidized nitrogenous
elements; for later we shall see that
perverted metabolism, largely of proteid
elements, is closely associated with cancer.

We noted also that some attributed cancer
to independent cell action, relating to
the polarity of cells, etc.; but it is inconceivable
that a cell or cells can idiopathically
start out on a rampant course and
pursue it with increasing severity, even
until death results, without, at least, some
definite pre-disposing cause, even though
diligent and earnest work has not as yet determined
just what that cause may be.
The error has been, we believe, in searching
too exclusively by the microscope and
by certain laboratory methods, and not
sufficiently along clinical and bio-chemical
lines. For it must be recognized that all
the cells of the body are continually bathed
in the vitalizing fluid of the blood, whence
they derive their nutriment, and into

74
which, with the lymphatics, they return the
products of their vital action, by anabolism
and catabolism.

By exclusion, therefore, we are reduced
to seek the etiology of cancer along other
lines, and about all that is left is metabolism,
as influenced by advancing, so-called
civilization, which relates very largely to
diet and mode of life. This we will take
up later, but will first examine some of the
scientific findings in regard to the blood in
cancer, and data relating to the various
secretions and excretions of the body bearing
upon metabolism in this disease.

That the blood shows great changes in
advanced cancer is recognized by all, as is
clinically manifested by the intense cachexia
and anæmia commonly present and
always strongly marked toward the end, of
which the cytology has been very fully
studied and presented by Türk. When
then examined there is found to be a
marked reduction of red cells, low hæmoglobin

75
index, and distinct leucocytosis,
with greatly diminished alkalescence.

The reported changes in the blood have
also varied with the location of the malignant
disease, according as it may interfere
mechanically or otherwise with the function
of certain organs, which fact naturally
obscures the question of the true relationship
of the blood to cancer. Thus, it is
stated that in cancer of the liver and pancreas
there is always leucocytosis and glycogen,
and that “cancer appears to interfere
greatly with the function of the liver
as a destroyer of intestinal toxins, they
pass into the general circulation, probably
cause the glycogen reaction, and at least
part of the leucocytosis, and very often
give rise to fever.” There are also other
microscopical alterations in the blood in
late cancer. Thus, degenerative change in
the leucocytes are common, with derangement
in the normal proportion of their different
forms, as also changes in the erythrocytes,

76
with nucleated red cells and
megalocytes in severest cases.

Price Jones in a study of the blood in 30
cases of cancer (9 of the breast) found the
red blood cells diminished on an average of
6 per cent., the white blood cells increased
38 per cent., lymphocytes increased by 10
per cent., large mononuclear cells increased
164 per cent. and polynuclears 42 per cent.
Burnham states that in the severe grades
of anæmia with malignant disease, poikilocytosis
is marked, and nucleated cells of
both normoblastic and megaloblastic type
may be present. The red corpuscles may
be reduced to 2,500,000, and exceptionally
to 1,000,000. Cohnreich in a very technical
study of blood from cancer subjects,
observed very great increase in the resisting
power of the red blood cells to osmotic
tension, that is, in regard to their hæmoglobin,
which he believed to be of diagnostic
value in doubtful cases.

Unfortunately, there have been relatively

77
few studies of the plasma of the blood in
this or other diseases; and yet the condition
of this fluid must be of the utmost
importance, as from it are derived the nutrient
principles not only of the solid constituents
of the blood, but also those of the
entire system, about 8 per cent. of it being
serum albumen and serum globulin. It
also holds in solution the phosphates, carbonates,
sulphates, and chlorides, the latter
often varying greatly, and being chiefly responsible
for the isotonic relation of cells
and serum. In cancerous cachexia a diminution
of carbonic acid, a constantly diminished
alkalinity, and an increase of acid
principles of the blood have been fully
demonstrated, pointing in all probability
to the existence of an acid intoxication.
The formation of the corpuscular elements
of the blood must be greatly interfered
with when metastases occur in the blood
making organs, the lymphatic tissue, bone,
marrow, and spleen, which probably occur

78
more frequently than is generally recognized.
It seems that the toxic secretion
from a cancerous mass has a distinct action
upon the blood, for after complete removal
there is often observed an increase of
hæmoglobin, as I have witnessed, and a
high leucocytosis has disappeared after
the removal of schirrus of the breast, only
to return again with the recurrence of the
tumor. Abderhalden states that in from
two to three weeks after the operative removal
of cancer, certain defensive ferments
can no longer be found in the serum.

Many laboratory studies have been made
upon the chemistry of cancer tissue, seeking
to determine the nature of the toxin
produced, and its experimental effect on
animals, but thus far no great results have
been obtained. It has been observed, however,
by Gruner that when cancer juice is
injected intra-venously a marked lymphocytosis
arises, which is followed by the appearance
of large mast cell myelocytes in

79
the blood. This cancer juice is supposed
to be autotoxic in cancer patients, and to
comprise toxic albuminoids, which being in
quantities too great to be quickly neutralized
poison the system, especially the blood
and the hæmatopoietic organs.

In regard to the real bio-chemistry of
cancer, we are still greatly in the dark.
Vast numbers of studies and researches
have been made to determine the real character
and nature of the bio-chemical
changes which occur in cancerous tissue,
and the mere recounting of the reported
findings and theories elaborated from them
would occupy far more time than can be
profitably given in these lectures. Some
have claimed very positive findings which
account in a measure, at least, for the
pathological conditions, while others, as
Beebe, state that “the chemical study of tumors
is in its infancy. We have scarcely
proceeded far enough to know where the
medical problems are, nor have methods

80
now available been perfected to such an extent
as to enable a decisive experiment to
be made.” “No phase of metabolism,”
says he, “has been described in cancer
which does not have a counterpart in non-cancerous
conditions. This applies to
such questions as the nutritive relations
between the cancer cells and the normal
body tissue, to the nitrogenous balance, retention,
elimination of sodium chloride, excretion
of acetone, the relation of ammonia
excretion, and a possible acidosis.” He
adds, however, “Diet doubtless forms an
important part in the growth of cancer,
possibly even in the origin of the disease.”
It is encouraging, therefore, to find that
this able and careful laboratory investigator
recognizes, in a measure, the basic
cause of diet, toward which all evidence
points so strongly, although the definite
connection may not yet have been established
by laboratory methods.

81
In all our study in regard to the relation
of diet to cancer it must be remembered
that there are divers elements and agencies
which combine to produce the many and
various disordered conditions of the body,
to which we give the names of different
diseases, and that cancer is no exception
to this general rule. For instance, in old-fashioned
gout the patient may have consumed
an excess of Port and Madeira wine
for years before the system finally rebelled
and acute gout resulted; and among the
causes for the systemic reaction we know
that frequently it is great mental strain or
shock which has so disturbed metabolism
that the wine was no longer tolerated.
Much the same is true in regard to cancer
and nitrogenous diet. And we will see
later that mental disturbance and nerve
strain or shock often seem to be causative
elements; also that constipation, or intestinal
stasis, is so common in cancer subjects

82
that it must be looked upon as one
of the contributing causes among others,
to be mentioned later.

Although it is quite possible that many
of the reported bio-chemical changes found
in primary cancerous tissue and metastases
may not be of etiological importance,
it may be interesting to briefly refer to
some of them as indicating the vital alteration
in tissues connected with what we
recognize as malignancy; even as in acute
and chronic gout the affected tissues exhibit
abnormal conditions in regard to
uratic deposit.

Many writers, some of them dating back
many years, agree that albuminous constituents
predominate in cancer tissue, and,
as in actively growing structures in general,
sugar forming substances abound.
Wolter states that cancer of the breast
contains 20 per cent. more nucleo-proteids
than the normal breast. Casein is also
present in breast cancers, and the abundance

83
of fatty matters, contained in the
cells of such neoplasms, is well known. In
regard to the proteids, Wolff, after many
studies, concludes that their character is
identical with that of normal tissues, and
it is only the quantitative distribution of
these that differentiates the tumor from
the physiological tissue. Wells agrees
with others that there is no very distinctive
character in the bio-chemistry of malignant
tumors, but by reason of their excessive
chemical component, as compared
with benign tumors, they naturally show a
high content of nuclear proteins; they,
therefore, contain a high proportion of
phosphorus and iron.

Interesting observations have also been
made on other characteristics of cancerous
tissues, such as the great abundance of enzymes
of great variety which are actively
autolytic, also in regard to certain relations
of cholesterin, in regard to which
Ewing has recently said, “There appears

84
to be something in the chemical or mechanical
nature of the irritation of cholesterin
which is peculiarly effective in producing
atypical proliferation of epithelium”; this
has been found to be no less than 65 per
cent. greater in quantity in fatty deposits,
as in the mesentery, in subjects of cancer
than in healthy persons, etc., etc. It would
weary you to no purpose to attempt to refer
further to the bewildering mass of research
studies in connection with the bio-chemistry
of cancer which are found in
special literature: much of it is fragmentary
and some of it contradictory, but all
has its value as contributory to our knowledge
of the actual conditions developed in
connection with cancer growth; but up to
the present time it cannot be claimed that
any very practical results have been thus
attained which will aid us in treating the
disease.

As all cell life and proliferation of tissue
depends on the activity of the cell nuclei,

85
much attention has been paid to the
changes found in them and the behavior
of the centrosomes and chromosomes, all
of which is too technical for us to consider
here: suffice to say, however, that several
observers have demonstrated heterotypic
mitosis in malignant tumors, and that histologic
examination confirms what other
judgment has indicated, namely, that the
cancer cell differs from a normal tissue cell
mainly in its aberrant action under some
stimulus, probably derived from the animal
fluids by which it is surrounded.
Thus we come back to our original proposition,
for these fluids are, of course, but a
reflection of the nutrition of the body or
diet, as modified by the action of the various
organs, including the internal secretions;
all this is influenced again by the
action of the nervous system.

It is difficult to produce definite proof in
regard to the influence of nervous and
mental strain and shock in the production

86
of cancer, but careful observers have long
claimed that there is such an influence,
and from what I have seen I am firmly
convinced that in some way these conditions
often do so disturb the metabolism,
or otherwise operate, in such a manner that
cancer results. The influence of the mind
upon the body is unquestionable, as has
been so fully illustrated by Tuke, and from
what I have observed I cannot doubt but
that the mental depression common in
those with the beginning of a process
which they fear might result in active cancer,
has much to do with accelerating its
growth; whereas, on the other hand, the
hopefulness which can arise with the attempt
to change the diseased process by
diet and proper medication, has much to
do with the favorable results which may
follow in suitable cases. In the same way
the constant fear of recurrence after operative
removal can have its share in inducing
and perpetuating the metabolic

87
error which excites the tissues to renewed
cancerous action. I know that some of
you will think that this is fanciful theorizing,
but many a scientific fact, in many
branches of science, has been worked out
from a theory which at first has seemed
fanciful.

We will now consider some of the data
which have been recorded in regard to the
relation of the secretions and excretions
of the body to cancer, including the internal
secretions.

Much labor has been expended, by very
many observers, upon the analysis of the

urine
in connection with cancer, as that
might be expected to reveal the metabolic
changes connected with this disease.
While many departures from the normal
have been reported, and while under complete
volumetric analysis the urine of a
subject of cancer is rarely if ever that of
health, it cannot be said that any definite
and specific changes have been established

88
which may not be found in those without
cancer; although there have been several
who have so claimed even diagnostic signs
from the urine. But minute, volumetric
analysis is often of great service in guiding
the nutrition and medication of these
patients, and gross errors are continually
met with, which have the greatest bearing
on the case in hand, as indicating very
great metabolic disturbance: and constantly
the urinary excretion will be found
to be extremely deficient, both as to its
quantity and its total solid elimination.
In one very interesting case of cancer of
the breast, in a stout, flabby lady, near 55,
in private practice, the total daily quantity
of the urine, measured for weeks, is
always very far below the normal amount;
and in spite of active medication it seems
almost impossible to raise the total daily
solids excreted in the urine, to more than
one-half of that called for by the weight of
the patient. We may now briefly consider

89
some salient points reported in connection
with the urine in cancer.

As remarked in regard to other elements
in the study of the disease, it would be
very desirable to have a knowledge of the
urine in pre-cancerous stages of health, or
ill health, and also in very early cancer,
likewise after surgical operations, that we
might better understand the metabolic
changes which lead up to malignant disease;
but unfortunately these are exceedingly
few and unsatisfactory, and almost
all the studies have been made in advanced
cancer, and often when the disease has affected
vital organs, or when by its own
poison it has disturbed the workings of the
economy.

Many observers agree that there is a
disturbance of proteid metabolism in cancer,
and dependent upon this many deviations
from normal are found in the urine,
some of which in turn are related to the inanition
which occurs. The
urea
is almost

90
invariably diminished, often very greatly,
as I have verified time and again in many
cases.

A number of studies have been made
upon the nitrogen partition in cancer by
Einhorn, Kahn, and Rosenblum, also by
De Bloeme, Swart, and Terwen, and others,
showing an increase in colloid nitrogen,
to more than double the normal
amount, increased elimination of xanthin,
oxyproteic acid, and urinary ammonia, together
with many other changes which
show that disintegration of the protein elements
is very imperfect and often excessive.
An interesting statement is made by
Blumenthal that the oxyproteic acids are
increased even in very early cancer, and
independently of the size of the tumor and
degree of cachexia, seemingly showing
them to have some specificity for cancer,
because they have not been found in other
forms of malignancy. He also states that
urobilin is increased in a large proportion

91
of cases of cancer, especially when cachexia
is setting in, and is a grave symptom.

Reid, who has confirmed many of these
matters reported by others, says: “I
have found an increase of amino-acid nitrogen
in practically every case of cancer
I have examined”; ... “Hence we can
only infer that in cancer, the liver, while
not involved in the disease, is still unable,
for some reason, to perform its functions
in synthetizing urea. The organ is functionally
injured, no lesions having been
found to explain its insufficiency”; or possibly
... “cancerous subjects form proteids
which the liver is unable to deal with,
so that they are excreted unchanged, or
nearly so.” Degrez has made confirmatory
studies along these lines, and found
the nitrogen disintegration very imperfect,
with increase of the ammonia fraction of
nitrogen, and increased elimination of xanthin
bases. He states that “the toxicity

92
of the urine is increased apparently as the
result of the presence of substances which
have not been fully oxidized.”

Notable changes have also been recorded
concerning the
sulphur
elements in the
urine, with a great increase in neutral (unoxidized)
sulphur and a considerable excess
of sulpho-cyanic acid, together with
an increase in sulphates and indican
showing the results of intestinal fermentation
of protein elements, which also I have
constantly observed.

The
chlorides
, on the other hand, are, as
a rule, diminished in cancer, especially in
its late stages, when there is inanition or
kidney insufficiency; and probably any
change in them has only a relation to the
nutrition of the patients, for the chlorides
come from the food and are commonly an
index of the amount of nutriment absorbed.
Robin finds some relation between the excretion
of chlorine and nitrogen, according

93
to the stage or degree in which the system
is affected by cancer.

The
phosphates
are known to be increased
in the urine of cancer subjects, although
irregularly and in an inverse ratio
to the chlorides; as inanition increases
there is greater autolysis of cellular structure,
and the nuclei yield an excess of phosphates,
which are excreted in the urine.
A more or less general demineralization
of the system through the urine has been
observed by several, and has been recognized
as a significant matter, and is of special
importance when we consider what an
important part minerals take in the nourishment
of cell life.

While the changes which have been observed
in the urine in connection with cancer
are not wholly pathognomonic, but occur
in connection with other diseased
states of the system, so that none of them
can be accepted as diagnostic of malignant

94
disease, they all have a certain significance
as indicating the metabolic changes which
accompany and, as we believe, have much
to do with the etiology of cancer; and, as
stated before, a careful, systematic, and
frequently repeated volumetrical analysis
of the urine certainly assists greatly in the
proper management of these cases, that is
when the departures from normal are carefully
studied and correctly interpreted.

The
saliva
, and its action, constitutes a
very important part in the process of digestion,
and consequently of metabolism
and the genesis of cancer; far too little attention,
however, has been paid to it practically,
in ordinary life or disease, although
there have been many laboratory
studies and writings on the physiological
action of this secretion; but I have not
been able to find in literature any investigations
relating to its condition in cancer.
And yet the experience and writings of
Mr. Fletcher and others have demonstrated

95
wonderful results from perfect
mastication and thorough insalivation, and
a careful consideration of digestion must
convince every one of the importance of
this secretion in connection with nutrition,
both in health and disease.

Our time does not permit of more than a
brief allusion to the subject, but in cancer
patients I have so constantly found the
salivary secretion acid, and often strongly
so, instead of the normal alkaline or neutral,
that I cannot but believe that this condition
has some bearing upon the subject
which we are studying; the saliva also is
apt to be acid in diabetes, which is closely
allied to cancer. It is to be remembered
that the saliva, which amounts in health to
between one and two quarts daily, varying
somewhat with the food, is not wholly for
the purpose of lubricating the mouth and
facilitating deglutition, but its enzymes,
ptyalin and maltase, effect radical and important
changes in the starchy matters

96
consumed. It is also to be remembered
that the latter cannot be acted upon by the
stomach secretions, but must be passed on
to the influence of the pancreatic fluid in the
small intestine, in case the action of the
saliva has not been effective; hence there
follows delayed and imperfect digestion,
faulty metabolism, deranged nutrition, and
possibly tumor growth. The importance,
therefore, of very slow eating, thorough
mastication, and perfect insalivation cannot
be too strongly insisted on, both as an
element of importance in the prevention
of cancer, and also as a curative measure
in patients in whom the diseased process
has already manifested itself.

The so-called
internal secretions
have
also been the subject of much research and
speculation of late years, in regard to their
influence on metabolism and the life processes
of the economy, and many studies
have been made concerning their connection
with cancer, which cannot be long

97
dwelt upon now; but there seems to be little
doubt but that the secretions of the
ductless glands in common have much to
do with regulating the metabolism of the
cells. We know, for instance, that disease
of the pituitary body produces bone disorder,
resulting in gigantism, that thyroid
derangement results in myxœdema, and
that disease of the supra-renal capsules
gives rise to Addison’s disease, or bronzed
skin; and it is not at all impossible that
the derangement of secretion of one or
more of these and other organs may be an
element in the disordered action of certain
epithelial cells, resulting in cancer. Harrower
calls attention to the fact that cancer
is essentially a disease of that period
of life when certain of the ductless glands
lose their normal function, this loss entailing
related changes in the whole chain of
interrelated functions of the ductless
glands.

The
supra-renal
glands by their secretion

98
have, as we know, great vaso-constrictor
influence, and their complete removal
is followed by death; it is more than
possible that some failure in this secretion
allows the exuberant blood to supply cancerous
growths. Sajous says: “Certain
growths, particularly the more malignant
forms of sarcoma and carcinoma, seem
closely connected with adrenal insufficiency
and its normal consequences,” and there
have been some clinical and research data
confirming such a conclusion. Sajous further
says, “The adrenals, as supporters of
the thyroid apparatus in the defensive
process, and in sustaining oxidation, metabolism,
and nutrition, seem to offer a new
clew to the pathogenesis and treatment of
cancer that is worthy of further inquiry.”

The
pancreas
has been thought to have
some influence in a perverted metabolism
leading to cancer, Kahle stating that there
is a retention of silica in that organ in cancer
patients, to even double the normal

99
amount. A treatment of cancer introduced
by Beard, also strongly presented by
Saleeby, by trypsin and amylopsin, the enzymes
of the pancreatic fluid, excited some
attention a while ago; but unfortunately
no satisfactory results have thus far been
obtained from this line of medication, as
was fully demonstrated by Bainbridge at
the New York Skin and Cancer Hospital,
in one hundred cases.

The
pituitary gland
by its secretion has
undoubtedly some coordinating power,
with the adrenals and thyroid, over the
processes of metabolism, and a number of
observers have regarded it as of importance
in connection with the genesis of cancer.
Little has recently reported some
cases of cancer in which
pituitary extract

with that of the pancreas has produced remarkable
results.

The
thyroid
is now recognized as playing
an important part in assisting metabolism,
and, like the adrenals and pituitary,

100
its complete removal, with the parathyroids,
in animals is followed by death.
While the study of the hormones is still in
its infancy, there seems to be no question
but that the endocrinous glands act conjointly,
the one influencing the other, and
that together they exert a very great influence
in the life processes of the body and
on the behavior of its component cells.
The thyroid has been shown to be one of
the main factors in the management of calcium
within the body, which is believed to
be an element in cancer, and enhances the
catabolism of toxic wastes, which are etiologic
elements in this disease. Many have
reported favorably on the effect of thyroid
feeding in cancer, and after an experience
with it in many cases I am convinced that
it has been one of the means which contributed
to the good results obtained. On
the other hand it has been claimed by Stuart-Low
that the surgical removal of the
thyroid, or part of it, or ligation of the

101
thyroid blood vessels has arrested cancer,
in several cases.

Thymus gland
feeding has also been reported
on favorably by a number of observers
(Rohdenburg, Bullock, and Johnson,
also Gwyer), they reporting relief of
pain and improved general conditions, notably
gain in weight and increased hæmoglobin
in all but one of sixteen cases,
though some of them died. On the other
hand Ross reports most unfavorably on the
administration of thymus, which he gave
to some inoperable and hopeless cancer
cases, in which he said that in two or
three weeks the tumors had quadrupled
in size and the condition of the patients
was very much worse; the same occurred
also when some cancer patients were given
calcium salts freely. Ross makes some interesting
suggestions in regard to the thymus,
and its relation to calcium and magnesium;
these latter are freely utilized in
the growth of bone up to the age of twenty-five

102
years, by which time the thymus gland
has quite disappeared; but after this time
these salts tend to have pathological relations
in various tissues, and also cancer
becomes frequent.

The internal secretions of the
testicles

and
ovaries
are also thought to have some
share in metabolic processes, and observations
have been made in regard to their influence
in cancer. Thus Cahen reported
that Beatson’s operation of castration for
cancer, done first in 1896, had been repeated
by many, so that Lott had reported
99 cases including his own. Of these in
23.2 per cent. the operation caused a distinct
improvement in the cancer. In 15
cases the improvement persisted for a
year, in 4 cases for 4½ years and in one
case for over 5 years. Cahen operated on
seven women with remarkable results; in
two cases life was prolonged 4 and 6 years
respectively. Others, however, have shown
by statistics, that damage to the ovaries by

103
disease, or their removal by operation,
greatly increases the proclivity to cancer.
Several writers have connected cancer
with the waning of the sexual powers, and
the suggestion is made by Sherrington and
Copeman that in the period which antedates
the cancer age, the reproductive
glands, by means of internal secretions,
are able to inhibit the growth of cancer.

In looking back over what has been observed
in regard to the secretions, including
those of ductless glands, we see that
very strong evidence has accumulated to
show that they have a very intimate connection
with the development of cancer, as
was to be expected, since they are very important
factors in connection with metabolism.

We have also seen that while there has
not been demonstrated any very definite
and specific change in the bio-chemistry of
tumors, and no specific enzymes or poison
secreted by cancer cells which can communicate

104
the disease, there is evidence that
the disordered cells secrete a something
which deranges the blood and ultimately
tends to end life; for the blood in advancing
cancer undergoes very radical, degenerative
changes, some of which improve
decidedly when a cancerous mass is removed
surgically, but return with the regrowth
of the tumor.

We have also seen that the urine manifests
alterations which show a disturbed
metabolism, and that the saliva has an abnormal
acidity leading to disturbed amylaceous
digestion.

We have further seen that there is evidence
that the internal secretions of many
organs, probably, through their influence
on metabolism, are factors of importance
in connection with the genesis and cure of
cancer. Little well says, “Cancer is a disease
of disordered nutrition, as a result of
which cells revert to a primitive stage,
which permits reproduction. The disordered

105
nutrition is due to relative hypofunction
of the ductless glands.” In later
lectures we shall consider the basic causes
of this deranged nutrition, which, as has
been already intimated, has much to do
with diet and the various elements of life
which tend to induce functional and other
derangements of the system, many of
which are included in and influenced by
what we term the advance of civilization.

106

LECTURE IV

RELATION OF DIET TO CANCER

In our earlier lectures we saw that cancer
was undoubtedly a diseased action of originally
normal tissue cells, due largely to
perverted metabolism, the special features
of which were brought out last week. In
the second lecture we studied the frequency
and geographical distribution of
cancer, which was found to be very different
for various peoples in diverse sections
of the earth, and which we saw was proportioned
in a great measure according to
their diet and mode of life. In this lecture
we will examine into the details of these
matters more particularly, and endeavor to
discover their practical bearing upon the
prevention and cure of cancer.

107
For the proper understanding of the relation
of food and drink to cancer, and the
satisfactory application of the principles
involved, it is necessary to bear well in
mind the chemistry of the body and the relation
to nutrition of the various elements
which contribute to form healthy and diseased
tissues.

The human body is composed of some fifteen
different elements, the relative proportions
of which may be understood by
the following table from Sherman, which
represents probably as approximately correct
an average as any that can be given.

COMPOSITION OF THE HUMAN BODY

Per cent.

Oxygen, about

65

Carbon, about

18

Hydrogen, about

10

Nitrogen, about

3

Calcium, about

2

Phosphorus, about

1

Potassium, about

0.35

Sulphur, about

0.25

Sodium, about

0.15

Chlorine, about

0.15

108
Magnesium, about

0.05

Iron, about

0.004

Iodine

}

very minute traces

Fluorine

Silicon

As the actual composition of the body is
changing day by day, through the activities
of the system, so that it is commonly believed
that after some years all the tissues
are entirely renewed, the daily wear and
tear, as also the material expended in heat
and activity, must be supplied by the diet.
For the ordinary requirements of the system,
in health, the appetite serves as a
guide, which should suffice in man as in wild
animals, to preserve the balance of nutrition.
But man has also the power to
gratify
the taste
, which must be recognized in
our study as distinct from the satisfying
of the appetite; and the refinements of
civilization have added so greatly to the
temptation of wrong and over-eating and
drinking, as they have to many other temptations,

109
that it is questionable if reason,
and what is often spoken of as the natural
instinct for food, can be trusted in mankind.

It is to be remembered that the advance
of civilization, and the facilities of transportation
and cold storage, have brought
from far and near an innumerable number
and variety of articles for food and drink,
including condiments, which bear no relation
to the few simple articles formerly
consumed; even the fruits which we eat are
rarely ripened fully by nature, but are
picked more or less green, and undergo an
artificial ripening without the action of the
sun, which is really akin to decay. In the
combination and preparation of articles of
food also, so-called civilization and refinement
have made the greatest departure
from the simple life of the aborigines, who
are free from cancer, and with increasing
ease and wealth throughout the civilized
world more and more individuals are sharing

110
in unnecessary and often harmful indulgences,
more and more freely: and this
is especially true of animal food, the consumption
of which has increased so greatly.
Many other elements likewise enter into
the matter of the digestibility and consequent
nutritive power of food and drink;
such are nervous conditions, rapid eating,
imperfect mastication and insalivation,
heat and cold, character of the air breathed,
micro-organisms, etc., and all the various
causes which may derange the action of the
digestive organs and so prevent the perfect
metabolism between nutrient material
and the cells of the body, as I tried to show
you in some former lectures.

As is well known, the nutrition of man is
supplied by the organic substances, protein,
carbohydrates, and fat; these are found in
various combinations in animal and vegetarian
foods, and as a rule contain also
much of the inorganic or mineral substances
necessary for the system; all of

111
these with water, and its salts, and oxygen,
supplied by the lungs, unite, through
anabolism and catabolism, to build and
maintain the human body in health.

It is also well known that in order to preserve
health and proper weight there must
exist in the economy a certain balance or
equilibrium between the amount of the ingesta
and excreta, representing the various
elements which enter into nutrition; thus
we speak of a nitrogen equilibrium, a
carbo-hydrate equilibrium, a phosphorus
equilibrium, and iron equilibrium, etc.,
some of which are disturbed continually in
ill health and in various diseases, including
cancer, as has been shown in our last lecture.

Until quite recently the principles of diet
(even if not often carried out in practice)
have been established on lines laid down by
Carl Voit, of Munich; this eminent physiologist,
after studying the dietary habits of
various classes of workers, claimed that

112
the adult man of 150 pounds, doing moderate
muscular work, requires daily 118
grams of protein or albuminous food, 56
grams of fat, and 500 grams of carbo-hydrate,
with a total fuel value of 3000
large calories, in order to maintain the
body in equilibrium. But the remarkable
and scientific experiments of Chittenden
have demonstrated beyond question that
perfect bodily and nitrogenous equilibrium
can be maintained with one-third of the
amount of protein called for by the Voit
standard, and with a total value in the diet
of only about 1600 calories, or about one-half
of that indicated as necessary by Voit.
These experiments were based on a group
of five men of varying ages, professors and
instructors at Yale, thirteen volunteers
from the Hospital Corps of the United
States Army, and eight students in Yale,
all thoroughly trained athletes, twenty-six
in all.

It would be quite beyond the scope of

113
this lecture to enter at all into the intricate
questions connected with the metabolism
of nitrogenous and other foods, but Chittenden
has well put the reasons “why
prominence is given to the establishment
of nitrogenous equilibrium and why the
proteid intake assumes a greater importance
than the daily amount of fat and carbo-hydrate
consumed. Fats and carbohydrates
when oxidized in the body are
ultimately burned to simple gaseous products,
viz., carbonic acid and water. Hence
these waste products are easily and quickly
eliminated and cannot exercise much deleterious
influence, even when formed in excess.... With
protein foods, on the other
hand, the story is quite different. These
substances when oxidized yield a row of
crystalline, nitrogenous products which ultimately
pass out of the body through the
kidneys. Prior to their excretion, however,
these products—frequently spoken of
as toxins—float through the body and may

114
exercise more or less of a deleterious influence
upon the system, or, being temporarily
deposited, may exert some specific or
local influence that calls for speedy removal.
Hence the importance of restricting
the production of these bodies to the
minimal amount, owing to their possible
physiological effect and the part they are
liable to play in the causation of many diseased
conditions.”

When we consider the small share which
nitrogen plays in the composition of the
human frame, as shown in the table presented,
only three per cent., it is easy to
see how an excess of nitrogenous food
must necessarily either pass off unassimilated
or undergo imperfect metabolism,
and so derange the general metabolism;
and this is found to be the case in many
conditions of disease, and, as has been
shown, in cancer. Chalmers Watson and
others have shown in a most remarkable
manner, by animal experiments, that an

115
excessive meat diet alters very materially
the microscopic structure of very many
organs and portions of the body.

Beneke, who is often quoted, was one of
the first to seriously consider the actual
diet beneficial in cancer, his observations
dating back to 1875 upon material in the
service of Esmarck and Oldehop, who
treated patients according to his plan.
While the diet he gives is not wholly vegetarian,
he limits the nitrogenous intake
very greatly, and reported some very
favorable results, with the complete disappearance
of some malignant new formations.

Referring now to the data presented in
the second lecture, in regard to the frequency
and geographical distribution of
cancer, we can understand better, on scientific
grounds some of the reasons why cancer
is so steadily increasing in civilized
communities, and why in some sections of
the earth it is less common, while certain

116
aborigines have seemed to be almost immune.

We found that in England the per capita
consumption of meat was 130 pounds per
year, and that it had doubled during the
past fifty years, while during the same period
cancer had increased
four fold
; but in
Ireland, where the meat consumption was
estimated in 1895 at only 40 pounds per
capita, or less than one-third that in England,
the cancer death rate is very much
lower, not much over one-half. We found
that in Italy, where the per capita consumption
of meat was the smallest of any
European country the cancer death rate
was almost the lowest. Also that in certain
other countries, where vegetarianism
was the rule, cancer was very infrequent,
while among certain aborigines the disease
was practically unknown; but we found
also that in both the latter classes of individuals
cancer has slowly increased, in
proportion as the inhabitants of different

117
sections had come under the influence of
modern civilization, and adopted the dietary
and other habits of foreigners.

In the United States cancer has certainly
increased very greatly during the last fifty
years, and statistics were presented showing
that in seven of the largest cities, during
the past five years, the number of cancer
deaths had augmented between seven
and eight per cent. It is known that the
consumption of meat here has increased
steadily, until in a communication from the
Bureau of Agriculture in Washington we
learn that it had recently reached the enormous
amount of 172 pounds per capita
yearly, much more than in England.

Cancer has been repeatedly spoken of as
a disease of civilization, and there are
many other elements besides meat to be
considered in connection with its etiology.

Coffee and tea are so widely and almost
universally used in civilized countries, and
their apparently pleasant effect is so great

118
that few realize the harm that may result
therefrom; although from time to time
their injurious effects, especially along the
line of digestive and nervous troubles, are
dwelt on by medical writers. Of late
years, however, more attention has been
paid to their influence on metabolism and
also to the relation of their consumption
to the increase of cancer. From a report
to the House of Commons in England,
Holland is shown to be the largest per
capita consumer of coffee of any country
in Europe, and the cancer death rate there
in 1905 was among the highest, while Hungary
was the smallest consumer of coffee,
and the cancer mortality in 1903 was only
39 per 100,000, or a little over one-third
that in Holland. It may be interesting to
know that Thompson states that “the people
of the United States consume one-third
of the total coffee produced, or more than
Germany, Austria, Hungary, France and
the United Kingdom combined. On the

119
other hand England and her colonies consume
one-half of the world’s output of tea,
and the United States but one-fifth of
it.”

The scientific basis of a possible relationship
of the consumption of coffee and
tea to the prevalence of cancer may be better
understood when we remember that
caffeine and theine belong to the xanthin
group, and contain exactly the same equivalent
of nitrogen as uric acid. A single
cup of coffee of fair strength, it is stated
by Hutchinson, contains from one to three
grains of caffeine, and a cup of fairly
strong tea 1.21 grains, or more than the
average medicinal dose of this drug; and
all know how great may be the consumption
of coffee and tea by some individuals,
and that many of the working class, especially,
consume enormous amounts of tea,
which is kept brewing all day. Roberts
has very clearly demonstrated, by clever
experiments, that tea interferes very

120
greatly with both the salivary and gastric
digestion.

Alcohol, or some of its combinations,
has also been shown by several observers
to be undoubtedly an element contributory
to the causation of cancer; this relates not
only to countries or cities where the consumption
is the greatest or least, but also
to various occupations, in which statistics
show the more or less abundant use of distilled
or fermented drinks, and deaths from
the same, and in regard to total abstainers;
and a careful study of the subject makes it
pretty clear that the incidence of cancer
corresponds in a measure with drinking
habits; that is, that cancer mortality is
highest among those classes of persons
among whom primary or secondary mortality
from alcoholism is greatest. There
are so many elements to be taken into consideration
in connection with the derangement
of metabolism which leads to cancer,
that it is difficult to fix the precise

121
influence which each may exert; but in
watching cancer cases for any length of
time it is easy to see the harmful effect
when alcoholic beverages are indulged in,
and the improvement when all such are
absolutely excluded.

An interesting confirmation of the beneficial
results of a low diet and simple life,
as regards cancer, is found in certain reports
of Commissioners of Prisons and
Asylums in England, where the matter has
been studied, as given by Russell. “Asylums
contain an excessive number of persons
who have inherited or acquired constitutional
weaknesses, and in many cases
tendencies toward consumption or cancer;
also many alcoholics who are prone to
these maladies. Yet the habits and rules
of these institutions reduce the cancer rate
much below the rate of the classes from
which they are drawn, and below the rate
of both occupied and unoccupied persons.”
The same is observed in regard to many

122
religious orders, where the members lead
a very simple and frugal life, and where
cancer is reported to be almost unknown.

Kessler has called attention to the disturbance
of sulphur partition in cancer
in connection with diet, and the desirability
of excluding those foods exhibiting an
excess of sulphur, giving lists of the same
and indicating a satisfactory diet.

Packard has made a strong argument in
regard to the value and importance of the
mineral elements contained in plant life,
in connection with the disturbances in
these same elements which has been observed
in connection with cancer, as we
have already seen. He recalls that modern
chemistry teaches that the inorganic
principles of the vegetable kingdom are
absolutely necessary to the highest degree
and type of animal tissue and health, and
resistance to disease. Plant life is the
connection between the minerals and salts
of the earth and animal life, but in the

123
manufacture or refinement, and cooking,
of products of the vegetable kingdom,
many of them are largely demineralized;
this especially illustrated in the case of
fine white wheat flour, rice, potatoes (in
peeling and cooking), etc. So that while
animals get plenty of mineral matter from
plants and the earth, man gets but little,
and while the herbivorous animals are
rarely affected with cancer, civilized man
is succumbing to it more and more. It is
stated that among savage tribes, who are
practically free from cancer, the water in
which vegetables are cooked is also consumed
as food, thus securing all the salts.
The same idea has been popularly presented
to the public in a startling manner
by McCann in a book which, with a great
deal of verbiage contains a large amount
of valuable information concerning nutrition,
and its disturbance by erroneous, or
worse, preparation and administration of
food.

124
Possibly there are other dietary elements
which may play some part in the
causation of cancer, but the demonstrated
facts in regard to them are so few and uncertain
that they need not detain us here,
although it is certainly desirable to investigate
any that seem to have reasonable
support.

Some of these which have been suggested
probably have to do with local irritant
action on the digestive organs, as we
have previously seen that local irritation
undoubtedly plays an important part in
the determination of the actual time of occurrence
and site of the cancerous disease.
Thus, some have ascribed cancer to hot
food or drink, or to stimulating drink, condiments,
etc. It is quite possible that
these contribute to the development of cancer
in the pylorus, irritating the secreting
cells in their passage. Mayo says: “In
civilized man one-third of all cancers are
seated in the stomach. This is not known

125
to be the case in uncivilized man or in animals.
There should, therefore, be something—some
one cause—which causes this
preponderance. The acid secretion may
favor its development, for when we come
to the colon, also with an acid secretion,
we again meet with cancer, and we seldom
see it in the alkaline, small intestine. Gastric
ulcer, which may be pre-cancerous, is
connected with hyperacidity.” In Scandinavia
cancer of the stomach is remarkably
frequent, according to Soëgaard, thus, of
1235 cases in Norway, 73.9 per cent. were
in that location. In our last lecture we
found that cancer in general was connected
with a lowered alkalescence of the blood,
and all our studies show hyperacidity to
be related to cancer genesis; and nitrogenous
acidity, or uric acid (purin, xanthin,
etc.), undoubtedly plays a great part in
inducing malignant action in tissues, as
Haig has so long contended, even in regard
to cancer.

126
The increasing frequency of cancer of
the mouth, œsophagus, and stomach in men
certainly looks toward an irritating character
of substances which traverse these
regions, including alcoholic drinks, and the
irritant effect of tobacco should not be
overlooked in regard to mouth lesions.
But of the millions who use tobacco only
very few are affected with cancer, and
only those who are predisposed thereto by
some metabolic disturbance, whose true
character and other manifestations are not
yet fully determined. We have already
referred to the practice of so-called betel
chewing in the Far East as a frequent
cause of cancer within the mouth, also to
the wearing of the Kangri charcoal baskets
in India, for warmth, causing a burn on the
front of the body which may develop into
epithelioma; it is claimed, however,
by some that of the many cases of “Kangri
burn,” but few result in epithelioma.

There are yet other considerations concerning

127
the relation of diet to cancer which
are worthy of attention. We have mentioned
some principal agents, which seem
unquestionably to have an influence in the
production and continuance of cancer,
namely, proteids, coffee and tea, and alcoholics.
But millions of human beings partake
of these with apparent impunity,
while in the relatively few they appear to
have cancer-genetic powers. This need
not surprise or puzzle us any more than
do the many other problems in medicine
which we are seeking to solve: for we know
how often it happens that the system
reaches a point where certain things, once
well borne, are no longer tolerated. We
know, for instance, that Port and Madeira
wine certainly can cause gout, but with
many individuals they may be indulged in
freely for some time before this result follows:
likewise that tobacco may even be
abused for a long time, without apparent
ill effects, when suddenly there is a revulsion

128
of the system and the slightest use of
tobacco will be intolerable: also that many
edible substances which have long been
well borne, will at a certain time act unfavorably
and excite eruptions, urticaria,
acne, eczema, etc.

Psoriasis also furnishes an illustration
which may be of service in understanding
the relation of diet to cancer; for psoriasis
is characterized by a disordered epithelial
growth, which both shows on the surface
and manifests itself by epithelial prolongations
into the corium, which are quite comparable
to the ingrowing cellular masses
of early cancer: moreover cancer is not
very rare in psoriasis patients. In this
eruption it has been very clearly demonstrated,
clinically and experimentally, that
error in nitrogenous metabolism is commonly
at the bottom of the eruption, which
has been seen to promptly disappear entirely
simply under an absolute vegetarian
diet, correctly regulated, excluding also

129
coffee and alcohol, without the use of any
medical treatment whatever, internal or
external; but, of course, this result cannot
always be obtained, and sometimes the
eruption will relapse during what is
thought to be a strict vegetarian diet.
There must, therefore, be some systemic
disturbance which causes nutritive material,
at some particular time, thus to derange
cell action in the eruptions mentioned,
and the same is true in regard to
the production of cancer.

Some years ago Braithwaite called attention
to the occurrence of cancer among certain
peoples who were vegetarians, and
attributed it to the great amount of salt
which they consumed. While the suggestion
of salt being a cause of cancer has
been ridiculed, it is quite possible that a
great excess of sodium chloride may disturb
the salt equilibrium in the blood, by
replacing the potassium which is so necessary
for proper cellular nutrition, and also

130
by hindering the excretion of uric acid, as
Haig has pointed out.

When we inquire into the cause of the
systemic disturbance which tends to such
faulty metabolism that the nutrition of
cellular structures is deranged, even to the
degree of taking on malignant action, we
find many possible elements, more or less
connected with what is known as modern
civilization, to which we have time to but
briefly allude. Williams has shown pretty
clearly that wealth, with its tendency to
luxury and idleness, greatly increased the
proclivity to cancer: not only is this observed
in different countries, but in certain
cities the difference is very striking
between the cancer mortality in sections
which are occupied by the rich and well-to-do,
and those in which the poorer classes
are herded. Also in England it was found
in one decennium that cancer mortality
was more than twice as great among the
well-to-do men, having no specific occupation,

131
as among occupied males in general,
the ratio being 96 to 44.

Change in the mode of life, and sudden
changes of environment have also been
found to have a great effect in the production
of cancer, as has already been mentioned
in another lecture.

Finally, for our time does not permit a
fuller discussion, nervous conditions unquestionably
can and very often do exert
a profound influence on the secretion of
the various organs of the body, and can
so disturb digestion, metabolism, and nutrition
that the most varied results may
follow, to which the names of different diseases
are given; so that nerve strain, more
or less incident to modern life, must be
accredited with a certain share of influence
in the production of cancer. The part
which imperfect and deficient intestinal
and urinary excretion play in inducing or
perpetuating the disease will be treated of
in later lectures.

132
In our next lecture we will consider certain
matters relating to the medical treatment
of cancer, but from long experience
and study I am firmly convinced that such
measures are of relatively little service unless
coupled with a rigid care of the diet
and hygiene. As Bell remarks, “Cancer
is essentially a disease supervening upon
a persistent neglect of hygienic laws.” It
is a disease of sub-oxidation, and all the
hygienic elements of importance in tuberculosis
are equally necessary in cancer; fresh
air and sunlight with, as far as possible,
an ideal regulation of life in all its aspects,
are indispensable.

Inasmuch as there is no specific medical
antidote for cancer, and we cannot be certain
of securing at once the metabolism of
health, it is wise to remove and to keep
away from the system those articles which
have been shown to have more or less influence
in its production, namely, animal proteids,
coffee, tea, and alcoholics. Time

133
does not admit a discussion of vegetarianism,
nor is it necessary, for there is abundant
evidence in literature and on every
side that perfect health can be maintained
thereby, and I went over the subject pretty
thoroughly two years ago. The vegetable
kingdom contains protein enough to build
up and maintain the tissues of the body, as
is shown in animals, and an extra number
of calories can be easily obtained from butter,
of which a quarter of a pound contains
some 800 calories, or fully one-third of the
total daily quantity required by most individuals.
The details of a purely vegetarian
diet, which experience has shown
to be of the greatest value in cancer, can
be worked out for individual cases as required.
I am also firmly convinced that
in this absolutely vegetarian diet, with
other proper hygienic and medicinal measures,
to be detailed next week, we shall find
a great power for the prevention of cancer;
although many persons are already so

134
saturated with poisoned blood and tissues
from prolonged errors of life, that perhaps
no very striking general effect on the
community can be obtained therefrom in
this generation.

In closing this lecture I must again urge
upon you the necessity of great patience
and perseverance, with very much careful
study of the patient in all particulars, over
a great length of time, if really favorable
results are to be obtained in cancer; and
this is true whether the disease be incipient,
or fully developed, or even post-operative.
The causes of cancer are deep
seated, and, as with many chronic affections,
there is no tendency to continue an
improvement once begun, but under a return
to the same conditions as before the
disease will certainly assert itself. We
have learned the lesson of assiduous perseverance
in tuberculosis; let us learn it in
regard to cancer.

135

LECTURE V

MEDICAL TREATMENT OF CANCER

It is remarkable that so little serious attention
has been paid to the medical treatment
of cancer, in standard works, in view
of the occasional strong statements and
reports which have appeared from time to
time in current literature and in occasional
books, dating back for many years. Much
of this, of course, relates to imperfect observation
and erroneous diagnosis, and
also to crude medical knowledge, but there
have been also plenty of good men, who
knew the disease and have reported favorable
results, and even the complete disappearance
of cancer, under dietetic regimen
and proper medication alone, without
operative interference of any kind.

Not to go back too far, reference can be

136
made to Lambe, who one hundred years
ago wrote clearly in regard to the causation
of cancer from luxurious living, and
adduced strong proof to show the effect of
diet in curing certain cases of undoubted
cancer of the breast and uterus, the diagnosis
of which was confirmed by prominent
surgeons of the day, several of whom endorsed
the vegetarian diet. Abernethy
wrote pointedly, soon after, regarding the
constitutional origin of tumors and says,
“There can be no subject which I think
more likely to interest the mind of the surgeon,
than that of an endeavor to amend
and alter the state of a cancerous constitution.
The best timed and best conducted
operation brings with it nothing but disgrace,
if the diseased propensities of the
constitution are active and powerful. It
is after an operation that, in my opinion,
we are most particularly incited to regulate
the constitution, lest the disease should be
revived or renewed by its disturbance.”

137
He then gives an endorsement of Lambe’s
dietetic treatment of cancer, and presents
several reasons why it should be fairly
tried.

In the classical work of Walshe we find
numerous references to the constitutional
nature of cancer, original or quoted from
recognized authorities, as well as expressions
in regard to the futility of expecting
that surgical interference would cure the
real disease in any great proportion of
cases. He says, “It would in theory appear
that the removal of a tumor cannot
in itself cure the disease, as the local formation
is but a symptom of a general vice
of the economy.”... “This tissue being,
as the normal textures, the seat of nutrition,
is like them susceptible of its disordered
actions,” and he alludes more or less
to the effect of diet on the disease.

The late Willard Parker, one of New
York’s great surgeons, in a study of 397
cases of cancer of the female breast, observed

138
from 1830 to 1880, wrote very
strongly in regard to the constitutional relations
of cancer. In considering the etiology
he places constitutional causes first,
and says, “luxurious living, and particularly
excess in animal food, increases the
waste products of the body, and if coupled
with insufficient exercise, the waste products
are retained in the system and have a
tendency to produce abnormal growths.”...
“Cancer is to a great degree one of
the final results of a long continued course
of error in diet, and a strict dietetic regimen
is, therefore, a chief factor in the
treatment, preventative and curative.”
Concluding his study he says, “There is
such a
consensus
of opinion as to the advisability
of early removal of the growth,
that a discussion of the subject would be
useless. So then, in the first place, let us
remove the tumor, and thoroughly. But
after we have done so, after we have taken
it out by the very roots, is this sufficient?

139
No. We must then adopt the means stated
above to prevent a second development.
We must change the diathesis; we must
seek to modify the patient’s constitution
so that it will be no longer prone to reproduce
the disease: and then only may the
surgeon be satisfied that he has done his
duty.” He further says, “In regard to
the effect of abstemiousness on cancer I
can speak with great positiveness, that
vegetable, or at least a very bland diet,
does check the progress of the disease, and,
in some cases now under treatment, has
been attended by an alleviation of symptoms;
and in a few instances even by a recession
of the growth.” He also quotes
from Sir Astley Cooper some strong language
which, as he says, “shows a broader
and more enlightened view of the subject
than is contained in the writings of some
more recent observers, who have supposed
that they were working far in advance of
the great English surgeon”; the rather

140
long quotation then given proves that that
great surgeon also believed absolutely in
the constitutional nature of cancer.

Sir James Paget is often mentioned by
writers, sometimes even with derision, as
a believer in the Constitutional Nature of
Cancer, and his words are very strong;
says he, “I believe it to be constitutional,
in the sense of having its origin and chief
support in the blood, by which the constitution
of the whole body is maintained,”
and speaks at some length in his lecture,
in support of this view; I will give you
one other small quotation. “The existence
of the morbid material in the blood,
whether in the rudimental or in the effective
state, constitutes the general predisposition
to cancer,” etc. It is remarkable
that the views of this prince of surgeons
and pathologists should not have carried
more weight in regard to cancer, when his
other views are so well accepted.

Time does not permit us even to refer

141
to the great mass of more or less similar
views and corroborative evidence scattered
in books and current literature during the
last fifty years, but a few more references
may be given. In 1884, and again lately,
Merriam has called attention to cancer occurring
as a reversion of tissue cells to
earlier or embryonic forms under the influence
of a disordered, or as he calls it, a
poisoned blood stream, from over nutrition
from a meat diet; and Haig has long
maintained that uric acid is a prominent
factor in the etiology of cancer.

While few will agree with Haig in all his
conclusions, there is no doubt but that a
faulty nitrogenous metabolism plays a not
inconsiderable part in the causation of
many diseased conditions, as has been also
shown in a previous lecture to be true in regard
to cancer: and while it may not be actually
uric acid or urea which does the
harm, as these are relatively harmless end
products of metabolism, it is true that the

142
purin and xanthin bases, of many forms,
and imperfectly oxidized nitrogenous elements,
are active agents in the production
of disease. Venus and Isenberg have both
written very strongly in regard to the unquestioned
value of a vegetarian diet in
cancer, the former citing many supporters
of the view, from ancient times to the present.
If time permitted any amount more
of corroborative evidence could be given
in regard to the connection of cancer with
metabolic disorders.

There have been many scattered articles
concerning the chemico-pathology of cancer,
all looking in much the same direction
as that which we are pursuing, which cannot
even be alluded to, but brief mention
must be made of a most illuminating and
suggestive study by Bristol. Reviewing
the many theories of the etiology of neoplasms
he shows pretty clearly that cell
reproduction comes from outside the cell,
or from the surrounding cell medium by a

143
process of diffusion, or by a definite chemical
attraction, and is closely associated
with the nutrition and growth of the cell,
especially the nucleus; also that a fixed
ratio between the salts in the blood, lymph,
and tissues is necessary for normal activity
and reproduction of cells; further that
a disturbance in this ratio and an upset in
the chemical equilibrium will lead to abnormal
metabolism, growth, and reproduction,
and result in an atypical growth in the
local area involved.

As before remarked, it seems strange
that the medical profession and the public
have been so slow in accepting the views
here presented. But both have become so
obsessed with the idea that nothing can
be done for cancer except operative procedure
of some kind, and so dazzled with
the glamour of modern surgery, so fascinated
with the apparent definiteness of
laboratory proceedings, and so attracted
by the glory of purely scientific research,

144
that it is very difficult for any other doctrines
to make headway: moreover, any
dietary or medical treatment, prophylactic
or curative, is very tedious and also difficult,
in the way of attention to minute details,
etc., and patients weary of restrictions
and are restless at seeing little or
slow progress made. Haig found the same
difficulty with Hospital patients, but does
not hesitate to state that in private practice
“some undoubted cases of cancer have
gotten well” under his dietary restrictions.

But when it is remembered that it is calculated
that, under present existing conditions
and treatment, fully 90 per cent. of
those attacked with cancer ultimately die
from it, and that there were last year
nearly 50,000 recorded deaths from this
cause in the “Registration area” of the
United States, covering but two-thirds of
its population, and that the disease is rapidly
and surely increasing, it behooves the
Medical Profession to put forth the best

145
efforts possible to stay the progress of the
disease. In New York City, according to
the Weekly Bulletins of the Board of
Health, there were from May to November,
1914, in 26 weeks, 2173 deaths from
Cancer, Malignant Tumor, or an average
of 83.5 per week, almost twelve deaths
daily from malignant disease.

Operative surgery has unquestionably
been of great service in certain cases and
along certain lines of cancer, and the claim
for the earliest possible removal of morbid
growths is certainly a just and proper one;
moreover, with our present knowledge it
is perhaps wise to attempt to remove the
offending mass while there is some hope or
prospect of benefit, and personally I am
occasionally advising this in proper cases.
X-ray and radium have also their sphere
of usefulness in a certain class or group of
cases, but the excessive exploitation of the
latter, not long ago, did harm in raising
false hopes in multitudes of sufferers, and

146
as these were shattered so also was confidence
shaken in regard to all help for cancer
from other than surgical removal.

But every one who has been brought
much into contact with cancer knows full
well what a mass of recurrent cases exist,
possibly many of them due to bad operation,
in regard to which surgery has to
acknowledge that it can offer nothing more,
that they are inoperable and therefore
they are regarded as incurable. Every
one also knows how many cases there are
which have advanced so far before coming
to a competent surgeon, that they are also
inoperable. Every one likewise knows that
there are numerous cases of cancer in internal
regions, and in certain localities, and
presenting peculiar features, which are also
recognized as inoperable, at least with any
proper justification. Thus it may safely
be said that of the total number of cases
of cancer existing at any one time, which
would be included under the above classes,

147
fully 50 per cent. are such that operative
surgery can offer no hope of material benefit:
also, it must be acknowledged that but
a relatively small proportion of all cancer
cases are likely to secure the very best
surgical service, such as claims the highest
percentage of success.

For this large number of hopeless victims
of this dire disease, at least, proper
dietary and medical treatment should be
most carefully studied and patiently applied,
with the hope and expectation that
the same, if correctly employed, would
more or less hinder or check its progress
or prevent a recurrence after operation.
But experience shows that such measures,
if taken promptly and thoroughly, can also
prevent the development of early threatening
lesions into those of malignant character,
suggesting surgical removal, and these
should never be neglected when there is
the slightest suspicion of cancer. For it
must be acknowledged that the surgery of

148
cancer is only an attempt at the physical
removal of a something, which medical
science and art should not have allowed to
develop out of normal tissue. And in the
matter of the general prophylaxis of cancer
it is certainly worth while to consider
and act strongly upon the facts which have
been presented, especially in those individuals
who have any hereditary suspicions,
or who exhibit the habit of body or
life which could lead to the development of
cancer.

The medical care of cancer, as of all diseases,
naturally includes both prophylaxis
and the treatment of a morbid condition
which has already developed; the former of
these is always considered to be of the
highest importance.

Prophylaxis of Cancer.
From what has
preceded in this and other lectures it can
readily be understood that the prevention
of cancer lies largely along dietary and hygienic
lines, including such medical attention

149
as shall secure healthy action of the
secreting and excreting organs. If the figures
and facts heretofore given are correct,
if cancer has surely been observed to increase
under certain conditions of life, if it
is found to be absent or relatively rare
under certain other conditions of living, if
cancer has been known to disappear spontaneously
in certain individuals, especially
when they have changed their mode of living,
it must then follow that when the exactly
correct habit and state of life are continually
assumed the disease will not occur.

In other words, when the blood stream
nourishing the tissues is ideally correct,
the individual cells of the body perform
their functions normally, and as each cell
is worn out it is removed by a healthy catabolism
and renewed by a normal anabolism,
and homologous cells then replace
those which have ceased to be able to perform
their function. On the other hand,

150
when there is perverted metabolism we
have various forms of deranged action, to
which we give the names of various diseases,
one of which is cancer: here in place
of homologous cells maintaining the tissues
in a normal condition, we have a malignant
metamorphosis into heterologous cells,
which take on a disorderly or rampant action,
and refuse to assimilate themselves to
others, so as to form healthy tissue; we
have then a mass of low vitality, tending
to easily break down or ulcerate, and to
extend their malignant action to adjoining
tissues, under the continued influence of a
contaminated blood current. When once
ulceration has occurred, the ordinary parasitic
micro-organisms, which are practically
omnipresent, find an acceptable
nidus, and aid in the destructive work, and
also in the systemic poisoning of the tissues.

The aim, then to be sought in the prophylaxis
of cancer is to secure the most

151
perfect blood stream possible, which is accomplished
by simple living, perfect mastication,
and the avoidance of excesses, especially
along the lines of protein, tea and
coffee, alcohol, etc., with the maintenance
of healthy habits of life, especially in regard
to bowel action. As already intimated,
we do not know just why in some
persons and at a certain time a disturbance
of metabolism results in perverted cell
growth, but there is, of course, a reason,
and the physician’s duty is so to regulate
the patient’s whole life that the metabolism
is kept in the state of perfect health. All
this seems very simple and trite, but really
it is a task which is most important and
often most difficult to accomplish, and requires
very careful study and infinite patience.
Dr. Kellogg, of Battle Creek, says
that of the many thousands who have
passed under his care he has not known
cancer to develop in any one who had been
faithful to the principles which he inculcates,

152
and I may say the same of the many
who have been under my care in private
practice, often with notes extending over
many years.

Time does not permit of going into detail
here in regard to the special features
of diet and hygiene, which I discussed with
you fully two years ago, in my lectures,
which were subsequently published: suffice
it to say, as previously remarked, that the
refinements of civilization add greatly to
the temptation of over-eating, and wrong
eating and drinking, as they do to numerous
other temptations, and in many instances
it requires the utmost amount of
grit as well as patience, both in the patient
and doctor, to secure the perfect result
necessary.

It is understood, I trust, that I believe
that for the proper treatment of cancer,
and to prevent its occurrence and recurrence,
it is absolutely necessary to maintain
a perfect vegetarian diet, which includes

153
even the exclusion of eggs and milk,
with food; but the yolk of eggs may sometimes
be taken with advantage, and also
milk alone and separate, at a body temperature,
one hour before eating, according to
the plan which I have often demonstrated
to you. As remarked in my last lecture,
the vegetable kingdom contains proteid sufficient
for the system, and the diet should
be so arranged as to give the requisite
quantity of calories, in proper proportion,
of vegetable protein, carbohydrates, and
fats: the latter is accomplished largely
with butter, of which a quarter of a pound
may be taken daily. Many writers on diet
hold that the protein in casein acts differently
from that contained in meat, and this
is allowed in many vegetarian dietaries: it
also contains phosphorus, which is an integral
part of living cells, especially their
nuclei. When nutrition seems to demand
it, this can, perhaps, be added to the diet,
mixed with cereals or in soups, and a small

154
amount of certain kinds of cheese is also
sometimes allowable. It is impossible to
elaborate the details of diet fully in a lecture
such as this, and I must refer you to
the many excellent works on food and nutrition
(Hutchinson, Sherman, Thompson,
Buttner, Braithwaite), for further information.

The
medical treatment of cancer
patients
is a matter which should receive
most careful and constant attention; indeed,
the patient in whom cancer is threatening
or has developed should be under the
watchful and unremitting guidance of a
physician who grasps the importance of
the matter and is prepared to guard the
health, and to meet and correct functional
disorders as they arise; for a careful study
of patients with cancer for many years has
constantly shown me gross errors in their
life and in the action of various organs,
and consequently disorders of metabolism

155
which are of weight in connection with the
disease.

The first point of importance to which
I wish to call your attention is in regard to
the action of the bowels. Some of you may
remember that even that great surgeon,
Sir Arbuthnot Lane, has recently emphasized
the fact that one of the terminal
results of intestinal stasis may be cancer.
This may seem strange, but it would surprise
you if you knew how very commonly
there was imperfect intestinal excretion, or
intestinal stasis, as it is now called, in these
subjects; indeed, I might almost say that it
is the rule, and that this assuredly plays a
most important part in the auto-intoxication
which leads up to cancer; in fact, I almost
feel like saying that the toxins produced
by the millions of micro-organisms
generated through intestinal stasis and fecal
putrefaction are the real, incidental
cause of cancer. Under a perfect vegetarian

156
diet there is less likelihood of trouble
in this direction, but even then there is necessity
of watching continually, that there
may be at least, one, full, free movement
of normal character, daily, after breakfast.
In many cancer patients I have secured
this by having the entire potato
eaten, skin and all, whether boiled or
baked; by this means also one gets the full
value of the inner layer of skin, which contains
the mineral salts so necessary to the
economy, which are entirely lost when the
potatoes are peeled before boiling; so that
potatoes should always be cooked in their
skins, even if the outer layer is stripped
off afterwards.

But the regulation of the bowel action
should not be left to the judgment and action
of patients, with a spasmodic use of
remedies, and with alternate constipation
and purgation; the physician himself
should carefully guide and direct the
proper treatment frequently enough to secure

157
perfect results. Of course each one
may have their own ideas and methods, but
I have long used with the best results the
remedies which you have often heard me
order in this clinic. Thus, at the beginning
of treatment, and often on the same
days of many succeeding weeks, I give ℞
Ext. Colocynth. Co., Mass Hydrarg
aa
gr.
x Pulv. Ipecac gr.
ij
M. Div. in Capsules
No. IV. Sig. Take two at night and two
on the second night after. For continuous
use, or in the nights between these, I have
long used a compound Cascarin tablet (℞
Podophylin, Aloin, Cascarin
aa
gr. ¼) one
or more each night, or have depended on
the Cascara in a mixture of which I shall
shortly speak. I do not like the action of
salts or laxative mineral waters in these
cases, and, of course, enemata are entirely
useless to secure real, effective liver and
intestinal action, and should be used only
in an emergency.

The action of the
kidneys
is also always

158
a very important element to watch and
control in cancer patients; this does not
have reference to albumen and casts, or
glycosuria, but to a functional derangement
of the secretion: for the former are
relatively infrequent compared to the latter.
This is so large a subject that time
does not permit of its elaboration; I made
the matter pretty clear to you in my lectures
not long ago on the relations of diseases
of the skin to internal disorders. I
must tell you, however, that, as a result of
numberless studies of the urine of many
cancer patients, I have almost constantly
found a deficient or defective urinary secretion:
in many cases I have had the total
daily amount accurately measured, and reported
in writing each week over long
periods, and while the total quantity may
at times be near normal, the total solids
sometimes fall to, and remain at, even less
than one-half the amount which should be
passed for the patient’s body weight.

159
I want here to urge upon you the importance
and value of repeated volumetric
examination of all possible ingredients of
the urine, as indicating in the best manner
obtainable the state of the arterial blood,
from which the urine is derived: especially
is this true of the exact volumetric acidity,
representing the diminished alkalescence
of the blood common in cancer.

The actual medicinal and dietary treatment
of the various possible departures
from normal can hardly be elaborated here,
but they are along very much the same
lines which you have often watched in connection
with certain diseases of the skin;
for you must remember that carcinoma is
an epithelial disease, and that the laws of
nutrition are much the same for this as for
various other morbid conditions of the
economy. I may say, however, that very
many of my cancer patients have received
the greatest benefit from acetate of potassa,
often in the formula familiar to you (
℞

160
Potass. Acetatis ℥i Tinct. Nucis Vomic ʒiv
Extr. Cascar. fld. ʒ
ij
-ʒiv Extr. Rumicis
radicis fld. ad ℥iv M. Sig.
One teaspoonful
half an hour before eating, well diluted).
For many years I have administered
potassa largely to these patients, and
it is gratifying to find not only support but
an incentive to its greater use, in the
studies and experience of Ross, who pushes
it to a very great extent, giving as high as
240 grains of potassium phosphate in a
day. Ross also advises the free use of
crude or brown sugar, as it contains a large
proportion of potassium salts, which are
for the most part removed from the white
or refined article. I must also remind you
of the great value of Bethesda water, in
washing out the kidneys, given a tumblerful
with each meal, and one tumblerful, hot,
one hour before breakfast and also an hour
before the evening meal.

The
blood
should also be watched, and in
my hospital cases I have a count made

161
every week; for the hæmoglobin content,
and the number of the erythrocytes, and
the percentage of the varieties of leucocytes
afford very valuable information as to the
physical state of the patient, and the progress
or recession of the cancer, and in a
measure these data are of value in directing
therapy. I have also the
weight
of the
patient taken and recorded each week, as a
guide to nutrition and dietary matters.
Also the
saliva
is tested and recorded before
and after each meal, and furnishes an
indication in regard to the administration
of alkalies.

Iron is found to be greatly wanting in
the blood and tissues late in cancer, and
should always be an element in the treatment
of this disease. Skene Keith, noticing
that after a cancerous mass was removed
the blood recovered in regard to
hæmoglobin and erythrocytes, administered
iron with arsenic, with the greatest benefit,
the growth shriveling up and the patient

162
gaining in weight; he recommends the
citrate of iron and ammonia, the preparation
which I have given to patients for
many years past. He also advises hypodermic
injections of iron, arsenic, and soda,
and reports cases thus treated, some of
them with good results. There is a loss of
phosphates in these patients, and phosphate
of iron or other phosphates are valuable.

When considering the metabolism of cancer
mention was made of derangement in
the action of the ductless glands in this
disease, and of the use and value of certain
preparations of the internal secretions in
its treatment. While a hormone therapy
of cancer is still in its infancy, in spite of
many books and innumerable journal articles
on the internal secretions, it is quite
possible that the future may demonstrate
its efficacy in helping to control the disease:
for, that the latter are efficient agents
in carrying on the vital processes in the

163
body, there can be no question, although as
Biedl remarks, “Our knowledge of the
chemistry of hormone formation is very
slight.”

But considerable clinical evidence has
been accumulated that one at least of the
internal secretions, namely, that of the

thyroid
, has a definite beneficial effect
upon cancer; this I have administered to
many cancer patients, and have reason to
believe that it contributed to the favorable
results obtained. Sajous, believing that
insufficiency of the adrenal secretion is an
element in altered nutrition, advocates
thyroid extract on the ground that it stimulates
the activity of the adrenals: Vincent
quotes Erlich as believing that “there may
be substances circulating in the organism
which may stimulate the body cells to resist
the athreptic influence of cancer cells.”
Shirlaw advises a tablet made of thyroid
6 grains, supra-renal ¾ grain, and pituitary

1
16
grain. While the treatment by

164
these hormones from internal secretions is
really in rather an experimental stage, it
would seem more than probable that the
correct use of these pluriglandular extracts,
in combination with other proper
dietary and medicinal treatment, would be
of service in the prophylaxis and treatment
of cancer. I have been a little cautious in
the use of thyroid, beginning with two or
three grains with meals, three times daily;
for, as a promoter of catabolism it can disintegrate
tissue faster than the emunctories
can remove the effete products, and may
thus poison the system.

Serum- and Vaccine-therapy are yet in
a stage of development, and as I have had
little or no personal experience with them
I will not attempt to discuss their value,
which time alone will demonstrate. While
there have been many claims of success
from treatment along these lines, unfortunately
they have not been confirmed by
later observations by others: I may say

165
frankly that they have never appealed to
me as rational, in consideration of the
views and experience I have long had along
other lines of thought and practice. If,
however, future investigations shall confirm
some of the remarkable reports which
have been made, the latest of which is by
Nowell, there may be opened a non-surgical
line of treatment of cancer which would
mean much to many otherwise hopeless
cases.

The
local medical treatment
of cancer is
also an important matter which should receive
careful attention. For many years
in early cancer of the breast, under proper,
general, dietetic, hygienic, and medicinal
treatment, I have seen the lump vanish
under the continued application of the
iodide of lead, in Hebra’s diachylon ointment
of the German Pharmacopœia
(ʒss-ʒi ad ℥i), and in very many instances
I have had the assurance of patients that
its application relieved the pain and was

166
of the greatest benefit also in axillary and
other metastases. In other cases the continuous
painting with ichthyol (50 p.c. in
water) has seemed to be of great service,
in combination with other proper treatment:
all of this in earlier cases, before
ulceration has occurred.

After ulceration has set in, either in primary
or recurrent cases, proper local medication
is very important. The ordinary
micro-organisms, finding a suitable nidus,
very readily germinate and add greatly to
the suppuration, and consequent exhaustion
and pain, and by their toxins, aid also
in the general contamination of the blood
and tissues. Hydrogen peroxide, laid on
with pledgets of absorbent cotton is often
of great service in changing the conditions
of the part, and when followed by Russian
oil, also applied with cotton, makes a most
satisfactory dressing. Adrenalin 1‒1000
is also often of service, both in checking
active hemorrhage, and in relieving pain,

167
and shrinking up the granulations. Ichthyol,
10 to 25 per cent. in water, and permanganate
of potash in water, 1 to 2 per
cent., are also often of service, likewise
acetate of aluminium, 3 to 5 per cent.:
methylin blue and fuchsin in watery solution,
1 to 2 per cent. were formerly much
used, and often served a good purpose.
It is understood, however, that none of
these measures have any great curative
effect on cancer, but as contributory elements
they should never be neglected.
Ichthyol ointment (℞ Ichthyol ʒss-ʒi Zinc
Oxid ʒss Unguent. Aquæ Rosæ ℥i) often
proves most satisfactory, spread on thin
layers of absorbent cotton, and changed
several times daily, after soaking the part
with one of the liquids above mentioned.

Time does not permit us to go into the
matter of the X-ray, which undoubtedly
has often been of great service in certain
cases of cancer: it should be carefully but
systematically employed, once or twice a

168
week in connection with other medical
treatment; radium can also be of real service
in these cases. In some inoperable
cases a mild surgery, especially with the
actual cautery, in the way of removing
exuberant masses, which would have to
slough off, can add much to the good progress
of the case, and the occasional excision
of cutaneous nodules removes just so much
cancerous tissue, which by its secretion
would poison the system.

In our study thus far we have seen that
there is much to be done for cancer besides
the surgical removal of the offending mass,
the existence of which is an opprobrium to
medical science, which has not thus far
guarded mankind against it: and until time
has passed, and by right living and proper
medical attention cancer has ceased to be
produced, or become greatly diminished,
surgery will probably be a great factor in
its treatment, as its mortality statistics are
constantly improving. But there can be no

169
question but that with the adoption of
proper dietary and medical treatment,
even from the first suspicion of a malignant
growth, and before, as also after operation,
the final results of operative procedure
will be even far better than have
been yet attained.

170

LECTURE VI

CLINICAL CONSIDERATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS

The test of everything lies in the results
obtained. Theories, discussions, and arguments
are all unavailing unless results
show their truth. In medicine, however,
it is sometimes difficult to demonstrate results
until after the lapse of time, as was
well illustrated by the preposterous claims
first put forth for “606,” which is gradually
attaining about its correct status.
The same is true in regard to the surgery
of carcinoma, where operations which formerly
were attended with very bad results
have gradually been improved, so that,
while the late Dr. Agnew of Philadelphia
once said, toward the close of his life, that
he did not know if he had ever been justified
in any operation he had performed on

171
this disease, the best surgeons are now
claiming notable successes, with relatively
good percentages of recovery: but here
again, time comes in, and while the three-year
limit of freedom from recurrence is
valuable, it is still said that fully 90 per
cent. of those who have once been affected
with true cancer, die of the disease, and its
general mortality is still increasing in spite
of all surgery. Dr. John B. Murphy of
Chicago, has also repeatedly expressed
himself most pessimistically in regard to
the ultimate results of the surgical treatment
of carcinoma, especially in those patients
who are fat, and with lax tissue, that
is, exhibiting evidences of imperfect metabolism.

Dietetic and medical treatment of cancer,
in the fullest sense, have never yet
been given a fair and fully intelligent trial
on a scale large enough to produce general
conviction in regard to their value. Many
cases have occurred here and there which

172
have recovered spontaneously, that is,
without surgical interference, and often
really to the surprise of the medical attendant:
this of itself shows that under
certain circumstances something may occur
in the system which causes the malignant
process to cease, and the cells to return to
a normal function. This certainly should
be a stimulus to discover what the reason
is for this beneficial change, and we believe
that it is to be found in what has preceded
in these lectures.

When the New York Skin and Cancer
Hospital was founded, over thirty years
ago, Cancer was included with Diseases of
the Skin, in the hope and expectation that
in studying the internal causes of the latter
light would be thrown on the etiology
of carcinoma, which, as we know, is a disease
of epithelial elements; and the earlier
Report of the Hospital shows but one department,
including Cancer with Skin Diseases,
with operating surgeons and a gynæcologist

173
to assist, whenever their services
were requested by the physicians in charge.
Before long, however, for reasons which
cannot now be given, and against the judgment
of the present speaker, the plan was
changed, and a separate cancer department
was erected under the exclusive
charge of surgeons. A Prize Fund was
also early established, which has been
slowly increasing, for the discovery of a
cure for cancer by other than surgical removal.

For thirty or forty years I have held
very much the same views regarding cancer
which have been presented in these lectures,
and have acted on them more or less
strongly, and in later years very stringently,
and have rarely seen cause for regret.
For one reason or another I have
also had many hundreds of patients, with
various affections, on a vegetarian diet
over varying periods: in a number of cases
I have records extending over many years,

174
in which I have observed the patients from
time to time (one psoriasis patient having
continued it for over twenty years) and
with only the best results, so I trust that
you will accept and test the validity of my
statements.

In looking over my case histories in private
practice I find that I have more or
less complete records of 96 cases of carcinoma,
mostly of the breast (two of them
having Paget’s disease), 29 of sarcoma in
various situations, and 619 of epithelioma
of different degrees of severity, of which
four others had Paget’s disease; a total of
744 patients with these forms of neoplasm.
Some of these patients were seen in consultation,
others only once or for a brief
period, but many of them were under care
and observation for a greater or less length
of time. During the past year I have also
treated on the plan here indicated a number
of cases of recurrent carcinoma in the
New York Skin and Cancer Hospital,

175
which have been submitted to very careful
laboratory study, some of whom have exhibited
decidedly favorable results: some
of these will be referred to later, but they
are too recent to afford positive data, and
I prefer to confine my consideration mainly
to private patients, in regard to whom
more reliable evidence can be obtained.

I will not weary you with any full analysis
of these cases, nor will I consider any
of them except those of carcinoma: for
while I believe that sarcoma is of the same
nature and origin, save that it relates to
connective tissue cells, but few of the cases
were submitted long enough to a vigorous
treatment calculated to yield efficient results.
I may say in regard to the cases of
epithelioma, mainly of the skin, that some
of the more severe ones showed very
markedly the benefit of dietetic and medicinal
measures of the character now being
considered, and that it is my custom to
treat such in the same manner; for reason

176
would seem to show that the same causes
would produce abnormal proliferation of
epithelial elements on the cutaneous surface
as well as in other parts of the body.

In regard to the cases of carcinoma there
were 6 in males and 90 in females; of these
the right breast was affected 42 times, the
left breast 45 times, and both breasts 3
times. In 28 cases the patients were operated
on surgically before adequate treatment
had been employed; many of these
were earlier cases, or those seen in consultation.
In seven instances it seemed wise
to have an operation, after a more or less
faithful trial of medical treatment. There
were no cases of cancer of internal organs,
except metastases, as these would not naturally
come to me. The average age of the
breast cases was 51.8 years.

In the large majority of cases, except
those who had been surgically operated on,
the diagnosis was clinical only, as it is an
accepted fact that it is very unwise to make

177
a biopsy, even before surgical removal, and
manifestly improper where this is not undertaken;
but in most of the cases there
was the independent diagnosis of one or
more other medical men, and many of the
patients came to me on account of threatened
operations by prominent surgeons,
and even after these had been arranged
for; in 27 cases there had been previous
surgical removal with recurrence, and in
several cases more than one operation, with
again recurrence.

The exact duration of cancer before
coming under observation is always an uncertain
item, for undoubtedly a tumor
starts in an individual cell or group of
cells, and has probably been forming some
time before being noticed by the patient or
attracting attention in any way. The average
stated duration of the disease was 1.6
years before coming under observation.

Surgeons are fully agreed that the
earlier a tumor is recognized and removed

178
the better the prospect of ultimate success,
and this is eminently true in regard to
remedial measures other than surgical:
for as we have seen, after a cancerous process
is well under way its cells secrete a
something which hastens the general depravement
of the system, and quickens the
growth of the neoplasm, and naturally
greatly increases the difficulty of overcoming
the dyscrasia.

Thus in the effort to get at and remove
all possible or prospective cancerous lesions,
many innocent or non-malignant
adenomata, etc., are operated on, which are
afterwards found to be such microscopically.
In the same way it is quite possible
that some of the small breast tumors which
have disappeared under the dietetic and
medical measures here described were still
non-malignant, and should not be grouped
with carcinoma.

It is fair to say, therefore, that among
my notes are also 22 cases of breast tumors

179
which have been excluded from the carcinoma
list, and entered with other titles,
such as abscess, cyst, chronic mastitis,
adenoma, etc. But I claim that even if
some of these also disappear under the
measures we are considering, as they frequently
have done, it is a better and more
desirable result than if they had been removed
by the knife: for in the former case
the cause which induced the unnatural
growth has been overcome, whereas by
surgery only the obnoxious mass has been
dislodged, and perhaps with it adjoining
tissue and glands, but nothing has been accomplished
toward checking the cause producing
the offending lesion. But the very
fact of the frequent recurrences after operation,
in the neighboring skin or elsewhere,
demonstrates the fact that surgery is but
an attempt to rectify past errors, which
might or might not have been prevented by
careful medical foresight and action; we
must, however, be thankful for the measure

180
of success which has followed the noble
efforts of our distinguished surgeons, only
it is to be hoped that hereafter other measures
will also be more commonly adopted,
looking towards a prevention of the recurrence
of carcinoma after operation.

Not to detain you too long with these
clinical considerations, I would like to give
the details of a few of the cases which have
been most striking.

Mrs. B. E. C., aged 44, was first seen on
account of trouble in the right breast, on
September 19, 1892. She then had a flat
tumor in the outer lower segment, an inch
and a half in diameter, rather sharply defined,
and tender on pressure at the sides,
which she had noticed about two months.
Not satisfied with the diagnosis of cancer,
and hesitating at the thought of medical
treatment, she consulted a well known,
prominent surgeon, who pronounced the
tumor as undoubtedly cancer, and urged its
instant removal; this I did not know until

181
she informed me of it some time later,
after the tumor had entirely disappeared
under treatment. I saw her at frequent
intervals for six months, and the breast
became entirely normal. Four years later
she was again seen in regard to the menopause,
which she was undergoing, and the
breast was found still to be normal: she
was maintaining her diet. Nearly three
years later I learned from her husband
that she was in perfect health, with absolutely
no breast trouble, and for eight years
later, while he himself was under occasional
treatment, I learned repeatedly that
she remained still perfectly well, over sixteen
years after beginning treatment, with
no recurrence of the breast tumor.

Miss B. M. L., aged 45, was first seen on
January 4, 1894, with a tumor in the left
breast, which had been diagnosed as cancer
by three medical men, and one of them,
a surgeon of prominence, had arranged for
immediate surgical removal the next day.

182
The mass was situated in the upper and
outer quadrant, well defined, not painful
on moderate handling, but subsequently she
experienced pain in it. Two months later
the lump was recorded as less distinct and
flatter, and within eleven months it had entirely
disappeared. A month or two later
she had some pain in the breast, in connection
with the menstrual disturbance accompanying
the menopause, but no trace
of the tumor. On Nov. 8th, 1905, she
called, bringing a relative for treatment,
and the breast was found perfectly normal,
and again five years later she called, with
another trouble, the breast still remaining
perfectly well, also sixteen years after first
coming under treatment.

Miss J. M. A., aged 45, was first seen October
12th, 1905, with a tumor of the left
breast, above, toward the median line, near
the nipple, not painful on handling, though
there was some pain afterwards, and it
had been awaking her with pain at night

183
for some months, with also a numb, shooting
pain in the daytime. She had seen a
number of medical men always with the
diagnosis of cancer, but she had declined
operation. Two months later, Dec. 15th,
1905, it was recorded that there was very
little to be felt in the breast, and there was
no pain at any time, and on January 5th,
1906, both breasts were the same on palpation,
with no sign of the former tumor.
For one reason or another she has been
seen from time to time, almost up to the
present date, and remains perfectly free
from her former trouble, a period of over
nine years. She has been a most faithful
patient, adhering strictly to diet and more
or less medication, except when on certain
occasions I have let up on the same; and
all the time from the first she has been under
great strain of work, mental and physical,
as a city missionary.

Another very similar case was in the
person of Miss G. M., aged 44, who has

184
been under constant observation and treatment
off and on for various troubles from
November 13, 1905, until yesterday. Fifteen
years previous to her first visit she
had fallen and struck the left breast which
was bruised, but the effects wore off in
some months, and there was no sensation
in the breast for some years. Then 7 or 8
years later she began to have pain in the
breast, aggravated before and during menstruation,
which had continued until her
visit, and for the last months she had been
kept from her work in school, the pain being
severe in the breast, and more recently
in the axilla: in July there had been bleeding
from the nipple. She had seen a number
of medical men, with the diagnosis of
cancer, and one surgeon of prominence in
one of the large hospitals had strongly
pressed for an immediate operation.

When first seen there was a tumor between
two and three inches in diameter, in
the upper, inner segment of the left breast,

185
hard, sharply defined, and more or less
nodular on the surface: there were some
enlarged glands in the left axilla. She
had long been constipated and was passing
about 60 per cent. of the amount of urinary
solids proper for her weight. Under very
active treatment it was recorded four
weeks later that there had been hardly any
sensations in the breast during the previous
week, that the tumor had diminished
materially in size, with only moderate
hardness, and that she was now out doors
every day, and feeling much better. One
month later it was recorded that the breast
was very well and on examination was almost
the same as the other, there being
some general caking in both: she had had
no pain for some time. One month or so
later she was again at her duties as a public
school teacher, which she has continued
at since, with rare exceptions, when some
temporary ailment prevented: the lump in
the breast did not wholly disappear for a

186
month or two later, but on April 7th it was
recorded that the left breast was the same
as the other, and no glands could be felt in
the axilla.

From that time to the present she has
had a variety of troubles, rheumatic and
other, and it has been difficult to keep up a
proper action of the bowels and kidneys;
but in spite of strenuous and often exhausting
work as a New York City public school
teacher, she has had no return of the breast
trouble, now for over nine years. A sister,
aged 60, has just died with cancer of the
stomach in a distant country town.

I could multiply these histories but do
not want to tire you, though I do want to
mention one more patient, to show what
can be done in the case of recurrent carcinoma,
after operation, of which I have had
a number of cases with varying results, according
to the duration and severity of the
disease.

Miss H. M., aged 61, came to me June

187
21st, 1913, with the following history:
About two years previously a lump appeared
in the outer, lower segment of the
left breast, which was removed in August,
1911; this healed soon, leaving a good axillary
scar, and there was no thought of trouble
until two months before her visit, when
a small red spot appeared near the edge of
the sternum. This enlarged and hardened
and others appeared around the scar, until,
when seen there were a dozen red nodules
up to half an inch in diameter, near the center
of the former site of the breast, with
others, not red, above; with the tense skin
and rapidly developing, multiple nodules
here and there, further surgical operative
procedure was out of the question.

Since that date she has been under strict
vegetarian diet and medication, including
thyroid from time to time, with repeated
application of X-rays, and under all
these measures together many of the
nodules have disappeared; although some

188
new ones have formed, several of which
have been removed under local anæsthesia,
the wounds healing kindly. As
she resides some distance from the city
she has not been seen since October 7th,
1914, she wishing to take the X-rays
nearer home, but she was earnestly
charged to continue also the dietetic and
other treatment. In this instance the patient
has lived comfortably and without
pain for almost sixteen months after coming
under treatment, and, although she has
lost some flesh, the active cancerous process,
which would otherwise have carried
her off long ago, has been in a measure
checked. What will be the further history
of the case one cannot tell, for it is quite
possible that being away from my care she
may neglect dietetic and medicinal treatment,
trusting only to the X-rays, which,
of course, cannot influence the real nature
and course of the disease.

Reference was made to certain cases of

189
recurrent cancer in the Hospital which had
been under active medical treatment during
the past year, with careful laboratory
studies, but it is naturally too early to report
anything very definite in regard to
them, especially as most of them were desperate cases,
which had advanced far beyond
any possible operative relief. Moreover
several of them remained but a short
time under treatment, as it is very difficult
to convince this class of patients that any
possible benefit can accrue from anything
but an operation, and this being impossible
they often give up and leave, preferring to
die at home; moreover the dietary restraint
seems also very irksome and useless
to them and their friends. In one
particular patient, however, there was
such a remarkable improvement that it is
worth reporting to you.

Mrs. C. M. was first seen February 12th,
1914. Nineteen years previously she had
an abscess of the right breast, which

190
healed and left a tumor the size of a pigeon’s
egg in the inner, upper quadrant of
the breast; this remained quiescent until it
began to enlarge, eleven months before it
was removed at the New York Skin and
Cancer Hospital, November 14th, 1912.
The tumor was then about the size of a
hen’s egg, with an area of skin the size of
a quarter, attached to it: a second tumor
was felt just below the nipple, which was
not retracted, and the axillary glands were
involved: there were no signs of metastases
in the abdomen. A complete operation
was then performed, with dissection of the
glands in the axillary and supra-clavicular
regions, and she was discharged January
16th, 1913.

On February 9th, 1914, she returned to
the Hospital and was placed under medical
treatment, with vegetarian diet. There
was then an ulceration along the line of incision,
from the second to the fourth rib,
with many nodules around it, averaging a

191
third of an inch in diameter, raised and
reddened. The liver extended two inches
below the edge of the ribs, with a hard and
nodular margin; the right arm was enormously
swollen and helpless. When she
left the Hospital, June 20th, 1914, the ulcer
had entirely closed, many of the cutaneous
nodules had entirely disappeared,
the arm had returned to normal size, like
the other, by measurement, and the liver
had retracted to a trifle below the margin
of the ribs, with hardly any nodules to be
felt. The treatment had included twenty-five
X-ray exposures, from 8 to 10 minutes
each, about twice a week, over three areas
each time.

While in the Hospital careful laboratory
investigations were made, according to
a definite schedule. The
blood
, studied
weekly, maintained a hæmoglobin of 80+
for over two months, then fell a little, and
again rose. The erythrocytes were 3,262,000
on entering, and rose within two

192
months to 4,282,000, then fell a little and
rose again to almost 4,000,000: the leucocytes
were 9,000 on entering, and fell to
5,200 just before leaving, the poly-nuclear
69 per cent. on admission, fell to 60 per
cent., and again rose a little, and the proportion
of the other forms remained about
normal. The
urine
, volumetrically analyzed
every three days, was kept a little
below the normal acidity, and the specific
gravity a little low, with a free daily
amount of excretion, largely by Bethesda
water: in spite of the vegetarian diet the
urea excretion was not much below normal,
and sometimes above, the chlorides
were diminished, owing to the rather small
amount of food taken, the phosphates varied
a little above and below normal, there
was never any indican, and the sulphates
averaged a trifle below normal. The
saliva
,
tested before and after each meal, was
acid at first, but became neutral and alkaline
off and on. The
weight
, taken weekly,

193
fell a little from the first, but maintained
a good level, and rose a little before she
left the Hospital.

This was a very difficult patient to manage,
as she was a very ignorant Polish
woman, who often rebelled at the diet, and
wearied of the routine and restrictions imposed;
she left the Hospital June 20th,
1914, against my wish, but with as great a
change in her physical condition and disease
as could be imagined, after about four
months and a half treatment, carried out
under disadvantageous circumstances.

One other case, seen recently, where the
disease was recurrent after three operations,
deserves mention, although it will be
some time before any decisive result can
be reported.

Mrs. W. C., aged 45, was first seen September
17th, 1914. Nearly four years previously
she had noticed a lump in the left
breast which was removed on January 6th,
1911, but it soon regrew, and a complete

194
operation was performed at the New York
Skin and Cancer Hospital, May 30th, 1911.
Two years later there was some return,
and she was again operated on at the Hospital,
May 30th, 1914. About two months
before her first visit, September 17th,
1914, a swelling of the sternum was noticed,
and soon another above it, both of
which increased pretty rapidly to the time
of her visit. When seen there was a hard
mass in the scar over the sternum, about
an inch and a half long, raised a quarter
of an inch or so, reddened and immovable:
an inch or so above it was another, smaller
one, not reddened: they were not particularly
painful on moderate handling, but
painful when at hard housework. When
last seen, December 7th, both lumps had
subsided fully one-half, there was no pain
at any time, and her general condition had
improved immensely, she feeling better
than she did four or five years ago, that is,
before the beginning of the cancerous development:

195
she has been working all the
time, unusually hard, as janitor of four
buildings and also going out scrubbing and
washing. She weighed 157¼ pounds
when first seen, then ran down to 154, but
is again gaining, being 155½ at her last
visit. The outcome of this case it is, of
course, impossible to conjecture, for one
can seldom be sure that patients will be absolutely
faithful to treatment, for a long
enough time, but certainly the change in
the woman and in the lesions in this two
months and a half has been remarkable,
compared with the increasing development
of the disease in the two months previous.

I must mention one more case, which, although
fatal, exhibited some of the good
results of careful medical treatment even
when a primary case had advanced far beyond
the possible aid of surgery.

Mrs. M. B. J., aged 68, a private patient,
was first seen on February 17th, 1914.
Two years previously she noticed a lump

196
in the upper part of the right breast, after
great and repeated mental distress from
the death of a number of very near relatives,
and a sister’s mental derangement;
the great nervous strain had been attended
with various bilious attacks and nervous
indigestion. The mass increased steadily
in size and was kept concealed even from
her family, until the day before she called,
when her family physician who was consulted
saw that it was far beyond the possible
hope from any operation, in which
view a surgeon concurred.

When seen the whole breast was involved,
was double the size of the other,
hard, immovable, and with an adherent
crust over an ulcerating surface on its
lower half, several inches in diameter,
from beneath which was a moderate discharge:
the axillary glands were enormously
enlarged, as also the supra-clavicular,
and she was strongly cachectic.
She was placed on an absolute vegetarian

197
diet, with no coffee or tea, and appropriate
medical treatment, and the breast kept
painted with fifty per cent. ichthyol and
water, care being taken not to disturb the
adherent crust. In a very short time the
discharge ceased, and the protective crust
adhered until her death from exhaustion,
with pulmonary œdema, on September 9th,
1914. On August 15th it was recorded that
the breast had done very well, that it was
soft and movable, and not larger than the
other breast, with no discharge, and no
pain since a short time after beginning
treatment: the axillary glands had diminished
three-quarters in size, and the supra-clavicular
glands were also very much
smaller.

And now, gentlemen, my task is done.
I have tried to let you see cancer through
my spectacles, as I have seen it for very
many years past, and to share with me my
optimism in regard to the prophylaxis and
cure of cancer, if only there can be sufficient
enlightenment in the profession and

198
public: and I must tell you that in collating
and preparing the material to support
my long held views I have expended very
much more time and labor in study, for
some months past, than I could have believed
possible. But as the subject developed,
and as I discovered more and more
support for my thesis, there was a fascination
about the work which I could not
resist; and if I have tried you with the
many details of proof presented I beg that
you will pardon me: for I wanted to present
the subject so strongly that my hearers,
at least, would accept the propositions
I have developed, and believe what I have
said in regard to my own experience with
the terrible disease under consideration,
and act upon both, and thus aid some sufferers
with cancer.

From my recent article on “The Relation
of Diet to Cancer” many medical journals
have quoted me as ascribing the disease
wholly to the use of meat, but you

199
who have heard these lectures now know
that animal proteids are only one of the
contributing causes.

I have tried to make it plain that metabolic
errors, inducing a vitiated blood
stream, are the basic cause of the aberrant
action in the cellular elements of the body
which may ultimately lead to malignant
disease; and I have tried to show that there
are many elements connected with modern
so-called civilization which conspire to effect
this end. I have quoted many who
were well acquainted with cancer, who believed
that luxurious living, which includes
much animal food, coffee and tea, and alcohol,
with indolence or want of sufficient
muscular activity to burn up the waste
products, and the persistent neglect of hygienic
laws, should be placed first among
the causes of cancer: but I have also mentioned
that the refining and preparation
and cooking of food prevented a proper
supply of the mineral and other elements

200
of nutrition, and also that nervous influences
could so disturb the action of the
organs of the body that they could not perform
their functions perfectly in the elaboration
of nutritive material, etc.

But I cannot go over again all the matter
already given in these lectures, and
only mention these to remind you that
there is no one single cause of cancer, and
consequently that its prophylaxis and cure
can never be found in any one single remedy;
hence I can never believe in the sole
use of thyroid, much less in the idea that
sero-therapy can overcome a disease dependent
upon the continued operation of
so many causes; and still less can I believe
that the mere cutting out of an already
diseased portion of the body is the proper
and only means of overcoming such a malady
as cancer.

I have acknowledged that local irritation
of many kinds may be the proximate cause
for the development of a malignant tumor

201
in any particular locality, as Ewing has
so clearly shown in his excellent resumé on
pre-cancerous lesions; but I have also contended
that we should withal look into and
overcome the cause; why, when once
started by local injury the cells should
pursue such a progressive, aggressive, and
invasive course; and this is found, I believe,
in the disturbed character of the fluids
which provide them with nourishment
for their abnormal growth.

From this study of cancer in regard to
its nature, frequency, geographical distribution,
metabolism, dietetic relations,
medical treatment, and clinical considerations,
what conclusions can be drawn?
Have we solved the problem of cancer?
Far be it from us to make any such claim.
Scientific research and study must still go
on in the laboratory, but clinical research
and study, with laboratory work, on the
human subject, which have not been hitherto
sufficiently cultivated, should be

202
pushed, so that by a mass of carefully recorded
observations the truth or falsity of
what has been here quoted and said may be
refuted or confirmed.

From the enormous work which has
been done on cancer with the microscope
and the test tube, it would seem sometimes
that research workers have become somewhat
myopic, and not farsighted enough to
recognize the true value of statistical studies
and clinical observations. In these
lectures we have attempted to make a brief
synthetic study of some of the work which
has been done in connection with cancer,
and from this we believe that certain conclusions
can be drawn; if these are correct
and followed, it is hoped that much more
can be accomplished in regard to the prophylaxis
and cure of this more than threatening,
fatal malady. In order that you
may hold clearly the points which have
been made I want to give you a synopsis
or conclusions of them, as they have been

203
brought out in this and preceding lectures.

1. Cancer is but a deviation from the
normal life and action of certain of the ordinary
cells of the body, which, for some
as yet unexplained reason, take on an abnormal
or morbid action; with this there
is a continued tendency to a malignancy
which invades contiguous tissue, and in the
end tends to destroy life.

2. There is some reason to believe that
this action first takes place in what are
known as “embryonic rests,” or pre-natal,
wrongly placed tissue elements, which,
however, are now shown to exist in every
one, in many localities: but the reason why
they take on this malignant action, and
form cancer, has not been satisfactorily explained.

3. Cancer is
not
wholly due to traumatic
causes, although those play a not inconsiderable
part in its occurrence in certain
localities and cases.

4. It is pretty conclusively decided that

204
cancer is
not
caused by a micro-organism,
or parasite.

5. It is also known clinically and experimentally
that it is
not
contagious.

6.
Nor
is it hereditary in any appreciable
degree.

7. Occupation has
not
any very great influence
on the occurrence of cancer, although
it is more frequent in some pursuits
than in others.

8. Cancer is
not
altogether a disease of
older age, although its incidence is greatly
increased with advancing years.

9. It does
not
especially belong to or affect
any particular sex, race, or class of
persons.

10. It is
not
confined to any location or
section of the earth, but has been observed
in all countries and climates.

11. No single cause of cancer has yet
been demonstrated, nor is it likely that
this will ever be the case, as the experimental
and other investigations have covered

205
almost every possible line of research,
with only
negative
results.

12. The exclusion of almost every other
possible cause of cancer, as well as its
pathological history, leads to deranged
metabolism as the only remaining possible
etiological element; this acts by inducing
changes in nutrition, which latter depends
on diet and the proper action of the
secretory and excretory organs, which,
still further, may be affected by nervous
influences.

13. While the bio-chemistry of cancer
throws little light on its true nature,
enough is known to show that the morbid
changes in the cells are largely associated
with deranged metabolism.

14. The blood, in advancing cancer,
manifests changes which indicate vital alteration
in the action of the organs which
form blood and control the nutrition of the
body and its cells.

15. Clinical and experimental evidence

206
demonstrate that the secretions and excretions
of the body exhibit departures from
normal, which, while not pathognomonic of
cancer, indicate metabolic disturbances involving
the nutrition of the cellular elements,
which disturbances are of importance.

16. The evidence seems certain that the
cancer mass itself, when fully developed,
secretes a poison which tends to augment
its own growth and hastens the lethal progress
of the disease.

17. Cancer mortality is undoubtedly on
the increase in every portion on the globe.

18. This increase seems to vary inversely
with the decline of tuberculosis, in
many localities.

19. The incidence of cancer seems to follow
closely along the lines of modern
civilization.

20. This extension of cancer seems to
depend largely upon the altered conditions
of life, particularly along the lines of self-indulgence

207
in eating and drinking, and
indolence.

21. The augmentation in the consumption
of meat, coffee and alcoholic beverages
appears to be coincident with a very
great, and proportionately greater, augmentation
of the mortality from cancer.

22. The nerve strain of modern life
seems to be an element of importance, both
through disturbance of metabolism, and
by direct action on morbidly deranged
cells.

23. No single remedy for cancer will
probably ever be discovered, since it is
conceded that there is no single cause for
the disease.

24. Surgery has improved materially the
statistics relating to the mortality of operative
cases; but the total achievements
along this line are insignificant compared
with the general ultimate mortality of over
90 per cent. of those once afflicted with
cancer.

208
25. Surgery has had, and may long have
its function to perform in removing the
products of the disease, more or less efficiently,
curing some and prolonging the
life of others, but it can never hope to lessen
greatly the morbidity of cancer.

26. The X-ray and radium, as also caustics,
are in the same position as surgery,
and can do relatively little more than cause
to disappear lesions which have developed
from causes which they cannot reach.

27. With all these means the measure of
success, aside from the technical skill of
the operator, largely depends on the time
or period of development of the malignant
tumor before treatment; the earlier the
removal is undertaken, other things being
equal, the greater the possibilities of success.

28. The same is true in regard to the
treatment of the disease by means other
than those mentioned: the earlier the morbid
process leading to tumor formation is

209
attacked by dietetic, hygienic, and medicinal
measures, the greater the promise and
expectation of success, present and permanent.

29. The prevention of cancer, therefore,
or the checking of its increasing occurrence,
depends largely upon the early
enough adoption of such measures as will
limit the agencies which induce a derangement
of the body juices which tend to bad
nutrition and derangement of the body
cells.

30. The simple life, with the avoidance
of the dietetic and other causes which have
been found to induce cancer in nations and
individuals, promises the best hope for the
arrest of the rapidly increasing development
of cancer throughout the world.

31. It is more than possible, however,
that the long continued operation of many
baneful causes has produced such a degeneration
of tissue in the human race, that it
will take a generation or more of proper

210
living to make the beneficial impression on
the general incidence of cancer which is so
longed for.

211

BIBLIOGRAPHY
[2]

1.

Abderhalden
—Defensive Ferments. New York, 1914.

2.

Abernethy
—Surgical Observations on Tumors. Lond., 1816, 221.

3.

Bainbridge
—
Medical Record
, 1909, LXXVI, 85.

4.

Bainbridge
—The Cancer Problem. New York, 1914.

5.

Banks
—
Lancet
, 1900, I, 684.

6.

Beard
—The Enzyme Treatment of Cancer. Lond., 1911.

7.

Beebe
—
New York Medical Journal
, 1910, LXXXII, 1058.

8.

Bell
—Cancer: Its Causation and Its Curability Without Operation.
London, 1903.

9.

Beneke
—
Berl. Klin. Wochenschr.
, March 15, 1880.

212

10.

Benratt
—
Indian Med. Gaz.
, 1908, XLIII, 452.

11.

Biedl
—The Internal Secretory Organs. New York, 1913.

12.

Blumenthal
—Handb. d. Spezial Pathol. d. Harns., 1913, 263.

13.

Braithwaite
—
Lancet
, 1902, I, 400.

14.

Braithwaite
—Plainer Food and Less of It. London, 1908.

15.

Bristol
—
Medical Record
, 1913, LXXXIII, 787.

16.

Bulkley
—Relations of Diseases of the Skin to Internal Disorders.
New York, 1906.

17.

Bulkley
—Some Problems in Metabolism,
Jour. Cutan.
Dis.
, 1911, XXIX, 217.

18.

Bulkley
—Diet and Hygiene in Diseases of the Skin. New York, 1913.

19.

Bureau of Agriculture, 28th Annual Rep. Washington, 1911.

20.

Burnham
—Hæmocytes and Hæmic Infections, 1913; 92; 138.

21.

Buttner
—A Fleshless Diet. New York, 1910.

22.

Cahen
—
Deut. Zeitschr. f. Chir.
, 1909, CXIX,
415.

213

23.

Chittenden
—Physiological Economy in Nutrition, 1904.

24.

Cohnreich
—Folia Hæmatologica, 1913, XVI, 307.

25.

Cooper, Sir Astley
—Lectures on Surgery, Boston, 1825.

26.

de Bloeme
,
Swart
, and
Terwen
—
Munch. Med. Wochenschr.
, 1914, LXI, 1718.

27.

Degrez
—
Gaz. Med. de Paris
, 1913, LXXXIV, 400.

28.

Einhorn, Kahn
and
Rosenblum
—
Arch. f. Verdauungskr.
, 1911, XVII, 557.

29.

Ewing
—Cancer Problems, Report of the C. P. Huntington Fund for
Cancer Research, Vol. II, 1908.

30.

Ewing
—
Medical Record
, 1914, LXXXVI, 951.

31.

Gruner
—Biology of the Blood Cells, 1913, 153; 260.

32.

Gwyer
—
Ann. of Surgery
, 1907, XXXXVI, 86; 643, 1908,
XXXXVII, 506; 631.

33.

Haig
—Uric Acid as a Factor in the Causation of Diseases. Phila.,
1908, 420.

34.

Haig
—
Brit. Med. Jour.
, 1912, II, 81.

35.

Harrower
—Practical Hormone Therapy, 1914, 29.

214

36.

Hislop and Fenwick
—
Brit. Med. Jour.
, 1909, II, 1222.

37.

Hutchinson
—Food and Dietetics. New York, 1911, 324.

38.

Isenberg
—
Monotschr. f. prakt. Wasserheilk
,
1910, XVII.

39.

Janeway
—
Sajous’ Anal. Cyclopedia of Pract. Med.
,
1912, II, 753.

40.

Johnson
—
Brit. Med. Jour.
, 1900, II, 982.

41.

Jones
—
Arch. Middlesex Hosp.
, London, 1911, XXIII, 72.

42.

Kahle
—
Munch. Med. Wochenschr.
, 1914, LXI, 752.

43.

Keith
—Cancer: Relief of Pain and Possible Cure. New York, 1908.

44.

Keith
—
British. Med. Jour.
, 1909, II, 140.

45.

Kessler
—
New York Medical Journal
, 1912, XVIC, 1122.

46.

Lambe
—Additional Reports on the Effects of a Peculiar Regimen of
Cancer. London, 1815.

47.

Little
—
Boston Med. and Surg. Jour.
, 1914, CLXXI, 587.

48.

Mayo, W. J.
—
Annals of Surgery
, 1914, LIX, 805.

215

49.

McCann
—Starving America. New York, 1912.

50.

McGregor
—
Brit. Med. Jour.
, 1900, II, 982.

51.

Merriam
—
St. Louis Courier of Med.
, 1884, XII, 385;

New York Medical Journal
, 1912, XVIC, 378.

52.

Mortality Statistics, Bureau of the U. S. Census, 1911, 1912.

53.

Murphy’s
Clinics, Aug. 1912, Dec. 1912, Aug. 1913, Oct. 1913,
Dec. 1913, Feb. 1914, June 1914.

54.

Nowell
—
New England Med. Gaz.
, 1914, XLIX, 461.

55.

Packard
—
Boston Med. and Surg. Jour.
, 1912, CLXVI,
452.

56.

Paget
—Lectures on Surgical Pathology. Philadelphia, 1854, 632.

57.

Parker
—Cancer. New York, 1885.

58.

Reid
—Cancer Research Laboratory, Manchester
Medical
Chronicle
, Nov. 1912, and April 1914.

59.

Renner
—
Brit. Med. Jour.
, 1910, II, 587, also 1911,
I, 110.

60.

Roberts
—Lectures on Dietetics and Dyspepsia. London, 1886, II
Edition.

216

61.

Robin
—
Bull. Gen. de Therapeutique
, 1913,
CLXVI, 433.

62.

Rohdenburg
,
Bullock
, and
Johnson
—
Arch. of Int. Med.
, 1911, VII, 491.

63.

Ross
—Cancer, Its Genesis and Treatment. London, 1912, 88.

64.

Rous
—
Jour. of Exper. Med.
, Lancaster, Pa., 1914, XX,
433.

65.

Russell
—Preventable Cancer. London, 1912, 96.

66.

Sajous
—
Monthly Cyclop. and Med. Bull.
, 1912, V, 219.

67.

Sajous
—Internal Secretions, Vol. I, 785.

68.

Saleeby
—The Conquest of Cancer. New York, 1911.

69.

Sandwith
—
Clinical Journal
, 1910, XXXV, 409.

70.

Schmidt
—
Medizin Klinik
, 1910, VI, 1690.

71.

Sherman
—Chemistry of Food and Nutrition. New York, 1911, 260.

72.

Sherrington
and
Copeman
—
Brit. Med.
Jour.
, 1910, II, 787.

73.

Shirlaw
—Liverpool
Medico Chir. Jour.
1913,
XXXIII, 398.

74.

Soegard
—
Zeitschr. für Krebsforsch
, 1913, XIII,
89.

217

75.

Stuart-Low
—
Lancet
, 1909, II, 1138.

76.

Sweet
,
Corson
,
White
, and
Saxon
—Proceed. Soc. for Exper. Biol.
and Med. New York, Vol. X, 175.

77.

Thompson
—Practical Dietetics, 1909, 256.

78.

Troisier
—
Gaz. des Hospiteaux
, 1913, LXXXVI,
2221.

79.

Tuke
—Illustrations of the influence of the mind upon the body in
health and disease. London, 1872.

80.

Turck
—
Vorlesungen Über Klin. Hæmatologie
, 1912.

81.

Venus
—
Centralbl. f. d. Grenzenb. d. Med. u.
Chir.
, 1910, XIII, 209.

82.

Vincent
—Internal Secretions and the Ductless Glands. London, 1912.

83.

Wakefield
—
American Medicine
, 1904, VII, 659.

84.

Walshe
—The Anatomy, Physiology, Pathology, and Treatment of
Cancer. Boston, 1844.

85.

Watson
,
Chalmers
—Food and Feeding in
Health and Disease. New York, 1912. Appendix.

86.

Wells
—Chemistry of Tumors,
Chemical Pathology
, 2nd
Ed., 1914.

218

87.

Williams
—The Natural History of Cancer. New York, 1908.

88.

Wolf
—
Zeitsch. für Krebsforsch
., 1905, III, 95.

89.

Wolff
—
Die Lehre von der Krebskrankheit
, Jena,
1913.

90.

Wolter
—Chemistry of Cancer,
Brockesn.
Zeitschr.
, 1913, LV, 260.

221

INDEX

Abderhalden, defensive ferments in cancer,
78

Abernethy on vegetarian diet,
136

Aborigines, freedom from cancer of,
48
,
116

Abstemiousness, effect on cancer,
139

Acid, amino nitrogen, increased in cancer,
91

Acid intoxication in cancer,
77

Acidosis in cancer,
80

Acids, oxyproteic, in the urine, increased in cancer,
90

Addison’s disease,
97

Adrenals, relation to cancer,
98

Africa, absence of cancer in,
50
,
52

Agamogenesis, relation to cancer,
72

Age affecting cancer,
22

Ages of patients with cancer,
176

Agnew on surgery in cancer,
170

Alcohol, relation to cancer,
120

Alkalinity of blood, diminished in cancer,
77

Amino-acid nitrogen, increased in cancer,
91

222
Ammonia fraction of nitrogen, increased in cancer,
91

Amylopsin in cancer,
99

Anabolism and cancer,
33

Anæmia in cancer,
74

Animal food a cause of cancer,
50
,
51
,
52
,
55
,
63
,
69
,
110
,
113
,
116
,
117
,
132
,
138
,
141

Animals, cancer in,
43

Argentine Republic, cancer in,
57

Australia, cancer in,
48

Auto-intoxication and cancer,
155

Autonomous action of cells,
33

Bainbridge, local nature of cancer,
30

Baltimore, cancer in,
65

Banks, Sir William, on diet in cancer,
61

Bashford,
55

Beard, trypsin in cancer,
99

Beatson’s operation,
102

Beebe, diet and cancer,
80

Beirut, rarity of cancer in,
56

Bell, cancer from neglect of hygienic laws,
132

Beneke, diet in cancer,
115

223
Benratt, rarity of cancer in India,
53

Betel chewing cancer,
54

Biedl, hormone formation,
163

Bio-chemistry of cancer,
39
,
79
,
83

Blood changes in cancer,
74
,
191

frequent study of, in cancer,
160

Blumenthal, oxyproteic acids increased in cancer,
90

Boston, cancer in,
65

Bowel action and cancer,
155
,
157

Braithwaite, plainer fare and less of it,
154

salt and cancer,
129

Brazil, rarity of cancer in,
57

Breast, carcinoma of,
176

non-cancerous tumors of,
178

Bristol, disturbance of chemical equilibrium causing cancer,
143

British Guiana, rarity of cancer in,
50

Burnham, blood changes in cancer,
76

Butter, valuable in cancer,
153

Buttner, a fleshless diet,
154

Cachexia in cancer,
74
,
77

Caffeine, nitrogen in,
119

percentage of, in coffee,
119

Cahen on Beatson’s operation,
102

224
Calcium salts, effect on cancer,
101

Cancer in the occupied and unoccupied,
130

personal statistics of,
176

problem,
201

Carcinoma, personal statistics of,
174

Casein sometimes allowable in cancer,
153

Cases, personal, of cancer,
180
‒197

Catabolism and cancer,
33

Causes of cancer,
27

Centrosomes in cancer,
34
,
85

Cheese sometimes allowable in cancer,
154

Chemistry of cancer,
39
,
79
,
83

of cancer tissue,
78
,
82

of the body,
107

Chicago, cancer in,
65

China, rarity of cancer in,
55

Chittenden’s experiments on nutrition,
112

Chlorides in the urine, diminished in cancer,
92

Cholesterin, relation to cancer,
83

Chromosomes in cancer,
85

Civilization, cancer a disease of,
44
,
46
,
50
,
68
,
109
,
117

Clinical considerations,
170

study of cancer,
17
,
18

Coffee, consumption in United States,
118

nitrogen in,
119

relation to cancer,
117

225
Cohnreich, blood in cancer,
76

Cold storage, relation of, to cancer,
109

Composition of human body,
107

Conclusions,
170
,
203

Constipation and cancer,
157

Contagiousness excluded,
19

Cooper, Sir Astley on constitutional nature of cancer,
139

Creoles in Africa, freedom from cancer of,
52

Cytology of cancer,
74

Danger from thyroid in cancer,
164

Deaths from cancer in New York City,
145

in United States,
144

De Bloeme, Swart, and Terwen, imperfect nitrogen partition in cancer,
90

Defective urinary excretion and cancer,
158

Deficiency of urinary solids in cancer,
88

Definition of cancer,
30

Degrez, imperfect nitrogen disintegration in cancer,
91

Denmark, cancer in,
82

Demineralization and cancer,
113

Diabetes, relation of to cancer,
95

Diet, effect of simple, in cancer,
121

relation of, to cancer,

226
46,
51
,
53
,
55
,
57
,
61
,
63
,
67
,
80
,
106
,
115
,
116
,
133
,
198

Dietetic treatment of cancer,
171

Disordered metabolism the cause of cancer,
74

Ductless glands in cancer,
97

Duration of cancer before treatment,
177

Early treatment of cancer, medically,
147
,
178
,
208

surgically,
177

Eating, wrong- and over-, and cancer,
152

Egypt, rarity of cancer in,
51
,
57

Ehrlich, effect of diet on cancer,
37

Einhorn, Kahn, and Rosenblum, imperfect nitrogen partition in cancer,
90

Embryonic rests in cancer,
23
,
25
,
72

Endocrinous glands, relation of, to cancer,
100

England, cancer in,
51
,
57
,
61

increase of cancer, with meat consumption,
116

Environmental change and cancer,
59

Enzymes, autolytic, in cancer tissue,
83

Equilibrium of tissue elements,
111

Esmarck and Oldehop, vegetarian diet in cancer,
115

227
Etiology of cancer,
74

Ewing, change in polar axis of cells in cancer,
34

relation of cholesterin to cancer,
83

Far East, rarity of cancer in,
55
,
56

Fiji Islands, rarity of cancer in,
50

Fletcher, imperfect insalivation and cancer,
94

France, cancer in,
62

Frequency of cancer,
43

Functional kidney derangement and cancer,
158

Geographical distribution of cancer,
43

“Germ of cancer,” 19

Gigantism,
97

Gout, relation to cancer,
72
,
81

Gratifying the taste, a cause of cancer,
108

Gruner, toxicity of cancer juice,
78

Gwyer, thymus feeding in cancer,
101

Haig, cures of cancer by dietary restrictions,
141

uric acid and cancer,
125
,
141

Harrower, relation of ductless glands to cancer,
97

Heredity, influence of,
20

Heterologous elements in cancer,
41

228
Highest cancer mortality,
62

Hislop and Fenwick, diet and cancer,
50

Holland, high cancer mortality in,
118

Hormones, relation of, to cancer,
100

Hormone therapy in cancer,
162

Hungary, low cancer mortality in,
118

Hutchinson, amount of caffeine in tea and coffee,
119

Hygienic laws, neglect of, a cause of cancer,
132

Hyperacidity and cancer,
33

Ichthyol locally in cancer,
166
,
167

Ideally correct blood stream and cancer,
149

Increase of cancer,
47

in the United States,
66

Incurable cancer,
146

Independent cell action,
73

Indians, North American, rarity of cancer in,
67

India, rarity of cancer in,
53

Infectious diseases and cancer,
29

Inoperable cancer,
146

Insalivation, thorough, importance of in cancer,
95

Internal secretions in cancer,
96
‒103

Intestinal fermentation in cancer,
92
,
155

229
stasis and cancer,
155

toxins and cancer,
155

Intolerance of certain articles a cause of disease,
127

Intoxication, intestinal, and cancer,
155

Iron, value of, in cancer,
161

Irritation, local, and cancer,
124

Isenberg on vegetarian diet in cancer,
142

Italy, low cancer with low meat consumption,
63

Jones, blood in cancer,
76

Kahle, silica retention in cancer,
98

“Kangri burn” cancer,
54
,
126

Keith, Skene, iron in cancer,
161

Kellogg, absence of cancer with normal metabolism,
151

Kerry, Ireland, low cancer mortality,
64

Kessler, sulphur partition in cancer,
122

Kidneys, faulty excretion and cancer,
157

Korea, rarity of cancer in,
57

Laboratory study of cancer,
175
,
191

Lambe on vegetarian diet,
136

Lane, Sir Arbuthnot, intestinal stasis and cancer,
155

230
Latham on cancer of the unoccupied,
61

Leucocytosis in cancer,
75

Lithæmia, relation to cancer,
72

Liver, condition of in cancer,
91

Local irritation and cancer,
21
,
124

medical treatment,
165

Lott, Beatson’s operation for cancer,
102

Lowest cancer mortality,
60
,
64

Lucerne, cancer in,
62

Luxurious living a cause of cancer,
68
,
138
,
199

McCann, erroneous preparation of foods,
123

McGregor, absence of cancer in Fiji Islands,
50

Madden, absence of cancer in Africa,
50

Malaria and cancer,
21

Mastication, thorough, importance of in cancer,
95

Mayo, acidity and cancer,
124

Meat consumption,

in England,
116

in the United States,
69

Meat, relation to cancer,
51
,
53
,
55
,
57
,
63
,
116

Medical treatment of cancer,
135
,
154

Melanesians, exempt from cancer,
50

Mental depression, influencing cancer,
86

strain, relation to cancer,
81
,
85

231
Merriam, meat diet a cause of cancer,
141

Metabolism, disordered, the cause of cancer,
74

of cancer,
70

perverted, and cancer,
150

Mineral disturbances in the system in cancer,
122

Mitosis, cell, relation to cancer,
85

Mortality from cancer 90 per cent.,
144

Murphy on surgery in cancer,
171

Myxœdema,
97

Nature of cancer,
15
,
29

Negroes, rarity of cancer in,
52
,
67

Nervous strain, relation to cancer,
85

New York City, deaths from cancer in,
65
,
145

negro death rate from cancer,
67

New York Skin and Cancer Hospital,
8
,
172

New Zealand, cancer in,
50

Nitrogen disintegration, imperfect in cancer,
91

increase in colloid, in cancer,
90

partition in cancer,
90

small amount needed in the economy,
114

Nitrogenous diet and cancer,
51
,
53
,
55
,
57
,
63
,
81
,
116

232
Non-cancerous tumors of breast,
178

Normal body cells and cancer,
31
,
41
,
70

Nowell, serum therapy,
165

Nuclei of cells, in cancer,
84

Nucleo-proteids in cancer,
82

Nutrition and cancer,
35
,
36

Occupation and cancer,
28

Ovaries, internal secretion of, relation to cancer,
102

Over-eating and cancer,
152

Over-indulgence, effect of,
68

Oxyproteic acid, relation to cancer,
90

Packard, disturbance of mineral elements in blood, in cancer,
122

Paget, Sir James, on constitutional nature of cancer,
140

Paget’s disease,
174

Pancreas, relation of, to cancer,
98

Parasitism excluded,
19

Paris, cancer in,
63

Parker, Willard, on constitutional cause of cancer,
137

Patience required for medical treatment of cancer,
134
,
152

Perseverance required for medical treatment of cancer,
134

233
Personal cases of cancer,
180
‒197

Perverted metabolism and cancer,
74
,
150

Philadelphia, cancer in,
65

Philippines, rarity of cancer in,
57

Phosphates in the urine, diminished in cancer,
94

Pittsburgh, cancer in,
65

Pituitary secretion in cancer,
97
,
99

Plants, cancer in,
43

Plasma of blood in cancer,
77

Pluriglandular extracts in cancer,
164

Polarity of cells in cancer,
34
,
73

Polynesians, exempt from cancer,
50

Potassium acetate in cancer,
159

phosphate in cancer,
160

Precancerous conditions,
89

Prevention of cancer,
148

Prize fund for cure of cancer,
173

Problem of cancer,
201

Prophylaxis of cancer,
148

Prosperity and cancer,
48
,
68
,
109

Protein foods, harm from,
113

metabolism, disturbed in cancer,
89

requirement of the body,
112

sufficient in vegetarian diet,
133

234
Psoriasis, lessons from, in cancer,
128

Putrefaction, intestinal, and cancer,
155

Radium, value in cancer,
29
,
145
,
168

Recurrent cancer,
146
,
187
‒195

Red corpuscles in cancer,
76
,
77

Refinement of food, relation of, to cancer,
109

Reid, increase of amino-acid nitrogen in cancer,
91

Relation of diet to cancer,
198

Renner, rarity of cancer among creoles,
51

Requisites for development of cancer,
25

Rheumatism, relation to cancer,
72

Ribert, beginnings of cancer,
30

Roberts, disturbance of salivary digestion from tea,
119

Robin, relation between chlorine and nitrogen in cancer,
92

Rohdenburg, Bullock, and Johnson, thymus gland in cancer,
101

Rome, cancer in,
63

Ross, thymus and calcium, harm from in cancer,
101

relation of potash salts to cancer,
160

Rous, cancer in rats checked by diet,
39

235
Russian oil as a dressing in cancer,
166

Saleeby, trypsin and amylopsin in cancer,
99

St. Louis, cancer in,
65

Sajous, adrenals in relation to cancer,
98

Salivary secretion, acid in cancer,
94
,
95
,
161

Salt, effect of, on cancer,
129

Sarcoma of same origin as carcinoma,
175

Scandinavia, cancer in,
125

Schmidt, infectious diseases and cancer,
29

Serum therapy,
164

Sherman, composition of the human body,
107
,
154

Sherrington and Copeman, reproductive glands inhibiting growth of cancer,
103

Shirlaw, pluriglandular extracts in cancer,
163

Silica, retention of, in pancreas, in cancer,
98

Simple diet, effect of, in cancer,
121

Soëgaard, stomach cancer frequent in Norway,
125

Solids in the urine, deficient in cancer,
87
,
88

Spontaneous disappearance of cancer,
36

Stasis, intestinal, and cancer,
155

236
Stuart-Low, relation of thyroid to cancer,
100

Sub-oxidation and cancer,
132

Sulphates, increased in cancer,
92

Sulpho-cyanic acid, increased in cancer,
92

Sulphur elements, altered in cancer,
92

Supra-renal glands, relation of, to cancer,
97

Surgery, operative, in cancer,
145
,
147
,
168
,
179

Surgical aspects of cancer,
7
,
9
,
10
,
25

Sweet, Corson, White, and Saxon, effect of diet on experimental tumors,
38

Switzerland, cancer in,
62

Syphilis and cancer,
22

Taste gratified, a cause of cancer,
108

Tea, relation to cancer,
117

Telluric influences in cancer,
22

Testicles, internal secretion of, relation to cancer,
102

Thompson on consumption of coffee and tea,
118
,
154

Thymus gland in cancer,
101

Thyroid, danger from in cancer,
164

relation to cancer,
97

value of in cancer,
99
,
163

237
Tobacco, influence of, in cancer,
126

Toxicity of urine, increased in cancer,
91

Toxic secretion from cancerous mass,
70
,
78
,
104
,
206

Toxins, intestinal, and cancer,
92
,
155

Transmission of cancer,
20

Traumatism and cancer,
24

Trypsin in cancer,
99

Tuberculosis and cancer,
16
,
44
,
45

Tuke, influence of the mind on morbid processes,
86

Türk, cytology of cancer,
74

United States, cancer in,
16
,
64
,
68

consumption of coffee in,
118

consumption of meat in,
117

Urea excretion, deficient in cancer subjects,
89

Uricacidæmia, relation to cancer,
72

Urinary disturbance, functional, and cancer,
158

Urinary solids, deficient in cancer,
87
,
88

Urobilin, increased in cancer,
90

Vaccine-therapy in cancer,
164

238
Valais, cancer in,
62

Vegetable protein,
133

Vegetable tumors,
43

Vegetarian diet affords sufficient protein,
133
,
153

Vegetarian diet and cancer,
50
‒53,
55
‒57,
63
,
115
,
123
,
128
,
136
,
142
,
180
‒197

Venus on vegetarian diet in cancer,
142

Vincent, quoting Ehrlich on resistance to athreptic influence,
163

Virchow, on tumor formation,
31

Voit’s dietary standard,
111

Volumetric analysis of urine in cancer,
87
,
94
,
159

Wakefield on hyperacidity of the blood plasma in cancer,
33

Wales, cancer in,
57

Walshe on the cause of cancer,
137

Watson, effect of meat diet on tissue cells,
114

Wealth, relation to cancer,
48
,
68
,
109

Weight in cancer,
161
,
192
,
195

Wells, nuclear proteins in cancer cells,
83

Well-to-do men and cancer,
130

West Indies, cancer in,
57

Williams, cancer problems,

239
36
,
45
,
47
,
50
,
58
,
72

Wolf, cancer in Australia,
47
,
48

Wolter, nucleo-proteids in cancer tissue,
82

Wrong eating and cancer,
152

Xanthin bases, increased in cancer,
90
,
91

X-ray, value in cancer,
29
,
145
,
167

1
. According to the United States Mortality tables for
1912 there were 44,531 deaths from cancer that year, or
77 per 100,000 living, while the rate in 1911 was 74.3,
an increase of 2.7. Tuberculosis has shown a steady
decline, the death for 1912 being the lowest on record,
149.5 per 100,000, it having fallen from 200 per 100,000
in 1900, or over 25%.

2
. No attempt has been made to collect an extensive
bibliography, which might cover many pages, and a list
is only given of those books and journal articles which
I have been able to personally consult and to refer to
in the text.

240

BY THE SAME AUTHOR.

DIET AND HYGIENE IN DISEASES OF THE
SKIN. $2.00 net.

COMPENDIUM OF DISEASES OF THE SKIN,
based on an analysis of thirty thousand consecutive
cases, with a Therapeutic Formulary. $2.00.

THE RELATIONS OF DISEASES OF THE SKIN
TO INTERNAL DISORDERS. $1.50.

PRINCIPLES AND APPLICATION OF LOCAL
TREATMENT IN DISEASES OF THE SKIN.
$1.00.

THE INFLUENCE OF THE MENSTRUAL FUNCTION
ON CERTAIN DISEASES OF THE
SKIN. $1.00.

ECZEMA, with an analysis of eight thousand cases of
the disease. $1.25.

ACNE, ITS ETIOLOGY, PATHOLOGY, AND
TREATMENT. $2.00.

SYPHILIS IN THE INNOCENT (Syphilis insontium)
clinically and historically considered, with a
plan for the legal control of the disease. $3.00.

ACNE AND ALOPECIA. The Physician’s leisure
library. Fifty cents.

THE SKIN IN HEALTH AND DISEASE. Fifty
cents.

THE USE AND VALUE OF ARSENIC IN THE
TREATMENT OF DISEASES OF THE SKIN.
Fifty cents.

ARCHIVES OF DERMATOLOGY. A quarterly
Journal of Skin and Venereal Diseases. Vols. I-VIII.
$3.00 each.

PAUL B. HOEBER, 67‒69 East 59th St., N. Y.

TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES

Moved the ad page to the end.

Silently corrected typographical errors and variations in spelling.

Retained anachronistic, non-standard, and uncertain spellings as printed.

End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Cancer--Its Cause and Treatment,
Volume 1 (of 2), by Lucius Duncan Bulkley

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CANCER--ITS CAUSE, TREATMENT, VOL 1 ***

***** This file should be named 59550-h.htm or 59550-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/9/5/5/59550/

Produced by Richard Tonsing, Turgut Dincer and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.