The Project Gutenberg EBook of Hernando Cortes, by Joachim Heinrich Campe

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll
have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using
this ebook.

Title: Hernando Cortes
Life Stories for Young People

Author: Joachim Heinrich Campe

Release Date: June 11, 2019 [EBook #59732]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HERNANDO CORTES ***

Produced by D A Alexander, Stephen Hutcheson, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by the Library of Congress)

CORTES AND MONTEZUMA

Life Stories for Young People

HERNANDO CORTES

Translated from the German of

Joachim Heinrich Campe

BY

GEORGE P. UPTON

Translator of “Memories,” “Immensee,” etc.

WITH SIX ILLUSTRATIONS

CHICAGO

A. C. McCLURG & CO.

1911

Copyright

A. C. McClurg & Co.

1911

Published September, 1911

THE · PLIMPTON · PRESS

[W · D · O]

NORWOOD · MASS · U · S · A

v

Translator’s Preface

The story of the career of Hernando Cortes
during his conquest of Mexico is a story
of extraordinary courage, undaunted resolution,
and hideous cruelty. It is a story of the
subjection of a “little people,” overcome and
enslaved by a superior nation, which, in its lust
for gold and territorial aggrandizement, left no
methods of stratagem, cunning, military science,
and barbarous cruelty untried to achieve its purpose.
Granted that the early Emperors of Mexico
were tyrannical in their treatment of the natives
and that their religious rites were accompanied
by human sacrifices and cannibalism, Mexican
cruelty pales before the horrible scenes enacted by
so-called civilized Spain in this dreadful Mexican
drama. The three principal figures are Hernando
Cortes, Montezuma, and Guatemozin—Cortes, the
conqueror; Montezuma, the weak-spirited Emperor,
victim of his own people’s fury; Guatemozin, the
patriot. Cortes was a born adventurer, and in his
youth possessed of skill in all military exercises.
He was a man of consummate cunning and captivating
address, of soaring ambition and marked
ability as an administrator and general. Apparently
he never knew what it was to fear, and consequently
no danger was great enough to appall him.
He was so skilled in stratagem that no situation was
devious enough to prevent its solution. He had the
same greed of gold as all Spaniards of his day had,
and no means of obtaining it were considered dishonorable
as long as they were successful. But
courageous, resolute, and ambitious as Cortes was,
he will go down through the ages branded with
infamy for his treatment of Montezuma, for the
frightful massacres at Cholula and Otumba, for his
execution of Guatemozin, last of the Aztec Emperors,
for the burning of caciques and chiefs which he
ordered, and for the countless atrocities of his men
which he permitted. In his old age, like Columbus,
he suffered from the neglect of an ungrateful Court,
but, while we can sympathize with Columbus in
that situation, we can feel no sympathy for Cortes
as we recall the black chapters of his career.

G. P. U.

Chicago
,
July, 1911
.

vii

Contents

Chapter

Page

I
Velasquez in Cuba—Hernandez de Cordova Discovers Yucatan—The Natives on the Mainland are Hostile—Grijalva Advances from Yucatan farther Northward—He is the First European to Step upon Mexican Soil
11

II
The Youth of Cortes—His Voyage to San Domingo and Settlement There—Cortes under Velasquez in Cuba—He Fits Out a Fleet for the Conquest of Mexico
20

III
Cortes is Regarded as an Enemy by the Natives of Tabasco, and is Forced into a Battle with them—He is Victorious, and they Submit
30

IV
Cortes Reaches San Juan de Ulloa—His Negotiations for an Understanding with Montezuma, Emperor of Mexico—Disquiet in the Army
42

V
Founding of the City of Villa Rica de la Vera Cruz—Disaffected Caciques Join Cortes—Destruction of a Heathen Temple because of Human Sacrifices—Introduction of Christianity—Cortes Sinks his Fleet after Sending a Vessel to Spain
55

VI
Cortes’ March to Tlaxcala—Battle and Defeat of the Tlaxcalans—Montezuma’s Messengers
71

VII
March to the Sacred City of Cholula—The Natives Plot the Destruction of the Spaniards—Cortes Discovers their Treachery and Slaughters Several Thousand Indians—March to Mexico—Montezuma Meets the Strangers and Escorts them to the Capital
85

VIII
Religious Rites of the Mexicans—Human Sacrifices—The Natives Discover that the Spaniards are not Divine but Human
96

IX
Montezuma is made a Prisoner—Quauhpopoka and His Leaders Burned—The Mexicans Swear Allegiance to the King of Spain
104

X
Division of the Spoils—Cortes Attempts to Introduce Christianity—Narvaez is Sent by Velasquez to Depose Cortes—Cortes Advances against Him
112

XI
Cortes Defeats Narvaez—Meanwhile the Mexicans, Outraged by Alvarado, Rise in Revolt—Cortes Returns
119

XII
The Mexicans Rise against the Spaniards and Fight with Desperate Courage—Montezuma is Killed—Cortes Struggles Bravely and is in Danger of his Life
127

XIII
Cortes, about to Retreat, Finds the Causeways Cut—The Spaniards Escape with Heavy Loss—The Tlaxcalans Remain True—Guatemozin is Elected Emperor of Mexico
136

XIV
Cortes Builds Vessels for a Land and Water Attack—A Conspiracy against his Life is Discovered—The Capital is Attacked
144

XV
The Spaniards Lose Heavily in Battle—The Prisoners are Sacrificed—Some of Cortes’ Allies Desert but soon Return—The City of Mexico Captured—Guatemozin Attempts Flight but is taken
153

XVI
Tapia, Commissioned to Depose Cortes, is Induced to Return to Cuba—Cortes is Confirmed as Governor of New Spain—He Goes to Spain and is Ennobled—A Second Visit to Spain Discloses the Fickleness of the Court—He Vainly Begs the Emperor’s Favor—His Death
162

Appendix
168

ix

Illustrations

Page

Cortes and Montezuma
Frontispiece

The Engagement between the Spaniards and the People of Tabasco
32

Mexican Caciques before Cortes
60

Meeting of Cortes and Montezuma
94

Montezuma the Captive of the Spaniards
106

The Entry of Cortes into Mexico City
158

11

Hernando Cortes

Chapter I

Velasquez in Cuba—Hernandez de Cordova Discovers Yucatan—The Natives on the Mainland are Hostile—Grijalva Advances from Yucatan Farther Northward—He is the First European to Step upon Mexican Soil

In the year 1511 Diego, Columbus’ son, finding
that the gold mines of Hispaniola were nearly
exhausted, decided to take possession of the
neighboring island of Cuba, or Fernandina, as it
was called, in honor of the King of Spain. The force
which he sent for the capture of the island was
placed under the command of Velasquez,
[1]
a man
described by his contemporaries as possessing extraordinary
experience as a soldier, having served
seventeen years in European campaigns, also of a
renowned family and name, eager for glory and yet
ambitious for wealth.

12

Velasquez speedily subjugated the whole island
and at once actively busied himself with the adoption
of measures for its welfare. He established
many settlements, secured farmers by free grants of
land and slaves, devoted special attention to the
raising of sugar-cane, such a valuable article of commerce
in later times, and, above all, to the development
of gold mines, which promised better returns
than those of Hispaniola. But the subjugation of
Cuba was too small a matter to satisfy his ambition,
as he would remain subject to the higher authority
of Diego Columbus, from which he wished to free
himself. The best means for accomplishing this
seemed to him the making of important discoveries
which would secure him an independent sovereignty.
With this end in view, he turned his attention to
the westward, in which direction he had every
reason to believe he should find a great mainland
region which no European had ever reached.

Chance favored his plans. Hernandez de Cordova,
a Spaniard,
[2]
undertook an expedition from
Cuba in 1517, with three vessels, to a neighboring
island for the capture of slaves. Storms drove him
upon the coast. In reply to his question as to the
name of the country the natives said, “Tektetan,”
meaning in their language, “I do not understand
you.” The Spaniards thought this was the
name of the place and distorted it into “Yucatan.”
Thus the peninsula of the mainland, which lies
opposite Cuba and divides the Caribbean Sea from
the Gulf of Mexico, came by its present name.
Cordova first landed at the northeastern end of the
peninsula, at Cape Catoche, then sailed along the
peninsula, stopping at various places, and at last
came to the region of the Campeche of to-day,
where the sea forms the Bay of Campeche.

13

The daring Spaniards had many fierce encounters
with the natives, whom they found far more civilized
and at the same time more warlike than the other
islanders. They were clad in garments of a woven
woollen material. Their weapons were wooden
swords, tipped with flint, spears, bows, arrows, and
shields. Their faces were painted in different colors,
and their heads adorned with tufts of feathers. They
were the first Americans who constructed dwellings
of stone and cement.

In their various encounters with these people the
Spaniards sometimes came off losers. In one of
them two Indian boys having the Christian names
of Julian and Melchior fell into their hands. They
proved of great advantage, for they served the
Spaniards as interpreters in subsequent communications
with the Mexicans. One day, when they had
landed to fill their casks with fresh water, fifty
Indians approached and inquired if they had come
from the place where the sun rises. When the
Spaniards answered in the affirmative, they were
conducted to a temple, constructed of stone, in
which they beheld various ugly images of deities
sprinkled with fresh blood. Suddenly two men in
white mantles, with long, flowing, black hair, stepped
forward, holding small earthen braziers, into which
they threw a kind of resin. They directed the
smoke toward the Spaniards and ordered them upon
pain of death to leave the country. Finding it dangerous
to remain there, they obeyed and returned
to their vessels. At another spot, where they had
landed, they were surrounded by so large a multitude
of hostile Indians that forty-seven were killed
and many wounded in their efforts to get back to
their vessels. Among the seventy wounded was
Cordova himself. After this disaster they hurried
back to Cuba as rapidly as they could, where their
leader died after making a report to Velasquez of
all that had happened.

14

Velasquez was delighted at the discoveries made
in his name, and decided to continue them. Four
vessels were fitted out, and Grijalva,
[3]
a man of great
ability and courage, upon whose uprightness and
good judgment Velasquez believed he could depend,
was given command of them. He was specially
instructed to confine himself to making discoveries
without establishing colonies in the new regions.
Grijalva left Cuba May 1, 1518, and directed his
course toward Yucatan, but the ocean currents
drove him southerly, so that he first made land at
Cape Catoche. Subsequently he discovered the
island of Cozumel, off the Yucatan coast. From
there he sailed along the coast to Potonchan, where
Hernandez had been so foully dealt with. The
Spaniards were eager to land and avenge the disaster,
and Grijalva consented. The Indians, full
of pride and defiance, and delighted with this fresh
opportunity, attacked the Spaniards courageously,
but they were driven back. Two hundred paid the
penalty with their lives for their rashness, and the
rest fled panic-stricken all over the country.

15

Grijalva resumed cruising along the coast. He
was astonished everywhere at the sight of villages
or towns with houses made of stone and cement,
which in passing appeared to the Spaniards finer
and better built then they really were. The resemblance
between this region and Spain seemed so
close to them that they gave it the name of New
Spain—a name which it retains to this day. Next
they came to the mouth of a river, called by the
natives Tabasco, but the Spaniards named it Grijalva,
in honor of their leader. The whole region
roundabout had such a flourishing appearance and
seemed to be populated so densely that Grijalva
could not resist the desire to obtain accurate information
about it. So he went ashore with his entire
armed force. There he encountered a multitude of
armed Indians, who with terrible outcries sought to
prevent their further advance. But he paid no
attention to their menaces, marched up to a bowshot’s
distance from them, then halted, drew his
men up in battle order, and sent the two Americans,
Julian and Melchior, who had been taken by Hernandez,
to inform them that he had not come there
to injure them, but to do them good, and that he
was anxious to make a peaceful agreement with
them.

16

The Indians, who had been gazing in astonishment
at the closed ranks, the costumes, and weapons
of the Europeans, were still more astonished at this
declaration. Some of their leaders ventured to advance.
Grijalva cordially welcomed them and told
them through the interpreters that he and his followers
were subjects of a great King who was the
absolute ruler of all the countries where the sun rises.
This King had sent him to demand their submission
to his authority, and he awaited their answer. Thereupon
a low murmuring ensued among the Indians,
which was stilled by one of their leaders, who replied
courageously in the name of his people that
it seemed strange to them that the Spaniards should
speak of peace and at the same time demand submission.
It seemed strange to them also that they
should be offered a new ruler without ascertaining
whether they were dissatisfied with their present
one. As far as the question of war or peace was
concerned he was not authorized to give a decisive
answer. He must submit that question to his superiors.
With these words he retired, leaving the
Spaniards not a little astonished at this sensible
reply. After a short time he returned and told
Grijalva that his superiors did not fear war with the
Spaniards, if it must be, for they had not forgotten
what happened at Potonchan. But they considered
peace better than war, and, as a token of this, he
had brought many necessaries of life for gifts.

17

Shortly after this, the cacique himself appeared,
unarmed and with a small retinue. After friendly
greetings on each side he took from a basket golden
articles of various kinds set with jewels, and fabrics
decorated with beautifully colored feathers, and
said to Grijalva that he loved peace and had brought
these gifts in confirmation of his words, but, that
there might be no opportunity for misunderstanding,
he begged him to leave the country as soon as possible.
The Spanish leader acknowledged the politeness
of the cacique by making gifts in return, and
promised to conform to his wishes as soon as he
could get under sail.

After cruising some distance along the coast, they
reached an island with many stone houses and a
temple. In the centre of this temple, which was
open on all sides, they saw various hideous idols
placed about an altar, elevated a few steps. Near
to it were six corpses, which, according to the prevailing
horrible custom, seemed to have been offered
up as sacrifices on the preceding night. On account
of this dreadful spectacle the Spaniards named the
place Isla de los Sacrificios (“Island of Sacrifice”).
Everywhere they found evidences that the inhuman
practice of sacrificing men to their deities prevailed
among these people. Coming to anchor at another
island, which was called Kulva by the natives, they
saw many more corpses of freshly slaughtered men,
which caused even the barbarous Spanish soldiers
to shudder at such cruelty. Grijalva gave his surname,
Juan, to this island, from which eventually
came the name, St. Juan de Ulloa, by which it is
now known.

18

Wherever they went gold was found in abundance.
This and the sight of many fruitful spots
which they passed aroused a general desire among
the men to effect a settlement, but Grijalva persisted
in carrying out the orders of Velasquez, and
everywhere that he landed, took possession of the
country in the name of the King. He continued
sailing along the coast until he reached Pánuco. At
the mouth of a river there he was so furiously
assailed by a swarm of Indians that a dreadful
massacre became necessary before they could be
driven back. After this, while attempting to sail
still farther along the coast, adverse currents forced
him to return to Cuba. Upon his arrival he met
with bitter reproaches from the unreasonable governor,
Velasquez, because he had not availed himself
of the excellent opportunity to establish a
colony in that rich region, although he had been
expressly forbidden to do so when he sailed.

19

Grijalva had sent back one of his principal officers,
Pedro de Alvarado, with a rich collection of jewels,
and golden vessels and ornaments, secured from
the natives by exchanging European knick-knacks
for them, and he had told much about the rich
country. When Grijalva returned, after an absence
of six months, he met with censure because he had
carried out the instructions of the governor! The
modest, unassuming man bore the undeserved
reproaches calmly. To him belongs the honor of
being the first European navigator to set foot on
Mexican soil and open up intercourse with the
Aztecs.

20

Chapter II

The Youth of Cortes—His Voyage to San Domingo and Settlement there—Cortes under Velasquez in Cuba—He Fits Out a Fleet for the Conquest of Mexico

Velasquez, an ambitious but at the same
time distrustful and fickle man, decided to
continue the great discoveries made in his
name, and to secure the rich profits which they
promised. With this object in view he fitted out a
strong fleet with the utmost expedition. The question
then arose, Who should take command of it?
Not having the courage to participate personally in
an undertaking exposed to so many dangers and
hardships, he was forced to look for another leader.
The choice was a difficult one, for one man seemed
to him too cowardly, another too courageous, this
one too dull, another too crafty. He was anxious
to find a man who would combine with the necessary
judgment and courage absolute devotion to him
and slavish obedience to his orders, and who would
not only accomplish great deeds but at the same
time give him all the advantage of them. Fortunately
he found such a man, one admirably fitted
for such an undertaking, but he did not understand
how to make use of him. That man was Cortes.

21

Hernando Cortes, of noble family, was born in
1485 at Medellin, a small town in the Spanish province
of Estremadura. From his earliest youth he
had unusual courage, unwearied patience in overcoming
difficulties, a restless, active spirit, and a
burning desire to distinguish himself by great deeds.
In his childhood he was weakly. In his fourteenth
year he was sent to the University of Salamanca,
his father, who built great hopes upon his brilliant
talents, having destined him for the law. He chose
a calling for him which opened up better prospects
for an industrious young man than any other, but
the son had no sympathy with his father’s purpose.
He showed little fondness for books and after his
second year of study returned home, to the great
disappointment of his parents, and spent his time
without following any special avocation. He showed
an inclination for a military life, particularly a life
full of adventure.

All eyes at that time were directed to the West
Indies, and his own eyes were turned to the same
region. He decided to enroll himself among those
bold spirits who defied all hardships and dangers
if only they might enrich their fatherland with new
possessions and gain for themselves a glorious name.
He was in his twentieth year (1504) when he sailed
from Spain and betook himself to San Domingo.
On his very first voyage his courage and steadfastness
were put to a severe test. He encountered
innumerable dangers and trials, but the bold, strong
youth, whose physical and mental strength had not
been weakened by indolence, effeminacy, and shameless
debaucheries, laughed at them. To work was
a pleasure to him, to hunger and thirst a trifle, to
die, if necessary, an indifferent matter.

22

The vessel which carried Cortes was one of a
large number lying at the Canary Islands, taking
on stores for their voyages, as was the practice of
all vessels at that time when making the passage to
the New World. Its commander was a greedy
fellow who was anxious to reach the New World
market before the rest so as to get a high price for
his goods. He sailed away secretly by night, but
a furious storm overtook him, dismasted his vessel,
and forced him to go back to the Canary Islands.
The other captains generously waited for their
faithless companion, but he managed to slip away
again by night. He lost his course, however, was
exposed to hard storms and adverse winds, and his
vessel was so violently tossed about that all on
board feared for their lives and were not a little
enraged at the author of their troubles. The young
Cortes, however, was not disturbed by the danger,
and contemplated the future joyfully. At last,
after long wandering about, the vessel arrived at
its destination. A dove which had gone astray lit
upon the mast. As it flew off they followed the
direction of its flight and reached Hispaniola, where
the other vessels had arrived a long time before and
the ship-masters had sold their goods.

23

Cortes reached San Domingo at a time when
Ovando was still governor. His very appearance
secured for him a favorable reception. He was
prepossessing, pleasing of countenance, and unaffectedly
friendly in his contact with every one,
but his peculiar qualities of disposition made him
still more the favorite. He was open-hearted,
indulgent, and magnanimous, but he was also
shrewd, far-sighted, and reserved. He spoke maliciously
of no one and was good-humored in conversation.
He was always ready to confer favors
but he could not bear to have them mentioned.
These meritorious qualities soon made him a favorite
with every one. Immediately upon arrival he went
to pay his respects to the governor, but Ovando was
absent, attending to affairs in the interior. His
secretary, however, received him cordially, and
assured him it would not be difficult for him to
obtain an abundance of land from Ovando upon
which he could settle. Cortes answered: “I have
come here to provide myself with gold, not to
plough like a field laborer.”

24

Upon his return Ovando induced the young man
to give up his ambitious designs, for a short time at
least, and convinced him that he would certainly
become richer if he settled down as a planter than
if he trusted himself to chance. Cortes therefore
secured land and an allotment of Indians in the
settlement of Azua. The monotony of his life was
often relieved by the part he took as an adventurer
in warlike expeditions, especially in the company of
Velasquez, when the latter as Ovando’s representative
was forced to suppress uprisings of the natives.
In this way he became better known to Ovando,
who was exceedingly anxious to retain his services.
But as his young, courageous spirit was eager for
more important undertakings, he applied for and
received permission to accompany Velasquez on his
expedition to Cuba in 1511. At last he had an
opportunity to display his courage and activity.
He quickly rose. In a short time the important
position of Alcalde of St. Iago was assigned to him.
A quarrel with Velasquez soon after occurred, which
might easily have been fatal to the incautious
Cortes, had not the friendship of the two been
so strong. Cortes, who was not a hero of virtue,
fell in love with a young lady of high rank, named
Catalina Xuarez, and had promised to marry her,
but put off the fulfilment of his promise so long
that he incurred the angry reproaches of the governor.
These reproaches naturally led to a coolness
between Cortes and his patron, and Cortes decided
that he would lay his grievances before Velasquez’
superior in Hispaniola. Other dissatisfied ones
joined him and they planned to send a messenger.
Cortes was selected, for no other would have ventured
to cross secretly in an open boat the distance
of eighteen miles to the neighboring island. But
the conspiracy was discovered, Cortes was arrested,
chained, and placed in close confinement. It is
said that Velasquez would have hanged him but
for the intercession of friends. Meantime the bold
Cortes did not long remain in prison. He shoved
back one of the fastenings of his chains, freed his
limbs, broke the window, and escaped to a church
near by. According to the customs of the time a
fugitive could not be seized in a sacred place. Velasquez
kept guards upon the lookout, and once, when
Cortes incautiously ventured out just a little too
far, he was caught, and bound, and conveyed to a
vessel which was to sail to Hispaniola the next
morning. But fortune favored him. He released
himself in the night, jumped from the vessel’s side
into a boat, thence into the sea, and swam ashore.
Exhausted, he sought the same asylum again and
declared he would marry Catalina Xuarez, if the
governor would pardon him. Velasquez assented,
Cortes married Catalina, a reconciliation between
himself and Velasquez was effected, and a closer
friendship than ever was the result.

25

When Alvarado returned with glowing accounts
of the new discoveries on the mainland, and Grijalva
also extolled the great rich western empire,
Cortes was the one chosen as the commander of the
fleet. The position was accepted by him, and all who
were to take part in the expedition were delighted
that such an able, courageous, and highly qualified
man was to be their leader. Cortes was also delighted
at the opportunity of displaying his ability,
contributed all that he had in providing an ample
store of campaign necessaries, and aided those of
his companions who were too poor to obtain what
they needed.

26

Before the equipment in the harbor of St. Iago
was completed Cortes stole away, for he had heard
that Velasquez designed to take the supreme command
from him, fearing that he might carry off all
the glory as well as the profits of the enterprise.
His entire force numbered three hundred men, and
a hundred more joined him from another part of
Cuba, members of distinguished families, eager for
the glory and boundless treasures which the expedition
promised. The day on which Cortes sailed
was the eighteenth of November, 1518. The first
destination of the fleet was Trinidad, and the next
Havana, where several persons and further stocks
of supplies were to be taken aboard.

Velasquez for a long time seemed to be satisfied
with the choice of Cortes as leader of the expedition,
though many a jealous tale-bearer sought to prejudice
him against him. But hardly did he see Cortes
sail away before he took a different view of the
prospect. He thought to himself, What if he
should abuse the authority entrusted to him, refuse
to be obedient, and make himself absolute ruler in
the country he was to conquer in Velasquez’ name?
The little clique of Cortes’ enemies ever at his side
observed what was troubling him and redoubled
their efforts to kindle his jealousy into flame, and
at last succeeded. A messenger was instantly sent
to the Alcalde at Trinidad, ordering him to remove
Cortes from his position as soon as he arrived there.
The Alcalde was prepared to carry out his instructions,
but Cortes, who was not conscious of any
offence, did not believe that he was bound to resign.
He assured the Alcalde that Velasquez’ change of
mind was due to a misunderstanding and requested
him to delay the execution of his instructions until
he could send a letter to the governor and receive a
reply. The Alcalde, who was not in a position to
carry out his instructions by force, gave his consent.
Cortes wrote the governor, weighed anchor at once,
and sailed for Havana. At the latter place he had
to wait some time, partly for his reinforcements
and partly to secure one thing or another indispensable
to such an important expedition.

27

At last all was ready. The fleet numbered eleven
vessels. The largest, of one hundred tons, not
larger than one of our two-masted merchant vessels,
was the Admiral’s flag-ship. The three next largest
were of seventy-eight tons’ burthen, and the rest
small open barges. Cortes’ force had now been
increased to six hundred and seventeen, of whom a
hundred or so were sailors and artisans, the rest
soldiers. Only thirteen of these were armed with
muskets and thirty-two with cross-bows. The others
carried swords and spears, for the use of fire-arms at
that time was very limited. Sixteen horses, ten
small cannon or field-pieces, and four falconets or
culverins, which are a kind of long, slender cannon,
no longer in use, constituted the most important
part of the outfit. With this comparatively
weak equipment, Cortes sailed for an unknown
country to make war against the powerful ruler
of Mexico, whose prosperous empire, together with
the neighboring provinces, was greater than all the
countries over which the King of Spain ruled at
that time.

28

In the meantime Velasquez was furious at the
news that Cortes, in spite of his prohibition, had
sailed away. He charged his representatives whom
he had sent to cancel the appointment with treachery.
His rage knew no bounds, and he made vigorous
preparations to prevent Cortes from escaping
a second time from Havana. He sent one of his
most trusty subordinates with express instructions
to seize Cortes and send him chained and stoutly
guarded to St. Iago.

29

Fortunately Cortes was informed of the danger
impending over him in sufficient time to make himself
secure. He quickly summoned his force, of
whose good-will he was convinced, explained the
danger which threatened them, and asked for their
opinion. They unanimously declared he should
pay no attention to the fickle governor and that
he should not surrender his legal rights nor deliver
himself into the power of such an unjust and suspicious
judge. They implored him, in view of the
importance of the expedition, not to give up his
leadership, assured him of their perfect confidence
in him, and expressed themselves ready, in the face
of all obstacles and dangers, to follow him even to
death. Cortes was easily affected and ready to
agree to anything which would aid him in carrying
out his purpose. After thanking the soldiers for
their consent he at once ordered anchors weighed,
and sailed from Havana, February 10, 1519.

30

Chapter III

Cortes is Regarded as an Enemy by the Natives of Tabasco, and is Forced into a Battle with them—He is Victorious and they Submit

Cortes decided to take the same course which
Grijalva had followed before him, and so
made the island of Cozumel his next destination.
There he had an opportunity to rescue a
Spaniard who had been left upon the coast by a
shipwreck, and since that time had been a servant
among the Indians. This poor fellow, named
Aguilar, during the eight years of his abode there,
had lost every European vestige and taken on the
appearance, color, speech, and habits of the natives
so completely that it was difficult to recognize he
had ever been a Spaniard. Like the natives, he
went naked, the color of his skin was dark brown,
and his hair, after the custom of the country, was
wound about his head in coils. He carried an oar
on his shoulder, a bow in his hand, and a quiver
on his back. His entire possessions were contained
in a knit bag and consisted of his provisions and
an old prayer-book in which he read industriously.
He had so far forgotten his mother-tongue that it
was difficult to understand him.

31

According to his statement he was wrecked in
the vicinity with nineteen others. Seven of his
comrades were overcome by hunger and exhaustion.
The rest fell into the hands of the cacique of that
country, a monster who sacrificed five of them to
his deities and placed the others in a kind of cage,
intending to fatten and then eat them. They had
the good fortune, however, to escape. Helpless and
despairing, they wandered about the forests, subsisting
upon roots and herbs, until at last they met
some Indians who took them to a kindly cacique,
an enemy of the other. He received them humanely
but each day imposed hard tasks upon them. The
most of them died in a short time, only two of them,
Aguilar and Guerro, surviving. They soon had an
opportunity to render the cacique important service
in his wars, for which he was very grateful. Guerro
married an Indian woman of distinction, was made
commander, and gradually became so Americanized
that when the Spaniards arrived he did not care
to change his conditions. He would not see them,
perhaps for shame, for Aguilar said he had pierced
his nose and painted various parts of his body as
the natives did.

32

Cortes embraced the poor Aguilar and covered
his nakedness with his own cloak. As Aguilar had
learned the language of the country during his long
stay there, Cortes was rejoiced at his discovery,
for he naturally hoped he would be of great service
to him in future communications with the Indians.
From Cozumel he directed his course to Tabasco,
and to that part of it where the river Grijalva
empties into the sea. He expected to meet a
friendly reception, as Grijalva had, but he was disappointed.
At sight of his vessels the natives
assumed a hostile aspect and seemed determined
to prevent him from landing. He sent Aguilar to
them to make an agreement, but it was useless.
They would not listen to him, and he had to return
without accomplishing his object. The event was
as unpleasant to Cortes as it was unexpected. He
had not planned to begin his conquest in that place.
His object was to reach as soon as possible the
region nearest the country of the great Mexican
Empire, and begin his operations there. Now he
found himself in the unpleasant situation of being
forced either to submit to the threats of the natives
or to inaugurate hostilities in an outlying province,
which, even if they ended successfully, must cost
at least time, and lives, of which he had few to spare.
If he turned back, the Indians would certainly take
it as a mark of cowardice and become more troublesome
than ever. After considering this view of
the situation, it seemed to him a conclusive reason
for attacking them. As the approach of night prevented
him from doing so at once, the assault was
deferred until the next day, and the intervening
night was devoted to the necessary preparations.

THE ENGAGEMENT BETWEEN THE SPANIARDS AND THE PEOPLE OF TABASCO

33

At daybreak all were summoned for action.
Cortes arranged his fleet in a half circle and in
this order, which was necessary on account of the
shores, he began sailing up the stream. But before
opening the attack, he sent Aguilar to inform the
natives that it rested with them to say whether he
should come as an enemy or a friend. Aguilar performed
his duty, but instead of listening quietly to
him the Indians gave the signal for attack and
rowed out in their canoes to meet the fleet. They
came together and the Indians began the assault
with a dreadful storm of arrows and stones which
caused great discomfort to the Spaniards, who were
still remaining passive. At this Cortes gave the
signal for defence. A single shot from the great
cannon was decisive. The Indians, astonished at
the unexpected thunder which roared about them,
and terrified at the sight of its destructive consequences,
jumped from their canoes into the water
and endeavored with all their might to escape by
swimming. The Spanish vessels drew up to the
banks, and Cortes landed with his whole force undisturbed.
The battle, however, was far from being
ended. The Indians, who had left their canoes,
fled into the brush, where a still greater number
of their warriors were collected. They rushed forward
while Cortes was engaged in placing his men
in battle order, and attacked him with arrows,
spears, and stones, uttering appalling battle cries.
Cortes, however, was not disturbed but continued
the arrangement of his ranks until the whole corps
was in close battle order. Then they charged
furiously against the Indians, advanced with wonderful
coolness through deep morasses and dense
thickets upon the countless swarms of the enemy,
and death and terror beat a way for them. The
sight of an army with European weapons was as new
as it was fearful to the Indians. They could not
face it and incontinently took to flight.

34

The enemy fled to their fortified city of Tabasco.
The fortifications consisted only of a row of stakes
driven into the ground, after the style of our palisades,
and surrounding the city in circular form.
Both ends overlapped, and between them a single
narrow road led into the city with many windings.
Great as the peril seemed to be, Cortes unhesitatingly
advanced along this narrow passage, but upon
entering the city found the streets blocked up with
stakes and the people ready to oppose him. The
Indians were forced back again and yet the battle
was not ended. They gathered anew in the market
place of the city, again offered stubborn resistance,
and again were overcome. Thereupon they
fled to the woods. Tabasco was captured, and the
battle was over. Cortes did not pursue the Indians
but took possession of the city for the Spanish
crown. He made three incisions with his sword
in a large tree and announced that he occupied
the city in the name and in favor of the Catholic
sovereign, and that he would maintain and defend
it with sword and shield against all who should
gainsay it. The same declaration was made by his
soldiers, and the proceedings were written down
and formally attested. The plunder taken by the
Spaniards did not come up to their expectations,
for the Indians carried off the greater part of articles
of value, leaving only some provisions which came
in good stead for the tired and hungry Spaniards.

35

At night Cortes quartered his force—in three divisions—in
temples at different places and stationed
watchmen to guard against a night attack. He
made the rounds at different times to see that they
were performing their duty. At daybreak he
searched the woods near by, but not an Indian was
to be seen or heard, which made him a little suspicious.
He sent spies to the adjacent region, who
brought him the disquieting news that a multitude
of Indians, forty thousand at least, were collected,
whom they had watched at some distance, while
they were getting ready for an attack. Such news
as that might well alarm one in Cortes’ situation!
He was confronted with a force a hundred times as
large as his own, compelled to fight for their fatherland,
their temples, and their lives. He realized
the danger, but, master of himself and his emotions,
he maintained as calm and composed a mien as if
the report were a mere joke. His example inspired
his men with like fearlessness, and they stood ready
to follow him wherever he should lead.

36

Cortes drew up his little army in battle array at
the foot of a hill. It protected his men in the rear,
and at the same time he could use his cannon in the
freest and most effective manner. He posted himself
with his cavalry in an adjoining thicket, whence
at the right time he could charge the enemy unexpectedly.
In this order they quietly awaited the
onset of the Indians. The ever memorable day
upon which the battle was fought was the twenty-fifth
of March, 1519, Annunciation Day.

The Indians appeared, most of them armed with
bows and arrows. The bowstrings were made of
the sinews of some animal or stag’s hair, and the
arrows were tipped with sharp bones. In addition
to these they carried spears which could be thrown
from a distance or used as a hand-weapon. One of
their most terrible weapons was a great battle
sword, made of very hard wood, the edge of which
was formed of exceedingly sharp stones, joined together,
and which was so heavy that it had to be
wielded with both hands, like an axe. Some of
them had clubs, others slings with which they could
hurl stones of great size with unusual force and
accuracy. The leaders alone protected themselves
with quilted woollen coverings, and wooden or tortoise
shell shields. The rest went naked, but to
give them a frightful appearance they painted their
faces and bodies in different colors, and to increase
their stature they wore headdresses of tall feathers.
Their battle music was in keeping with their looks.
They used reed pipes and large sea-shells as wind
instruments, and drums made of hollowed tree
trunks. The art of fighting in close ranks was
entirely unknown to them. They observed a certain
order, however, by dividing the whole force into
little squads, each with its own leader. They had
this in common with the European plan of battle,
that they did not engage all their warriors at the
same time in a fight, but kept a part in reserve to
come to the help of those in front when it should be
necessary. Their opening assault was always made
with frightful outcries and with great vigor, but
if the enemy withstood the first attack and succeeded
in throwing the advance into disorder, a panic
would strike them and a general retreat ensue.

37

Such was the enemy the little army of Spaniards
now saw advancing upon them in countless numbers.
Silent and solid as a wall they awaited the
attack. When they had come within bowshot, the
battle opened with terrible yells and a shower of
arrows which darkened the air. The Spaniards
replied with a cannon and musketry fire, which
covered the ground with heaps of the closely crowded
enemy. The Indians, however, were undaunted.
They filled up the void, threw sand in the air to
conceal their losses in a cloud of dust, and after
another flight of arrows came to a hand to hand
struggle. The Spaniards did their best to overcome
superiority of numbers, but the impetuosity and the
multitude of the enemy were so great that they
could not long withstand them. Their ranks were
already broken through in several places, and a
general massacre seemed imminent when suddenly
Cortes appeared with his cavalry and charged into
the midst of the enemy. It was a new and dreadful
sight to the poor Indians, who had never before
beheld horsemen. They thought they were huge
monsters, half man and half beast, and were so
overcome with fear that their weapons dropped from
their hands. The Spaniards improved the opportunity
to get into order again, the cannon fire was
renewed, and, attacked upon every side, the panic-stricken
Indians incontinently fled.

38

Satisfied with this display of his superior power,
Cortes at once ordered that the fugitives should be
spared and only a few of them captured in order to
make a peaceful arrangement with the whole nation.
Eight hundred Indians lay dead upon the field, and
only two Spaniards, but seventy of the latter were
wounded. All the Indians who were not too severely
wounded had fled. The field was made the site of
a city, which, in honor of the day and the event,
was called Santa Maria de la Vittoria, and afterward
became the capital of the country.

39

On the following day some of the captives were
brought before Cortes. Their faces wore an expression
of anxiety and fear for they had no doubt that
they would be sentenced to death, but how great was
their joy and astonishment when he received them
with the greatest kindness, and Aguilar, the interpreter,
announced their freedom. Their delight was
still further enhanced when Cortes displayed his
generosity by making them gifts of trifles, which he
knew would secure their good-will. Overcome with
joy, they hastened to tell their people how handsomely
they had been treated. The result was that
the Spaniards won over all those hearts which
had been filled with rage and vengeance. To
manifest their confidence and good intentions,
various Indians shortly came, bringing all kinds of
subsistence for which they were generously recompensed.
The cacique himself sent messengers with
gifts and begged for peace. It was granted, and
when, soon afterward, he came in person, assurances
of peace on each side were confirmed by presents.
Among other expressions of good-will the
cacique brought twenty young women who knew
how to bake Indian corn bread, and made a present
of them to Cortes. One of them, who had been
christened Marina, was the daughter of a cacique
and had been kidnapped when a child and sold to
the cacique of Tabasco. She was not only unusually
beautiful but intelligent, and in a short time
learned the Spanish language and was of great
service to Cortes afterward in his dealings with the
Mexicans.

40

While the cacique and his leaders were with
Cortes they chanced to hear the Spanish horses
neigh. Thereupon the terrified Indians anxiously
inquired what was the matter with these frightful
beings, meaning the horses. They were told that
they were angry because the cacique and his people
had not been punished more severely for their
audacity in attacking the Christians. The instant
they heard this they hurried off and brought various
kinds of game to appease them. They meekly
implored forgiveness and promised they would
faithfully submit to the Christians in the future.

Their confidence was soon displayed. Spanish
knick-knacks were exchanged for the raw products
of the country, such as food of all kinds, woollen
goods, and golden ornaments. When the natives
were asked where the precious metal came from,
they pointed westward and replied, “Kulhua,”
“Mexico.” It was at once decided to leave the
country and proceed to the land of gold. Before
they left, Cortes displayed his solicitude for their
conversion. He called their attention to the great
doctrines of Christianity, and sought to persuade
them to abandon heathenish practices. As the
Indians offered but little objection, the conversion
ceremony began on Palm Sunday. The whole
army, with a priest at its head, moved in solemn
procession through the blooming fields, surrounded
by thousands of Indians, to the principal temple, in
which the image of the heathen divinity had been
removed from the altar and displaced by the image
of Christ. The priest conducted the mass, the soldiers
sang, the natives listened in deep silence and
were moved to tears. Their hearts were filled with
reverence for the divinity of those beings who
seemed to control the thunder and lightning with
their hands.

41

After the ceremony was concluded the soldiers
bade farewell to their Indian friends, and a few
hours afterward the little fleet was on its way to
the gold coast of Mexico.

42

Chapter IV

Cortes Reaches San Juan de Ulloa—His Negotiations for an Understanding with Montezuma, Emperor of Mexico—Disquiet in the Army

Cortes, satisfied with the fortunate outcome
of a struggle which might have had most
disastrous consequences, and full of hope for
similar good fortune in his future undertakings, left
Tabasco. A favoring east wind filled the swelling
sails, and the course was westward. On this voyage
Cortes visited all those places where Grijalva
had been before him. At last he reached the island
of San Juan de Ulloa, which Grijalva had visited,
and came to anchor between the island and mainland.
They had not been there long before they
saw two large and long canoes approaching them
from shore. The Indians in them seemed to be of
some importance and were apparently apprehensive
of danger, but Cortes received them on board in a
friendly manner. They began to speak, and Cortes
awaited an explanation of their visit, but they spoke
a language which Aguilar, his interpreter, did not
understand. They talked in Mexican, but he had
learned only Yucatanish—an entirely different
tongue.

43

In the meantime Cortes to his great delight observed
that the slave Marina of Tabasco was conversing
with some of the Indians and found that
this person, who had been born in a Mexican province
and been kidnapped, and taken to Yucatan,
could speak the language of both countries with
equal facility. Marina spoke with them in her
own dialect, communicating what they said to
Aguilar in Yucatanish, who in turn spoke to Cortes
in Spanish. By this fortunate occurrence Cortes
learned that Pilpatoe, the governor of that country,
and Teutile, the great Emperor Montezuma’s general,
had sent these Indians to ascertain his object
in coming and to offer him assistance in continuing
his journey, should he need it. Their appearance
showed them to be a very different people from
those wild tribes of the West Indies before encountered.
Cortes recognized the difference immediately
and replied in a cordial way that he had
come with the friendly purpose of bringing tidings
to their ruler which would prove of great importance.
He dismissed them with gifts and, without waiting
for a reply, began sending his people, horses, cannon,
and war material to land. The hospitable
natives submitted, hastened to lend helping hands
to their future oppressors, and set up straw huts
for them. Unfortunates! If some friendly spirit
could have revealed the future to them and shown
them how dearly they would have to pay for this
friendly service, how they would have recoiled from
these wolves in sheep’s clothing! How they would
have put forth all their strength and joyfully spent
the last drop of blood to drive these dangerous
strangers from their shores!

44

On the following day Pilpatoe and Teutile appeared
in person with a numerous retinue of armed
Mexicans. Their appearance was imposing as befitted
the majesty of their great sovereign. Cortes
also displayed as much pomp as his circumstances
permitted, to impress them with his own importance
and that of the sovereign he represented. He
ordered his troops to march at his side with military
precision and in respectful silence, and received
the Mexican officers with a display of dignity which
deeply impressed them. Upon being asked who
had commissioned him, he haughtily replied with
intentional brevity that he came in the name of
Charles of Austria, the great and powerful monarch
of the East, who had entrusted him with a message
to the Emperor Montezuma that could only be
delivered in person. He desired therefore that he
should be conducted to him.

45

Ferdinand, the Catholic, who ruled over Spain in
the time of Columbus, had no sons, but left a daughter,
named Joanna, who married Philip, an Austrian
prince. A son was born to them, named Charles,
and it is he who is mentioned above. When Ferdinand
died, Charles, whose father was no longer
living, became heir to his crown. He was also sovereign
of the Netherlands, which had come into his
possession a year previously. Later he was chosen
German Emperor and thus became one of the most
powerful monarchs in Europe. As four princes by
the name of Charles had occupied the throne before
him, he was designated Charles the Fifth.

The Mexicans were much embarrassed by the
resolute declaration of Cortes. They knew that
his determination to have a personal interview with
their Emperor would be extremely disagreeable to
the latter. Montezuma had been greatly disturbed
at the first appearance of Europeans on the Mexican
coast. There was an old saying in his country that
a mighty people dwelt toward the east, who sooner
or later would attack and overthrow the Mexican
Empire. How this saying originated it is not easy
to say, but it is certain that the superstitious Mexicans,
and Montezuma himself, were terrified by the
old prophecy as soon as the Europeans appeared.
This was also the reason why Montezuma’s ambassadors
were so disturbed when Cortes demanded
the interview. Meanwhile, before making a reply to
his demand, they sought to win his favor with gifts,
among them ten bales of fine woollens, exquisite
feather cloaks, whose beautiful and delicate colors
rivalled the finest paintings, and a willow basket
filled with gold ornaments. Cortes expressed his
gratitude for the gifts, which emboldened them to
tell him such an interview would be impossible.
To their intense astonishment Cortes, with a sinister
and angry expression of face, interrupted them
by declaring that he could not return to the great
monarch, whose representative he was, without carrying
out his object. That was more than they
had expected and all they could do was to request
Cortes to have patience until they could acquaint
Montezuma with his purpose and receive his reply.
Cortes assented to this and sent gifts to the Emperor.
These consisted of a richly carved and
colored arm-chair, a head covering having a gold
medallion with the image of St. George and the
dragon on it, a quantity of necklaces and bracelets
and ornaments of cut glass, which, in that country
where they had no glass, was regarded by the Mexicans
as a precious stone.

46

Upon this occasion also several painters attached
to the Mexican retinue made drawings upon white
cotton of the most remarkable European objects they
observed. Learning that these drawings were to be
sent to the Emperor, Cortes decided to offer the artists
still more interesting subjects that would be likely
to make a deep impression upon Montezuma. He
drew up his entire force in battle array and displayed
before the astonished Mexicans a realistic
picture of a battle conducted in the European
manner. The spectators were so overcome with
astonishment and awe that some of them fled, others
in a dazed condition threw themselves upon the
earth, while the rest fancied that what they saw and
heard was a game for their diversion. The artists
now had an opportunity to use their pencils in
depicting the fearful and destructive effect of European
warfare. They worked with trembling hands,
and when their pictures were finished, they were
sent with the other gifts by swift runners to the
Emperor. In that country they had swift runners
on all the principal roads leading from the most
distant provinces to the capital, ready at any
moment to convey intelligence of all that was transpiring
at any place.

47

In a few days the Emperor’s reply was received.
As was expected, the interview was declined, but
to mitigate the disagreeableness of the refusal, Montezuma
accompanied it with gifts which were truly
regal. Pilpatoe and Teutile had the unpleasant
duty of presenting both. They wisely produced the
gifts first, to prepare Cortes, if possible, for a favorable
reception of the reply.

The gifts were brought in by a hundred Indians
and spread out on mats at Cortes’ feet. The Spaniards
greedily gazed at these proofs of the richness
of the empire. There were samples of cotton which
resembled silk in its gloss and fineness, pictures of
animals, trees, and other natural products skilfully
wrought out in vari-colored feathers, and gorgeous
necklaces, bracelets, rings, and other ornaments of
gold. But as the sun eclipses all the other luminaries
in the heavens, so were these objects eclipsed
by two large circular disks, one of which was of
solid gold, the other, of silver. The one represented
the sun, the other the moon. As if for the
purpose of still further exciting the cupidity of the
Spaniards, several caskets filled with precious stones,
pearls, and grains of gold from the streams and
mines were presented.

48

Cortes accepted these splendid gifts with expressions
of the utmost respect for the giver, and thereupon
the ambassadors proceeded to the disagreeable
part of their commission. They declared on behalf
of their sovereign that he could not permit foreign
soldiers to approach the capital or remain longer
within the limits of the Mexican Empire. They
were requested to retire immediately. Fair and
reasonable as the request was, Cortes assumed the
mien of one who had been insulted, and asserted
even more haughtily than before that he utterly refused
to accept the reply, for his own honor and that
of his sovereign would be offended should he return
without having had the interview. The eyes of
the Mexicans, who were accustomed to abject submission
to their ruler, were fixed in astonishment
upon a man who dared to resist anything which
their absolute lord had ordered. Such audacity
was so terrible to them that it was some time
before they could recover from the shock. At last
they regained composure and begged of this bold
European a second delay in order to report his
unexpected persistency at the capital. Cortes again
consented, but upon the condition that he should
not have to wait too long for a reply. Firm and
decided as he appeared to be in these negotiations,
he was not altogether sure that he was on secure
ground. Everything convinced him that he had to
deal with a powerful and well managed government.
It seemed the most hazardous thing in the world
to oppose such a power with a handful of Spanish
adventurers.

49

Nevertheless he held to the bold purpose of
venturing the undertaking, cost what it might.
Two motives actuated him. Religious zeal was the
first. He was convinced he would be doing Heaven
a great service if he could convert these heathen to
Christianity. The second was based on his own
doubtful circumstances, for, after what had occurred
between himself and Velasquez, the governor, upon
leaving Cuba, he could not hope to escape unpunished
when he returned. As his life was in danger
in any event, he might better risk it in the accomplishment
of an unheard of adventure than expose
himself to the danger of losing it at the hands of
the hangman upon his return. Unfortunately there
were several in his army who were growing very
anxious, and these were men who were more closely
attached to Velasquez than to him. They had used
their utmost efforts to disaffect the others and to
excite a general uprising so as to force their leader
to return to Cuba. But the prospect of securing
vast and exhaustless treasures was so strong that
nothing else could make a deep impression upon
them. Besides, they believed there was good reason
now to expect a favorable answer from Mexico.

50

The reply came at last, but it was not what they
had anticipated. Far from being alarmed by the
stubbornness of the Spanish general, Montezuma
had come to the manly conclusion to abide by his
decision that the Europeans must retire. Teutile
brought the disagreeable message, as well as more
handsome gifts. Cortes thought best this time to
assume a less insolent attitude and mildly replied
that the Christians esteemed it their duty to instruct
their ignorant neighbors in the doctrines of that
religion which pointed all men to the only road to
happiness! It was for this reason his greater monarch
had sent him to show Montezuma and his
subjects the error of their ways, which they could
no longer look upon without pity. Therefore he
could not leave without insisting that this interview
should take place. Teutile had hardly the patience
to wait for the close of Cortes’ statement. He rose
from his seat angrily at last and indignantly declared
that as the Emperor’s gracious offers were of no
avail, the instructions of his master would be carried
out in a more forcible manner. With these
words he hastily rushed out, followed by his entire
retinue and all the Mexicans who were in the vicinity.
In a short time the whole region was abandoned
by the natives.

51

This was more than Cortes had expected. He
was surprised and his danger now was greatly
increased. With great anxiety he contemplated the
results which must follow from this occurrence.
The most direful evil threatening them was the
utter lack of subsistence, which the hospitable
natives had so generously furnished them hitherto.
The discontented ones in the army renewed their
efforts to force Cortes to return to Cuba. They
ventured now openly to inveigh against him, to
accuse him of foolhardiness, and to urge their comrades
not to suffer him to lead them farther in the
way to destruction. Cortes, who was as courageous
as he was far-sighted, with the aid of his confidants
secretly investigated the sentiments of his army,
and when he was informed that the insurgents were
not making any deep impression, he summoned the
foremost of the instigators, among whom a certain
Ordaz was conspicuous, met them in a friendly
manner, and inquired the meaning of their conduct.
They did not conceal their purpose, but urged even
vehemently that they should embark and sail back
to Cuba.

52

Cortes quietly listened to them. Then he replied
that so far as he was concerned, in view of the danger
to which they were exposed, he did not see how, as
their leader, he could oppose their wishes. Therefore
he would give his consent. He thereupon caused it
to be proclaimed through the camp that all must
be ready to embark for the return voyage to Cuba.
He clearly foresaw what an uproar this would cause
and his anticipations were promptly realized. The
Spaniards, who, since their landing, had dreamed of
nothing but exhaustless treasures, stood as if thunderstruck
when they learned that they had based their
assurance upon such slender hopes, and that, without
having earned the slightest reward for their
previous hardships, they were to return home poorer
than when they started away. These reflections
were intolerable, and an angry murmur of discontent
at the fickleness of their leader spread through the
camp.

Cortes was rejoiced at this, for he clearly saw
it would aid him in his plans. He contrived with
the aid of his confidants to increase the indignation of
the soldiers still more. They complained all the more
loudly that absolute cowardice was keeping them
from the road to glory and wealth. The result was
increased excitement and a general demand that
their leader should appear before them. That was
just what Cortes desired. He came at once with a
look of extreme surprise on his face. They unanimously
accused him of lack of courage in doubting
the successful outcome of an undertaking for the
spread of the true religion and for the great glory
and advantage of the fatherland. They declared
furthermore that for their part they were firmly
determined to pursue the glorious course upon
which they had entered, and to choose another
leader if he faint-heartedly deserted them. Their
defiant words were music to his ears, and it was
some time before he recovered from his surprise.
At last he began to express his astonishment at what
he had heard. He assured them that he had never
dreamed of giving up hopes which were as great as
they were well founded. But, as it had been stated
to him that his entire army had become discouraged
and wished to go back, he had unwillingly decided
to comply with its wishes. At this point his excited
soldiers with united voices declared he had been
deceived. A few cowards had charged the whole
army with cowardice. They were ready to risk
their blood and life to carry out his great purpose.
He might lead them where he pleased. They were
ready to follow him even to the death.

53

All was as Cortes wished. With an expression of
joy and satisfaction he extolled the glorious steadfastness
of his soldiers and promised to carry out
the desires which they had so unanimously expressed.
He would therefore, he added, end his stay in the
region where they were and march into the heart
of the country with the larger part of the army. A
universal and enthusiastic cheer greeted his decision.
Now came the last act of the comedy. He was
and still remained their leader, but his entire authority
depended solely upon their good-will. The
absolute authority of the soldiers that had made
him their commander, under changed circumstances
could take the command away from him. He
sought to remove this possibility in the following
crafty way. He named a court of justice for the
new colony whose membership he knew was favorable
to him. Hardly was this done, and hardly had
the magistrates assembled, before Cortes appeared
in their midst, his staff of commander in hand.
After permission had been granted he thus addressed
them:

54

“I regard you, gentlemen, from this time forward
as the representatives of our great sovereign. Your
decisions will always have the sanctity of law.
You unquestionably recognize the necessity that
our army must have a leader whose authority
does not depend upon the caprice of the soldiers.
Now I find myself in this position. Since the
governor has revoked my appointment, both my
authority and my position, indeed, are doubtful. I
consider myself bound, therefore, to resign my command,
which rests upon such a doubtful basis, into
your hands and to request you, after due consideration,
to designate some one in the name of the King
who seems to you most worthy of being the commander.
For my part, I am ready as a common
soldier, pike in hand, to furnish an example to my
comrades of obedience to the one selected as leader.”

With these words he kissed his staff of command,
handed it reverently to the Chief Justice, placed
his letter of resignation on the table, and left. The
judges thereupon played out the farce. For appearances’
sake they accepted the resignation, pretended
the proper consideration, at last made a new choice,
and Cortes was unanimously elected commander.
Thereupon the army was summoned, and the choice
was announced and enthusiastically welcomed.

55

Chapter V

Founding of the City of Villa Rica de la Vera Cruz—Disaffected Caciques Join Cortes—Destruction of a Heathen Temple because of Human Sacrifices—Introduction of Christianity—Cortes Sinks his Fleet after Sending a Vessel to Spain

Cortes was now the authorized commander
at the head of six hundred greedy wolves,
before whom the countless hordes of naked
Mexicans were as so many defenceless sheep. The
High Court appointed by Cortes gave to the settlement,
which was established before his departure, the
name of Villa Rica de la Vera Cruz, “the rich city of
the true Cross.”
[4]
The budding settlement was called
“rich” because it was there they had a chance to
judge of the wealth of the Mexican Empire by the
gifts which had been sent, and because they expected
that the treasures of that rich people, unfortunately
for them, would soon be flowing in there. The
addition, “true Cross,” was made because they
landed there on the anniversary of the Crucifixion.
This remarkable appellation of the first European
colony in Mexico indicates the two leading passions
which animated the Spanish adventurers, namely,
avarice and religious enthusiasm. They were animated
alike by the longings to fill their purses with
gold and Heaven with souls. It was a mixture of
the earthly and heavenly, cruelty and apparent
humanity, shameless cupidity and pretended piety.

56

The discontented Velasquez faction in Cortes’
camp soon discovered that they had been deceived
and began to murmur afresh. Cortes at once seized
those who were the most intemperate in speech
and placed them on board the vessels in chains.
Those who had been misled into sympathy with the
mutineers were sent, under a reliable leader and in
the company of several of the loyal ones, into the
neighboring region to procure subsistence. After they
had returned with abundant supplies, and hunger
was appeased, a reconciliation was soon effected.
Every one of them acknowledged his authority,
and they soon became his most trusty and devoted
followers. Their destiny and his were now joined,
for they had mutually taken the decisive step and
must follow him wherever he led. When peace was
fully restored, the Spaniards made all their preparations
for departure, and a fortunate event cleared the
way of all obstacles. They encountered five Indians,
messengers from a cacique, whose possessions were
not far distant, who asked to be conducted to the
Spanish commander. Their request was granted,
and Cortes, with the aid of his interpreter, learned
the agreeable news that the cacique of Zempoala
had heard of the great deeds accomplished by the
Spaniards at Tabasco and was anxious to make
a friendly treaty with them. After much questioning
Cortes discovered that Montezuma, of whom
the cacique of Zempoala was a vassal, was a proud,
overbearing, and cruel master, both hated and
feared by all his subjects, who were only waiting for
an opportunity to free themselves from his yoke.

57

Cortes was careful to conceal his satisfaction
over this intelligence. He knew how easy it is to
overthrow the mightiest empire as soon as dissatisfaction
and misunderstandings arise between
the ruler and his people, and he now had not the
slightest doubt of the success of his undertaking,
which but for this fortunate event might have proved
foolhardy in the extreme. The Indians were dismissed
with friendly assurances for themselves and
their master, and with the promise that Cortes
would shortly pay them a visit. To fulfil his promise
and at the same time to investigate a spot which
they recommended as a convenient place for a
colony, he departed with his whole army after giving
orders to his fleet to coast along in that vicinity.
At the close of the first day’s march they reached
an Indian village which was completely deserted.
They found empty houses and temples with images
of deities, remnants of human beings who had been
sacrificed, and some books, the first which had been
discovered in America. They were made of parchment
or hide which was smeared over with gum and
arranged in leaves. In place of letters they contained
pictures of all kinds and symbols connected
with the abhorrent Mexican religion.
[5]
On the following
day Cortes continued his march. They came
to broad luxurious plains and wooded regions rich
with the vegetation of the tropics. The branches
of the stately trees were hung with dark red, gracefully
curving vines and other parasitic plants of
brilliant color. The undergrowth of prickly aloes,
interlaced with wild roses and honeysuckles, in
several places made almost impenetrable thickets.
In the midst of this profusion of fragrant blossoms,
countless birds and swarms of butterflies fluttered
about, while exquisite singing birds filled the air
with their melody. Although the invaders were not
very susceptible to the beauties of nature, they
could not help expressions of delight, and, as they
traversed this earthly paradise, it reminded them of
the beautiful regions in their own fatherland.

58

Cortes was greatly surprised to find the whole
country deserted, although it was the territory
of the cacique of Zempoala. It looked suspicious
to him. But toward evening twelve Indians,
carrying provisions, who had been sent by the
cacique, met them. They besought the Spanish
leader in the name of their master to go to his
residence, which was only a sun’s (one day) distance
from there. He would find everything there that he
and his men needed. Upon being asked why the
cacique himself had not come to meet him in person,
they replied that he was prevented by physical
infirmity. Cortes sent six of the Indians back with
thanks, retaining the rest to act as guides. On the
following day the cacique’s city came in sight, lying
in a fruitful, smiling region, and very handsome in
appearance. Some of the soldiers in the advance
rushed back, excitedly shouting that the walls of
the city were made of solid silver. To their great
regret they found they were mistaken, for the walls
were only covered with a cement so white and
glistening in the sunshine that it easily deceived
those who dreamed day and night of nothing but
gold and silver. Upon entering the city they found
all the streets and public squares filled with curious
natives who were unarmed and conducted themselves
more quietly than might have been expected of
such a multitude of uncivilized beings.

59

As they approached the house of the cacique,
his Indian highness himself appeared. His figure
revealed the nature of the infirmity which had
prevented him from going out to meet his guests.
He was so monstrously fat that he could scarcely
walk, his servants having to support and move
him along. His shapeless bulk and clumsy manner
were so ludicrous that Cortes had some difficulty
in restraining his men from loud laughter and in
preserving his own seriousness. The attire of the
cacique was gorgeous. He was dressed in a cloak
profusely set with precious stones, and his ears
and lips were perforated and richly adorned. His
address of welcome did not in the least correspond
with his laughable appearance. It was very clever,
and well put together, and closed with the request
that Cortes would condescend to be his guest and
abide with him, so that they might have an opportunity
to talk together at leisure. The rest of the
day was spent in partaking of refreshment and
enjoying the fruits which grew there in great profusion.

60

In his interview with the cacique Cortes designedly
impressed him with the idea that he had
been sent there by the great eastern monarch for
the purpose of putting an end to tyranny in that
part of the world. This encouraged the cacique
to make bitter complaint of the haughtiness and
injustice of Montezuma, whom he did not hesitate
to characterize as a cruel tyrant, whose yoke was
intolerable not only to himself but to others of
his vassals. His indignation was so great, as he
spoke of it, that tears sprang from his eyes. Cortes
endeavored to quiet him and assured him of his
protection. He also informed him that the power
of the tyrant did not disturb him in the least, for
he knew that his own power, which was supported
by Heaven, was irresistible. After taking a cordial
leave of the hospitable Indian, Cortes set out upon
his march to Chiahuitzlan, the place selected for
a settlement. Their way led over fruitful plains
and through pleasant woodlands, and after a moderate
day’s journey they saw the city upon a rocky
eminence. The people had fled. As they reached
the market-place fifteen Indians emerged from a temple,
greeted the strangers, and assured them that their
governor and all his people would come back without
delay if their safety were guaranteed. Cortes
solemnly assured them no one should be hurt and
in a short time the cacique and his people overcame
their fears and returned. Cortes was pleased
to discover that the cacique of Zempoala was there
also. Scarcely had the interview begun when bitter
complaints were made of Montezuma’s persecutions.
Cortes, who heard these complaints now for the second
time, consoled them and renewed his promises of
protection.

MEXICAN CACIQUES BEFORE CORTES

61

In the meantime some of the Indians approached
the two caciques and whispered something in their
ears which greatly astonished them. They sprang
up affrighted, and left the spot trembling. Uncertain
what might be the cause of their fear, they
were followed, and the reason was soon discovered.
Six splendidly clad representatives of Montezuma
accompanied by a considerable number of slaves,
holding feather umbrellas over their heads, passed
the Spanish quarters with glances of contempt at
Cortes and his officers. Their haughtiness so enraged
the soldiers that they were restrained with difficulty
from violently assaulting the Mexicans. Marina, who
had been sent to gather information, returned with
the news that they had bitterly reproached the two
caciques for their treachery in receiving strangers,
who were the declared enemies of their sovereign.
As a penalty for their disloyalty, besides the customary
tribute, twenty Indians should be delivered
over to them as a sacrifice to the offended deities.
Cortes was enraged but wisely refrained from giving
expression to his wrath. He assured the caciques
they need have no fear of harm and instructed
them to bring Montezuma’s messengers before him
in chains to give an account of themselves. The
caciques, who had been used to absolute obedience
to their master, hesitated, but Cortes, leaving them no
time for reflection, repeated his orders so emphatically
that they dared not offer objection. The
messengers were arrested, the Spaniards, for appearances’
sake, taking no part in it. Having gone
thus far, the caciques would have gone still further
and done to the fettered messengers what Montezuma
proposed to do to the Indians, but Cortes
objected to such inhumanity and ordered that the
prisoners should be guarded by his own men.

62

Cortes desired, if possible, to conceal the appearance
of open hostility to the powerful Montezuma.
He cunningly planned to put him under obligations
to himself by making him believe he had not
the least connection with what had occurred. With
this purpose in view he summoned two of the prisoners
at night, announced to them that they were
free, and instructed them to inform their master
that he would strive to secure the liberty of the
others, and with this dismissed them. The Indians
were told the next day that the prisoners had escaped.
Shortly after this, the other prisoners were permitted
to join their companions. This tricky dealing had
the effect which Cortes expected. In the meantime
other caciques were found in the neighboring mountainous
region who shared the same hatred toward
their Emperor and were equally desirous of escaping
his tyrannical rule. All these heads of Indian tribes,
bearing the general name of Totonacs, entered into
agreements with Cortes, disavowed the authority of
Montezuma, and declared themselves vassals of the
King of Spain.

63

Steps were now taken for the founding of a city
at the new settlement. The name of Villa Rica de la
Vera Cruz was retained for the city, but the name
to-day has been abbreviated to Vera Cruz. Every
one in the Spanish army assisted in laying the walls
and constructing the buildings of the new city. No
one refused, and Cortes set an example for all by
assisting personally. The work went on with
incredible swiftness and in a short time the enclosed
place was sufficiently secure against Indian assaults.
Meanwhile Montezuma’s messengers had returned
and performed the favorable offices expected by
Cortes. Their report considerably mitigated the
anger of the monarch, who in his first heat of passion
had ordered the mustering of a mighty army to
extirpate these strangers and their Indian auxiliaries
by fire and sword. Now, however, he was greatly
concerned and decided to employ kind measures
to induce these dreaded strangers, if possible, to go
away peacefully. To this end he sent messengers
with gifts of great value, two young princes, relatives
of the Emperor, being the bearers. They reached
the Spanish camp just at the time of the completion
of the fortifications. They discharged their duty,
presented the costly gifts, thanked Cortes for the
assistance he had rendered in releasing the prisoners,
and concluded with the request that he would be
pleased to leave the territory of their sovereign.

64

Cortes showed them the greatest honor and made
the following reply: He was sorry that the Emperor
had been caused trouble by the imprisonment of
his messengers, and yet it must be acknowledged
that they had brought it upon themselves by an
inhuman demand, which he hoped had been made
without the Emperor’s knowledge. In any event
he must declare that the Christian religion did not
recognize the cruel practice of human sacrifice and
that he felt himself bound to prevent it wherever
and however he could. As for the wrong which
had been done the Emperor, that had been compensated
for by the release of the prisoners, and, as he
was under obligations to the allies he had accepted,
he flattered himself that the Emperor would overlook
the hasty act of the caciques of Zempoala
and Chiahuitzlan, and pardon them. He was
obliged to take these vassals of the Emperor under
his protection for they had striven to make amends
for Teutile’s incivility by giving him a hospitable
reception. As to his departure from the country,
he had already had the honor to assure their master
that a mission of the utmost consequence bound
him not to return to his fatherland until he had
had a personal interview. A European soldier never
feared to perform any duty imposed upon him by
his superiors. The messengers, amazed at the cool
and stately manner in which Cortes delivered his
reply, returned, filled with admiration at his courageous
firmness and with secret contempt for their
own sovereign, to whom they reported all they had
seen and heard.

65

The new Spanish city was now in a satisfactory
state of defence, and Cortes devoted himself in
earnest to the completion of other necessary affairs.
Fortune seemed decidedly in his favor, but his
excessive religious zeal came near ruining everything.
Word was brought to him that human
sacrifices were to take place in one of the temples
of his allies. Enraged at their cruel superstition
and that such an enormity should be attempted
under his very eyes, he rushed to the temple with
some of his soldiers and threatened destruction by
fire and sword if they did not instantly release the
intended victims. His zeal did not stop with this.
He demanded that the priests should pull down
their idols, and renounce their false religion forever,
although they did not yet know of a better one.
The priests prostrated themselves at his feet, moaning
and lamenting, and the caciques present trembled.
As they refused to pull down their idols, he ordered
his soldiers to do it by force. The priests rushed
to arms and in a few moments Cortes and his little
band were surrounded by a crowd big enough to
appall the heart of the stoutest. But Cortes remained
unmoved and announced to the assembled
multitude that the first arrow fired by them would
cost them the lives of their caciques and the destruction
of them all. The soldiers advanced to carry
out his orders. In an instant the idols were hurled
down; the sacred vessels and the altar followed
them. They were all destroyed, and the temple was
cleaned. The human blood which adhered to the
walls was washed off, and the image of the Virgin
was set in the place of the idols. The astonished
Indians expected that fire would descend from
heaven any instant and revenge this indignity to
their divinities. But not a spark was seen, and the
temple-stormers continued their work audaciously
and triumphantly before their very eyes. This
weakened their faith and caused them to reflect,
with the result that they gradually came to believe
that the Spaniards were divinities themselves and
mightier than their own gods. They did not long
stop to consider, but, gathering up the remnants of
their idols, contemptuously threw them into the fire.
The temple was consecrated as a Christian church
and upon the same day was dedicated with Roman
Catholic ceremonies, which the Indians greatly
wondered at though they did not understand them.

66

Cortes had hardly escaped the danger to which
his religious ardor exposed him before another and
no less threatening one confronted him. Some of
the soldiers and sailors, tired of wandering about
and alarmed at the prospect of fresh dangers on
the march to the capital, had entered into a plot
against the commander and decided to seize a vessel,
make their escape to Cuba, and notify the governor
of what Cortes had been doing. Fortunately the
plot was discovered before it was too late. Cortes
arrested the leaders and imposed a fitting penalty
for the offence. As he was convinced that the
source of disaffection had not entirely disappeared
in his little army, he gave the matter serious consideration
and at last hit upon a definite but dangerous
plan of intimidating their small souls and causing
them to recoil with terror from any thought of
mutiny. He determined to remove the last hope
of return and to leave them the alternative of an
advance upon the Mexican capital or death, by
destroying his fleet, thus convincing the fainthearted
ones in his army that there was no middle
course and that they must either conquer or die.

67

Great as was the courage necessary to accomplish
this, still greater was the task of making it acceptable
to his army. Fortunately Cortes was as tactful
as he was brave. He began by dismantling
his vessels. He had the rigging removed and all
the material on board as well as the cannon brought
ashore. The ships’ carpenters then examined the
hulls of the vessels and reported that they were in
such a wretched condition it would be impossible
to repair them. Cortes now inspired his soldiers
with such courage and zeal that they hastened of
their own accord to destroy them—their last refuge
should the expedition prove a failure—and to
bring the boards and planks on shore. Only one
of them was spared to carry out Cortes’ purpose.
He had been appointed leader by the tribunal
which he himself had chosen, but in reality this was
not any more authoritative than if he had appointed
himself. He was anxious to place his rights upon
a secure footing, and, with this end in view, he
decided to send a vessel to Spain to obtain the sanction
of the Court for all his movements thus far,
as well as relief from any further responsibility to
Velasquez and his appointment as absolute governor
of the empire to be conquered by him.

68

He knew of but one sure way to accomplish his
purpose, and that was to send the government actual
proofs of the treasure he would secure for it. To
make these convincing he determined to send all the
gifts which had been received from Montezuma,
and that all concerned, officers, soldiers, and sailors,
should contribute their share. It was a hard demand,
but Cortes ventured it and carried his point.
With these gifts Cortes sent a letter to the Emperor
in which he gave a detailed account of all that
had occurred—his various discoveries, his battles
and dealings with the natives, their conversion to
Christianity, his own dangers and hardships, and
much information about the countries he had
visited. He described his difficulties with the
governor of Cuba, what had been done with regard
to settlements, and besought the Emperor to confirm
all that had been accomplished as well as his
own authority. In the meantime he was thoroughly
certain that with the help of his brave companions
he could place the great Indian Empire in possession
of the Castilian crown.

69

The officials of Villa Rica also wrote a letter
similar to that of Cortes, and closed it with an
emphatic statement of the maladministration of
Velasquez, his venality, extortions, schemings for
his own profit, and disregard for the advantage
of his sovereign. With these two letters a third
was sent in the name of the citizen soldiery of Villa
Rica, expressing their loyalty to their sovereign
and praying him to confirm the appointment of
Cortes as their leader. The richly laden vessel,
in charge of noblemen upon whom Cortes could
depend, left Villa Rica de la Vera Cruz July 26, 1519,
and, in pursuance of exact orders, anchored for a
short time on the north coast of Cuba, but fortunately
escaped the pursuers sent out by Velasquez.

70

Cortes now prepared to march. His army consisted
of five hundred infantry, fifteen cavalrymen,
and six field-pieces. The others, about fifty men,
mostly invalids, besides two horses, remained as
part of the garrison at Vera Cruz. Including his
auxiliaries, Cortes had only thirteen hundred men
and one thousand so-called
tamanes
, that is, porters,
who had to carry the necessary baggage and subsistence.
In that country, where there were no
horses or pack animals of any kind, a class of men,
named as above, carried things from one place to
another. For the security of those he left behind
Cortes took fifty of the leading Indians of the country
with him, whom he kept as hostages, though they
were not aware of it.

71

Chapter VI

Cortes’ March to Tlaxcala—Battle and Defeat of the Tlaxcalans—Montezuma’s Messengers

The little army set out from Zempoala
August 16, 1519. Nothing of consequence
marked the first day’s march. Their way
led through the territory of their ally, the cacique.
They met with a friendly reception and hospitable
treatment. At last they came to the borders of the
mountainous country of Tlaxcala.
[6]
The natives of
this region surpassed all the other Americans in
extraordinary courage and especially in their love
of freedom. They had bravely thrown off the
Mexican yoke and for a long time maintained a
republic. The country sent its representatives to
Tlaxcala, the capital, and these representatives, or
chiefs, in assembly, constituted the tribal council
and law-making power of the whole nation. Their
form of government was also an aristocratic one.
Pride and love of liberty, courage and a warlike
disposition were the chief characteristics of this
small but formidable people. Montezuma had vainly
tried to subdue them and to induce bold and imperious
spirits among them to usurp authority. They
stoutly maintained liberty, that noblest blessing
of humanity, against every assault, and remained
invincible. Cortes would have rejoiced to secure
such a people for his allies and decided therefore, as
soon as he reached their borders, to send a friendly
embassy, after the Indian manner, accompanied with
all the customary ceremony.

72

Four of the leading Zempoalans were selected
for this duty, and Marina undertook to deliver a
stately address to the Tlaxcalans, which she had to
learn by heart. They were arrayed in the following
manner: They put on long cloaks of a woollen
material. Upon the left arm they carried a great
shell in place of a shield, and in the right hand an
arrow with white feathers, the tip of which was
bent downward. This was a symbol of friendliness.
An arrow with red feathers would have meant
war. Thus equipped, they set out without fear,
confident no harm would come to them, but at the
same time taking the precaution not to leave the
highroad, because there alone would their dress
protect them.

73

As soon as the four messengers reached Tlaxcala
they were conducted to a building specially fitted up
with everything necessary for an audience. On the
following day they were requested by the Council,
which was in session, to deliver their message. The
assembled members, on account of their age, sat
upon low seats, made of some rare wood. With
the utmost reverence, manifested by covering their
heads with their cloaks, the messengers advanced,
holding their arrows aloft, and the councillors rose
slightly from their seats. They then bowed in their
peculiar manner and with measured steps advanced
to the centre of the apartment and sank upon their
knees, and with downcast eyes awaited permission
to speak. When this had been granted, they sat
cross-legged and Marina began her address:

74

“Noble republic! Brave and mighty people!
Your friends and allies, the caciques of Zempoala
and the mountains, send you greeting and wish for
you rich harvests and the downfall of your enemies.
Next they send you word that an extraordinary
people have come to our country from the sunrise
land. They seem more like gods than men. They
have come across the sea in great palaces and carry
in their hands for weapons the thunder and lightning
of heaven. According to their statements they are
servants of a higher God than ours, who cannot
endure tyranny or human sacrifice. Their leader
is the messenger of a very mighty monarch, who is
bound by the dictates of his religion to redress the
grievances and persecutions we have suffered from
Montezuma. This leader has freed us already.
It is now necessary that he should make his way
through your country to Mexico, and he wishes to
know in what manner this tyrant has persecuted
you so that he may defend your rights, as well as
his own, and settle other matters connected with
his journey. He comes also with friendly intentions
and desires nothing more from you than a free
passage through your country. You may be sure
he seeks only your own advantage, that his weapons
are the instruments of justice, and that those who
bear them are by nature peace-loving and will
never use their strength except against those who
first offend or attack them.”

At the conclusion of the address the messengers
rose to their knees, made a low bow in that posture,
reseated themselves cross-legged, and awaited an
answer. The councillors replied at first in an informal
way that they were grateful for the information
brought to them. They would consider Cortes’
request and give a definite answer later. Thereupon
they dismissed the messengers and began the consideration.
Opinions were divided. Some were
for peace, others for war. The leader of the war
party was Xikotenkatl, a young, bold, impetuous
man, who was only too glad of an opportunity to
draw his sword. His party was in the majority
and it was decided that the messengers should be
detained upon various pretences, while they were
making the necessary war preparations. Eight
days thus passed, and at last Cortes as well as his
allies began to have misgivings as to the cause of
the delay. It was finally decided to move forward
and ascertain what had become of the messengers
and their mission. The Spaniards had not gone
far before they encountered a troop of armed natives
who offered a stubborn resistance. A battle ensued
which ended disastrously for the natives, while
the Spaniards, protected by their armor, received
only a few trifling wounds, though the enemy outnumbered
them ten to one.

75

After this first victory Cortes continued advancing
inland, and on the following day had the satisfaction
of seeing two of his messengers approaching in the
company of some Tlaxcalans. The latter placed
the responsibility for the attack of the day before
upon their allies, the Otomis, who had begun hostilities
upon their own account and had been
punished by the loss of their bravest leader. After
this brief apology they took themselves off without
making any definite statement of their intentions.
In the meantime their mysterious conduct was soon
explained, for, on the next day, as the Spaniards
advanced nearer Tlaxcala, the other two messengers
met them in a mournful plight. They fell at
Cortes’ feet weeping, embraced his knees, and with
piteous gestures affirmed that the treacherous Tlaxcalans
had violated the sacred right of nations and
had bound them with chains to be sacrificed to their
deities. In the meantime they had succeeded in
freeing themselves in the night, but they were confident
that the Tlaxcalans were planning to sacrifice
the entire Spanish army. Cortes now knew
what to expect and resolved to face the danger,
however great it might be. He advanced at once
and before long saw a countless multitude of armed
Tlaxcalans and their auxiliaries with the fierce
Xikotenkatl at their head. The battle which ensued
was a savage one, and a slight disaster nearly involved
the destruction of Cortes’ whole force. A
Spanish cavalryman dashed so far into the dense
ranks of the enemy that he was surrounded on all
sides. He received several wounds, and his horse was
pierced so often that it fell dead. The Indians cut
off the animal’s head, stuck it upon a spear, and
carried it about triumphantly so that all might see
the monster was not invulnerable, as they had believed,
but was really dead.

76

This event inspired the Indians with indescribable
courage, and they now fought with a fury which
the Spaniards could no longer withstand. At the
instant when their utter destruction seemed inevitable,
to their great astonishment the fierce battle
cries of the natives suddenly ceased, and hostilities
came to an end. They heard the horns sounding for
retreat and beheld the whole great army of the
enemy quietly withdrawing for some mysterious
reason. This was done, the prisoners afterward
stated, because their foremost people had fallen, and
their places could not be filled at once. Meanwhile
they regarded the horse’s head as their greatest
trophy. Xikotenkatl carried it off himself and sent
it to the Council.

77

Cortes thereupon intrenched himself in a convenient
place and attempted once more to induce
the Tlaxcalans to come to a peaceful agreement.
He despatched some of the prisoners to make offers
of peace as well as to warn them of the dreadful
consequences they might expect in case they continued
hostilities. Xikotenkatl was so furious at
his offers that he mutilated the messengers shamefully
and drove them back to the Spanish camp to
notify the general that he would appear the next
morning with a countless force, capture his entire
army, and sacrifice it to his deities. The news was
not very consoling, but it was accompanied by something
that considerably sweetened its bitterness.
Xikotenkatl at the same time sent three hundred
Indian fowls and a great quantity of other provisions
so as to get the enemy in good condition
before he slaughtered them. The Spaniards laughed
at his bombastic folly and relished the gifts which
gave them fresh strength for the morrow’s struggle.
Xikotenkatl was as good as his word. He appeared
at daybreak with a multitude of warriors, and the
battle began anew with extraordinary fury on both
sides. The issue for a long time seemed in doubt,
but at last European skill prevailed in spite of the
hordes of the enemy and their desperate courage.
The Tlaxcalans gave way, and the Spaniards held
the field.

78

But even this third defeat failed completely to
daunt these warlike people. They were now more
than ever convinced that the Europeans, all and
every one of them, were wizards who could not
be vanquished in the usual way and that the magic
of their enemies must be thwarted by the arts
of their own magicians. They had some priestly
impostors who told them that with their spells they
could see into the future and perform divers feats
surpassing human power. They were called into
Council and offered the following advice: The
Spaniards are the Children of the Sun. By day
their mother strengthens them with her rays and
they are invincible. But at night, when the sun
loses her maternal influence, their superhuman power
disappears and they are no stronger than ordinary
beings.

The superstitious Tlaxcalans did not doubt the
truth of this for an instant and hastened to avail
themselves of the discovery by making a night
attack. But Cortes was too watchful and far-sighted
to be surprised by such an enemy. He stationed
his outposts carefully so that he might have instant
intelligence of their moves and be prepared to
meet them. When the Tlaxcalans made their
attack they found the Spaniards already under
arms and although they fought desperately they
were at last driven back with great loss. These
poor people were now in a state of utter perplexity.
They were convinced the Spaniards were super-human,
else, how was it that in all the battles they
lost thousands and the Spaniards not a single man?

79

But the problem which troubled them most was
the goodness or badness of their own divinities. The
first thing which impressed itself upon them was
the necessity of getting rid of their deceitful sorcerers
and doing away with human sacrifice. Their next
step was to send an imposing delegation to pray
for peace. It was composed of their most distinguished
people, who went to the Spanish camp in
their ceremonial dresses, adorned with white feathers,
the symbol of peace, and at a distance made signs
of their extreme reverence. From time to time
they stopped and touched first the earth and then
their lips. This ceremony was repeated several
times until they reached the intrenchments, before
which they burned incense and repeated the signs
of reverence already described. Cortes received
them with a haughty dignity, in order to impress
them with dread, and ordered them to speak. They
obeyed, and their first remarkable utterance was
this:

“Be you cruel and vengeful divinities, we deliver
to you these five slaves that you may drink their
blood and eat of their flesh. Be you gentle gods,
we give you an offering of incense and white feathers.
Be you men, we offer you meat and bread and fruits
for your nourishment.”

80

They further declared that they had come to ask
forgiveness for the past hostility of their people
and at the same time to supplicate for peace. Cortes,
still retaining his haughty demeanor, bitterly reproached
them for their contemptuous rejection
of his friendly advances, but added that he was
ready to forget the past if they, from that time
forward, would remain quiet and make compensation
for the offences they had committed. With
these words he dismissed them. As soon as his
answer was taken to Tlaxcala, the Council issued
a general order to all the people thereabout that
they should supply the camp of these wonderful
strangers with subsistence and refrain from taking
pay for it. The order was obeyed with a willingness
and promptness which surprised the Spaniards.
Two days later a great and imposing procession was
seen approaching the camp from Tlaxcala. The
attire of the natives showed it was peaceful of intention
and Cortes ordered it to be received without the
slightest hint of distrust.

81

At the head of this delegation was the brave
Xikotenkatl, his attendants being fifty of the foremost
of the people in splendid attire. He wore
a long, white, military cloak which was richly
adorned with feathers and precious stones. He was
tall and slender, active and nervous, and his personal
appearance indicated dignity and courage.
After making obeisance to the Spanish commander in
the fashion of the country, he seated himself in the
most informal manner, without even asking permission,
and declared in a manly way that he was
alone responsible for the hostilities which had occurred,
because he had supposed that the Spaniards
were supporting Montezuma, his enemy. He surrendered
himself willingly, therefore, into the hands
of his conqueror, and would take upon himself all
the responsibility for his acts, and asked forgiveness,
and would agree to maintain peace in the name of
the Council, the nobility, and the people. The city of
Tlaxcala stood ready to receive Cortes and his whole
army and entertain them hospitably. Cortes was
delighted with the frank, bold, open-hearted manner
of the young warrior and could not help expressing
his esteem for him. But he did not refrain from
reproaching him for the bitter opposition he had
made, ending with the assurance that in a few days
he would accept the invitation to go to Tlaxcala.

82

In the meantime messengers from Montezuma
arrived with new gifts and with fresh protests
against Cortes’ determination to go to Mexico.
Their principal object, however, was to prevent
Cortes from making an alliance with the Tlaxcalans.
To this end they told dreadful stories of the faithlessness
of that people. Cortes, however, did not
heed their warnings, being confident he had just as
little reason to fear their secret plans as open hostility
in the field. The Tlaxcalans were much disturbed
because Cortes did not come to them immediately,
and concluded that Montezuma’s messengers had
prejudiced him against them. To remove all grounds
for suspicion the entire Council decided to go to
the camp and offer themselves as hostages. The
procession moved with great stateliness. All were
arrayed in white garments of peace, and each one
of the officials was borne in a kind of litter. The
most conspicuous person in this dignified company
was Xikotenkatl’s father, a venerable old man, who
was blind but still intellectually vigorous. He seated
himself next to Cortes, embraced him with a noble
kind of frankness, and touched his face and body to
get some idea of his appearance. The speech which
he made is so impressive and beautiful that it merits
preservation as a sample of manly eloquence. He
spoke as follows:

83

“Magnanimous General! Whether you are of
the race of the immortals or not, you have the high
Council of Tlaxcala in your power, and it gives you
herewith the great symbols of its obedience. We
have no desire to excuse the faults of our nation,
but only express the hope that our sincerity will
mitigate your anger. We have not only abandoned
our purpose of making war upon you, but we have
also decided to pray for peace. We know that
Montezuma is seeking to secure you as an ally.
But if you listen to him you must remember he is
our enemy. We do not ask you to assist us against
him. We are strong enough to defend ourselves,
but it will grieve us if you believe his promises, for
we know his deceitfulness and, although I am blind,
I see a sure light revealing to me the disaster which
will overtake you. You will have peace with us if
Montezuma does not prevent it. Why should he restrain
you? Why should you not grant our prayer?
Why will you not honor our city with your presence?
We are fully resolved either to win your friendship
and confidence or to leave our freedom in your
hands. Choose now which you prefer, for no middle
course is of any avail to us. We must either be
your good friends or your bondmen.”

84

Who could resist such an appeal from such an
old man? Cortes could not. He replied that he
would grant their every wish. He asked only that
they should furnish him people to carry the baggage
and heavy ammunition. On the following morning
six hundred burden bearers appeared who contested
for the honor of carrying the heaviest loads. The
entrance of the Spaniards into Tlaxcala resembled
a triumph. The streets were filled with great multitudes.
There was such shouting and jubilation
that one could not hear himself speak. Young
maidens covered the strangers with flowers. The
priests appeared in their ceremonial robes and
burned incense. The entire Council and the leaders
of the people met them and welcomed them. Everywhere
confidence, peace, and harmony prevailed.
A fitting residence was ready for their sacred guest,
whom they called Teules, or divinity. Cortes, as
soon as he occupied it, stationed sentinels at all
the approaches. This troubled the Tlaxcalans, who
regarded it as a sign of distrust, but when they were
informed that this was the custom of European
soldiers, even in times of peace, they were no longer
alarmed, and Xikotenkatl himself introduced the
practice in his own army. Cortes recognized more
and more the great advantage the friendship of
this martial nation would be to him. He therefore
ordered his men to treat them in a just and friendly
manner, and he himself adopted every means in his
power to strengthen the confidence and respect he
had already gained.

85

Chapter VII

March to the Sacred City of Cholula—The Natives Plot the Destruction of the Spaniards—Cortes Discovers their Treachery and Slaughters Several Thousand Indians—March to Mexico—Montezuma Meets the Strangers and Escorts them to the Capital

The Spaniards rested a little in Tlaxcala after
their exertions and their life among the natives
was very peaceable. Several daughters
of caciques married prominent Spanish officers, and
from these unions distinguished Spanish noblemen
have sprung. The caciques did not offer their
daughters in marriage to Cortes, for they thought he
was married to Marina, or Malinace, he appeared so
often in her company.

86

But days of rest must have an end. Cortes began
preparations for the advance to Mexico with his
army and an auxiliary force of six thousand brave
Tlaxcalans. While thus engaged, another delegation
from Montezuma appeared. They brought
costly gifts upon golden platters of beautiful workmanship,
and richly embroidered fabrics of linen
and feather work. The messengers spoke timidly
and hesitatingly. They begged Cortes not to enter
into an alliance with the low and barbarous Tlaxcalans,
but to go alone with his army to Cholula,
[7]

as the Emperor had given orders he should be fitly
received there and his soldiers properly cared for.
The Tlaxcalans regarded this invitation with suspicion.
They were sure that Montezuma meditated
treachery and begged Cortes not to expose himself
to the danger awaiting him at Cholula. Cortes
thanked his Indian friends for their solicitude, but
assured them that European soldiers were not in
the habit of avoiding any danger, however great it
might be. He broke camp at once and marched to
Cholula.

87

The reception he met was unusually friendly and
respectful. The Tlaxcalan auxiliaries, being sworn
enemies of the Cholulans, were not allowed to enter
the city and were obliged to occupy a convenient
spot outside the walls. They had already learned
from their European friends how to intrench themselves,
and they at once put their knowledge into
practice. After a few days of rest, events gradually
occurred which confirmed the suspicions of the
Tlaxcalans. Provisions were supplied sparingly,
the authorities displayed more coolness, and Montezuma’s
representatives had frequent interviews with
them. Two Tlaxcalans shortly appeared, who had
stolen into the city in disguise and informed Cortes
they had seen a multitude of women and children
fleeing by night to adjacent places and that they
learned from them that six young children had been
sacrificed in a principal temple,—a custom always
observed when any hostile movement was to be
undertaken. They advised him, therefore, to be
on his guard against attack. While Cortes was now
using the utmost watchfulness to discover the secret
purposes of the Cholulans, chance suddenly revealed
the whole matter. A prominent Cholulan woman
had conceived an unusual attachment for Marina,
the interpreter. She was anxious to save her new
friend from the universal massacre, which had been
planned, and told her confidentially of the bloody
designs of her people so that she might escape before
it was too late. Marina, who was both shrewd
and heartily devoted to the Spaniards, pretended
she would follow the warnings of the Indian woman
and induced her to disclose the whole plot without
reserve. She learned that upon the day fixed for
the massacre a force of Mexican soldiers would be
concealed in the neighborhood of Cholula, for the
purpose of rushing in at the appointed time, obstructing
the streets by filling them with holes, lightly
covered, into which horses would stumble and fall,
and conveying great quantities of stones and other
missiles to the roofs of houses and temples to be
showered down upon the Spaniards, thus making
their destruction inevitable.

88

Marina hastened to bring the news to her friend
Cortes and the latter lost no time in devising means
to prevent the disaster which threatened him.
His first step was to persuade the Indian woman and
two high priests by threats and bribes to make a
full confession of the plot. Then he decided to set
such an example of revenge that Montezuma and
his followers would never again engage in such an
undertaking. To effect this, he drew up his people
and the Zempoalans in battle order in the courtyard
of the large building which had been assigned him as
quarters. The Tlaxcalans were instructed to enter the
city when they heard the first shot and under various
pretences decoy the principal Cholulan leaders
to the Spanish quarters where they would be arrested.
Everything being arranged, Cortes gave the signal for
attack and the massacre began.

89

The Spaniards and Zempoalans advanced, and
the Tlaxcalans at the same time entered the city.
Furiously they swept through the streets from all
sides and countless corpses marked the course of the
destroyers. The native leaders stood as if thunderstruck
and hardly dared to raise their trembling
hands in defence. The Mexican force advanced to
protect them, but it was easily overcome. To escape
the sword, they and many of the natives sought
shelter in a temple. Cortes led his men there in
close ranks and loudly shouted that all who would
come out and surrender in good faith should be
spared. Only one person availed himself of the offer,
the rest preferring apparently to die rather than
submit. Cortes then proceeded to the commission
of a deed from which we turn our eyes with pity
and horror and at which humanity will always
shudder. He fired the temple, and the multitude
of unfortunates in it were victims of the flames.
This horrible massacre went on two whole days—two
days of rapine, fire, and slaughter, but women
and children were spared by Cortes’ order. At last
revenge seemed complete, the lust of plunder was
satiated, and the bloody deed ended. The leaders,
who had been made prisoners, were released. Cortes
upbraided them for their treachery which had made
the massacre necessary, and ordered them to recall
the fugitive natives and restore the former order.
Universal pardon was proclaimed and an idolatrous
respect for the Spaniards and fear of their terrible
power soon took possession of the Cholulans who had
survived. In a few days the devastated city was
once more crowded with natives, humbly submissive
to the murderers of their kindred and destroyers of
their temple.

90

Fourteen days had hardly passed since the entrance
of the Spaniards into Cholula before Cortes decided
to resume his march to the capital, without further
loss of time. The army set out. Cortes was active at
every spot where his presence was necessary, now in
the advance, now in the rear, encouraging the weak,
urging on the laggards, and striving to inspire each
one with the enthusiasm he himself felt. He never
failed to make the rounds at night to see if every
one was at his post. Upon one occasion his watchfulness
came near proving fatal. He came too near
a sentinel who did not recognize him in the darkness
and aimed his cross-bow at him. His quick
outcry of the watchword for the night alone saved
him.

91

The army advanced vigorously, and the farther
it penetrated the country, the more reason Cortes
had to expect a successful issue to his undertaking.
Everywhere he heard complaints of Montezuma’s
tyranny and cruelty. Everywhere he found governors
ready to shake off his yoke. The Spaniards
soon left the pleasant, level country, their way
leading through the mountainous region, which
divides the great tablelands of Mexico and Puebla.
[8]

The higher they ascended, the sharper and more
piercing grew the air, and the wind which swept
down the frozen mountain sides made the soldiers
shiver, even in their thick woollen uniforms, and
benumbed the limbs of men and horses. Their road
led them between two of the highest mountains of
the North American continent, Popocatepetl,
[9]
or
“Smoking Mountain,” and Iztaccihuatl,
[10]
or the
“White Lady.” The natives held the former mountain
sacred to their divinities and for this reason
had never made an attempt to ascend it, but the
mysterious dread with which the place was invested
and the unconquerable love of adventure made
some of the Spanish knights eager to accomplish
a feat which the natives considered impossible and
involving the lives of those who attempted it.
Cortes encouraged them for he was anxious to convince
the Indians that his followers never flinched
from any danger. A captain, Ordaz by name, nine
Spaniards, and some of the Tlaxcalans, who had
plucked up courage by this time, undertook the
ascent. After overcoming many obstacles and dangers,
they reached the height of thirteen thousand
feet. At this point the Indians, alarmed by a
strange subterranean rumbling of the volcano, would
go no farther. The Europeans, however, advanced
to the vicinity of the crater, but the smoke, sparks,
and ashes from the burning interior forced them to
return.

92

The army continued its march among hills and
through ravines. After great exertions a sight
met their eyes which compensated them for their
trials and filled them all with delight. A vast
and beautiful country lay before them, and in the
midst of it a lake, which looked like the sea. Along
this lake were many stately cities and towns, and
in their midst the queen of them all, the far-away glistening
capital, splendid with its many temples and
towers.
[11]
They had reached the valley of Mexico,
or Tenochtitlan,
[12]
as the natives call it. At first
view of this magnificent region the astonished
Europeans stood as if uncertain whether they were
awake or dreaming. All their past dangers disappeared
like mists vanishing before the sun, and
they were ready now for anything that might happen.
Cortes observed their enthusiasm with delight
and cautiously advanced along the shore of the
lake toward the stately capital.

93

Suddenly a great crowd of people appeared coming
from the capital toward them. There were over
a thousand, evidently persons of distinction as they
wore elegant cloaks and tufts of feathers. They
approached the Spanish army in respectful stillness,
and each of them displayed his deepest reverence
for the general, as they informed him that
Montezuma himself was drawing near. The vanguard
of the capital next appeared, two hundred
in number, uniformly costumed and decorated with
feathers. These came barefooted in pairs, and,
as soon as they reached the head of the Spanish
army, stationed themselves so as to afford
a view of the glistening ranks of court attendants
in whose midst Montezuma
[13]
himself was conspicuous
in a golden sedan chair. Four of the leading
personages of the Empire bore it upon their
shoulders. Others held a beautifully constructed
canopy over him, which seemed to be made of some
fine material embroidered with silver and adorned
with green feathers. In advance of this brilliant
procession went three magisterial persons with
golden staves which they raised ceremoniously
from time to time. At this signal all prostrated
themselves and covered their faces as if they were
unworthy to look upon the person of their exalted
monarch.

94

As soon as the procession was sufficiently near,
Cortes dismounted from his horse and hastened to
pay his respects to the monarch. The latter at the
same time stepped from his chair and rested, leaning
upon the shoulders of two princes, then advanced
with slow and stately stride to meet the dreaded
stranger, walking upon carpets which his followers
laid down so that his feet should not touch the
ground. Cortes met him cordially and greeted him
with a low bow after the European manner. Montezuma
replied to the greeting with an obeisance
which in his country was significant of the highest
respect. He kissed his own hand and then touched
the ground with it. This condescension from the
proudest of monarchs, who was accustomed to greet
even the images of his divinities with a careless nod
of the head, greatly astonished the Mexicans and
induced the conviction that these strangers were
divine and not human beings. The word “Teules”
(gods) was constantly on their lips. Cortes wore
over his armor a necklace set with paste stones which
he intended to give the Emperor. As soon as the
ceremony of greeting was over, he took this false
ornament and hung it about the neck of Montezuma.
The Emperor appeared pleased at this attention and
ordered one of his own costly ornaments to be
brought—a necklace of very rare shells, from each
of which on both sides depended four golden crabs.
He handed this decoration to his guest, which still
further increased the astonishment of his people.

Montezuma appeared to be about forty years
of age. He was of medium size and rather thin.
He had a very majestic appearance, a pleasing countenance,
and in color was not so brownish yellow
as the rest of the Mexicans. He wore a long cloak
of fine woollen stuff which was literally covered with
ornaments, pearls, and gems. A golden crown, much
resembling a bishop’s mitre, comprised his headdress.
His shoes were made of solid gold plates
fastened with straps and gold buckles.

MEETING OF CORTES AND MONTEZUMA

95

The entry was now made with his guest. The city
was large and populous. According to the Spanish
historians it had twenty thousand flat houses or
adobes and a multitude of temples and palaces which
in size and splendor exceeded anything ever seen
before in the New World. One of the largest of
these so-called palaces was assigned to Cortes as his
headquarters, and Montezuma accompanied him
there. As soon as they arrived he left, in order to
have time for rest, as he said, and, as he was going
away, begged Cortes to make himself as much at
home as if he were among his own brethren.

Cortes stationed sentinels as usual and placed
cannon at all the approaches to the palace and ordered
his officers and soldiers not to relax their vigilance.

96

Chapter VIII

Religious Rites of the Mexicans—Human Sacrifices—The Natives Discover that the Spaniards are not Divine but Human

On the evening of the same day Montezuma
and his brilliant retinue returned to make
the first visit to their much honored guest.
As soon as Cortes was notified of his approach, he
went to the courtyard, received him with a low bow,
and conducted him to his apartment. The Mexican
Emperor seated himself familiarly and requested the
general to be seated also. His attendants ranged
themselves at the side of the room and the Spaniards
did the same. Marina, the interpreter, was
stationed near by, and the Emperor began a ceremonious
address, in which he made a strenuous
effort to remove any prejudice which Cortes might
entertain against him, growing out of harmful
reports. “Some have said,” he stated, “that I
belong to the immortal gods, others have striven
to calumniate me, representing me as a haughty and
cruel tyrant. The first of these reports is as false
as the other. The refutation of the one will expose
the falsity of the other.” With these words, he
bared his arm and requested Cortes to convince
himself by sight and touch that he was made of
flesh and blood like other men—a fact of which
Cortes had no doubt. After this he continued his
assurances that the reports of his tyranny, with
which his enemies had sought to prejudice Cortes
against him, were unfounded. After these preliminaries
he expressed his sentiments as to the
arrival of the Spaniards and the object of their
visit in the following words:

97

“We know from traditions which have come down
to us from old times that our ancestors came from
a distant region and conquered those countries which
are to-day subject to my authority. Their leader
was the great Quetzalcoatl,
[14]
who, after he had
established our Empire, left this part of the world
again to take possession of other regions toward
the east. But he prophesied that some time a
people descended from him would come to us and
change our laws and whole system of government.
Now I see from all that has been told of your coming
here, and from what I myself have observed, that
you are the descendants of that great ancestor. For
this reason I have received you not as strangers but
as kindred, and declare to you that we recognize you
as the representative of the great Eastern ruler and
that your authority will not be disputed by me or
my people.”

98

Cortes rejoiced at this news which was favorable
to his intentions. He confirmed the superstitious
Montezuma in his belief and satisfied him that the
prophecy of the great Quetzalcoatl had been fulfilled
and that he and his Spaniards were his descendants.
“In the meantime,” he added, “while
it is evident that the exalted monarch of the East,
whose most humble servant I have the honor to be,
has a just claim upon all your countries, yet he is
too far away personally to assert his claim. He
only desires of you and your people that you shall
abandon your errors and accept the true faith which
he has commissioned me to announce. You are
living under a false religion. You are worshipping
senseless blocks, made by your own hands. There
is but one true God, and He has created and governs
everything that is. This one Being, who is without
beginning and without end, has made out of nothing
the whole universe, the flaming sun which shines
upon all, the earth and all that is in it, and the first
man, from whom we are all descended. We are all
obliged to recognize the First Cause of all things,
and for that reason the King, my master, invites
you, great Emperor, and all your people to accept
these sentiments and maintain affectionate and
brotherly relations with him. He desires you to
enter into a friendly alliance which will always be
of great advantage to you.”

99

Montezuma was visibly excited by Cortes’ address.
It was so intolerable to hear his deities insulted that
it was with difficulty he could restrain his impatience
until Cortes ended. Then he arose somewhat hastily
and replied that while he gratefully accepted the offer
of friendly relations with a prince descended from
Quetzalcoatl, these relations might be maintained
without giving up his own deities for the God whom
the Spaniards worshipped. With these words he
closed the interview and, after bestowing some costly
gifts, made his way back to his palace.

On the next day, accompanied by his leading officers,
Cortes went with much ceremony for another
interview with the Emperor. This one lasted longer
than the first. Montezuma asked a hundred questions
about the European mode of life, habits, and
customs, but Cortes, who had not these matters so
much at heart as the work of conversion, seized
every opportunity to give the conversation a religious
turn, and specially inveighed against the cruel
custom of human sacrifices. At the close of the
interview Montezuma exhibited to his guests the
splendors of the temples. He conducted them to
the largest of these, and the priests offered no
objection to their admission upon condition that
nothing unseemly should be done. Montezuma
himself exhibited and explained everything to them.
He told the names of the deities, the highest of
which was called Bitzliputzli, and described the
worship which was paid to each of them. As these
heathenish rites were inexpressibly shocking, Cortes
asked permission to place the Cross of Christ in
the temple, thinking that it would soon convince
them that their deities were powerless. Montezuma
listened to the proposal with the greatest
displeasure, and the priests with amazement. The
Emperor soon recovered his composure, however,
and merely replied that he had expected his guests
would show the same respect for the place where
they were that they had shown to him. With
these words he passed out, telling the Spaniards
they were at liberty to repair to their own quarters,
but as for himself he would remain to ask
pardon of his deities for his extraordinary patience.

100

The natives of Mexico professed a horrible religion,
of which human sacrifice was the principal feature.
They often made war upon neighboring people for
no other purpose than to capture prisoners to be
slaughtered upon their altars and afterward eaten.
During battle they spared the lives of their enemies,
saving them for a more terrible death by the knives
of the priests. The number of these unfortunate
victims sometimes reached thousands in a single day.
Some historians have placed it as high as twenty-five
thousand. If the nation were at peace for a
long time and no prisoners were available for offerings,
the priests would notify the Emperor that the
deities were suffering from hunger. As soon as the
Emperor’s proclamation spread the news through
the country that the deities were ready for a banquet,
it was the signal for a general war upon their
neighbors. Then as soon as a sufficient number of
prisoners had been collected, the priests began their
hideous business. It cannot be denied that the
various calamities which befell the natives at the
hands of the tyrannical Europeans were a very great
wrong, but, as compared with the terrible cruelties
practised before their arrival, it must be acknowledged
that these unfortunate people upon the whole
gained more than they lost by submission to the
Spanish yoke.

101

Cortes’ delight over the successful progress of his
undertaking up to this time was now disturbed by
reflections upon the dangerous situation into which
he had so recklessly plunged. He realized all too
clearly that he had ventured more than he might
be able to carry out, and that the fate of himself
and his army rested in the hands of a prince whose
real intentions seemed to grow more and more mysterious.
The Tlaxcalans from the beginning had
not ceased to warn him that Montezuma’s object in
receiving him in his capital was to catch him in a
trap from which there was no way of escape. The
disposition of this ruler and the peculiar situation
of his capital lent probability to these warnings.
Should they destroy the causeways located along
the lake, which were the only approaches to the
city, he saw that he would be completely cut off
from the rest of the world and surrounded by a
multitude against whose superior numbers neither
his courage nor his weapons might be of any avail.
In this emergency a very unpleasant event had
occurred at Vera Cruz, of which Cortes received
information shortly before this time.

102

Quauhpopoka, one of the Mexican generals, after
Cortes’ departure for that region, determined to
punish those people who had revolted and placed
themselves under the protection of the Spaniards.
Escalante, the governor of Vera Cruz, considered
himself bound to assist his allies. At the head of his
little band and with the two remaining horses he
offered battle. He held his ground, but he himself
and seven others were fatally wounded. The most
unfortunate event of the battle was the killing of
one of the horses and the capture of one of his men.
The Mexicans killed their prisoner at once and sent
his head to various cities as a proof that the Spaniards
were not immortal. At last their trophy
reached the capital. Cortes, who naturally was disturbed
by the dangers confronting him, spent that
night in earnest consideration of methods to escape
them. Toward morning he summoned some of his
faithful Tlaxcalans to ascertain just what they had
seen or heard of Montezuma’s secret designs. Their
statements confirmed his suspicions as well as his
determination to carry out the plan he had settled
upon. They specially informed him that the leading
officials had acted mysteriously for several days,
that the head of a Spaniard had been sent among the
provinces, and that Montezuma had issued orders
to conceal it. Finally they declared they had heard
that preparations were already being made to destroy
the causeways.

103

This was enough for Cortes. His decision was
made, and he endeavored to convince his officers that
there was no other way of escape except that which
he had planned.

104

Chapter IX

Montezuma is Made a Prisoner—Quauhpopoka and His Leaders Burned—The Mexicans Swear Allegiance to the King of Spain

Cortes summoned his officers to a council
of war and set before them the great danger
to which they would be exposed in case
Montezuma attacked them. They recognized at
once that the situation must be met. Some were
of opinion they should leave the city entirely and
cross the causeways before their road was cut off.
Others suggested that they should retire with the
knowledge of the Emperor. Both these measures,
however, appeared unwise, since any withdrawal
would seem like flight and would involve not only a
battle with the Mexicans but also the contempt
of their allies. Cortes announced a plan, inspired
by the highest daring in the face of a desperate
situation. He would make Montezuma a prisoner,
leaving him an appearance of sovereignty, but
actually ruling in his name. The deed of Quauhpopoka,
for which the Emperor was responsible,
would furnish justification for his imprisonment.
After the council had approved this project, preparations
were made to carry it out. The whole force
was placed under arms in the closed courtyard
in readiness at the first signal to go to the help of
the general. Some small detachments were ordered
to occupy the streets leading to Montezuma’s palace,
which would not create excitement, as the people
were used to seeing armed Spaniards. When the
hour came in which Cortes was accustomed to
wait upon the Emperor, he betook himself with
five officers and thirty of the bravest men in his
army to the palace. This also aroused no suspicion,
for a military escort was a common spectacle.

105

Cortes as usual was courteously received and was
conducted to Montezuma’s apartment with his officers
and interpreter. The servants withdrew and the
venturesome scene began. With a countenance expressive
of the highest indignation Cortes denounced
the faithless act of Quauhpopoka, who, at a time of
peace, and in defiance of justice, had attacked his
people and allies, inhumanly slaughtered a Spaniard,
and sent his head through the country as a show.
He added that report made Montezuma himself responsible
for this and therefore he was forced to
demand satisfaction for the insult which had been
offered to his master, the greatest monarch of the
earth.

106

Montezuma was so terrified that he turned pale,
but he declared by all that was most sacred he was
in no way responsible for the outrage. As a proof of
his innocence he added that he would at once order
Quauhpopoka and his accomplices to be brought to
Mexico in chains. Cortes thereupon assumed a more
friendly attitude and assured Montezuma that as far
as he himself was concerned he was entirely content,
but to satisfy his enraged soldiers he would have to
demand more. They would never be persuaded that
such a deed could have happened without the Emperor’s
knowledge if he did not agree publicly to
prove his good faith and sincere friendship. The
proof which they demanded was his presence for several
days in their quarters where they might offer
fitting honors to His Majesty.

Montezuma was beside himself with astonishment
and indignation at this unusual demand. He was
unable to speak and stood like a statue, while Cortes
represented to him that this request of his soldiers
was not unseemly as he would spend the time in
quarters assigned to him in one of his own palaces.
At last the astonished man came to himself and
found words to express his indignation. With great
dignity he said: “A sovereign of the Mexican Empire
is not accustomed voluntarily to accept imprisonment,
and, even if I were capable of it, my subjects
would never submit to such shameful treatment.”

Cortes, who was reluctant to use force, both
flattered and threatened Montezuma to induce him
to give his consent, but it was in vain. At last,
after three hours had been wasted in useless talk,
Velasquez De Leon, one of the Spanish officers,
a young, excitable man, whose patience was exhausted,
exclaimed with threatening gestures: “Why
all this consideration? Take him by force or kill
him.” Montezuma asked what he had said. Marina
informed him and added that she trembled for his
life if he refused to go. The poor man at once lost
all courage. He realized that he was in the power
of strong men and that he must expect the worst
if he longer refused. He yielded to his fate, sprang
from his seat, and informed Cortes he trusted to his
assurances and would go with him.

MONTEZUMA THE CAPTIVE OF THE SPANIARDS

107

Thereupon he called together his leading officials
and informed them that for important reasons he
should spend a few days with his guest. They were
greatly astonished but did not venture to offer
the least objection to the absolute will of their
master. They carried the litter in which the unfortunate
monarch was borne away from his own
people, a prisoner under Spanish guard. Hardly
was his removal known in the city before the streets
were filled with crowds. Some shrieked, others
wept, others threw themselves upon the ground as
if in their last despairing agony. But Montezuma
tried to calm them. He appeared with a smiling
countenance, motioned to them with his hand, and
assured them he was not a prisoner. He was
voluntarily going to visit this guest for a few days.
This quieted them somewhat, and the Spaniards
proceeded without hindrance to their quarters with
their prisoner. Montezuma went to an apartment
he was accustomed to occupy and the attendants
treated him with the utmost respect, as their general
had ordered. His first act was to send an order in
Cortes’ presence to his body-guard, to bring Quauhpopoka
and the rest of the guilty ones in chains
to the city.

108

In due time Quauhpopoka, his son, and five of his
principal people were brought to Mexico. Cortes
called a council of war and the unfortunates were
condemned to be burned alive. As soon as the
decision was made, in order to humble this submissive
monarch to the utmost and make a mockery
of his former power, Cortes, in sight of all the
people, arbitrarily emptied Montezuma’s arsenal of
the great quantity of spears, shields, and other
weapons kept there, in order to make a pyre of it
upon which to burn the victims, who were not guilty
of crime for they had only done what their master
had ordered. The weapons collected for the protection
of the Empire were heaped up. A countless
multitude of dazed spectators stood there, not knowing
what to say or do. The awful sacrifice was
made.

109

At the same instant Cortes, accompanied by several
officers and a soldier carrying iron fetters, went to
Montezuma’s apartment. He approached the terrified
monarch and fiercely thundered at him that he
was the malefactor, for he was the author of the
outrages perpetrated by these victims. Hardly had
he spoken these words when he turned his back
upon the man fallen so low from his former high
estate, and the soldier placed the fetters upon the
Emperor. Montezuma stood speechless, helpless,
almost senseless. At last he broke into a loud wail,
evidently expecting they would immediately lead
him also to the place of punishment. But what
made this piteous scene most touching was the
demeanor of his faithful attendants, who prostrated
themselves in silent grief at his feet, bedewing
them with their tears. They raised his fetters to
lighten their weight and placed little pieces of soft
cloth between the iron and his skin that his precious
limbs might not feel the pressure. It was a sight
to bring tears of sympathy to the eyes of the most
hard-hearted spectator.

The punishment having been inflicted, Cortes
approached Montezuma in a friendly manner and
said that justice was satisfied. With these words
he ordered his fetters taken off. The distracted and
humiliated monarch was wellnigh overcome with
delight. He embraced his oppressor over and over
as he expressed his gratitude for his release. The
unfortunate monarch in his excess of joy seemed to
forget that the fetters taken from him now might
soon be fastened more firmly than ever.

110

Cortes now made one bold move after another
to bring the Mexican people into complete subjection.
He sent some of his officers through the country,
partly to learn the extent and nature of each province
and partly to discover the places where gold and
silver were to be found. He also persuaded Montezuma,
under various pretences, to remove the ablest
and most courageous of his officials and appoint
in their places weak and unintelligent men who
could easily be managed by the Spaniards. Then
he made a last humiliating demand in his efforts
to crush Montezuma’s proud spirit. It was that
he should publicly acknowledge himself a vassal
of the Spanish King and bind himself to pay an
annual tribute as a sign of his subjection. What
could Montezuma do? His liberty, his life, were in
the hands of Cortes. He realized that he must
concede every demand, however exacting.

111

He summoned the notables of his Empire, reminded
them of the old prophecy which was now
fulfilled, and announced that from now on he and
his Empire were subject to the great King of the
East to whom sovereignty had descended from their
common ancestor. With these words, the tears
came to his eyes, showing how great was the sacrifice
he was making. There was a low murmur
among the assembled Mexicans. Astonishment and
indignation were visible on every face, and they
appeared ready to maintain the rights of the Empire
and their sovereign by force. But Cortes allayed
their anger and prevented any outbreak by assuring
them his master had no intention of taking his
Empire from Montezuma but would be contented
to become its protector. This assurance as well
as their Emperor’s demeanor quieted them, and the
ceremonies which the Spaniards had arranged to
make Montezuma’s subjection the more impressive
were completed without interruption. Montezuma
confirmed his allegiance by making a handsome gift
and ordered the caciques of his country to do the
same.

112

Chapter X

Division of the Spoils—Cortes Attempts to Introduce Christianity—Narvaez is Sent by Velasquez to Depose Cortes—Cortes Advances against Him

Now that mighty Mexico had become a Spanish
Province, Cortes next proceeded to allot the
collected spoils. They were divided into
five parts. One was assigned to the King of Spain;
the second to himself, as commander; the third was
set apart as indemnity for those who had paid for
their own equipment; and the remainder was given
to the army. The share for each soldier and sailor
was not as large as had been expected, which caused
general dissatisfaction, but Cortes promptly quieted
them by presenting them with a part of the treasure
which properly belonged to him.

113

The unfortunate Montezuma, as we have seen,
had conceded all the demands made upon him, but
to the great surprise of Cortes there was one which
he firmly and steadfastly declined to yield. This
was the abandonment of the religious belief of himself
and his people. Neither flattery nor threats
moved him. Cortes, no longer able to endure its
hideous cruelties, went to Montezuma with some of
his officers and demanded that room should be made
for the Christian service in the principal temple.
Montezuma was greatly surprised at the demand
and replied that the Mexicans would never permit
such a desecration of their temple, that resistance
would be made, and much bloodshed would result,
so great was their fear of the wrath of their deities.
But when Cortes announced he would be satisfied
if one tower were set apart for the Christian service,
Montezuma answered that he would consult the
priests about the matter. Their decision was favorable,
and the use of one of the sacred towers was
granted. The news occasioned great joy in the
Spanish quarters. The sacred place was cleared of
its revolting impurities, an altar was erected with
a cross and image of the Virgin upon it, and the
walls were newly decorated. The soldiers entered
in festal procession, the mass was heard, and the

Te Deum
sung with tears of gratitude. Thus the
sweet tones of divine love and mercy mingled with
the wild songs of the Indian priests in honor of
Anahuak, a war god.

114

This unnatural situation could not long continue.
The Mexicans were greatly outraged because their
religion was trodden under foot. They realized
more clearly than ever the haughty insolence of
these strangers, and they began to consider plans for
their removal. The priests and leading men, who
were present at private interviews with the imprisoned
Emperor more frequently than of late, implored
revenge for their insulted deities, and Montezuma’s
condition thus grew more dangerous and distressed.
What should he do? Whither should he turn? At
last he aroused himself and decided to take a middle
course which wisdom pointed out as the safest.
With this object in view, he summoned Cortes.
The latter, whose suspicions had already been
aroused by these private interviews of the priests
and leading men with Montezuma, took the precaution
of having twelve of his bravest men accompany
him. His suspicions were confirmed when he
entered Montezuma’s apartment and observed a
seriousness of expression on his face which he had
never seen before. He was still more surprised
when Montezuma seized his hand, drew him aside,
and in an almost menacing tone said to him that,
as the object for which his master had sent him was
now accomplished, he hoped he would hasten his
departure.

115

At this unexpected reply, and moved still more
by the dark look and decisive manner which accompanied
it, Cortes turned to his men and quietly
ordered them to have the entire force under arms
at once. Then with the utmost composure and
indifference of manner he turned to Montezuma and
replied that there was nothing he wished more
heartily than to return to his fatherland, but, as all
his vessels were destroyed, he must build others
and would have to request the necessary assistance.
Montezuma could not conceal his delight. He embraced
Cortes, overwhelmed him with caresses, and
assured him that his declaration would satisfy his
priests and his subjects, both of whom were desirous
the strangers should leave. Cortes now clearly ascertained
the sentiment of the priests and the
people, and came to the conclusion that the only
way he could evade the danger threatening him
and his plans was by continual dissimulation. He
accordingly publicly ordered the construction of new
vessels, secretly instructing the ship-carpenters, however,
to protract the work in every possible way,
in hopes that the reinforcements he was expecting
from Spain would arrive in the meantime. But
truly, as if the punishment of heaven were following
close upon his dishonest conduct, an event shortly
occurred which plunged all his plans into desperate
confusion. Montezuma hastily summoned him and
showed him a picture, painted in the Mexican style
upon white calico, of eighteen European vessels.
The picture had been brought to the Emperor by
swift runners with the news that these vessels were
lying at anchor on his coasts.

116

Cortes was delighted at this news, for it inspired
the hope that these vessels had brought the confirmation
from Spain of his appointment as governor
of the newly discovered country. But to his great
astonishment he learned several days later from
Sandoval, the governor at Vera Cruz, that the fleet
which had arrived was sent out by Velasquez for no
other purpose than to capture him and take him to
Cuba for trial. As we know, Cortes had sent one
of his vessels to Spain with samples of the rich
products of Mexico, and at the same time to secure
his appointment. Montejo and Puertocarrero, the
commanders of this vessel, had received explicit
orders not to touch at the island of Cuba. They
were to leave the island as far to their right as possible
and sail around the point of Florida through
the Bahamian Straits. But Montejo, who had
property in Cuba, was so far forgetful of his duty
to his superior as to attempt a visit to his possessions
before sailing to Spain. He hardly reached
the coast before Velasquez received news of his
appearance. Velasquez’ wrath was kindled anew.
He despatched two strong vessels for the purpose
of capturing Cortes’ vessel with all on board, but
luckily they received warning in time to effect their
escape and sail for Spain without interference.

117

Velasquez was now more furious than ever. He
decided to fit out a powerful squadron, hunt out
Cortes, and make him feel his vengeance. While
preparing his expedition he received news from
Spain that Cortes’ vessel had safely arrived, and
also learned just where Cortes was and the success
of his operations up to that time. The equipment
was pushed forward with redoubled vigor. The
fleet consisted of eighteen vessels, carrying nine
hundred foot-soldiers, eighteen troopers, and twelve
cannon. It was a formidable force for those days
and outnumbered Cortes’ army two to one. Everything
completed, Narvaez, a very bold, passionate,
implacable man, was made commander with the
title of deputy-governor of the countries discovered
by Cortes. He sailed from Cuba in March, 1520.
It was toward the end of April when Cortes heard
the news of the arrival. He now found himself in
a critical position which grew more dangerous every
day. Should he venture to oppose a European
force twice as strong as his own? Should he remain
in Mexico? In that case he would be exposed to
attack from two formidable enemies at the same
time, for it was more than likely that as soon as the
Mexicans found he was in danger they would immediately
rush to arms against him. In this state of
uncertainty he received reports every day, each
more disquieting than the other. He found that
some of his soldiers were deserting to Narvaez and
acquainting him with everything he wished to know.
He heard that Narvaez was everywhere proclaiming
that Cortes and all his men were traitors, who had
undertaken the subjection of the Mexicans without
the knowledge or consent of their sovereign; and
that he had been sent to capture them and take
them back in chains for punishment. Montezuma
and the whole suffering nation were urged to make
common cause with him and aid in the capture of
this robber band. It may easily be imagined that
this was delightful news to Montezuma and his
oppressed subjects. Their joy and their willingness
to aid Narvaez were apparent everywhere. Cortes
meanwhile in the most positive manner denied the
reports which Narvaez had circulated, and assured
the Mexicans these Europeans were his good friends,
subjects of one and the same master, and that he
and his men would soon depart with them. But
indifferent as Cortes appeared, he was in reality
greatly troubled. Meanwhile he considered every
plan of escape from these dangers which his ingenuity
suggested, and at last reached a decision
which seemed to him both reasonable and bold.
He would first discover whether he could make a
friendly agreement with Narvaez, and if he failed,
then he would resist him.

118

He made the attempt but did not succeed. The
impetuous Narvaez would not hear of any agreement,
for he esteemed it an easy matter to overpower
Cortes and his little force. Nothing now remained
for Cortes but to defend himself as well as he could,
and he made his preparations to do so. He appointed
Alvarado, a brave officer who was highly
esteemed by the Mexicans, as commander at the
capital and leader of one hundred and fifty men
whom he decided to leave behind. He explicitly
urged them to conduct themselves quietly and
peaceably during his absence and to treat Montezuma
respectfully as he had promised to remain
under Spanish protection until Cortes returned.

The bold man was now ready with this little remnant
of his divided force to meet an enemy who
not only greatly exceeded him in strength but was
greatly embittered against him.

119

Chapter XI

Cortes Defeats Narvaez—Meanwhile the Mexicans, Outraged by Alvarado, Rise in Revolt—Cortes Returns

Narvaez had advanced to Zempoala. Sandoval,
meanwhile, confiding the colony at
Vera Cruz to the protection of the allies,
hastened to unite his force with that of Cortes.
They met at a spot about twelve miles distant
from Zempoala, and numbered, all told, not more
than two hundred and fifty men. Cortes steadily
advanced upon Zempoala until he was only a mile
away, and Narvaez, who had the utmost contempt
for him, deciding to give battle at once, advanced
to meet him with his greatly superior force. A
fierce rain storm occurred that day, and Cortes
had so well chosen a position on the opposite side
of a swollen stream that Narvaez did not discover
him. The latter’s soldiers murmured and protested
there was no enemy in the vicinity. “What is the
use,” they exclaimed, “of staying here to fight the
elements? There is no enemy here and nothing to
fear in such stormy weather. Let us return to
Zempoala and be ready in the morning to defeat
the enemy if he appears.” Narvaez, who was not
at all disinclined to follow their suggestion, returned,
gave the necessary instructions for their safety, and
then displayed the most utter negligence, as if no
enemy were near. His soldiers, many of whom were
not yet accustomed to the hardships of the march,
were delighted with the arrangements and were
equally negligent. Cortes, believing that Narvaez’
contempt for him, and the fatigue of his not yet
hardened soldiers, would lead them to be off their
guard, decided to make a night attack. He drew
up his little army, explained his purpose, and found
to his great delight that it was not at all necessary
to encourage them in this venturesome task as all
expressed their greatest willingness to follow him.
The army was divided into three detachments, one
led by Sandoval, one by Olid, and the other by Cortes
himself.

120

It was one of the darkest and most inhospitable
nights imaginable. The swollen stream rushed along
like a mountain torrent, and there was no way of
crossing it except by fording. Cortes was the first
to plunge in, and his men followed him with enthusiastic
alacrity. The water was up to their necks, but
all save two men safely reached the other side.
The dripping soldiers formed in order and marched
to Zempoala in death-like stillness, each carrying
a sword, a dagger, and a long Indian spear. The
spear was for use against the enemy’s cavalry.
Cortes’ conjectures were confirmed. Narvaez was so
unconcerned that he had placed only two sentinels
on guard. One of these was surprised and taken
prisoner, the other escaped and fled to the city in a
panic of fear to give the alarm. Narvaez’ contempt
for his enemy was so great that he declared the sentinel
had been dreaming and that it was ridiculous
to imagine that Cortes would dare to attack him
voluntarily with a handful of men.

121

Suddenly he heard the battle cry as Cortes and
his men hurled themselves upon the city like a thunderstorm,
terror following in their wake. Too late
Narvaez realized his foolish error, but he hastened
as fast as he could to rally his men. He and his
troops were quartered in and around a great temple
which the enemy stormed so quickly and irresistibly
that only a single cannon could be used against
them. Sandoval, who commanded the advance,
captured the cannon and drove the enemy helter-skelter
up the temple steps. The struggle was a
desperate one. Narvaez, who was in the temple,
sought to rally his men and inspire them with the
example of his own courage, but Sandoval continued
driving them before him. Olid supported him, and
Cortes, who forgot for the moment that he was the
commander, sprang to the front and inspired his
men with his own daring. A soldier in Cortes’
troops suddenly discovered that fire had broken out
among the reeds on the roof of the temple. The
building was immediately in flames and Narvaez
found himself forced to leave. He strove at the head
of his men to make his way out, but a spear was
thrust in his eye and he fell. Sandoval seized him,
dragged him down the stairs quickly, bound him,
and bore him to a place of safety in the rear. The
victors raised a triumphant shout, and the enemy,
now without a leader, became so panic-stricken that
their resistance grew weaker and weaker. A general
holocaust would have been inevitable had not Cortes
offered pardon to all who should come out and surrender.
Narvaez’ men had seen a countless number of
little flickering lights in the darkness of the night,
which resembled matches, and which led them to believe
Cortes had a large force of arquebusiers posted in
the thickets, for fire-arms at that time were always
discharged by matches. This fancy—for these lights
were made by glow-worms—increased the alarm of
the enemy, and at last no further resistance was
made.

122

The victory was complete. While the air was full
of the shouts of the victors Cortes seated himself
and, after throwing a richly embroidered cloak
about his shoulders, received the congratulations of
his officers and soldiers. He graciously permitted
the common soldiers to kiss his hand, paid special
distinction to the officers, and cordially greeted those
of the enemy who had once been his friends. Indeed
he treated them in such a considerate manner that
those who but a short time since had fought against
him became his friends. In this way his little
army was increased by the addition of eight hundred
fresh and well-armed soldiers, an increase which
secured for him the most powerful army yet seen
in that part of the world. As soon as the wounded
Narvaez came to himself it was with a deadly
feeling of humiliation that he found himself chained
hand and foot and in the power of the enemy for
whom he had had so much contempt. Cortes
desired to see him without his knowledge so that he
might not seem to be gloating over his misfortune,
but as soon as he entered the room the respect
shown by the soldiers in attendance betrayed his
presence. The proud Narvaez turned to him and
said: “Señor Cortes, you have cause to congratulate
yourself upon the good luck which has made me
your prisoner.” Such haughtiness seemed to need
some reproof, so Cortes replied: “All that God does
is well done; meanwhile, I assure you that I consider
the victory just won and your capture as among my
slightest achievements.” Cortes kept him bound
and had him taken to Vera Cruz.

123

Hardly had Cortes enjoyed a few hours of rejoicing
over his quick and glorious victory than his attention
was directed to fresh dangers which had arisen,
like a distant storm, in another place. Messengers
came from Mexico with the unpleasant news that the
people of the city had risen in revolt and attacked
the Spaniards left behind, and that Alvarado was
trying to protect himself against them in his stronghold.
Montezuma himself had sent one of his people
to implore Cortes to return as quickly as possible
and put down the uprising. The danger was so great
and threatening that Cortes lost no time in going
to the rescue of his people. After he had provided
for the safety of the vessels by manning them with
his own crews, he placed himself at the head of
his now formidable army and marched as rapidly
as possible through Tlaxcala to the capital. The
faithful Tlaxcalans offered to reinforce him with
their entire war power, but he contented himself
by taking only two thousand men and giving them
hearty thanks for their steadfast loyalty. His
march was made in a cautious manner but his good
fortune and the simplicity of the Mexicans made
caution superfluous. It would have been easy to
cut off his return to the capital by destroying the
causeways, but the Mexicans were either too stupid
or too timorous to do it. Cortes found them just
as he had left them, and nothing stood in the way of
his entrance into the city. This occurred June 24,
1520.

124

But how different was the manner of this from
his first entrance! This time there was no one
to receive him, no one who looked on in astonishment,
no one who raised a cry of joy. All was
silent in the deserted streets, and none of Alvarado’s
soldiers was seen until the Spanish quarters were
reached. Then there were cordial greetings on both
sides, embraces, and exultant shouts without end.
Alvarado and his men were delighted at their unexpected
deliverance from an appalling danger. Cortes
and his companions were overjoyed with the double
pleasure of victory and meeting their companions,
and Montezuma himself, who had kept his promise
not to leave the Spanish quarters, appeared to sympathize
with the delight of his oppressors.

125

Cortes now learned all that had taken place during
his absence. Infuriated by their treatment at
the hands of the malicious Spaniards, the Mexicans
had rushed to arms. Alvarado gave his consent
for a celebration in honor of Pitzliputzli if
they would appear at the temple unarmed. As
the Mexicans, among them several hundred of their
prominent men, were engaged in the ceremonies
the Spaniards fell upon them and murdered many.
The survivors were infuriated. Neither their own
danger nor that of their imprisoned sovereign deterred
them from attacking the Spanish quarters
with such fierceness that Alvarado and his little
band had difficulty in protecting themselves. Then
two vessels were burned, four Spaniards killed, and
several wounded. The rest expected their destruction,
but a few days before Cortes’ arrival the Mexicans
suddenly ceased hostilities and remained quiet.
With his extraordinary force, and considering the
extreme awe with which the Mexicans regarded him,
it would undoubtedly have been easy for him to
have put down the uprising at once. But his
methods of administration were now changed. Intoxicated
with the astonishing good fortune which
had accompanied his every move, he regarded each
new danger with the utmost contempt and did not
even consider it worth while any longer to conceal
his intentions. From this time on he utterly disregarded
Montezuma and so far abandoned his previous
prudence as to pay no attention to the just
indignation of these outraged people.

127

Chapter XII

The Mexicans Rise against the Spaniards and Fight with Desperate Courage—Montezuma is Killed—Cortes Struggles Bravely and is in Danger of his Life

Cortes flattered himself it would be an easy
task to hold the mutinous Mexicans in check
by force. Thinking thus, he sent one of his
bravest officers, Ordaz by name, with a corps of
four hundred men, partly Spaniards, partly Tlaxcalans,
to ascertain whether the people had really
quieted down or were making preparations for new
attacks. In pursuance of his duty, Ordaz marched
through the city streets but had not gone far before
he encountered a body of armed Mexicans. In order
to intercept some of them he incautiously advanced
upon them, but they at once retreated. This was
done, as soon appeared, not from cowardice, but
because of their orders to draw the Spanish leader
and his men into a trap. Their plan succeeded.
Ordaz pursued the fugitives to a quarter of the
city where he suddenly found himself surrounded
and attacked by a countless swarm of the enemy.
Even the flat roofs of the houses were covered with
men who darkened the air with stones, arrows, and
other missiles, hurled at the Spaniards from every
direction. Fortunately Ordaz, serious and unexpected
as the danger was, lost neither his courage
nor presence of mind but placed his men in a formation
best calculated to make the attack. Then he
charged upon the enemy where they were densest.
It was not long before the Mexicans began to
weaken. Ordaz cut his way through them and at
last, after much bloodshed, succeeded in reaching the
Spanish quarters. One Spaniard and eight Tlaxcalans
were killed, and Ordaz himself and most of his
people were wounded.

128

After this disaster Cortes expected the Mexicans
would desist from further hostilities, but he was
mistaken. Hardly had the Spaniards reached their
quarters before they observed the enemy assembling
in formidable bodies for a general attack. Cortes
instantly made the necessary preparations for defence,
and now began a battle which for courage and obstinacy
has hardly been equalled. The Mexicans
charged with such a din of drums and horns and such
fearful battle cries that the roar of the cannon could
hardly be distinguished. They seemed unanimously
determined to conquer or die. Some kept up a
continuous shower of arrows and stones. Others,
despising death, sought to scale the walls and others
to get possession of the gates. Some mounted upon
the shoulders of others to reach the top of the walls,
and when they were hurled down dead or wounded,
others would take their places instantly. Such was
their courage that they trod upon the dead and
wounded to fill up the breaches, and, terrible as was
the effect of cannon and musketry among them,
they still kept up their furious attack until at last,
after horrible slaughter, superstition forced them to
end the battle and withdraw, for they never fought
after sundown, and it was now evening.

129

The night that followed was not much quieter,
for, although the Mexicans did not dare to fight,
they found ways to set fire to the Spanish buildings
and it was only by extraordinary exertions that a
general conflagration was prevented. Although
exhausted with the struggle and their last night’s
labor in extinguishing fires, the Spaniards at daybreak
again were at their posts to resist another
attack. One bloody assault followed another. It
seemed as if the fury of this embittered nation could
never be extinguished, although each fresh attempt
to storm the Spanish stronghold failed, and Cortes
by various methods slaughtered the natives by
thousands and devastated a part of their city by
fire.

130

Cortes shared the fate of most of his soldiers
and was wounded. He was struck by an arrow in
the left hand. Thereupon he withdrew to his
apartments where undisturbed he might form some
plan to extricate himself from his dangerous situation.
He had hardly begun gathering his thoughts
together when the storm broke out anew at every
corner of the quarters, for the Mexicans had now
formed in bands for a general assault. He rushed
back and found that his presence was never more
necessary, for the enemy now was fighting with even
greater courage than on the day before, and all his
alertness and skill were required to make the necessary
defence at every place.

When the battle was at its height, the unfortunate
Montezuma decided—some say voluntarily, others
say at the request of the Spaniards—to make an
attempt to stop this bloodshed by showing himself
in person to his raging subjects and reminding them
of their reverential duty to him. He put on his
imperial mantle, placed the regent crown on his
head, and adorned himself with the wealth of jewels
which he had been accustomed to wear on state
occasions. Thus arrayed, he went, in company with
some leading Mexicans, to the Spanish stronghold.
One of these mounted the wall and announced to the
furious multitude that their sovereign had arrived
and that he was ready to listen to their grievances
and end hostilities with the strangers, his guests.

131

At the mention of his name the battle ceased and
respectful silence followed. Thereupon the unfortunate
monarch himself mounted the wall. All
bowed in reverence, some fell upon their knees and
kissed the ground. Glancing over the multitude,
Montezuma sought out the leaders and, after thanking
them for their expressions of devotion, assured
them they were wrong in supposing he was a prisoner.
He had only remained so long among his guests that he
might acquaint himself with their customs, and show
his respect for the mighty ruler whose representatives
they were. As he was now about to leave them he
implored his people to lay down their arms and
return to their homes.

132

When Montezuma had concluded his address,
there was a general silence for several minutes, but
gradually a low murmur began and soon grew into
an uproar of protest. The boldest and most insolent
of the crowd hurled invectives at their ruler and
shouted that he was no longer Emperor of Mexico
but a miscreant, a wretch, and a miserable slave of
the enemy of their fatherland. Montezuma tried
to speak and motioned with his hand for silence but
in vain. There was a great bustle and in an instant
arrows and stones were hurled at him. The two
soldiers at his side whom Cortes had sent with him
tried to cover him with their shields, but it was too
late. His cup of sorrow was filled. He was pierced
by many arrows, and a blow upon the head by a
stone felled him senseless.

133

Amazed at this unfortunate event, Cortes had
the almost lifeless monarch taken to his own house,
to save him if possible, and then, flaming with anger,
rushed back to take a bloody revenge, but he was
too late. Hardly had they seen their Emperor fall
when the Mexicans scattered, as if expecting fire from
heaven to descend upon them for this cruel deed.
In the meantime Montezuma regained consciousness
but his condition was pitiable. The thought
of his subjects’ conduct made him almost insane.
They had to hold his hands to prevent him from
doing injury to himself. Cortes vainly tried to
quiet him. He rejected all offers of consolation,
tore the bandages from his wounds, and tried to
put an end to his life. These passionate outbreaks
and his obstinate refusal to take nourishment hastened
his death. He died uttering imprecations
against his subjects and disappointed the anticipations
of the Spaniards by rejecting with great contempt
at the last moment the proffer of the Christian
faith. When Father Olmedo, kneeling at his side,
raised the cross and earnestly entreated him to
embrace it, he coldly repulsed the priest and said:
“I have only a few hours to live and I will not be
untrue to the faith of my fathers.” The fate of
his children, especially of his three daughters, rested
heavily upon his mind. He called Cortes to his
bedside and committed these children to his care
as the most precious jewels he should leave behind
him. He implored him to see that they were
not left helpless and that they had their rightful
share of his inheritance. “Your ruler, the King of
Spain, should do this,” said Montezuma, “were it
only for the friendly service I have rendered the
Spaniards, and the affection I have shown them,
which has brought me to this wretched plight.
But even that has not turned me against them.”
These, according to Cortes’ statement, were the
last words of the dying Emperor. Not long after
this, on the thirtieth of June, 1520, he died in the
arms of one of his nobles, who had always been
faithful to him. As long as Montezuma lay suffering
from his wounds his subjects remained quiet, but
hardly had he died when they prepared for the choice
of a new ruler and the immediate resumption of
hostilities. Montezuma’s successor was his brother,
Cuitlahua, a brave and warlike prince, who died suddenly
from small-pox four months after he became
Emperor.

134

The new Emperor commenced hostilities with a
movement that sorely pressed the Spaniards. He
had his bravest men occupy the flat roof and tower
of the principal temple, which stood close to the
Spanish quarters, from which points they could
hurl stones and beams into the inner court.
Cortes, who was seriously contemplating a retreat,
was thereby prevented from making the necessary
preparations and found it imperative to drive the
enemy from this dangerous position. He entrusted
this duty to Escobar, one of his bravest officers,
whom he placed at the head of a picked troop.
Meanwhile he himself planned to drive the enemy
from the streets with the rest of his force in order
to keep them open for those who were attacking the
temple. Escobar advanced and met with no resistance
up to the foot of the temple steps, a hundred in
number. But when they were half way up the
ascent, a multitude of the enemy appeared at the
rails and hurled down upon them such a shower of
arrows, stone, and beams that he and his men
could not resist their force. Three times he sought
to achieve the impossible and three times he was
driven back. When Cortes, who in the meantime
had not been idle, heard of their plight, he sprang
from his horse, without stopping long to consider,
bound his shield to his arm as he could not hold it
with his wounded hand, and rushed with drawn
sword to the temple steps. He called upon his men
to follow him and advanced apparently to his certain
death. He dashed down everything that opposed
him and at last gained the flat temple roof where
the flower of the Mexicans had gathered, determined
to conquer or die. A fierce hand to hand
struggle ensued with clubs and swords, every one
resolved to sell his life as dearly as possible. There
was not one who would not rather have been cut
to pieces than surrender. Some leaped down from
the pinnacle of the temple rather than outlive their
freedom, and all fought with a lion-like courage
never before exhibited in the New World.

135

While Cortes was making this desperate fight,
his troop in the streets was meeting with little
success. As soon as the temple was captured, he
hastened to the assistance of the rest of his men.
He swung himself upon his horse, hung the bridle
upon his left arm, and with levelled lance dashed
into the enemy, hurling every one who opposed him
to the earth. Unfortunately his zeal carried him so
far that as he turned his horse he found himself cut
off from his men by so great a swarm of the enemy
that it seemed impossible to make his way through
them. His situation was serious but he quickly
found a way out of it. He noticed a side street in
which the enemy was not so densely massed. He
plunged into this and soon regained his men. As
he did so he suddenly noticed that his friend, Andreas
Duero, had been taken prisoner and was being
dragged to the temple, by a great crowd, to be offered
up as a fresh victim to the gods. Cortes lost not
a minute and, without the least consideration for
the number of the enemy, dashed into their midst
to rescue his friend. He scattered those who were
taking him, and Duero, as soon as he was liberated,
with his dagger disposed of one who was trying
to hold him and of another who held his horse,
mounted the animal unhurt, and the two friends
safely rejoined their people. Cortes always considered
this achievement as the happiest in all his
life. The enemy now gave way on every side.
Cortes, therefore, to save more bloodshed, and to
give his exhausted men an opportunity for rest,
gave the signal for withdrawal. They returned to
their quarters and cared for their wounds.

136

Chapter XIII

Cortes, About to Retreat, Finds the Causeways Cut—The Spaniards Escape with Heavy Loss—The Tlaxcalans Remain True—Guatemozin is Elected Emperor of Mexico

On the next day both sides remained quiet.
Cortes made preparations for his departure
and the Mexicans did not appear disposed
to resume hostilities. But their apparent peacefulness
was far from being genuine. They were more
determined than ever to extirpate the Spaniards and
they were engaged upon a well considered change
of plans to accomplish it. Their design now was to
prevent his retreat by cutting the causeways and
leaving them to perish from hunger. But Cortes,
whose foresight never failed him, built a floating
bridge with incredible swiftness, which could be
thrown across the opening. As soon as it was ready,
he ordered that the retreat should be made in the
night. He hoped that either the darkness would
enable him to make his escape or that the well
known night superstition of the Mexicans would
prevent them from interfering with him. But in
this he was mistaken.

137

As soon as night came he divided his army into
three columns. Sandoval was appointed leader of
the advance. He himself led the centre column, and
Velasquez de Leon, a near relative of the governor
of Cuba, brought up the rear. The army set out
in the stillness of midnight. Noise of any kind
was carefully avoided and the falling rain seemed to
favor them. For a time not a trace of counter preparation
was discovered and at last they reached
the causeway leading to Tacuba which had been
selected for two reasons by Cortes. In the first
place, it was the shortest, and in the second, he had
hopes that the Mexicans might have neglected to
cut it, as it was in an entirely different direction from
that which the Spaniards had taken when they came.
But this hope was soon dissipated, for when they
reached the spot, they found it cut. With the help
of the floating bridge, they attempted to make the
crossing, but before it was accomplished the terrible
battle cry of the enemy was heard, announcing
death and destruction on every hand. The lake
was suddenly alive with canoes. The beginning of
the battle was marked by a terrible storm of arrows
and stones. The place, the darkness, and the desperation
of the assailants made it one of the most
deadly in history.

138

The Spaniards were caught upon a narrow pier
between the first and second openings. They now
sought to raise their bridge and take it to the second,
but the weight of the heavy guns had forced it
between the stones so closely that they could not get
it loose. All their exertions were in vain and they
were now so fiercely attacked in front, in the rear,
and on both sides that no hope was left, either
of victory or escape. The Mexicans fought with
desperation, determined either to die themselves or
destroy the enemies of their fatherland. The Spaniards
strove with all their skill and might to clear
the way, but, as often as they secured a passage
with the sword, fresh fighters took the place of the
slain. They rushed upon them in such dense masses
that they could not use their fire-arms. At last
their strength was exhausted. They could no longer
withstand this constantly increasing multitude.
The advance gave away and there was universal
confusion. Infantry and cavalry, friends and foes,
were huddled together so closely that they fought
blindly and without knowing, in the darkness,
whether they struck friend or foe.

139

In the midst of this dreadful slaughter Cortes
got together about a hundred men, with whom he
made an effort to cut his way through, and finally
succeeded in making his way to the mainland. He
could not endure the thought of his own rescue, however,
while the larger part of his army was still in
danger. Selecting those who had not been wounded,
he went back to share the fate of his friends. A part
of them had succeeded in forcing their way through
to him, but his joy at seeing them was turned to
grief when he discovered that the Mexicans were
carrying off their living captives to be sacrificed
to their deities. He tried to save them but was
unable to do more than protect the little remnant
which had escaped. All were so exhausted that they
could not renew the fight. The larger part of his
army was either slain or met death by drowning.

140

The morning light broke and revealed a ghastly
spectacle. More than half the Spaniards and over
two thousand Tlaxcalans had perished. Velasquez
de Leon, besides others of the bravest leaders, were
missing. The most of the survivors were wounded.
Artillery, ammunition, baggage, and the treasure
they had collected were lost. The night of this
horrible slaughter, which occurred July 1, 1520, is
known to this day in New Spain as the Night of
Sorrow. The first rendezvous was Tacuba but
they could not remain there long for the whole
country was in arms. The only place offering a
secure shelter was Tlaxcala. To reach the road
leading there they had to traverse the whole northern
half of the Mexican lake, upon the west side of
which they found a marshy region, and for several
days had to march through an unknown country
without the sustenance necessary to relieve their
exhausted condition. But there was no other way
left open to them. They must either abandon all
hope of possible rescue or continue their march.
Five days they traversed this apparently endless
marsh. Early on the sixth they reached Otumba,
and, as they ascended the adjacent heights, they observed
the entire great plain covered with countless
warriors at sight of whom the stoutest among them,
except Cortes, abandoned all hope. Nothing could
daunt his courage. His bearing impressed his soldiers
with the certainty that they must either conquer
or die. With his accustomed composure he rallied his
men and led them against the enemy. As the heavy
grass is cut by the scythe of the mower, so the enemy
was mowed down by the swords of his soldiers.
Nothing could withstand their onset and blood
and corpses marked their course. But at last they
were exhausted. Their arms sank powerless. The
enemy hurled themselves upon them from all sides,
and their destruction must have followed had not
their watchful leader fortunately saved them. He
noticed from a distance the Mexican chief carrying
their battle flag. He remembered to have heard that
Mexicans gave up all for lost if their flag was lost
and his decision was instantly made. Followed by
some of his brave officers, who were mounted, he
dashed into the midst of the troop which guarded
the banner, and hurled the Mexican leader to the
earth with a thrust of his lance. One of his attendants
sprang from his horse, killed him, and seized the
flag. At that same moment all the other flags were
lowered, a panic seized them, they threw down
their arms and took to flight. Thus a lucky thought
saved the Spaniards and gave them a victory which
was as glorious as it was profitable, for, when the
booty was collected, its value nearly reimbursed them
for the treasures they had left behind in Mexico, as
most of the Mexicans, confident of victory, had bedecked
themselves with their most costly ornaments.

141

On the following day they reached the territory
of the friendly Tlaxcalans. They dreaded lest they
should find a change in their relations, but their
fears were groundless. That noble and magnanimous
people remained as faithful as if the Spanish power
and fortunes had suffered no calamities. Among
these people the Spaniards rested, recovering from
their hardships and caring for their wounds. All
devoted themselves to recreation save Cortes, notwithstanding
he had striven and suffered more than
any of them. He had no time to think of rest.
He was engaged upon plans for the future and soon
was delighted to find that good fortune had not yet
abandoned him.

142

Velasquez, the governor of Cuba, had so little
doubt that Narvaez would succeed with the strong
force entrusted to him that, without waiting for
news, he sent him two more vessels loaded with
supplies and munitions. As they were sailing past
Vera Cruz the commanding officer there induced
them to enter the harbor. He easily took possession
of the vessels and just as easily persuaded the men
to enter Cortes’ service. This was not all that fate
turned to his advantage. Not long after this, three
other vessels of unusual size, belonging to a fleet
which the governor of Jamaica had fitted out for
discoveries, appeared on the same coast. Their
commander unfortunately took a course toward the
northern provinces of the Mexican Empire, whose
people were both poor and warlike. He was very
inhospitably received and after a long series of misfortunes
at last succeeded in reaching the harbor of
Vera Cruz. His men were also induced to enter
Cortes’ service. In this way Cortes received such
accessions of men and material that his past losses
were nearly made good. He felt strong enough now
to resume his great plans for the conquest of the
Mexican Empire. With his faithful allies, the Tlaxcalans
and other Indian tribes which had united
with him, he was now at the head of an army of
ten thousand men.

In the meantime the Emperor Cuitlahua had died
suddenly of small-pox. After his death the electors
were summoned to choose his successor. Their
duty at this critical time was one of the most serious
responsibility. The chief priests implored the blessing
of their highest deity in the following appeal:

143

“O God! Thou knowest that the days of our
Emperor are ended, for thou hast placed him under
thy feet. He tarries in the place of rest. He has
traversed the road we all must go. He has gone to
the house where we must all follow—the home of
eternal darkness which no light enters. He tarried
but a few days in his Empire, for we had enjoyed
his presence but a few days when thou summoned
him to follow his predecessor. He is therefore
grateful to thee for freeing him from such a hard
burden and sending him peace and rest. Who
shall now care for the welfare of thy people and
the empire? Who shall be appointed the judge to
administer justice to thy people? Who shall sound
drum and pipe to call the old warriors and the
mighty to battle? Our Lord and our Protector,
willst thou in thy wisdom select one worthy to sit
upon the imperial throne, to bear the heavy burden
of sovereignty, to love and console thy poor people,
as a mother loves and consoles her children? O
merciful God, shed the light of thy countenance
upon this, thy kingdom. Ordain that in all and
through all, the honor shall be thine.”

The choice fell upon Guatemozin. He was a
nephew of both the late Emperors and when he came
to the throne was not over twenty-five years of age.
Young as he was, he had had much military experience
and had distinguished himself in many bloody
campaigns. He hated the Spaniards as Hannibal
hated Rome, and, as soon as he heard of the organization
of his enemy’s army, he assembled an extraordinary
force of fighting men from all the provinces
at the capital, with whom he determined to fight
to the last drop of blood. Cortes, who was aware
of his preparations, realized that he must encounter
great difficulties and dangers, but he faced them with
his usual courage. Boldly and enthusiastically he
began the march upon Mexico at the head of his
greatly increased army.

144

Chapter XIV

Cortes Builds Vessels for a Land and Water Attack—A Conspiracy against his Life is Discovered—The Capital is Attacked

As Cortes approached the capital of the Province
of Tezcuco, messengers met him with signals
of peace and urgently invited him in the
name of their cacique to make his night quarters
in the city where everything possible would be furnished
for the comfort of himself and his men. The
invitation was accompanied with the request that
Cortes might be pleased to have his Indian auxiliaries
camp outside the city. There being some reason
to doubt the sincerity of the cacique’s intentions, he
decided to avail himself of the invitation at once but
at the same time to take every possible precaution
and make his entrance immediately, which was accomplished
at noon of December 31, 1520. As soon
as he had occupied the best and largest area of the
city he deposed the cacique who had stood by the
Mexicans and been false to the Spaniards. He put
in his place the man who was declared by the people
to be the most worthy. This man, Ixtlilxochitl, was
young and amiable, and of such a noble and distinguished
presence that Cortes could not refrain from
embracing him and assuring him of his friendship.
He also decided to make his headquarters in the
city until all his arrangements for the conquest of
Mexico were completed.

145

The Mexicans at this time were in a very good
state of defence. At the places where the causeways
had been cut, strong bulwarks and breastworks
were constructed to prevent the enemy from
using floating bridges. The new Emperor, Guatemozin,
had armed many of his warriors with bows
and very long spears with which they could defend
themselves at a considerable distance. Besides
this they had a countless number of canoes, so that
they could attack from every side. Cortes knew that
he could not think of capturing this really strong
city until he had a flotilla of small craft with which
to dispose of these canoes. But how was he to get
them? There were only three or four ship-carpenters
in his entire army. All the building material would
have to be procured in the Tlaxcalan forest, and his
whole Spanish force would not be sufficient to convey
it from there to Tezcuco. But the greater the difficulties
which confronted this extraordinary man, the
stronger was his determination to overcome them.
A large number of Tlaxcalans were assigned to his
carpenters for manual service. While the necessary
material was being prepared, Cortes began to make
himself master of the whole region surrounding
Mexico in order to cut off the unfortunate capital
from subsistence. He overpowered some of the
towns by force and induced others by mild means
to enter into an alliance with him. Guatemozin regarded
the defection and loss of his faithful vassals
with sorrow and indignation and sought—but in
vain—to prevent it. But his great heart did not
waver in the manly determination to defend his capital
to the last drop of blood.

146

In the meantime a danger impended over the head
of Cortes which threatened a tragic end to his undertaking
and his life. The soldiers of Narvaez had
willingly joined Cortes, but they did so with the
expectation that in a short time and without much
danger they would secure untold treasures. The
destruction of their hopes and the prospect of all
the dangers they must encounter in an attack upon
Mexico created great dissatisfaction with Cortes
and bitter regret that they had decided to follow
him. Villafanga, a common soldier, but a smart,
venturesome fellow, who was still loyal to Velasquez,
took advantage of his comrades’ discontent to
hatch a plot which contemplated nothing less than
the murder of the general and his leading officers, the
choice of a new leader, and return to Cuba. The
plan was as follows: While Cortes and his leading
officers were at table a large packet of letters from
Vera Cruz should be brought in. The conspirators,
under pretence of desiring to hear from their country,
would crowd about the general while he was opening
the packet, and suddenly slay him as well as all the
others who had been selected as victims. All was
now ready for the accomplishment of their black
purpose. The following day was selected and the
conspirators, of whom there were a large number,
had made their plans so secretly that neither Cortes
nor his friends had the slightest suspicion of them.
At the last moment, however, a fellow conspirator,
who had been one of Cortes’ men from the start, was
suddenly seized with remorse. His conscience stung
him so fiercely that at last he ran to Cortes’ quarters
and made a clean breast of the whole matter.

147

Cortes was astonished but quickly decided what
to do. In company with some of his officers he
went at once to Villafanga’s quarters. His unexpected
appearance at such a time and place so surprised
the would-be assassin that he could neither
deny his guilt nor think of a defence. He was
instantly seized. Cortes snatched a paper from him,
which he was attempting to conceal in his bosom,
and, concluding that it related to the conspiracy,
stepped aside a minute to examine it. It contained
a list of the conspirators, which filled him with surprise.
But he wisely concealed it and appeared as
if he were not aware that any one else was implicated.
He reserved punishment for the principal
offender, and as his confession made any further
investigation unnecessary, he was hanged the same
night in front of the house where he had been
arrested.

148

On the next morning Cortes summoned his entire
force and informed them of Villafanga’s treachery
and the penalty which had been inflicted, but added
that, notwithstanding all his efforts, he had not discovered
any of his accomplices, as Villafanga had
been persistently silent even under torture. He
assured them that as far as he was concerned he was
pleased with this secrecy for it would have given
him great pain to have delivered any more of his
companions into the hands of justice. He closed
his address by appealing to them to tell him in what
way his operations had been a disappointment or
how he had incurred the indignation of his comrades,
so that he might correct his mistakes then and there.
The hearts of the guilty ones were relieved by these
words. They breathed freely again and in their joy
at being undiscovered resolved at every opportunity
to display to their leader still greater and more
steadfast loyalty.

149

Cortes knew, however, that idleness may ruin
the best of men. He bestirred himself, therefore,
to provide new occupation for these turbulent ones
so that they might have no opportunity for indulging
evil fancies. His good luck attended him
again. He was informed that the building material
for thirteen vessels was ready to be brought
from the Tlaxcalan forests to Tezcuco. As the
transporting had to be made by Indian carriers
and a strong guard was needed to protect them
from the Mexicans, the repentant conspirators were
selected and the watchful, brave, and true Sandoval
was placed in command of them. The journey was
one of the most difficult they had ever undertaken.
Eight thousand
tamanes
, loaded with beams, planks,
masts, ropes, sails, and iron-work, went in the middle.
A force of fifteen thousand Tlaxcalan warriors
escorted them in the advance, rear, and on
both flanks, among whom the Spanish soldiers were
distributed to keep them in order and accustom
them to regular marching. The entire line was
more than a mile long. Sandoval placed himself
at the head of the force and assigned the command
of the leading column to Chichimekatl, a young Tlaxcalan
leader, for the proud and fierce Xikotenkatl
was no more. He could not endure the thought of
submission to the foreigners and incited a revolt.
But his purpose failed, his own people arrested him,
and his own father, a second Brutus, pronounced the
death penalty and turned him over to the Spanish
general, that the penalty might be inflicted. But
Cortes, reluctant to consent to the death of the
young, fiery patriot, pardoned him, set him at
liberty, and took him with him on the march to
Mexico. But even this magnanimous treatment
did not move his proud heart. He improved every
opportunity to denounce the plans of the Spaniards
with republican outspokenness, and to prejudice
his people against them. His companions informed
the Tlaxcalan High Council of his conduct, which in
turn notified Cortes that he was striving to raise
a revolt in the army and that by the law of their
land he deserved the death penalty. It was now
incumbent upon Cortes to deal with him severely
for if he returned to Tlaxcala he would not be mercifully
treated. Cortes, however, once more told the
obstinate young man that if he came to him and
performed his duties he should suffer no injustice.
But the Tlaxcalan would not consent, and when
Cortes sent the guard to bring him by force he
resisted and defended himself until at last he fell
dead from many wounds. Such was the tragic
end of a man who under other circumstances might
have been, perhaps, a Hannibal or a Cæsar.

150

The expedition had a march of fifteen miles before
it, and the way led mostly through a rough and
mountainous region. Large bands of Mexican soldiers
frequently appeared but when they saw that
the Spaniards were always ready for attack, they
withdrew. At last Sandoval, after a march of
extreme difficulty, had the good fortune to arrive
safely at Tezcuco, where he was received with open
arms by Cortes. While they were engaged in constructing
the vessels, another fortunate event occurred.
Some time previously Cortes had sent some
of his officers to Hispaniola to bring him reinforcements
if possible. He had long been anxious for
their return, and had long been disappointed, but
at last the glad news came that four vessels with
large reinforcements had arrived at Vera Cruz from
Hispaniola. They brought two hundred soldiers,
eighty horses, two cannon, and a great quantity
of powder and ammunition. The building of the
vessels was now pushed forward with the utmost
zeal. Although the Mexicans from time to time
attempted to hinder the work and to burn them on
the stocks, their efforts were frustrated by Cortes’
watchfulness and the bravery of his soldiers. At
last the vessels were finished and launched and as
the wind filled their sails a joyous shout was raised,
announcing the important event to the whole surrounding
region.

151

Cortes now decided to attack the city from three
sides and divided his army into as many columns.
Sandoval was given command of the first, Alvarado
of the second, and Olid of the third. The first was
to advance from Tezcuco, the second from Tacuba,
and the third from Kajahuakan, while Cortes himself,
commanding the vessels, was to support them.
The three took the positions assigned them and began
the advance. Alvarado and Olid on their march
destroyed the fine aqueducts which brought the
sweet mountain water from many miles away into
the island city. The water famine which followed
was only the beginning of the many hardships with
which the unfortunate people had to contend. From
this time on, not a day passed without some fierce
encounter. The vessels had to attack a vast swarm
of small canoes and the land troops an equally
vast swarm of the enemy at the causeways. The
frail canoes were soon destroyed or driven ashore,
however, but in the encounters at the causeways
little was achieved. The Spaniards attacked with
the utmost vigor the bulwarks erected to protect
the openings, but every night they were forced to
retire to the mainland, while the besieged every
night restored what they had lost during the day.
Notwithstanding all this bloodshed, they made no
progress from day to day, and the fatigue of the
Spaniards and their allies each day was so great
that they began to fear they would gradually succumb.

153

Chapter XV

The Spaniards Lose Heavily in Battle—The Prisoners are Sacrificed—Some of Cortes’ Allies Desert but Soon Return—The City of Mexico Captured—Guatemozin Attempts Flight but is Taken

Cortes, realizing that the battle could not
be continued in this wise, decided to end the
long and wearisome struggle with one bold
venture. He arranged for a general attack at a
designated time (this was about the end of May,
1521) and ordered each of his commanders to advance
into the city with his division, in spite of all obstacles,
and post himself there. He himself took command
of the force which was to attack the causeway of
Cojohuacan, determined to let nothing stop him from
reaching the city. The eventful day came. The
leaders placed themselves at the head of their troops
and the tragedy began. It was a thrilling spectacle,
the irresistible advance of the Spaniards and
the stubborn resistance of the Mexicans. Nothing
could withstand the onset of Cortes. He carried
one defence after the other in desperate charges,
cut down or shot down everything before him, and
pursued the flying enemy into the city.

154

Guatemozin, who had been informed of all that
was transpiring, rejoiced at the imprudence of the
enemy as he realized the advantage it placed in his
hands. He immediately ordered several strong detachments
to march by different roundabout ways
to the abandoned causeways, enlarge the openings
as much as possible, and hold their positions there.
The rest of his warriors, who were engaged in a hand
to hand struggle with the enemy, gradually fell
back in order to lure the excited Spaniards farther
into the city. His cunning scheme was successful.
Assuming that his orders had been executed, Cortes
without hesitation drove the enemy from one street
to another and at last reached the very place where
Guatemozin was awaiting him with the flower of
his warriors.

Suddenly, at a signal from the Emperor, the
hollow boom of the war god’s sacred drum was
heard from the adjacent temple—a sound which
always filled the Mexican with indescribable rage
and utter contempt of death. In an instant the
Spaniards, to their astonishment, found themselves
attacked on all sides so furiously that with all their
courage and skill they were unable to withstand it.
They began falling back slowly in close ranks and
maintaining the defensive, but as the numbers of
the enemy increased every moment and their attack
grew more furious, they gradually began to seek
safety in flight. At last their ranks broke. All,
Spaniards and Tlaxcalans, foot-soldiers and horsemen,
fled in disorder to the nearest causeway where
their terror was still further increased by finding
the enemy in possession.

155

Cortes vainly sought by commands and entreaties
to check the disorderly flight and restore order.
They neither saw nor heard anything. Their
only impulse was to save themselves in any way
they could. They jumped into the openings in
squads. Many of them were drowned and others
were captured or killed by the enemy in their canoes,
for unfortunately this part of the lake was too shallow
to allow the Spanish vessels to come to their
assistance. Cortes was greatly alarmed at the danger
of his troops but gave not a thought to his
own. While striving to rescue some from the water
and others from the hands of the enemy, he was
suddenly seized by six stout Mexican chiefs and
dragged away in triumph. Two of his officers, seeing
what had happened, determined to save their
commander by sacrificing themselves. They dashed
into the midst of the enemy, struggled and fell, but
not until they had killed those who were holding
Cortes. He was freed and made his escape,
although pitifully disfigured and at the cost of his
officers’ lives, which pained him more than his
wounds. A thousand Tlaxcalans and over sixty
Spaniards were lost, many were captured, while
among those who escaped there was hardly one who
was not injured in some way.

156

Cortes’ position was now most critical. His
people were completely discouraged and the enemy
was correspondingly encouraged. They grew so bold
indeed that on the next morning they ventured an
attack upon the headquarters, which the Spaniards
and their allies had great difficulty in resisting.
Guatemozin at this junction conceived of another
cunning project for the discomfiture of his enemy.
He sent the heads of the slaughtered Spaniards
through the provinces and everywhere proclaimed
that the blood of these enemies had appeased the
wrath of the war god and that he had declared that
in eight days all the hated foreigners would be
destroyed. The news created general consternation
among Cortes’ Indian allies. Their superstition was
so great that they did not doubt for an instant the
threat of their war god would be executed. They
determined to abandon all association with people
whom the Heavens had doomed to destruction. Some
of the Tlaxcalans themselves were recreant and
began to desert. But Cortes discovered a plan for
preventing this withdrawal, which met with success.
He suspended hostilities for eight days, meanwhile
covering his well intrenched army with his
vessels, and quietly awaited the expiration of the
time set for his destruction. When it passed and
the Spaniards had not suffered the least injury, the
allies began to open their eyes. They realized
they had been deceived, grew ashamed of their
credulity, and came back more determined than ever
to assist the Spaniards in the complete overthrow
of the hated Mexican Empire. Others, who had not
really believed the deceitful announcement came
from their war god, were all the more grateful that
the deception now made the downfall of the Mexicans
inevitable. The accessions of old and new allies
were so great that in a few days Cortes had an army
of one hundred and fifty thousand natives. Instead,
however, of being misled by this astonishing increase
of his strength, he proceeded more cautiously than
ever. He made several tenders of peace to the
Mexicans, but Guatemozin, who was thoroughly convinced
that any alliance with the Spaniards would
result in the servitude of himself and his people,
rejected the offers with scorn, being still determined
either to rescue the fatherland or die in the attempt.

158

Hostilities were resumed. The city was now so
closely shut in that supplies were entirely cut off.
This produced a dire famine, followed as usual by
a pestilence, which swept away the poor natives
in great numbers. Meanwhile the Spaniards daily
approached nearer the city by the three causeways.
In pursuance of Cortes’ new plans every advance
was accompanied by preparations for a safe retreat
to the mainland in case of necessity. By continuing
this policy the city was reached on all three sides
and the noble, brave Guatemozin at last fought the
Spaniards upon a hand-breadth of land. The latter
continued advancing, setting on fire the section of
the city already captured, and maintaining their
strongly intrenched position. The great marketplace
was the objective point for all three divisions.
Alvarado was the first to reach it. Cortes quickly
followed at the head of the division led by Olid,
driving the Mexicans before him at the point of the
sword. Sandoval also joined them and the slaughter
was terrible. Three-fourths of the city was now
captured and almost reduced to ashes. Guatemozin
had intrenched himself in the remaining part with
the flower of his soldiers. The Spaniards were
about to attack him, but Cortes, who was anxious
to save further bloodshed, and flattered himself
that Guatemozin could hold out no longer, stayed
further hostilities and again made offers of peace.
Seemingly the Emperor was ready to accept them
and a short cessation of fighting followed without any
expressed agreement. Meanwhile the two parties
confronted each other, separated only by a trench.
Absolute quiet prevailed on both sides. Guatemozin
meanwhile put off the Spaniards from day
to day with the assurance that he would personally
appear and conduct negotiations. This was only a
pretext to lull the Spaniards into security, and conceal
his own purpose. Acting upon the entreaties
of his nobles, he had decided to save himself from
death or capture by flight to distant provinces of
his Empire, there to raise a new army and make
head against his enemies. The necessary preparations
were all made. The Mexican nobles were
ready to give up their lives for their loved Emperor.
They had a great number of canoes in readiness
and a bold attack was made upon the vessels while
Guatemozin, the object of their tender solicitude,
was being conveyed across the lake. Sandoval,
who was in command of the vessels, vainly attempted
to drive them back by firing his heavy cannon.
They despised death and wounds and rowed about
unterrified, seeking to come to a hand to hand
struggle.

THE ENTRY OF CORTES INTO MEXICO CITY

159

Suddenly Sandoval observed a strongly manned
canoe being rowed with great speed directly across
the lake. He also observed what the canoe contained
and at once gave chase. Holquin, whose vessel
was the fastest, reached it first, but as soon as the
rowers found that he was about to open fire, they
dropped their oars and begged him to spare the life
of the Emperor. Overjoyed at the honor his good
fortune had brought him, Holquin sprang with drawn
sword into the canoe. Guatemozin met him nobly
and fearlessly, and said he was his prisoner and
ready to follow him, praying only that his wife and
her attendant should meet with honorable treatment.
He turned to the latter, spoke a few words
of encouragement, and then extended his hand to
conduct them to the vessel. That moment—it was
the thirteenth of August, 1521—decided the fate of
the whole Mexican Empire which in the person of
its Emperor was delivered into the hands of the
Spaniards.

160

Holquin hastened to conduct his prisoner to
Cortes who received him upon the shore of the lake
with the respect due to his position and his virtues.
The unfortunate Guatemozin seemed to accept the
courtesy of his conqueror with a certain pleasure
and accompanied him with great self-command to
his quarters. He seated himself for a moment, then
rose and said to Cortes, with the interpreter’s help:
“I have done what my duty demanded. I am
of no more importance, and a prisoner like me must
be a burden to his captor. Rise! take this dagger
(placing it in Cortes’ hand) and plunge it into my
heart and put an end to my useless life.” His wife
wept aloud at these words and Cortes was much
agitated. He besought the unfortunate man to
calm himself and thereupon left him so as not to
increase their trouble by his presence.

As soon as it was known that Guatemozin had
been captured, the Mexicans laid down their arms
and the Spaniards were masters of the city. The
first few days were spent in rejoicing over the fortunate
outcome of their undertaking, but before
long rejoicing changed to discontent at the sight of
the small compensation they were likely to receive
after so many dangers and hardships. The larger
part of the houses were consumed with all their treasures,
and when Guatemozin had found that the safety
of his capital was doubtful, everything of value in
the royal treasury had been thrown into the lake.
The booty which was collected was so inconsiderable
that many of the Spaniards threw away with contempt
the portion assigned to them. They soon
began loudly to denounce Guatemozin and next their
general, whom they were bold enough to declare had
taken the largest part of the treasures.

161

Cortes vainly tried to quiet them. Aldereto,
who had been appointed royal treasurer, espoused
the cause of the malcontents and demanded by virtue
of his office that the Emperor and his premier
should be delivered over to him to reveal in what
part of the lake the treasures were sunk. Cortes,
who had faced so many storms, was this time weak
and inhuman enough to yield to this monster.
Guatemozin and his loyal premier were stretched
upon the rack. The Emperor bore all the torments
which the brute could devise with wonderful firmness.
His premier imitated his example, but when
they proceeded to put him to still more inhuman
torture, he uttered a loud cry and turned his eyes
to his master as if asking permission to confess
what he knew. Guatemozin understood the look
and said with the utmost composure, “Am I lying
upon a bed of roses?” His words went to the heart
of his faithful servant. Not a loud sound escaped
his lips again as he expired before the eyes of his
tortured master with the sublime steadfastness of
a hero and the tranquillity of a saint.

Cortes, who had heard from a distance the outcry
of the poor man, overcome by remorse and shame,
rushed to the apartment and saved the life of the
tortured Emperor.

162

Chapter XVI

Tapia, Commissioned to Depose Cortes, is Induced to Return to Cuba—Cortes is Confirmed as Governor of New Spain—He Goes to Spain and is Ennobled—A Second Visit to Spain Discloses the Fickleness of the Court—He Vainly Begs the Emperor’s Favor—His Death

The conquest of imperial provinces shortly
followed the capture of the city. One after
another surrendered and their people suffered
the same hard fate which the American islanders
had endured for twenty years. They were enslaved
and cruelly treated. Cortes in the meantime received
no reply from Spain and was uncertain how
his operations were regarded there. At last a vessel
arrived at Vera Cruz, having on board a certain
Tapia, who had been sent to depose Cortes, bring
him to trial, and fill his position. Fortunately for
Cortes, this man was both weak and cowardly. He
cunningly interposed so many obstacles and intimidated
him in so many ways that Tapia thought the
safest course for him was to return home without
making any attempt to carry out the object of his
mission. Cortes also knew that he was a very
covetous man and offered to purchase his horses,
slaves, and entire outfit indeed, at a handsome price.
Tapia was willing to sell and returned to Cuba with
a goodly amount of gold.

163

The storm impending over Cortes’ head, however,
soon began to gather again. In hopes of escaping
it, he sent other messengers to Spain to lay before
the Emperor, Charles the Fifth, a complete report
of his operations and present him with his share
of the booty. The brilliancy of his deeds and the
greatness and importance of his conquest both rejoiced
and amazed the young monarch. He not
only approved of all that Cortes had done but
invested him with the dignity of Governor of New
Spain, and appointed a commission to investigate
the pretensions of Velasquez. As might have been
expected, this commission made a report in accordance
with their master’s wishes. Velasquez’
complaint of Cortes’ disloyalty and his claims of
governorship over the newly conquered territory
were pronounced null and void, and he was declared
entitled to no further compensation than the
legitimate cost of the expedition. This twofold disgrace
was more than the proud and passionate Velasquez
could endure. It cost him his life and Cortes
now found himself at the very summit of fortune’s
pinnacle.

164

He began to raise Mexico from its ruins and to
consolidate the Spanish power in the Empire. In
carrying out his plans he resorted to the most
cruel and arbitrary measures, which invited the
Mexicans to revolt again. This revolt was speedily
crushed, however, and inhuman penalties were inflicted
upon caciques and nobles. Upon the mere
rumor that Guatemozin had encouraged the Mexicans,
that brave, magnanimous prince and also
the caciques of Tezcuco and Tacuba were hanged.
Some Spanish officials who had been sent to Mexico
to administer the royal revenues attempted to
exercise authority without recognizing Cortes. But
Cortes was not in the habit of allowing his inferiors
to treat him contemptuously. He laughed at their
efforts to weaken his authority. The officials, however,
sent to the Spanish Court a description of
Cortes’ character and his administration. Their
statements made such an impression that it was
decided to send a commissioner to Mexico to investigate
Cortes’ transactions, and if his findings
warranted it, to send him to Spain. When the
commissioner arrived, however, he was taken ill
and died.

165

Cortes’ danger was not yet over. The officials
continued sending unfavorable reports to Spain
and a new commission was appointed with absolute
power to investigate and punish him. Cortes was
informed of its purposes. He was furiously indignant
to find the arduous and important service he
had rendered the fatherland thus requited, and his
friends counselled him, in view of such shameful
treatment, to meet force with force. He hesitated,
however, to take a step which would conflict with
the loyalty and obedience he owed his sovereign,
and at last decided to suffer ungrateful and shameful
treatment rather than resist the legal authority
of his country. He resolved to go to Spain and
entrust his fate to the mercy and justice of the
King.

As he appeared before his sovereign, all eyes were
turned with admiration and respect upon the man
whose achievements seemed to eclipse those of the
great heroes. The modesty with which he plead
his cause before the high judges removed the suspicions
they had entertained. The King received
him with expressions of the highest respect and
gratitude and showered favors upon him. He
decorated him with the order of St. Iago, elevated
him to the rank of count, and conferred upon him
a broad stretch of territory in Mexico which would
yield him a large revenue. But when they came
to the confirmation of his governorship, it was
clearly apparent they considered it dangerous to
invest him anew with the power he might misuse.
All that he received was his recognition as general
and permission to make new discoveries. The
entire administration of civil affairs was entrusted
to a viceroy.

166

Cortes went back to Mexico, but from that time
forward his career was marked by an unbroken
series of troubles. He was so hampered by the viceroy’s
strictness and so humiliated by his loss of
authority that his only relief was found in the
discovery and conquest of new regions. He fitted
out an expedition on the west coast of Mexico for
making discoveries in the great South Sea and succeeded
in finding the peninsula of Lower California.
Upon his return his life became so embittered that
he decided to go to Spain again, appeal to the
justice and former favor of the King, and lay his
grievances before him in person. He little anticipated
the still greater troubles he must endure.
During his restless and martial life he had had little
chance to know the fickleness of a court and the
unreliability of the favor of the great. He was now
to discover it.

167

He was coldly received, indifferently listened to,
and his complaints and appeals dismissed as of no
consequence. He had grown old. What further
important service could he promise? What he had
accomplished for his King and country was forgotten
or it was considered as already fully recompensed.
He found himself at the close of his career, like
Columbus, ignominiously treated by a thankless
King and his malicious ministers, and obliged to
beg for justice. Six long wretched years passed in
solitude and neglect but at last grief and indignation
at such treatment brought his life to an end. He
died October 11, 1547,
[15]
in the sixty-third year of
his age. His body at his express desire was taken
to New Spain, perhaps because he considered his
ungrateful fatherland unworthy to be its burial-place.
[16]

Footnotes

[1]
Diego Velasquez was born at Cúellar, Segovia, in 1465—some
authorities say in 1458—and died at Havana, Cuba, in 1522 or 1523.
He accompanied Columbus to Hispaniola (Haiti) in 1493.

[2]
Francisco Hernandez de Cordova was born about 1475 and died
at Leon, Nicaragua, in 1526. He was beheaded for attempting to set
up an independent government in Honduras.

[3]
Juan de Grijalva was born in Cuéllar in 1489 or 1490 and died
in Nicaragua. He was a nephew of Velasquez and the discoverer
of Mexico.

[4]
Villa Rica has been a movable municipality. It was nominally
founded on the present site of Vera Cruz and known as Villa Rica de
la Vera Cruz. This was in 1519. Later, actual settlement was made
farther north. In 1525 the site was changed to a place on the Rio
de la Antigua. The final removal to the present site was made in
1599, the city being known by its present name, Vera Cruz.

[5]
Picture-writing at this time was the means employed by the Mexican
priesthood for recording religious festivals and legends, for keeping
calendars of years, and for recording historical events, much after the
manner of the Egyptian hieroglyphs.

[6]
The Tlaxcalan Indians were less advanced in the arts than the
Aztecs, but were very warlike and liberty-loving. Their principal
pueblo was on the spot now occupied by the city of Tlaxcala. Some
of their descendants still occupy that region.

[7]
Cholula is a small town sixty miles southeast of the city of Mexico.
Its principal feature is its so-called Pyramid, a lofty mound or series
of mounds which was probably the site of the Indian village at the
time of the conquest.

[8]
Puebla is a Mexican State of about 12,000 square miles. Its capital
is La Puebla de los Angeles, the second city in the Republic. It was
the scene of many struggles during the conquest, and of revolts in the
last century. The capital derives its name from the legend that angel
hosts were seen in the heavens above its site before the conquest.

[9]
Popocatepetl is a volcano forty-five miles southeast of the Mexican
capital. Its crater is 5000 feet in width and the peak is 17,853 feet
high. It is called the “smoking mountain,” from
popoca
, “to smoke,”
and
tepetl
, “mountain.”

[10]
Iztaccihuatl is an extinct volcano north of Popocatepetl, about
17,000 feet high. It derives the name of “the white lady” because
its west side bears some resemblance to a woman in a white shroud.

[11]
The City of Mexico at the time of the conquest was in all its splendor
and, as described by Cortes, “a thing of fairy creation rather than
the work of mortal hands.” It was about twelve miles in circumference,
intersected by canals, and connected with the mainland by six causeways.
The lake has diminished in depth and extent and is now two
and a half miles away from the city.

[12]
“Tenochtitlan” (
nopal
or
cactus on a stone
) was the original name
of the city, afterward changed to “Mexico” in honor of the war god
Mexitli.

[13]
Montezuma, in Aztec Matenczoma, was born in 1479. He was
the son of Axayacatl and succeeded his uncle in 1503. Some of his
descendants are said to be living in Mexico now, and his name is still
held in great respect among the Indians.

[14]
Quetzalcoatl in the Mexican religion represents the god of the
air, and in legend a ruler and civilizer. He is described as a white
man with long black hair and beard, who came from Yucatan and
preached austerity and virtue as well as hatred of war. His name
means “the feathered serpent.”

[15]
Other authorities assign December 2, 1554, as the date of his death.

[16]
Soon afterward he fell into neglect and could scarcely obtain
an audience. One day, however, having forced his way through the
crowd which surrounded the Emperor’s carriage and mounted on the
doorstep, Charles, astonished at an act of such audacity, demanded
to know who he was. “I am a man,” replied the conqueror of Mexico
proudly, “who has given you more provinces than your ancestors
left you cities.”

168

Appendix

The following is a chronological statement of
important events in Cortes’ career:

1485
Birth of Cortes.

1504
Voyage to San Domingo.

1511
Accompanies Velasquez to Cuba.

1518
Expedition to Mexico.

1519
Founding of Vera Cruz.

1519
Defeat of the Tlaxcalans.

1519
Cholulan massacre.

1519
Interview with Montezuma.

1520
Montezuma made prisoner.

1520
Mexican revolt and Montezuma’s death.

1520
Battle of Otumba.

1520
Retreat from City of Mexico.

1521
City of Mexico retaken.

1521
Emperor Guatemozin hanged.

1522
Cortes confirmed as Governor of New Spain.

1523
Confirmation revoked and viceroy appointed.

1536
Cortes discovers peninsula of Lower California.

1547
Death of Cortes.

LIFE STORIES FOR YOUNG PEOPLE

Translated from the German by

GEORGE P. UPTON

36 Volumes Now Ready

American Explorers

Columbus

Pizarro

Cortes

Eric the Red and Leif the Lucky, and Other Pre-Columbian Discoveries of America

Historical and Biographical

Washington

Franklin

Penn

Maximilian

Barbarossa

William of Orange

Maria Theresa

The Maid of Orleans

Frederick the Great

The Little Dauphin

Herman and Thusnelda

The Swiss Heroes

Marie Antoinette’s Youth

The Duke of Brittany

Louise, Queen of Prussia

The Youth of the Great Elector

Emperor William First

Elizabeth, Empress of Austria

Charlemagne

Prince Eugene

Eugénie, Empress of the French

Queen Maria Sophia of Naples

Musical Biography

Beethoven

Mozart

Johann Sebastian Bach

Joseph Haydn

Legendary

Frithjof Saga

Gudrun

The Nibelungs

William Tell

Arnold of Winkelried

Undine

Illustrated. Each 50 cents
net

A. C. McCLURG & CO.,
Chicago

Transcriber’s Notes

Copyright notice provided as in the original—this e-text is public domain in the country of publication.

In the text versions, delimited italics text in _underscores_ (the HTML version reproduces the font form of the printed book.)

Silently corrected palpable typos; left non-standard spellings and dialect unchanged.

End of Project Gutenberg's Hernando Cortes, by Joachim Heinrich Campe

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HERNANDO CORTES ***

***** This file should be named 59732-h.htm or 59732-h.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/9/7/3/59732/

Produced by D A Alexander, Stephen Hutcheson, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by the Library of Congress)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

Dr. Gregory B. Newby
Chief Executive and Director
gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.